But you'll be so kind as follows
Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez.
Here Senator Moores.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle.
All of them.
Senator Stewart Air Senator
Wirth here.
Senator Ingle here Senator
Duhigg there and senator.
President you have a quorum.
Well thank you very much on
welcome everybody on on Monday
morning to everybody and
As we go through the meeting
today the scent that she just
makes your heart to forgive the
pro tempore to force this on the
voice are given the and I'm
celebrating that she was doing
yesterday
and
Thank you and and what model is
as a as the Superbowl proceeded
she are she spoke some some more
words on Friday and one of them
came through.
So our congratulations.
Senator Stewart I think the
winner.
and then some actually.
Without so this is what kind of
music so with that and let us
proceed all right we're doing a
little bit of our of our pick up
from a previous meetings and
then moving into a couple of
other provisions today the first
is Senate Joint resolution
three.
the environmental rate
structures amendment of west on
the so called green amendment we
have
Senator Sedillo Lopez our
president we've we've already
taken public testimony on this
measure there is a letter but I
know there's some discussion
over the weekend
about about financing on some
rain guage and some some things
here and there I think
The folks at having those
conversations are are fairly
close but not quite in
employment and so we are so
we're gonna start our meeting
today with the original language
from Senate joint resolution
three and and proceed from there
there is a proposed committee
substitute from the sponsor that
we can prove it to if we need to
but I think at this point we
started with the original
language on that was introduced
on some short resolution three
and I also believe that we have
a a proposed amendment from
Senator Pirtle on several from
are you I'm not saying Senator
I'm not all right now and even
though it we were here last time
so we'll we'll circle back
around them some very joining us
again.
before we have to route but so
it Sir Senator Pirtle arrives
and if you doesn't I'm going to
give Senator Moores the
opportunity if you wants to
present rules I'm important.
The up
otherwise is there any Senator
songs Mr chair.
So it is connected there we go
Senator program twenty hours
are.
Senator Pirtle.
So.
Discussion personal circle back
around and from the Santo
programs on computers is is not
responsible access or more so
I'll give you an option to
present this ma'am.
John it Mr chair just a point of
order yeah so it I guess I'm a
little confused is there a does
the sponsor have a committee sob
and and if she does I guess why
why are we getting into
amendments to the original if we
if we got a committee sub that's
going to change things.
How are the amendment from
senator programs would in the
same.
On the on the part of the
committees of as it would be
applied to the originally okay
great thank you well
that's a good question they are
also.
Senator programs and is there
any other discussion from
committee with regard to Senate
joint resolution.
Operate.
Well let.
Senator.
I apologize Mr since I do get on
wait are we on the ritual one we
on the substitute your
substitute are we ons Senator
will post city Lopez a
substitute or I'm all jealous if
you prove your speed.
That's quite alright morning
ritual in which.
Some some yes so there was there
was there was some discussion
about Senator in the suburbs are
primary if there was if we got
to a place of
our alignment.
It's close but not quite there
and and so so I think we're
gonna be working off the the
ritual in which this at this
moment our center city office
does have a Committee several
for own if if from the up on
down with the language of the
original the original call
was indicating that the
amendment Senator pearl had
proposed would equally I think
be applied to of the committees
in one such as was originally
Senator did you want to present
in a moment at this time I can
have Miss Vigil put up on the
screen.
Mr chair if you wouldn't mind
that would be fine.
Well this bill if you'd be so
kind as to what is my my doctor.
So this would be able to create
and subsection rise which is
which is why I guess that I
think would be equally applied
to committees I was would be to
the regional and for those of
you who cannot who are listening
and only what we're building is
to is to create and subsection
D. M. seven drug resolution
screen that would say the
provisions of the rights
established in this section
shall not infringe on any other
person's environmental rights
including environmental rights
of persons who are residents of
another state or citizens of
another nation.
And also the program and present
your I'm in.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee essentially
what this would do is if if
the constitutional amendment as
written could put.
The oil and gas industry out of
business or other industry out
of business what it would ensure
is is that if we stop a certain
industry here that we don't then
of support the
Save.
Different country who were
buying oil from or cold from who
does it in a way that's much
dirtier than the way that we do
it since the since we are one of
the better players in the world
this just ensures that we don't
stop
that issue in our backyard but
that we actually care about the
environment as a whole in the
entire world thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much is there any
our Senator Sedillo Lopez would
this be a family member or were
knocked no Sir it's not very
well and and did you when you're
expert have any risk madam you
want to make on this before we
go to the committee.
You don't need to have the
opportunity to note no Sir.
Is there any discussion from the
committee on the amendment
senator Morris.
The I'm trying to switch out of
the the
Mr but
So Senator per what I see you
doing here is sense so if we're
going to be
are closing down oil and gas
your for instance a couple years
ago we had the issue with our
closing on the the coal plants
up in the northern part of state
but the nothing prevents us from
buying coal from other places
ship it from a much sturdier
polluted countries so what we're
saying here is of respect on in
St your New Mexico we're not
just outsource students to are
much dirtier environments and
countries that just don't have
our regulatory environmental
standards more reading that
correctly but it for us tonight
example used earlier which are
trying to their coal industry is
much much dirtier includes come
in and out of other coal
industry is much more damaging
to the world there are what are
coal industry was that what your
intentions are.
And senator of our Mr chair and
senator that's absolutely right
so if we shut down oil and gas
production or refining here in
New Mexico or electrical
production with the use of coal
it just ensures that we don't
stand purchase these products
from somewhere that isn't as
permanent to the environment as
us so that we're not buying fuel
from China that that they've
refined and and for a lot more
pollutants in the air per gallon
that what we put because we
don't want to just safe ship off
our the the the the emissions we
do a better job here we should
continue to do that here and so
just make sure we're not
importing things are products
that we need every day but was
created in a nation that
actually pollutes.
Really high right.
Thank you thanks Senator I think
Mr Senator Sedillo Lopez how
could this possibly be
unfriendly since this is the
intent of your this legislation.
It doesn't really
Really add anything to what what
this legislation does is or
might the what a joint
resolution does is it elevates
of the right to clean air land
water to a constitutional right
and what this seems to do.
I think this is addressing
another issue it is very eight
it's very unlikely this
particular amendment has used in
other states has not shut down
in Pennsylvania it is not shut
down the oil industry in any way
shape or form so it's very
unlikely and second I think it's
it would confuse the voters
because I think they would not
understand what what this is
about I am not sure that I
understand what it's about and I
don't think it accomplishes the
purpose we are a federation
in this country a joint of
state.
So I I again I I'm not sure.
I'm not sure it is certainly
does not.
Go with what we're trying to do
in this joint resolution and I
will defer to my experts
institutions in the COVID.
I thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator dear Lopez and members
of the committee I'm.
This certainly would take more
consideration but.
Fundamentally The New Mexico
constitution is about the
relationship between the people
of New Mexico and the government
and the bill of rights section
of the constitution it's about
the people of New Mexico saying
to New Mexico government when
you go for thing governed over
us which we give you now the
authority to do we want you to
do so in a way that doesn't over
reach and infringe on the
environmental rights of the
people of New Mexico so this
really seemed out of keeping
with that fundamental structure
of what the constitution is
about and keeping it focused on
the relationship between the
people of New Mexico and the
government.
Our.
Just awfully confuse it should
issues about the protective our
climate for New Mexicans you
would see that this will be a
friendly amendment because
that's what this does is it
protects New Mexicans from other
polluting so trying to Mexico
and elsewhere that so do not
have the standards of government
control we have so it seems like
this would be the in terms of
legislation proves true about
technical and so thank you
Senators thank you searcher to
consider Pirtle step it up and
bring this to us is this is
actually the intent that's all
the emails and getting this is
what the people wanted in those
emails not some watered down
version that seems to be the
president thank you Senator
Pirtle for stepping up for state
unemployment.
Discussion Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
The table Mr chairman.
Are you moving to to paper so
you're you would make a motion
to table Senate resolution
three.
No penalty amendment.
We're moving on the amendment
anyways right yeah let's let's
just let's just see how that a
hundred because of the moment
on a real quick and then and
then we can we can address
rather.
motions after that is is there
any further discussion on the
amendment.
Thank you debate into Mr
chairman the the explanation to
Senator again for his amendment.
And the support of.
Language from senator Morris.
Don't seem to be about the
amendment is before us
whatsoever.
This is amendment that would
save them the rights of people
in other states and other
nations shall not be affected by
a power has been amendment.
The joint resolution that would
protect our rights here in New
Mexico to environmental the
health and and and the
explanation they gave is it is
it was something totally
different so and it's no wonder
that we can figure out what it
says because our explanation has
nothing to do with what this
says.
What they seem to be saying here
is.
New Mexico is another change for
example passed a law or passion
amendment saying the we we
believe so strongly in the right
to bear arms sense of but it's
an absolute right here that we
actually require people in this
state.
South Carolina West Virginia
Mississippi were over.
To bear arms at all times.
That that would somehow have
some impact on us and it doesn't
we've has amendments for
ourselves in New Mexico
constitutional amendments.
And it doesn't have anything to
do with what goes on in other
nations other states.
I think this is a red herring is
being floated in an attempt to.
Delaying action on the bill.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I thank you very much Sir he's
being no incentive for
discussion on the moments.
Well say no for the discussion
on the Senator Pirtle did you
want to say one last thing.
Thank you Mr chairman and what's
I think what's ironic here is is
that the the there's such a
disconnect between
you know what this says and what
what the intent is I mean very
simply if this constitutional
amendment that was passed in a
power plant was closed down
because the emissions were too
high for the public safety of
the people with the New Mexico
we would then import power from
state of Mexico where they don't
have the high standards that we
have so the net would be that
there's more pollutants put out
into the atmosphere so the
intent is to clean up the
environment this will ensure
that we don't shut down certain
things in New Mexico then import
things from nations where they
produce things at a much higher
rate of of pollutants so it's
it's it's something that I think
really makes this amendment do
what the intent is and so I
would urge the committee to
support thank you Mr chair.
We
are seeing no one else at this
time seeking recognition must be
held if you please call the
roll.
Yes Senator Lopez Mr Chairman if
I could for clarification of
what are we voting on you madam
on the portal amendments.
And was it reduce just.
It was hard to pass on the
parliament as per okay now.
Earlier you.
Okay.
Senator Morris.
Our test on the amendment.
Senator o'neill.
D. C. Pino no.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart.
No the amendment Senator Wirth
no.
Senator Ingle.
Yes on the amendment.
Senator do.
No.
And senator I.
Was what it is four two four
four two six with one excuse.
Well.
On the original Senate joint
resolution at this time is there
any further debate right now.
Some analysts.
Since we're on the original
version to go back to my notes
since the substitute of that
civil service rural person
talked about passing maybe a
little more present some.
The original version when we
talked Senator of Mr chair
Senators to open issue in the I
got your back I apologize bear
with me to get to that original
version
You know just that you had
mentioned something about public
lands and I thought your your
stop to toot was are going to
try to fix some of the
constitutional issues and
conflicts of by that language in
the resolver students not seeing
what you're trying to fix that
some that would.
So can you tell me in your in
this original version what you
mean by public lands.
Public lands are defined as
lands owned by the state of New
Mexico.
And can you you obviously saw
that as a conflict because of
your substitute you try to fix
the constitutional conflict that
we that exists with the public
lands be managed by the all
commissioner of public lands on
your intent to limit that office
with this original version
because you see you seem to try
to understand that there was
that constitutional conflict
with the substituting fix that
so Marcin where you're not
trying to fix that because there
is a separate constitutional
conflict you seem to want to
eliminate the commissioner of
public lands.
No Sir there is no intention to
eliminate that the public lands.
The.
Secretary programs.
Well Senator.
Mr chair that's what you're
doing those are you are you fix
that.
Well Senator
I think that you can read it
that way I don't know that a
court would read it that way I
do agree that their fate
certification would help but
we're debating the original
amendment and I I simply don't
read it that way and it hasn't
been read that way in any other
court
in a country that has dealt with
this amendment and I will with
in in my I will defer to my
expertise if she has anything to
add has she knows is you know
she wrote a book about the green
amendment and in Pennsylvania
she was an individual who
brought the nation under the
green amendment that really has
been transformative in
Pennsylvania in helping the
state
focus on the need for
environmental protection and
climate change so with that L.
defer to my money expert my
again my cave and awesome.
Thank you senator I I must say
I'm a little bit confused I
don't really see how you read
into this the elimination of the
state land commissioner what
this simply would do.
Whichever version you utilize
whether it's the original
version or the modified version
it would ensure that the state
land commissioner and all of
those with authority over New
Mexico public lands are as they
are managing and doing there are
there works with regard to those
lands are prioritizing
protection of the environment
right to the people of New
Mexico and are ensuring that
they fulfill their fiduciary
responsibilities as trustee over
the natural resources of New
Mexico including those in on and
around public lands.
I'm Mr chair senator our expert
witness dispenser going to have
a commissioner of public lands.
It has want to vacation and
natural resources which is
responsible for overseeing and
managing the public lands of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
So the answer is no president is
not have a commissioner
constitutionally established
mature public lands as a
constitutional office correct Mr
chair senator.
You can see Senator I don't know
what it agencies created by the
constitution of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
The amount to Mr aso senators to
vote for winners dispensing have
a permanent fund.
Mr chair I do not know whether
Pennsylvania has a permanent
fund.
And so my point being is that
Pennsylvania constitutional is a
close to what was established
here with our neighbouring Act
with public land specifically
defined in our constitution and
the constitutional officer
charges that is the commissioner
of public lands and their
constitutional obligation is to
prop is to use those plans for
the beneficiaries of the
permanent fund.
So what you're amendment does
that you're subject to fixed
your amendment that you have
right now is in direct conflict
with the duties of the land
commissioner and of the
permanent fund for in behalf of
those beneficiaries.
You are now taking all
subdivisions of the state knows
in charge of the COVID the
public lands the currently
constitution puts in the hands
of the commissioner of public
lands.
Why aren't she you obviously
realize there is a conflict
there because your substitute
tries to fix that conflict so
why aren't you trying to fix it
because right now what you're
doing is eliminating that power
the constitution or have a
conflict our constitution of
Pennsylvania does not have that
we have in our neighboring act
in our constitution and our
management of those public lands
for the benefit of those
beneficiaries which is you know
includes our schools with
schools or universities which
includes our school for the
blind our school for the deaf
the military student for god
knows what reason got four
percent during apercent Fund
so we're talking about some
state institutions that benefit
from those lands so why are we
not fixing that here.
On Mr chair the the chair
directed us to go to the
regional language I do not
believe that the.
The original language would be
read to eliminated
constitutionally created office
as I read president in this
state the court's harmonize the
provisions of the constitution
and I do not believe that a
court would find that this
amendment have the attention of
of the.
Eliminating another part of the
constitution that would just not
be how courts interpret
constitutional amendments.
So.
We're with you know it's hard Mr
chair but.
Right now the constitutional
obligation of the commission co
clan is to maximize the benefits
of those public lands
they can do oil and gas leases
they can do.
Lots of different things grazing
leases thank you know our
partner with the solar or a wind
farm company to put up put up
We went to France
what I see this is doing is
taking that power and that money
away from permanent fund and
those benefits years
Actually by having conflicts
with the county commission he
does not want to have a wind
farm put up in their county but
that revenue would actually
benefit the school for the blind
school for the deaf to public
schools so there is a direct
conflict.
What is the constitutional
obligation for that commissioner
in your substitute you talk
about the trustees so you
realize that there was a problem
there so if there is that
problem we should fix it would
you just pass it right now.
Obviously there is a problem
since you have it you're saying
so what is preventing a county
commissioners wanted wind farm
in Union County or wherever
try to subvert and hold up that
we far project if the commercial
programs wants.
Mr chair Senator Moores is is
Senator Moores of moving to
introduce my.
Updated.
Amendment.
You as a senator can your job is
to fix your bill not my job to
fix your bill you realize
there's a problem the advocates
realize there's a major problem
they might not have that problem
in Pennsylvania but in New
Mexico you have that problem so
when your colleagues want to do
it I'm pointed out from a
problem that you actually have a
significant problem so we have
three votes you guys got a
hundred boats so you guys pass
whatever you want right now so
so do you guys fix it if you
want to pass something is in
direct costs of conflict of our
constitution go for.
As I said I don't believe that a
court would would interpret it
in direct conflict with the
constitution I think the courts
absolutely no have to deal with
this and they have in the past.
I don't think it's absolutely
necessary our proposed updated
language with to take into
account several editing
suggestions that the chair
proposed however some of those
suggestions probably had the
inadvertent of fact a weakening
the the amendment and so we did
not come to a complete agreement
and
since the chair directed us to
debate the old language I will
just again repeat that the old
language it is not intended to
eliminate the commissioner of
public lands and would not do
so.
Well
you know we're given three
options here in I quite frankly
the three to like the chairs
version the the best
so since you asked I'll I will
move the substitute of the
chairs of language that was sent
out
on the most of a conversation
about that so I do think of the
three versions of his language
was the best so I do that to us
to our it's impossible finest Mr
chair on on all this these
emails.
Is there a tool to run out there
is that two two number is two
one nine six four zero.
Two one nine six four zero.
And then
Senator Sedillo Lopez working
with the other Sanchez.
Our in response she came up with
two one nine six nine eight.
So.
Is seven two one nine six one
zero from what kind of rules on
this are and then Senator
Sedillo Lopez are structured
referral and came up with two
one nine six nine eight so I
think you would be moving six
four zero at this time I will
inform senator Morris.
That why I.
Louis one fronts.
Commitment and working with the
sponsor what has to try to work
to a place where we would be in
alignment on language in this
committee
Twenty one we're we're
relatively close and and so I'm
just on this website are the
sponsor of the US Sir mark no
the rest of members that it in
terms of my intent today.
this this goes to Judiciary and
a lot of the issues that are
remaining I think at this point
I'm Judiciary.
Hi issues is that is that if if
there is our operation at
Senator Sedillo Lopez
in rental agreement to today I'm
certainly happy to proceed with
that if there but but if we're
not in alignment
them I just assumed
Continue with the with the
original Senator resolution and
address some of these issues as
we get to
to judiciary but none the less
it is your right to make the
motion.
So what the
Senator that is not a friendly
motion to to the sponsor.
To all of us want.
I would hate to have about
senator Wirth and senator Ron
Ingle deprived of their right to
participate in this process
since they're not on the
Judiciary Committee so
we have a habit and long tracts
in the tradition of this
committee images church for
community trying to fix
legislation is squarely
as complex before it leaves our
communities so I don't like the
idea of punting to the Judiciary
Committee even though many of us
are on the committee I would
hate to miss out on senator
Wirth Senator Ingle so wise and
sage advice on this
constitutional because this is a
constitution we're talking about
if there's problems that will
clearly identify with these
three different issues we should
try to work to work them out and
actually keep it in this
committee before we pass along.
This is something sponsor we
we're three weeks into the
station for a long time I don't
see why this why the need to
rush this out right now when we
do we see glaring conflict here
Mr chair if that is the case
then I would move my.
my substitute.
The chair to take your remote on
the committee so who takes
someone else to do.
Correct I'm just been informed
of the committee streaming went
down.
So we're gonna standard ease
until I can confirm that we're
back up.
Mr chair says Baca here I have a
I have a non a non related
it's not debate I just I just
need to know the date when this
this is a substitute was emailed
out I don't so just looking
forward to my email here if you
could help me out Mr chair so
let me know if you remember it
does appear that we're packed up
on the air so Committee several.
Six point zero Mariah's emailed
out I believe last on Thursday.
And then committees six nine
eight.
There was an additional drop
after that I believe that was
emailed up yesterday morning for
members of the committee and
from centers be a request and
then
then the formalize raft was sent
out this morning if I remember
correctly.
Thank you Mr chairman not seeing
it do you have a time you have
an approximate time that it was
emailed out I just not seeing is
is all.
let me say
One second is Mr hero who
sometimes.
Six four zero I believe.
It certainly when I'm from New
legis.
I didn't have as many.
Emails from people repeatedly
saying the exact same thing
about this amendment would be
easier to find things.
Yes Arora sometime around
February Representative at nine
seventeen AM.
Mr chair just for the committee
we are streaming hit the web is
working and I will all this
conversation is up.
Yes that's what we're going to
have a conversation I just want
to make sure the committee
members understand though that
it's we're we're live.
And then be and then.
The the six nine eight point one
was emailed out act eight twenty
to this point.
I don't have a couple of
increase our level also treated
organized on that fed couple of
inquiries from people are
watching as to whether or not
the committee subs you made
available on the website and the
I do apologize for the
frustration from thanks our and
in trying to keep up with this
those were watching online.
If if it even if you're on the
wrong we are looking at
something we would have enough
copies for everybody else was
that the the R. to the south as
a as a as a proposed amendments
is not placed on website unless
it is adopted by up by committee
and the committee report is
approved for.
So that is apartment eight right
in terms of.
Health issues that.
Okay so what are you up to your
state yeah you said this Mr
chair you said that it was me
email that eight forty two this
morning a party to this morning
there was an email that one out.
This call and and that's the
that's the that's the so we're
looking at right now that is not
no that is on the Senator
Sedillo Lopez this up
on on the fifth of February is
when two one nine six four zero
was sent out and you want to
just write of searching your
email for two one nine six four
zero okay thank you so you know.
One of the second amendment is
critical at.
Mr chair summer Baca I just re
sent you I forwarded you both
email but the amendments so you
should have the top your inbox
this is on the Legisla- mail
correctors this on my other
email.
I.
Thank you.
You know Mr chair I got it you
know it bothers me that we just
got this at eight forty two PM
and eight or eight forty two
this morning you know Mr chair
and and the reason the bothers
me in particular is because the
good sponsor decried Mian
Committee just last week and
make sure to check that I got my
amendment in twenty four hours
earlier yet here we are of forty
eight minutes before the fact
getting an amendment in from
very self and and I feel like
balances somewhat hypocritical
but we can continue thank you.
Mr chair I personally sent an
email to every member of the
committee yesterday morning
with this amendment out of the
budgets of caution and it was
provided to the committee
secretary the night before that
on Friday night unfortunately
because I was concerned about
this very issue I've been on
staff on Saturday morning email
to each and every member of the
committee with the the draft of
this
Of this particular version this
committee substitute and I
suggested that they take a look
at it in as an alternative to
the chairs.
Committee substitute and I did
that I believe about with before
nine AM on Saturday morning.
No yesterday morning I'm sorry
the days Brandon MARKOSEK
morning yes sentiment.
Know your donations on that plus
some syllabus.
And I did it because of what I
had done it has Senator Baca
stated.
Making sure that we all wells.
Okay
let us.
Getting organized less are I've
got so we're just on the floor
and then we have Senator Stewart
and service yes I think I think
it's worth having a conversation
so back to the
I would like to help please to
see what we're what we've been
seeing so it's going to move on
and I can I don't have the two
oh two number the
Better work so
We are.
Also what I'm hearing from
senator Morris unless you if
we're gonna it is Mr chair is a
plan to cater to all this year
are we move forges desire the
majority to just get bill out
today I think I think the desire
is to is to move this bill
forward to the judiciary where
some of the.
More Judiciary specific issues
that would not.
Yes going to move this to a to.
Right well so when I was when I
hear from Senator Moores scroll
down the researcher.
If you pass this is the right
one we're Senators.
If I may.
Well.
This is do not pass motion on
Senate joint resolution three
and again pressed motion on
Senate joint resolution on on
that set rules committee
substitute for Senate resolution
three two one nine six four zero
point one.
So that is your motion.
Thank you I'm trying to squint
to read this so it does look
like the the one I.
Your.
This material if you will go
down just a little bit I'm I'm
I'm gonna ask you to stop in the
second if you remove one is on
the tax Ruiloba.
So I can go back and she said
she had to be resolved at the
very top.
And that will have.
Yeah the system members of the
need right down the street so
just just for the record please.
Also that was or was our our
internal solution around that
that I think of of fundamental
there are there are there are a
couple of minor issues but a
fundamental
The distinction between the two.
Would be between center city
office as and and the one that I
put forward one is is our
subsection C..
Use the word just storage for
the people and subsection C.
employers says the state
including is political
subdivisions shall service trust
the.
The natural resource.
Subsection C. is the main is the
main distinction between the
two.
Mr thank you for Perkins so and
and the reason I think this is
where I think we all agree on
the people the state have the
right to a clean and healthy
environment including water air
health ecosystem and climate to
the protection of the natural
cultural scenic and helpful
qualities of the environment and
then you did the inspection
take away the conflict that was
invited there by talk about
public lands which public lands
to the very soon if you're has
ace.
This.
I have a funky alarm house plays
the raiders loss are wrong
Representative goes up my
apologies
so anyways now you know a little
bit more about the more social
but it was a takes care of the
the issue that we have with the
public lands definition here
with the conflict between day on
commissioner of public lands but
also at the Senator Lopez so
syllabus is what you were
intending to do with the actual
subdivisions of the state
be protected in actually being
stewards of the apartments more
so than just those those public
lands that we're talking about
that are.
The
the state for the permanent fund
I believe that was your regional
center.
Really sure if at all just want
to the fifth largest school
specific.
Things laid out in our enabling
act.
Channels Mr chair
The words for the people
actually says nothing while
trustees.
The language that I propose the
state and I understand we don't
necessarily have to have
including its political
subdivisions that's unnecessary
language because the state
includes political subdivisions
shall serve as trustee of the
natural resources of New Mexico
and shall conserve protect and
maintain these resources for the
benefit of all New Mexicans
including present and future
generations the reason the
trustee language is so important
is because it has legal
significance and if you read the
cases that are described in the
book the green amendment they
all rely on the legislature's
obligation to serve as trustee
for the benefit benefit of the
resources for the benefit of the
people Stewart is extremely weak
language and would just make
this appeal going amendment
without legal import.
In addition there is the case
the read the.
The Sanders be read Senators
read the Martinez case in which
the court interpreted article
twenty section twenty one to
simply director legislature to
do something about the
environment and did not specify
a level of care for the
environment and so what this
what what having Stewart instead
of trusting and the wait is
phrases is extremely problematic
in addition the the shares
version has something unusual it
says it may it must use these
resources for the benefit of all
New Mexicans in fact the state
of New Mexico doesn't use
natural resources it limit it
leases that natural resources
and it leads others to extract
them and it collects royalties
on them but it doesn't use them
so my language is language in
I'm the I'm sorry I should say
money the language of the
Sanchez all of the sponsors of
this bill is much clearer about
the intent of the bill which is
to make this strong something
that can be used and to repeal
the week article twenty section
twenty one which has only been
interpreted once in the state
and unfortunately was
interpreted has almost nothing
just a feel good kind of
amendment directing the
legislature to do something
about the environment.
And I don't know if my expert I
apologize I don't know if my
experts
Has anything to add as you know
she wrote the book.
I think you covered it well but
if there are being additional
questions about the value of
trustee I'll be happy to offer
that later but I think you've
covered it beautifully.
Senator Wirth.
Garcia Zarate robbery so Mr
that's on this point or not okay
very well let me proceed over
than Senator Stewart.
I'm not on this point Mr
chairman.
Okay Representative also Lopez.
Mr Chairman it can be related to
what I just wanted to mention
that I think could be good for
those who are watching also
since they don't have you know
that the two different
proposals that could be I think
what currently talking about I
think the one that we're
watching that we have on the
screen is this the chairs
proposed substitute.
So let me just clarify the chair
is not proposals to the chair
Sierra and and work on some
language to see if if if we can
get to.
That is what it is and
yes Mr chair what I'm asking
which one are whose is this that
we're looking at right now on
the screen this is not center
city office okay well who's is
this that we're looking at
senator Morris may be our motion
based on the on the doodles that
I've worked on that contract up
okay so this is a.
I potentially proposed which
will right now is being
discussed what I want to mention
Mr chair I think what would be
good is that since we don't have
in front of us and I know it's
it's is this is what we're
working with yeah this were
online this is a new system
usually if we're in person we
have everything laid out in
front of us and paper but I
think what would help maybe for
the discussion Mr Chairman is if
we could have for the
differences are between what
we're looking at this point and
what Senator Sedillo Lopez is
substitute also has so that
maybe there's some points that
we could look at I think would
be very helpful I'm especially
for the public who's out there
watching and because some of us
you know we printed out what we
have but I'm just thinking this
to at least if there could be a
highlight as to what the
differences are between your
committee substitute as well as
Senator Sedillo Lopez either you
are see there's the magic just
so that we can kind of keep the
the conversation and everybody
knows where you're where the
points are of the differences
that Senator Sedillo Lopez is
benching and of course for quite
the southern measure looks at
just for purposes of of
So we can keep track of the
public knows what we're
discussing thank you certainly
no problem at all and and again
leave the differences.
There's a difference between and
subsection more subsection be
between the two I think the only
differences subsection C..
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair I'd like to
make a motion to table two one
nine six four point one.
Very well so there's a motion to
table so we're not in.
I can't believe you your maps
yes yes yes yes right yes two
one nine six four point one
So I don't battle.
Senator Wirth have the floor let
me disconnected especially wants
to but but but then that
question isn't in order it's
just you just you know they have
people have stepped on that
point there was a wee okay can
we proceed.
I'm gonna say no to our Senate
leader with the house of those
to do with the rules of C. want
so orders all of which said that
the siege Senator you know my
respect for you
yeah that's that's funds going
to vote.
Ms being no if you'd please call
the roll this is a motion to
table.
I propose committee substitute
two one nine six four zero point
one.
Miss Vigil please call.
No.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes yes Senator Ingle.
Senator do.
Yes Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes only ones on the left when
I.
I'm still going yes what is the
number six to four with one
excuse by well so on a vote of
six different
Point two one nine six four zero
point one is stable we're back
on the original language and
Senator Stewart Mr chair I think
I still do I still have the war
actually Senator Stewart has the
for.
You Mr before you and then and
then you.
You are muted.
Thank you Mr chairman.
A.
So I'm questions for us Senator
Antoinette Sedillo Lopez.
Senator are you.
Are you more interested in us
passing the substitute that you
have come up with for the
original the as J. R..
Well I think if we're going to
debate it would be easier to
debate off of my committee
substitute I do think that
Senator Ivy Soto made some good
points in in trying to
In trying to clarify and make
the bill update the bill so.
So I and I also think it would
be better to pay off that bill
instead of the bill that is
likely to be changed in a and
Judiciary so we can get the the
issues discussed has.
As clearly as possible.
So Senator Sedillo Lopez so
which one would you like us to
make a motion to pass out of
here the original S. J. R. or
your subject to.
My committee substitute.
So Mr chairman I move that we
adopt the
six nine eight point one version
for discussion purposes.
Federal also we have a motion do
not pass percentage of
resolution three in a motion
produce passive Committee subs
rules committee substitute
resent resolution three two one
nine six nine eight point one.
Our and so we're debating then
between that committee
substitute and the visual
language.
Is there Senator Sedillo Lopez
is this a friendly motion or not
yes this is friendly very well
is there debate on on Senator
Stewart did you want to begin
right on this or are we can
proceed run two hours.
Mr chairman I think we've
debated quite a lot and I would
like us to remove the secretary
aren't real resolution along so
I have no further debate now
what senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr chair I just just
a COVID
I really appreciate the work
that you have done along with
Senator studio Lopez to address
and tighten this language up I
do think it's important to to
acknowledge and I I certainly
appreciate my good friend
senator Morris wanted to make
sure.
Senator Ingle higher part of us.
All of the legal discussions but
but I do think it's important to
acknowledge that really the
there isn't there are legal
issues between trustee and
Stuart and that really is
appropriate for the Senate
Judiciary Committee to work on
and so I just want to say that I
think this is exactly how
your committee Senate rules
committee should work is you've
you've tightened this I really
appreciate Senator Sedillo Lopez
working on its
you know when there may still be
some legal questions which can
be addressed in the next
committee but again I just want
to make that statement that I
feel very comfortable moving
this forward given the work
that's gone into this thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Baca.
Thank you Mr chair of I don't
know if we were on on on webcast
will go so really I just wanted
to for the record again
statewide interjection to the
amendment on this route this
rules committee asked for
preferred email from us at the
onset of committee starting and
I did in fact find that email
yesterday but it was a non
preferred address as you know
we're getting inundated with
hundreds of emails every day so
we provided addresses so that we
can not
get these and other notices that
are pertinent to committee
meetings and again so I just
wanted to restate that objection
we can carry on with the vote
now thank you thank you very
much I do appreciate it you you
keeping us.
That means in these important
issues.
Are particularly violent with
that in which we are right now
I'm not I would say if I may
before we go to actually not so
Senator Pirtle medicine but when
we go to some problems that you
have
couple things and want to say
about this to the stop in terms
of some areas that I think I
think you will need to be
focusing on between here and
Judiciary senator.
And thank you Mr chairman I I
just wanted to be clear we're
just
gonna vote whether or not we
adopt this and then we'll have a
vote whether to pull this us in
this out of committee or is it
just one vote.
There are two Rep Patricia just
a question so it's actually two
books out to suppress the first
bill would be that the that the
main motion what what the main
motion as one for the committee
sob and number and then after
that it would be the
The the the whether not to given
what.
Thank you Mr chairman I do have
something that I had in my notes
the last time we were debating
and then
I ended up not bringing it up.
So on page.
To.
Line one it mentions and to the
protection of the natural
cultural scenic helpful
qualities of the environment.
I was just curious what we're
cultural what.
Pertaining to which culture I
mean that's so weird that when
you look at the definition
on line it's a very very broad
term and I'm just curious what
the intent of the word what
areas were are we intended to
protect and then what the
unintended consequence of such a
weird in this certainly and and
the private centers in this
legislation on that subsection
pay is on the first sentence in
the existing article twenty
section twenty one that has been
in the constitution of the last
fifty years.
so
so that is.
That language is not going to
work helpful on has been has
been president not constitution
the last two years.
Mr Chairman have there been any
cases regarding this.
Section.
Those are
Senator Pirtle there was one
case centers reimburses Martinez
which was decided I think five
years ago and that case
what it found was that
and and and actually can we can
distributary by the the
citation that right but the
issue this first sentence
nothing in this present Ms
became an issue in that case
what that case revolved around
was was the issue of a public
trustee are and whether not on
how many long orders
statutory law availed on that
issue as well as the procedural
issues attenuating to
environmental improvement for
decision.
Okay thank you Mr maybe the the
sponsor would would like to
elaborate on the weird cultural
what the intent is and then how
how that could be interpreted.
Thank you Mr chair
we work with a lot of people
we've been working on this
probably for over a year now in
New Mexico and this is in
response to work with we've
needed people who suggested that
one of the problems of is that
they didn't feel that their
cultural rights to their own
land or to public lands were
being expect seeing accepted so
that cultural is a very
important word that we would not
want to lose this is a multi
cultural state and I think
people's cultural rights to
their land is something that
should rise to put a
constitutional prominence and
something that the people should
have the opportunity to vote on.
And and Mr chair incident with
that include my culture.
Yes.
So.
No.
I'm looking at the definition of
culture and Merriam Webster to
diss the customary beliefs
social forms of material traits
of a racial a racial religious
or social group.
so it's it's a pretty broad
definition of Merriam Webster I
understand what the intent is
but I can see how
they brought interpretation
could be very problematic
with with the language of where
we're going to put this in the
constitutions I just want
everybody to be aware you know
you're probably gonna have some
some large issues come up with
things going on around the state
in different areas because of
the broad interpretation that
could possibly occur with this
word so thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much Senator
Ingle.
Yeah thank you Mr chairman I was
just curious when we're talking
about to this in the state of
The expertise from state of
Pennsylvania is that correct.
She is not in doubt.
Okay so she yes okay I was just
curious how many of state owned
acres there are by the state of
Pennsylvania in the state.
I don't
have my my finger to but I could
certainly look it up and send it
along to you.
Well I think the I think the
there's there's there's there's
there's just a major major major
major difference in the number
of acres that are owned and
Think about so many of these
things that.
You hear about and discussed his
partners things like that a
difference if we can do for the
state and where we can put
things in the state I can
remember a few years of back to
senator Phil Griego had it has a
the company that want to put
some when Chargers in this in
San Miguel County.
And not we had some discussion
in the legislature about it and
he was probably told that to
mainly by the folks in the
county of Santa Fe that they did
not want those on the horizon
and that ended the whole thing
right there and the thing we
have to understand that so many
cases here is we have such a
different.
Lyman and a different look in
the state we have to be real
careful what we consider and
what we do here because we all
know that to there's a lot of
the the funds to fund everything
in the state and mainly our
school and thanks for our
children come from a part of the
state that should be dollars not
very pretty.
And we have to be real careful
when we're crashing things like
this the what the damage that we
can do this status on believable
as far as companies coming in
here and developing.
What assets we have and we have
to be extremely careful where
this takes us thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Ingle Senator Lois.
Thank you Mr chairman I was just
I actually don't have the
discussion I just wanted to make
a motion when the time is right
okay thank you
Senator Moores.
Thank you.
Thank you senator thank you
center back to the Senator
pearls question that popped out
of my head is that I I think you
know the yes this this would not
the council member would not
apply to tribal lands correct
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Centers in the office.
You.
Center city office.
I apologize I know your
conversations to do Senator
Stewart our our refer recent.
At.
I can be tribes.
I'm.
So because the tribe's currently
on number tribes currently have
oil and gas exploration programs
coal mining on the Navajo Nation
on two factor were proposals in
the past where I think we'll
walk to you maybe it on you know
we're.
This literal looking at nuclear
waste dumps so this would not
infringe on their rights to
export their oil and gas the
whole if they want to do a
nuclear waste dump in on what
you were
on Mescalero say we still have a
ways to do that correct.
That's correct the state could
not control.
Would be so they would have with
the tribe then in the cases
Senator coral was talking about
would tried to be able to stop
the windmill farms are going up
near there try within a local
community would not have the
power to stop a nuclear waste
dump as opposed to going to be
very stressful events in the
past have any control over that.
Thanks amendment would apply to
state action would affect
tribal.
It would not limit tribal
government.
So so do you Senator Lopez Mr
it's a one way path so if what
you wanted to do a nuclear waste
dump again I don't know if
that's and senator Wirth
district and I don't think it is
the consistent what senator
Wirth district management people
in I lay a community and serve
our neighbor would be upset if I
try to put a nuclear waste dump
just well this there is walking
with so there's no action that
will good citizens of Senators
workflows District role products
it gives a try put a nuclear
waste dump in their area.
That would be there were they
would have to work with the
federal government on that issue
on and the federal government
probably has the federal
government works now have of
opportunities for the neighbors
the neighboring jurisdictions to
comment and to give their input.
So we would go through the
normal processes this amendment
however would not be something
that would bind the tribe's.
Careers would still be able to
export oil and gas resources on
their tribal lands maybe to
rural three directional drilling
off their lands on as long as
they can still droll that but
the other other organizations
might not be able to do that
with the contractors then with
their careers be subject to the
US war with increases have to
only use tribal owned
governments are government owned
contractors do their oral injury
all will grow into their
fracking in all of the things
that happen on all real and what
they will only be allowed to use
tribal owned entities and not
so.
Businesses that are under the.
Jurisdiction of the state of
Mexico.
Mr chair senator Morris this
amendment would not
I have a problem with the
premise of your question this
amendment would not stop oil and
gas drilling in the state what
it would do is it would
encourage legislators as a
matter of policy and respecting
the voice of the people to read
to regulate it so that it it
does not destroy the land does
not pollute the air and does not
risk of polluting and the water
for taking all the water out of
Papen furs that would be a
responsibility that the
legislature would have but it
would not shut it down.
That was that was my question
the question is would it affect
operations on tribal lands so we
have a constitutional duty or if
this is passed to protect the
oil for our.
Not the oil the floor plan and
everything else we would not
have the power on to.
do so.
If that land is in the state of
New Mexico but on tribal
entities correct.
Mr chair senator
that is the Craig case now we
have a government to government
relationship with tribes and
there is much collaboration the
tribes have to respect the
federal government with because
the federal government holds
those lands in trust for the
tribe's so they would work with
the federal government has is
the case now this amendment
would change nothing about that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator that was my question.
Thank you very much Sir more
Santo Domingo.
Thank you Mr chair I was just
gonna let the committee know
with Senator Ingalls question
that Pennsylvania has sixteen
percent public land in New
Mexico is nearly fifty percent.
Thank you very much appreciate
that.
Is there any further debate.
We're also not Senator Stewart
you're gonna make and.
Mr chairman I thought I already
made the motion.
So I'll corrected I move that do
not pass the Senate joint
resolution three and they do
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for S. J.
R. three with the two oh two
number six nine eight point one.
well with a second presented
will address.
Okay yes
And up.
I'm.
That are one of the reasons that
we weren't able to get the full
alignment opt over this weekend
I was out our hospitals were.
More as
there's a I'm not the committee
so.
Alex and richly we thought that
was going to be
Residents I was gonna be
considered on Friday of this
last week.
Which would give them a little
bit more of an indication on
some of the issues some
ancillary issues with regard to
this most efficient.
I do anticipate that that will
happen they will be working on
that either this afternoon or
Wednesday so that by the time
this is the next committee.
What have greater clarity as to
where possible full sets and
what the impacts into being and
and whether that becomes
relevant to the conversation
when we get to Judiciary not as
well as dealing with issues of
of the future relationship and
how far that the chair will ship
would extend with regard to this
constitutional moment.
So having said that though
The R..
We are on a motion right now so
let me just clarify the
procedure.
This motion is to determine
whether the main motion is going
to be the original Senate
resolution or the committee
stop.
Once we decided that will have
the opportunity to have a vote
as to the as to the position of
the committee recommendation of
the committee on what are the
main motion it's so I yes votes
we have the main motion be the
committee set up to nine two one
nine six nine eight no no would
revert us already would have us
continuing with the main motion
being the originally introduced
Senate resolution three.
With that Miss Vigil if you
please call Senator Baca.
No.
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Moores.
You're just in the center Mr
this is to say except the sub
and then we will be voting on
this.
Correct.
Yes yes.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator.
Yes.
And Senator Ivy Soto.
No.
What is the what is the vote
eight two three so and eight in
favor and three opposed on the
main motion is not Senate rules
committee substitute for US
Senate joint resolution three
eight number two one nine six
nine eight point one.
And Senator Lopez you want to
make a motion with regard to
the.
The committee recommendation.
Yes Mister chairman I'd like to
make a do pass motion on Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate joint resolution three
but I will also run depressed
motion for our
centers have assistive percent
resolution three two one nine
six nine eight is there any
further discussion this time.
Saying that Miss Vigil please
call the roll.
Senator.
No.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
No.
Senator o'neill yes Senator T.
C. Pino.
Yes Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle no.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator Ivey
Soto yes ma'am.
So.
Seven so K. one of seven to four
center city office you have a do
pass recommendation on Senate
rules committee substitute for
so passionate resolution three
number two one nine six nine
eight point one thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee thank you for
operating in the committee and
and for the discussion and
answer state thank you all so
very much more would be willing
to work on I'm revising the
language and what not and and
and all that that would end with
another oral conversations that
took place a lot of extra goes
on to the so thank you much for
shipping thank you Mr check.
The Senate bill
R. one hundred major minute
matter party ballot nominations
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
dispersing.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and Committee members.
This bill Senate bill one
hundred is a bill that intends
to increase the the level of
participation in our elections.
By making it possible for New
Mexico to become one of those
states and there are several
others the information was
called fusion voting.
This is a process in which.
From minor party candidate.
For a candidate nominated by a
minor minor party might also
have been nominated by a major
party.
And is one this done in several
of the state of the secretary of
state's office is working with
us and says this is feasible in
New Mexico.
And we think this is a be a way
to to make it possible for for
voters who are.
Disenchanted or some what
feel like their views have not
been
incorporated in two major party
platforms are major party the
selection of candidates process
sees and so they don't want to
register for either the major
parties but they still can can
have a role in the in the
election.
And this is been done as I
mentioned in in several other
states we have expert witnesses
here who will.
Give us information about this
and with that I'll turn it over
to.
Mr Eric Griego who is my first
expert witness then we also have
a miles Rapoport and Larry
Norton in each home will speak
briefly on this measure and then
finally the drafter of the bill
Shawna Casebier is available if
there are any technical
questions and with that I'll
turn it over to Mr regal.
I.
I'm not sure Griego in the
waiting rural I'm gonna send you
an email really quickly because
in like again just to make sure
that you will have an.
Architect.
Mr speaker.
You're on.
Senator Sanchez.
Four of ten would be the next
person to speak right well from
the apps Center and modern
models around the for
international president
come across as well as a former
next president denotes.
Our business and please proceed.
What.
Mr chairman thank you for
inviting me here today the only
additional thing I would say
about myself there's Eric should
we go back to him first not okay
what we prefer to hear from you.
Okay hired.
Anyway I appreciate the
opportunity to talk and I have
submitted written testimony I
did service secretary of the
state of the state of
Connecticut for four years from
nineteen ninety five to nineteen
ninety nine and ten years in the
Connecticut legislature from
prior to serving as secretary of
the state and that combat in
that in the Connecticut house I
was chair of the government
ministration elections committee
which had cognizance over
elections so I have done a lot
of work on these issues over
time and Connecticut is a state
that has in Connecticut called
cross and doors mint but it's
six exactly the same as fusion
voting.
We have had it in Connecticut
since nineteen eighty one so
it's been in place for forty
years
we have a number of minor
parties in Connecticut some on
the progressive side some on the
conservative side they have the
you know I in my judgment played
a healthy role in Connecticut
politics over time
administratively the point I
made in the in my testimony was
that administrative relief this
has not been difficult at all
for the local Connecticut
registrars every town has a
Connecticut in Connecticut has
both the democratic and
Republican registrar
the voting machines have been
calibrated for all the time that
we've had so that the votes for
each party votes for candidates
who are cross endorsed by
another Marty minor party our
cat in
Separately but then added in so
that the can.
Is endorsed by a minor.
Votes counted as well just
quickly a couple little
interesting things from based on
the Connecticut experience out
we currently have I the.
Statewide
minor parties we had a
Connecticut party which was that
sep founded by senator Lowell
Weicker back in the in the in
the in the in the nineties we
have a Green Party we have an
independent party which is
conservative party we have the
working families party we have
the Reform Party originally
founded by Ross Perot supporters
at and we have the Libertarian
Party.
Just for point of comparison of
kind of impact in the twenty
sixteen presidential election
at one million at.
It the results are enhanced by
party registration because the
voters are identified my part
eight we had ninety nine hundred
and twenty six thousand
democratic voters four hundred
eighty thousand Republican
voters and one million twenty
six thousand who were
independent voters and
altogether forty two thousand
who are minor parties for all
the money it received people
receive us for money part so
they have been a in my view
generally a healthy way for
people who don't fully feel
represented by the major parties
to participate without serving
as spoilers or as without you
know having an unnecessarily
high style relationship to the
majority party so I think it's
generally been a healthy
development last thing I'll say
is in twenty eighteen
in the gubernatorial election at
the democratic candidate receive
six hundred and seventy seven
thousand votes on the democratic
party line an eighteen thousand
votes on the working families
party line so relatively small
number but significant and the
Republican candidate receive six
hundred and twenty four thousand
votes on the Republican line.
And twenty five thousand votes
on the libertarian line so again
sort of roughly equivalent on
the conservative and the liberal
the liberal side so I you know
this issue came up when I was in
the legislature and came up on a
secretary of the state generally
I was strongly supportive of
keeping across indoors meant
as sounding in Connecticut we it
is still an impact today has
general support both from the
democratic and Republican.
RT
legislators at never been it has
been a serious attempt to repeal
it of late.
So it gives money brought my
would be it's not hard to
administer it doesn't cost money
and it gives people who feel
like they are somewhat
Representative but not fully
represented by the major parties
an opportunity to have a party
that they feel fully invested in
which is not necessarily a
spoiler in elections so I would
say that the I'm happy to be
here and answer questions but I
think that the The New Mexico
would be well served to have
this kind of legislation in
place agency Robert thank you
very much appreciate it.
Senator Ortiz B. how did you
have any other expert witness is
one all.
Mr Chairman.
Can you sell it later we are
going to be the next thanks for.
Thank you Mr chairman sorry
center I was stuck on the
webcast it gets that between the
two the broadcast so thank you
for hearing is actually I'm just
here Senator Mr chairman to to
answer any questions we do have
a couple amendments that that we
we're working on that center to
the Pino can talk about that
address some of the concerns
that some members of the
committee raise and also that
we've heard from secretary of
state well the FIR and some of
the conversations to try to make
sure that we build on the
experience of Connecticut New
York and South Carolina and the
other states but this is really
kind of unique to New Mexico and
I hope that at the appropriate
time we can talk about those
because I know there's some
concerns about candidates being
listed more than once which
we've addressed in an amendment
and also to to make doubly sure
that there is no possibility
that.
This this this so called sore
loser provisions in current law
would be in any way affected
that someone who lost in a
primary could then run as
another party member so we have
the equipment to address both of
those concerns make it crystal
clear that that candidates will
be lifted once and that and that
there there will be no
possibility of shenanigans in
terms of people trying to run
once they lose in a primary but
I will I'll defer to to Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino if there's any
questions myself and I need
Matthews will also be able to
handle a we've been working on
the bill for a while and so
hopefully in Shawna Casebier
from the State Council help the
minutes also available and
finally Mr chairman and members
the committee Larry.
Norton who is a national expert
on some of the technical issues
around how we do this how we
live literally implement.
Disaggregated the votes by party
so essentially if you run as a
as a Democrat in as a second
party member working families
are few honors to Republican and
a and a Conservative Party for
example New York we disaggregate
those votes are added up
separately the good news is that
the same company that does it in
New York communion does it in
New Mexico and the Larry Norden
Norton who will hopefully be
able to join us he's he's trying
to try to get here soon as
possible he's in New York
we'll be able to address any of
the technical issues and it's
fairly he's been told by the
minutes fairly routine it's it's
really a software change and it
should be a complicated all
given their experience but I
will I will us stop there just
be open for questions and as
soon as Larry to bits you Mr
chairman senator maybe maybe he
can address some of those
questions he's trying to get off
another call right now so thank
you Mr chairman and committee.
Thank you very much so so that
some of it is enrollment
computer programs will be able
to take care.
Our initial us Senator Ortiz if
you know.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
move the first amendment.
Part of the first amendment let
me just as a matter of
displaying a point out that that
was sent in jest there is no
suggestion whatsoever that there
are actually program resentment
as well there's also privileges
and immunities clause in New
Mexico there's no need to
operate for the litigation on
that site comment thank you very
much senator if you know please
proceed.
Thank you.
I would then number one to
Senate bill one hundred and what
is the total number on that
amendment place.
Well now I have to find it.
Senator it is two one nine five
two one point one wrote to put
it up on the screen.
You reached peak that the we
have three members your sourcing
was a one nine five two one
point one.
And this on page one or nine
thirteen.
Strong winds for like lines
fourteen through seventeen.
That would and certainly there
are.
Amending enacting sections of
the NMSA in nineteen seventy
eight billing lost twenty twenty
chapter nine section two.
Well and then on pages nine and
Spanish.
Right section seven.
Prior to me.
That is right from the bill.
Not statutes.
And then we number of the
succeeding sessions.
Senator Ortiz panel please
present the on the amendments.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this is simply removes
language the.
That would possibly allow
candidates to be listed more
than once on the same ballot and
this this clarifies and that's
not the intention.
Very well.
Are there any questions on on
amendments on this amendments.
Morris.
Thank you senator us Mr Senator
Ortiz on the conversation I had
with our I guess it was the
chair of the Conservative Party
New York called and was talking
to me about this said that that
was actually the intent that
work well and state was that
that was listed multiple times
is it not listed multiple that
save it had jury Ortiz depino
Democrat you're or to see you
know when the Terry injury or to
see if you know
second amendment right so a
party all those great to you so
you stand for
that's what he said actually
works there New York so why
we why are we taking.
Mr chairman and and senator
Morris I think we in the next
amendment will make that clear
we will also provide you with a
mock up.
The balance would look if it's
amendment number two is accepted
as well as amendment number one
in in in basically Liz.
Then under.
Is there is a market yup so so
it in New Mexico because of the
language we had to.
The legal issues that could have
been raised by listing the same
candidate multiple times on the
ballot we now we listen
candidate ones and then the
parties would be listed under it
multiple times different states
handle different ways this is
the way we we we thought it
would work best in New Mexico.
Hello in for the questions on
the sentiments.
Is there any objection to
adopting this moments.
Well see no objections this
amendment is adopted Senator
parties bureau please proceed.
Mr Mr chairman I would I would
move adoption of a second our
second amendment to Senate bill
one hundred if the if the
captain put that up as well
thank you well so Senator to the
panel is now promoting the
second amendment's.
That makes senator Morris very
happy Mr chairman.
The.
The second amendment
So
induction of the of the second
amendment ended already.
We've got that you for us yes
okay then then then.
This primarily what the what the
Moscow showed us doing.
but it also says that if
somebody loses.
In the primary for a major
party.
Nomination can I.
Then come back and and and try
to get back on the ballot as a
minor party candidate.
It makes clear that we still
don't want to and sore loser
phenomenon to take place.
And is this Mr Griego had
anything else to add to that and
like to hear is further
explanation.
Mr thank senators so yeah this
is in response to actually
secretary states are due to that
the secretary state's office and
also a couple members had raised
to just make it crystal clear
that the intent was not to have
somebody losing a primary and
then re file as a minor party
candidates this even though we
thought it was cover an initial
draft and this case appears here
can can clarify that as the
drafter do we want to just make
it explicit all and Mr chairman
centre also just wanted to note
that the Larry Leri nor nor
agency here if he if he.
If he's needed to to clarify any
issues around the the voting
issues just to know he's trying
to call.
Welcome.
Are there any on the.
There any questions on.
This I'm I'm at a moment seven
five seven two point one.
Sen course.
Thank you Mr on thank you for
Senator Ortiz bill quick
question on maybe it's better
for the chairman thank you know
what this applied to
presidential elections I'm
thinking like you know I guess
this was nineteen eighty with
the Anderson and on our own.
When he ran and then renters of
federal roster I guess Ross for
primary so someone's the primary
with the supply to the
presidential candidate well as.
Independent which has happened
in American history topless you
for state races.
That's a question to ask.
In fact we have
on in the market that they
provided it did have a
presidential candidate being
nominated by more than one party
are we actually presidential
nomination knocks which is
article five fifteen Hey and
this is not seek to modify or
amend article fifteen eight only
our is is modify want to call
eight many of the procedures of
article fifteen a depend upon
the procedures and article eight
so quite candidly I'm not sure
how well how well that that the
the interplay between the two
would actually work.
That's necessary.
We've been out of since our
expert witnesses no Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino would you have an
idea on that your expert
witness.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
will defer to the expert witness
either Mr Adam Porter Mr Griego
costly Mr Norton to and to.
Mr Darden do you have an answer.
I do not.
I I just I think it Mr not to
crack it I mean the idea is that
that no this is for not for
primary so just to clarify this
is for the general election only
this is for the other difference
is this is for minor parties
endorsing a major party
candidates so that would not be
a scenario where two major
parties would endorse the same
candidate on that was very that
was again based on feedback we
heard from consulting with many
members of the secretary state
and so want to make sure that
there were there was a concern
that major party should not be
in any way sort of intervening
in other major party process
these so this is really about
empowering smaller parties minor
parties to participate if they
if two things happen one is the
to to endorse a major party
candidate and to that can a once
their divorce their rights the
can is not forced in any way to
do that here she has to file a
declaration of candidacy for the
second for the minor party so
we we we in this mock up we have
the presidential races are
assumption is that it would as
it is in other states that those
party those major party
candidates could also choose to
to accept the minor party in a
nomination in the listed
underneath their name is under
two parties Republican Party
Conservative Party for example
and so hopefully that that
clarifies but I will defer to
the chairman who obviously knows
a lot more about election law
than I do whether or not we need
to tweak this to make it to make
sure it's in compliance with how
we handle the presidential
process yeah I'm actually on on
if I may the no I'm sorry you
have article fifty names the
nomination of president as
president article fifteen our
presidential elections and it
would seem to create an issue.
With regard to the selection of
the presidential electors of
course this would not be an
issue at all if New Mexico or if
it's sufficient other states and
but not to the national popular
vote compact
but until the national popular
vote compact is is adopted.
In New Mexico but we do is that
the presidential election
nominee of the party was
for president vice president
received the highest number of
votes at the general election
shall be elected presidential
electors with the state so if
you have a elector nominees of
different parties on them then I
don't know that the aggregate
would actually do grow I just
don't get our it also is unclear
whether or not we're talking
about the same slate of four
nominees are this doesn't
resolve the issue of whether or
not the the minor party will
print their own electors are not
on our end and so that is also
not addressed in in this so so
there's a there's a number of
issues actually with regard to
presidential that are not
addressed in this in this bill.
That is a major problem with
that so this Mr chair center to
see you know is that of that is
so the church's pointed out we
don't lacked a president elect
electors other nominated by the
Democratic Party Republican
Party New Mexico
and so I see a situation was
what clear clear about this part
of the said recent TV Ross Perot
race more recently or you have
a.
more recent times make the.
Clemente Brock bomb situation
this is an example maybe the the
minor parties nominates one of
those losers presidential race.
Figure out what they are.
So ballot so we're reduces the
press primary job so the reform.
Constitution party or the greens
are the working families party
to.
It also so.
This is what we do about this.
Mr chairman and and senator
Morris I think this amendment
would clarify that if you lose
in the primary.
As a candidate for a major
party.
This makes clear that you cannot
then come back and and here is a
candidate for a minor political
party for that same office.
So that would take care of your
concern about that.
I'm not sure does center since
the presidential races are
different but I want to do this
for two our experts on some.
Thank you senator additional
research at this resort sure
thank you.
Chairman I.
I have a question about the mock
up and I'm not quite sure how
this amendment works with that
but so if you.
So the instructions if the
candidate that you support has
been nominated by more than one
party please fill in only one
oval under his or her name the
vote will count equally
regardless of the party you
prefer what in the world is that
me I I don't understand how if
we're talking about fusion why
would you only be able to fill
in one of those ovals and I
don't I just don't see how that
would work with other candidates
on the ballot.
I don't understand that language
the vote will count equally
regardless of the party what
does that mean.
What
but.
Senator Senator Ivy Soto you Mr
chairman if you wanted to answer
that's fine
but then as it is for example if
you were developed for our I
have been looking at some of the
Democratic Party that's one
Phelps.
If you were to vote for having
Martinez on the working families
party that's also one vote.
So it's it's equal it doesn't it
doesn't make any difference
which party you vote for if you
want to support this Martinez
although I will say that if you
wanted for both the Democratic
Party Javier Martínez and
working problems finding on the
Martinez you would rate your
brought your markets.
You.
Mr Chairman euro you can only
vote for one Senator.
That is correct we would not
know which is your preferred
focus for but it was for
more democratic have your margin
is working families this
Martinez and and so if you
wanted for both so as we would
not know which one you would
want me to one of the recapped.
Well Mister chairman of we did
discuss that matter with the the
secretary of state's office and
they said.
Thank you for making provision
in the software so that is is is
the both of those the mobile
Google we're thrilled and it
would only ones and it wouldn't
necessarily disqualify the
ballot.
There is because the same person
it's for the same person for two
different people.
On to point out that there's
nothing there's actually nothing
in.
In the bill that accounts for
that and in fact the
instructions that been provided
the Senator Stewart
as a reading person actually
read the instructions on what is
the the extractions are are.
There in.
Under his or her name.
And and I think that is
consistent with Representative
the overall structure of the
election code and that if you
were to have someone with a
little more than one because
these are the way that this is
written it is reported that we
separately tally.
The Democratic Party fiveyear
Martinez votes and the working
families party for the emerging
spots so certainly certainly
tallied if you want to forclose
you know which one to tally and.
Here because eight eight please
please.
This this is learned from the
from the Brennan center and I
apologize I can't really see the
instructions as written on the
ballot but I can see this is
very straightforward in New York
I and and it can be made quite
clear in the instructions
somebody votes for this scene
candidate that is running under
two different parties in those
in both oval State the Democrat
and and the working families
party the vote is going to count
for the candidate and it is
going to count for the first
party in this case the
Democratic Party
so.
Is that could be quite clear you
know candidates may be nominated
by more than one party vote for
a candidate by selecting the
party you prefer under their
name and then what's going to
count
no matter which party you
selected and there's a way of
doing that that's that's very
clear and and
we managed to do that.
In New York and I just wanted to
give some speaking if I can just
also clarify everything and I
might not have understood the
discussion exactly but
it in New York
If there's the presidential
candidates listed under two
parties if somebody votes for
that candidate and what's just
take the last election Joe Biden
under working families party the
the
the electors that for
the working families party
refused to the Democratic Party
so.
It's those electors that that
are under Democratic Party that
are going to get the votes.
There's there's not an issue
with when voting for a separate
set of electors.
I don't have a language
legislation from the that seems
like fairly straightforward it's
not addressed clearly a fairly
straightforward thing to do to
be able to do and and and Mr
Martin R. Preciado work could be
done what we're considering is
what is before us imam of that
is addressed to the language
before us.
So that there are service
reviews on the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman I I just
think that these instructions
are confusing I I I think if
this moves forward these
instructions not get changed and
that we all need to know a
little bit more about how this
is gonna work thank you
what senator senator do it.
Thank you Mr chair I'm.
So I got to say.
Off the bat I think a better way
to give minor parties voice in
our political process is to
allow them to participate in our
primary elections and so it's
significant to me that this does
not apply to primary elections
but.
But my main concern is is what
was but essentially just being
discussed I don't see language
in this bill that would.
I see the mock up here I don't
see the language in this bill
that actually creates the small.
and I feel like there's just a
lot of assumptions that are
being made here that at that are
reflected by by the actual
statutory language and until
that statutory languages in
their.
It's hard for me to know what
this would actually look like
I have.
I'm worried about voter
confusion especially it's I know
the one of the handouts that
they have been presented had
talked about how those over
votes are dealt with with
spoiling ballots of folks voting
in person especially with the
increase of mail in voting that
we're saying we're not a lot of
voters are going to have that
opportunity to have their
ballots but back out and spoiled
and and redo it so we're putting
folks in a position of trying to
interpret.
These over votes are without
statutory language that actually
addresses as I I would I would
want to see language like that.
Included if if this is going
forward.
Another concern I have is a some
of the sex I read all the
materials that you all sent out
and one of the talking points
that was in there was about we
say that this is a way to
encourage the majority party is
to differentiate themselves.
Which I don't think is a
problem.
Differentiated themselves quite
well and to me that this would
suggest that this is something
that would make those major
parties.
Get further and further apart
which I don't think it's
something that that serves our
society well I'm of the opinion
that the more we can get to
consensus candidates we're all
better served by that
So right now I'm I'm not to a
point where I can support this
bill right now
I like that the concept behind
at I.
But but not the education.
Thank you Mr chair.
I thank you Senator Senator
thank you Mr chair members of
it I'd I disagree I don't find
anything confusing about this
you know the bottom line is this
would increase voter
participation which I think all
of us can agree is a good thing
I think we under estimate the
voters and just like you're
gonna vote for somebody or
you're not gonna vote for
somebody and and it's this row
especially with the amendments
and certainly the sore loser
amendment you know I'd I'd
strongly support this bill and I
don't think it.
Creates the kind of complexity
that some of my colleagues on
this committee bill it does
thank you.
Well well I'm not saying no one
else at the moment seeking the
floor
just from the TIRS perspective
on to simply say that
I do think that that there's
there are provisions are not
dealt with here would not dealt
with additional presidential
electors would not dealt with
the issue of ability I'm here we
we've also
what this does are quite
candidly is it it I think I
think Senator Woods observation
about about the effect of this
this has in terms of candidacies
of Sarnath is a business to one
which is that.
I think I think the assumption
the markup is is is that working
families is is our props more
liberated shows and then the the
broken part of the constitution
party will be more conservative
than the Republican Party and
that and that so then what you
would have is
a situation on the ballot where
there is an endorsement of of
those people are who are further
to the extremes of our within
each party
and and then a on with the
settlement of US national Cup
that if there was somebody who
are not sufficiently
ideological for one of the third
parties and then they would want
to separate candidates in those
races as a way out of
underlining the folks on the
destructiveness of the major
party candidate in that way my
by having that on the ballot I
also
recognize that that both the
conservative on those because
the constitution party in New
Mexico as well as working
families money both of which we
used in this example neither one
of them have more than five
hundred members of the party.
So we have political parties
that don't have enough numbers
to be able to in terms of number
of.
If they were to get signatures
from only the party members run
for statewide office that we
haven't members will not enough
members might burst thank get
gets interest from anybody and
yet and yet then there's that
there's and there's a out of
state my platform in terms of of
the of the house investments
taking place here it does also I
I fear
even with and with the market
the way it was it will increase
the.
The length of the ballot because
if you've got somebody who's
impressed by five different
political parties then instead
of.
Their space on the ballot being
their name and and one voter
response area it would be their
name and I different response
areas.
And I'm not going to talk about
and we're already running in our
in our
major counties are already
running seventeen inch ballots
what six point fox sometimes
working desperately to try to
I'm gonna make that and our and
this would not assist in that
process of amelioration finally
in terms of increased
participation I guess I'm
confused about how it is that
someone will be able to vote for
the
you have no choice in this
election really you you have a
choice you can vote for the
Republican great product you go
for the libertarian right Baca
or you can vote for the
constitution might pop up.
Mexicans are and your choice in
this election time Travis.
How that really makes people
feel
Zero one hundred and election
unless.
They want credit because they
get so.
Press
incorrect box.
Right that's.
I
was getting want to does not
talking but not.
And so it seems to me there's
also it's also lacks a little
bit of.
In that regard.
And so for the panelists reasons
this is this is not something
that I'm going to be able to to
support our but today and and
but but like I said
philosophical issues aside
structurally the bill just
simply isn't this.
So I'm Mr chairman Mr Mr
chairman urgent debate in the
bill of when we can return to
the amendment we have a motion
bending.
I apologize all right in my mind
we had already adopted that
amendment I do apologize and and
so that's what we've we've gone
back on the of the the bill
itself let me just very quickly
then wrap that up.
One.
One
point we were to go to the
public for COVID you never have
done that yet either.
certainly well what we're are in
time today actually
I can relate with that a few of
those we need to get to Senator
Pinto has been patiently waiting
through to committee hearings so
far and I am committed to
getting to her those today and
I'd like to ensure that we're
able to do that so all right let
me just ask will correct is
there any objection to adopting
amendment number five seven two
point one.
I
see no objections that amendment
is adopted so we are now on the
bill itself.
Are you and and I do apologize
to the public in terms of of
public comment but I I I I think
on this issue we've all had a
rare opportunity to receive
emails from folks and our baton
one or two hundred emails on
this issue and and and to to
discuss things on this bill on a
search I'm I'm presuming senator
Dino the term making a motion
for to pass I would like to make
a motion for you have said like
to explain well I am doing and I
your arms.
Summary of what we support is
you may.
This is a growing percentage of
voters in the state despite what
Senator doing seem to indicate
was a of the plenty of choices
already existing the fastest
growing.
Percentage of voters registered
voters are then declined to say
the two parties may think that
there are accurately reflecting
all the interests and and.
The concerns of the voters but a
lot of people aren't voting.
A lot of people are registering.
A lot of people who bother to
register register has declined
to say because neither the
existing political parties
accurately reflect their views.
This is simply an effort to make
it possible for minor parties to
survive and to reflect and.
The whole.
Political views that exist in
our in our in our society and
and yeah fusion voting would as
as as you so mockingly
explained.
Give you a choice between three
different varieties of Greg Baca
but that's not always the case
there may be a case in which a.
Two of those issues included we
feel separate candidates.
Ever had a chance to build up
they never had a chance to reach
out to the voters they simply
cannot exist this would happen
to the Green Party in our state
today that one point there were
more greens registered in my
district and Republicans.
The Democratic Party managed to
change the rules to legislative
action in the grease greens have
largely vanished this what will
happen to all the minor parties
if we don't make some effort
fostering the diversity of
opinion that this bill seeks to
foster and so I think this is
simply a step in responding to
what the voters are already
saying they're saying neither
the Democrats nor the
Republicans accurately reflect
my views and so I don't register
or I don't go to I do load I
don't vote in their primaries
because they don't reflect me.
This is an effort in dealing
with that pretty simple this one
than many other states do.
The the supposedly barriers and
logistical concerns have been
raised by the chairman and
others simply don't exist in
those states they're easily
dealt with the money you
Representative was it was a
sample it could be change the
instructions can be changed as a
secretary of state does now.
So this is this is the an effort
and reaching out to more people
and I would hope that the
members would join me in
supporting this legislation.
Thank you madam ceremonial.
Thank you Mr and just quickly
before we go to the vote look
people vote for the candidate
they both for Senator Baca and
if you happen to be four
different parties big deal I
mean people both for the
individual and again I mean you
can you can mark this approach
but you know the notion that
it's gonna light dramatically
expand the ballot I mean
seriously you know there are
other ways that that ballot it's
got longer so respectfully
disagree with your opinions well
stated as they always are sent
chairman Ivy Soto so thank you
thank you very much Santo
Domingo senator Morris.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Ortiz you know that I
always enjoy working with you on
reform pieces of letters in my
car redistricting and everything
else I agree with you with a
number of conversations about
the problem in the issue with
the client to states and I I do
believe we look at younger
generations even numbered Center
portal they don't sign up to
Republican or Democrat or any
party
it's also it is a pox on all our
houses because we become so
polarized country and I don't
think I don't think going to
what I see is more parliamentary
system but this is going to help
our previous close to build
closer to working together so
the divergence that's happened
that's why I've been on was
happy to work with some Senator
do it and Republicans and
Democrats on the open primaries
issue because I believe that is
the better six and right six to
allow us to climb the states and
my part is participate in those
elections and we have some
disagreement on that form but I
think that is really what we
need to be doing to bring us
closer together work together
that is especially since we're
asking declined the states which
is the growing population
registry should voters to pay
for those elections with the
model are participated actions
as you and I know all that's
where a lot of these elections
are won and lost in New Mexico
especially in our levels
legislative races so I would
definitely agree on the problem
I believe the solution is to
work with a Senator Duhigg
others and bipartisan manner.
Bill passes currently start six
six will over House committee
right now and maybe we can get
moving again but I think that's
really what we need to be to
work together
in this primary.
So those forces are opened up to
those all these people you talk
about my daughter's generation
which Charles children
generation just don't care
about.
Public becoming a Republican
Democrat what we do with ways
the way back we should so I
think that's what we need to
work on together.
Thank you so much for
unit was appreciate your desire
for reform just like.
I think I want reform sources
thank you.
Thank you very much the rules
are single we also can afford at
this time on to do passed motion
from center to use if you know
on Senate bill one hundred as
twice amended.
Miss Vigil would you please call
the roll Senator Baca.
No.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Ingle.
No.
Senator do.
Well.
Senator Ivey Soto.
What is about five to six on a
five to six to do passed motion
fails thank you very much Mr
chairman and thank you for the
spirited debate members thank
you very much and Mr what is
wait to see you Sir are looking
for for the discussions and
thank you all for joining us.
Where are we now to Senate bill
one ninety six Senator Lopez
this is one that we have already
begun discussion on this bill
and our this has to do with the
children's clothes reform are
most force and the.
I do believe a.
This year.
There was.
Yes let me share my screen
correct and Senator Lopez and on
we were we had lost the the
discussion we ran out of time in
the last committee rise over
over of the separation of powers
issue in terms of whether or not
we direct or we requests and the
size of the committee and I
think both of those resolved
with this language that is
before us right now I've got the
the the the the practical side
of it and then at the bottom is
if you do in a limitation that's
what it comes out to just to
make it easier for everybody to
in order to read our subsection
B. that the the beginning parts
a few details and it's.
That you the the three and it's
about you it cools the language
down below and so Senator Lopez
is this our did you want to
make this motion.
Mr motion Mr motion home my gosh
Mr Chairman sorry.
Up to move of the Senate rules
committee amendment number one
to Senate bill one ninety six.
Well so this amendment is before
the committee are there any
questions on the amendments
those changes the shower to a is
requested to and it changes the
challenge of.
To
the comprised of our receive
input recommendations for.
Is there any objection to the
amendments.
See no objections the minister
questions.
I'm just so are you able to see
all of us we were sharing the
screen on.
I can't right now I'm not able
to.
See everybody at one time I just
some of our so
frustrated teachers and so does
this take care of Mr Senator we
had a conversation about how
massive the task force was but I
heard you say that this the
trust that issue how does this
amendment take down the size of
the task force and what will the
size speed if we adopted this
amendments.
What about this amendment that
then the so the task force and
In both general fund not forty
different entities that are
mentioned what this does is
instead of saying a point of
task force of forty different
entities are indeed just as a
point of task force it doesn't
say how many people should be on
there.
Our but that we but but the
request is that the task force
what should be comprised of or
receive input recommendations
from these forty entities so
it's it's a guidance to them
they can appoint a task force of
whatever size they believe will
be on the up the most effective.
Eight are all of these groups
that would be invited to as well
as anybody else point to give
input recommendations.
So Mr SLO's were basically
punting the issue to.
The trial children's court to
actually do that as we figure
out what the what their proper
proper size forty missus okay
thank you madam chair thank you
my former madam chair in
occurrences thank you.
Gentlemen good to see you again
Sir.
Questions on the on the
amendments.
The questions on the moment is
there any objection the moment.
Actually a moment please show
the moment as being adopted
we're not on the amended bill
and that
is there any further discussion
on the amended bill.
Single for the discussion on the
amended bill Miss Vigil please
call the roll.
Is a request it's just what.
Let me just back up a second
Senator Lopez I'm assuming
you're making a impasse motion
as amended yes Mister chairman I
move it to pass on Senate bill
one ninety six as amended
and I will go ahead.
Senator Stewart the second set
very well
This we have the handle Senator
Baca no Senator Lopez yes
Senator Moores.
Yes Senator o'neill.
Sorry yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Ingle.
Yes.
Senator do.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Senator.
All of ten to one hi you have a
do pass recommendation on Senate
bill one ninety six as COVID.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you very much Senator
council.
Yes I'm here.
One.
This to Senate education to just
go back to let me are so a have
Senate Joint Memorial when.
What are number one.
Can you see the amendment.
That's
what.
But I'm sorry.
Two one nine six four three
point two.
Also this will be on page.
Right winds five.
Is this point to I think when
you have to point one.
I don't know if you can scroll
down to the bottom.
This point one we have different
amendment.
Yes there was one after
consulting with the Fort Sill
Apache
tried this is the point two is
the one I had it sent to the
email of the committee secretary
and I believe sent to the email
of the members the.
Committee members.
Sure.
Let me know when it came out of
that and see these so we try to
find it to work Mr are three
males.
Stamps on them and I'm sorry I
was referred to earlier is our
regional support full so it's
hard to provide email so if you
could let us know when it came
out start that's fine they're on
screens thank you.
Yes it just came out this
morning I sent this morning.
Comes VS consultation to the
tried and this is what they
replied into in consideration of
the first amendment.
The chair to put yes the
crystalline this is this point
to.
But once.
Yes Senator this okay.
So it's on on page three line I
have to the comma.
Inserts the chair of the Fort
Sill Apache tribe of Oklahoma
and New Mexico.
Yes.
Well is there any are there any
questions on the amendment
center starts moving up should
the amendment Mr chairman thank
you very much are any questions
signal question is inject yes I.
Yes I have one question
Mr chair and senator has just
been put out to any of the other
tribes and pueblos within the
state if so is there been any
objection or support to this
language.
Yes and I believe the members
did receive Mr chair members of
the committee that the there was
supporting documentation that
was emailed to the committee
secretary on this Memorial from
the Navajo Nation scholarship
office it was several documents
their resolutions
supporting this agenda more out
and we this is the second time
we've been through this memorial
we we did have it presented and
the last regular session and
we've got all the way through
all the committees unanimously
without but we didn't get to for
ran out of time.
Not just Senator some of the
place where it's located is in
on about it for the resolved
that copies of the royalty
transmit.
So go ahead Senator.
Mr chair and senator I was
curious more about the the
language about including the
Fort Sill Apache tribe of
Oklahoma New Mexico has been
approved by any of the other
tribes or pueblos or objected to
by any other tribe or pueblo
with in New Mexico.
This was proposed by
I believe I don't have the
screen Daryl Begay was also
expert witness on this memorial.
Mr chair with us can you answer
the question.
You are muted Sir.
good morning my name is Gail
Begay I in the legislative
analyst for the Navajo Nation we
requested the amendment because
of the program the congressional
legislation will affect all of
the tribes including the Fort
Sill Apache tribe of Oklahoma
and New Mexico and we wanted to
include them on as we're going
to go
we they are passing a resolution
of support of the congressional
legislation
This month in February at the
next tribal council meeting it
but I want to make sure that
they they were also.
Thanks very much Senator.
Thank you Mr chair and get out
so that's all I needed was to
ensure that this language have
been floated around and other
groups had seen it that might
have concern or support for it
thank you Mr chair.
Thanks R. Pirtle sentiments.
Thank you Mr and I have similar
questions about that to make
sure that have been floated
around our students tribes are
Representative tribal
representatives question is Ford
Sanchez Mr chair
fix muscles are aware of the
history of four still do we have
students in New Mexico currently
after all they've been exiled
ons in the state we have a we're
still students in New Mexico
we're running Arnold yes non
destructive Senator Pinto.
Where is that Mr chair and
members of the committee senator
Morris I am not aware of any
data that actually separates the
tribe's needs done in being in
school I think most of the
tribal schools do.
Just a bit versus honesty I be
basically if I'm not mistaken Mr
Begay and did we do I don't know
if rose grant is also an expert
witness that actually works.
Navajo Nation might I don't know
she's privy to any data that
would give us an answer to that.
But I yield to her are Daryl
stay.
I'm if I may.
Mr chair members of the
committee I don't know of a
specific key students from Ford
field who are attending the
tribe of the attending the New
Mexico School but I will find
out I suspect there are
that the money here for that we
want to cheer on get forward
funding
tried to use it to send their
students you're in a school
across the country and in
particular hopefully they would
bring them to New Mexico so but
I will find that information out
and send it out.
Thank you very much.
We bring up the point that I
think we need to current.
the students back to New Mexico
after.
What's been hundred twenty years
thirty
Could be a great opportunity to
bring back with all the
educational opportunities here
in the state thank you.
I thank you very much you.
There are also a nobody else
seeking recognition of this time
is there any objection to
adopting the amendments.
So are are.
Similar in our objection the
amendments the amendment is
adopted were not on the amended
joint resolution are there any
further questions on the
The amended resolution.
So as.
Thank you Mr chairman so
appropriate at this time I would
we would do pass.
We have to pass motion on Senate
Joint Memorial number one has
amended.
Our from Senator box with a
second
Senator Lopez.
And
Is there any public discussion
on the Senator when one of us.
Okay.
Yes this is.
Yes yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator Moores.
Yes.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Ingle yes.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator Ivey
Soto yes ma'am what is the
what's the past tend to with one
excuse
not available so our
congratulations Senator Pinto.
I think you have the high water
mark right now on the unanimity
on of a Joint Memorial let's see
if we can read a second time are
we on our joint Senate Joint
Memorial number two.
And go ahead and present please.
Your.
So I just try not to.
Okay.
Senate Joint Memorial to.
The federal
government payments and lower
taxes.
Yes.
Yes the.
And this the state of Utah will
be passed this Senate Joint
Memorial.
And.
It gives us for real time
estimate if you look at the FIR
on the federal lands that the
state with holes so last year
and the.
Well yes right at the end of the
year the president signed a
letter for the to fully fund P.
I. L. T..
So during September Utah is
forty passed a resolution in
this with the payment of taxes
and they received an additional
two million.
So it is a.
Formula that has been put
forward before kind of just like
our entire gate formula that
they used to.
Calculate the P. I. L. T.
payments so these population
revenue sharing payments amount
of federal land within an
affected County so the money
that with fifteen counties
benefited from that two million
dollars that you talk at a
increased in their payments
acted as joint resolution.
So we're hoping to recapture
that I haven't really read too
much as far as any opposition to
wit and even when this was
passed well as some of the
communities were able to.
Kind of convert some of their
land to develop that so that
bonds and developers could come
in especially for low the
economic impact areas and if we
use able to use that as leverage
in development and with the
technology today it is a lot
easier so I hope we can and this
is just a request.
Then hopefully if there's enough
request throughout the US maybe
it'll change the calculation of
the P. I. L. T. payments thank
you Senator thank you chairman.
Thank you very much appreciate
that miss Clark is there anybody
waiting in the the waiting room
to speak on this but on this
Memorial.
We have been waiting to speak on
this more.
Now from all
of that is there any further
discussion from the committee.
Certainly I know that
The whole payment some of taxes
issue has been it's been an
ongoing one with the federal
government and where they thanks
to the valuations Navajo
valuations are at this is this
is a good measure to task for a
government tax have some
integrity of that process.
Look taxes Senator.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
for bringing this forward I
think we've all seen the map of
the the amount of federal land
in states and then how will
those states do in in education
dollars per student and so I
think this is a concern of many
of us especially in in the rural
part of the state with regard to
the federal government owning
land within the within the state
so you know if if the feds are
going to own the land and you
know they should be held to the
same.
Standard as as the private
citizens within the state we use
this money for operating county
governments along with education
and so many other things so I
think this is a step in the
right direction you know and I
think was in the seventies that
the feds decided that they were
no longer going to try to
privatize the land but actually
hold on to more of it and not
offer it for sale or trade or
homesteading or anything along
those lines so if that's going
to be the policy of the federal
government I think they should
definitely
be treated the same as as
taxpayers so I really appreciate
you bring this forward and
hopefully it results in in a
full tilt payment just as a
rural counties are suffering
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Morris.
Thank you Mr Singh Senator I
think who's just ask what sort
term stations have you have on
this issue with our next
secretary of interior on and
what commitments Commission
provided or actions that she's
done in Congress your commitment
session maybe to help our our
this issue mood for.
Thank you Mr.
Senator.
One of the main points in one of
the reports that was that timing
of.
Going this route was very
essential so that if you have
the support in the upper levels
that it would.
You know follow through and
we're not really exactly they
are perceived in
In position but I'm hoping that
we get ahead of the discussion
already have it in place so that
we are on the list in the sense
of consideration for full
funding.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator it's I I think
it was a Tom Brady Gronk T.
mobile commercial there also
hope way on heard it correctly
so your your connect your
connections co committed out but
I appreciate that.
Thank you very much senator
Morris are seeing nobody else
Garcia recognition at this time
what is the point of the
committee.
We have a due pass much for
Senator Lopez.
A second from Senator dot com.
And if there is no other
discussion may help please call
call center back up yes Senator.
Yes.
This.
The most.
S.
and Senator Ortiz.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle yes Senator do.
And senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am
what is the what's ten with one
excused you were on hand zero
votes on of this committee a
condition Pinto I know I do pass
recommendation Senate Joint
Memorial number two and Senator
like to talk to you about lebron
to co sponsoring some of my
legislation given the message
receiving our it might it might
help but thank you very much for
your patience and for joining us
today in the Senate rules but
it.
Yeah
we now come to Santa Clara two
eighty six our and
Mr in us Senator if you would be
so kind as to provide I'm gonna
stop.
Thank you Mr chair I'm yes Mr
chair please proceed.
So on September twenty six is a
bill that deals with the special
congressional election that is
going to happen
And CD one
and our and so this bill is one
that kind of mirrors in many
ways what we did with our set of
four in the first national
session in terms of providing
some of the rules
the general election I want to
highlight the differences
between what we did and Senate
bill for our I have been for
special session and a plan to
the general and what is being
done here as it would apply to
the first congressional district
race are and and and also just
as reminded everybody what
happened on in with Senator for
use at the provisions that were
not possible to the general
election in twenty twenty are
repealed as of December thirty
one and so on so there are
certain things that will always
happen if if we do not adopts
so this is the first difference
between the two our is that we
If you look on page three our
subsection D. begins on the
online eight there in the in the
our Senate Bill.
We don't special session that
bill as introduced allowed each
county clerk the option of
milling about one million
application to each billable
Rohrer and this but I am and
then that was modified to have a
little it's kind of hard to
million application
from ballots each mail the
longer what this bill does
actually so we went and we just
find.
Discussed because we have to two
distinctions on this.
The legislation we have on this
is that
are right so we got we got
wanted to back the thing we got
from voters is that members did
not work.
All of this did not appreciate
receiving an unsolicited
application in the mail.
In addition to that is and
receiving.
Five six eight different
applications in the mail going
into the general because we are
only start probably sending out
applications and that contains a
lot of books.
And and so what what this does
final word from that experience.
Our is that right when we are
On page five you get in line for
the Santa Fe county clerk shall
only accept applications from
your ballots.
Some personal web portal
operated by secretary of state
for submitted on the official
paper form central part of
County Cork.
Senator third party applications
are for the special election.
And and is that this will
encourage groups not to send the
applications the first point.
Our offices are seen as the
official form and so then and
I'm going back there storing
them what the county clerk would
do is that the county clerk
would send a notice to ensure.
The notice.
Is.
The knowledge need agnostic to
what I mean by that is that the
the the the notice what
apartment owners an option.
The local cycle.
So.
Members if you want now.
Here is the URL when you can go
online to request a number
through the online infants.
The alternate Department late
must to do it because people
have talked allocate themselves.
What the warm.
That is part of the recall
categorical cost synergy.
It has access to do online.
And.
Hi a list of the day sometimes
locations running in person
seven eight the learning there's
much in coming out and just the
regular no alternative ways of
learning.
Without making a suggestion
mission or when they're not and
how is the weather to make their
own shorts.
On.
The R. so that's that's that's
the big difference is is that we
do that instead of a star
seventy operation of the other
thing is that again we don't
allow them to third party
applications are to be sent out
the the next difference that we
do it is our that.
so just reminded everybody what
we would have to.
In law is we're trying to member
of the mail ballot you need to
provide your name registration
address your product in the
twenty twenty general election
of the chairman of the shifted
to having a
the remote for the last four
digits associated it's it's it's
more secure in terms of the
information on that on that that
is why it.
There was some question.
That was raised in the general
election as to the ability our
our.
One part is to have a challenger
presents one of the county work
was doing the initial review as
to whether Senator was present
and what the last one is for
president or not they match and
so if you look on page seven
begin on twenty two.
When they make very explicit
that a political party with a
candidate on the ballot name
point of challenger those are
the determination made by the
county park with some project
mailed out.
The general fund model pose a
challenge to the county clerk
wants to impose a challenge to
the action but question for.
She says says yes no there's a
Senator here the last four
digits March.
What does not.
Are you the vote on election so
there is the ability of the
challenger to raise a challenge
before the election board and if
there is a sense that that that
the election board did not do
their job said that the kind of
work did not do their job did
with U at all or or there was an
issue with with this
information.
And insurers can properly do
their job into the the the the
transparency online Alexion
process we also are do they
claim no of generation I'm happy
record or transcribe any portion
of their social security number
and so we can protect the the
the substring number one
provided the balance between
that and accountability of our
elections.
The that is a a change with this
and the bill that we did over
the summer is that as you
remember over the summer because
we didn't know what the pandemic
was the whole.
We created the legislative
electronics in safety task
force.
Was in order to make changes to
a current process based on
public health orders and so we
are ultimately that task force
was never call and never match
and we made a decision not to
include that task force that
task force which would be able
as of December thirty one that
task force is not included in
this bill so we are the
provisions and there is no there
is no committee task force what
relevant that is in power to
change the procedures of the
election once we get into that
process.
So with that Madam vice chair of
the happened stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr chair miss cook is
there any public comment on
this.
You madam chair there's not.
On the way that mistrust Mr
Secretary states offices present
to provide.
The closest.
Senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you madam chairman and
Senator Ivey Soto this.
This again is it is the.
Lengthy complex legislation
dealing with just a single
election is that what I need to
understand the election in may
not actually ever be called.
In the current the Congress
woman is not confirmed.
This is an accurate madam chair
and senator being of that is
correct the reason for that and
that's a very good question is
why are we doing this is this
legislation.
That is because this has to have
an emergency clause in order to
be able to go in the fact in
time for any such option that
would cause in twenty twenty one
is only active role in the
Russia specific national
elections in twenty twenty one
they they are
I mean this is a a ten page
bill.
Our it is I guess somewhat
complex in its substance it's
it's actually relatively short
for the sponsor.
I agree.
And so there is I do know that
the secretary of state and that
kind of clout so working on
some some revisions to a bill
that was filed by Senator words
that I'm hoping that we'll be
able to hear soon to be able to
are to codified Senator these
changes in the auction code in
general but the thing is that we
don't expect that that bill will
go into effect until sometime in
June and so we want to make sure
we have the special provisions
able to go on the fact with
regard to the special election
efficient.
Well.
Madam chairman and and Senator
Ivy Soto I mean the complexity
comes in and we keep changing
every election there's been a
change lately and and and so it
does leave the voters we will do
what would happen if we don't
pass this would would would we
follow the same procedures we we
we would ordinarily be following
wouldn't it be simpler that's an
excellent question so Senator
Ortiz we don't we don't about
this are there in this last
election having asked submitted
by mail to provide the last four
digits social security number.
Then in the special election
saying.
Four digits provided your name
registration address your
borders.
And this is a bill the
possibility between the
secretary of state and that kind
of closeness and the fact as I
think they're they're they're
discuss it right now then in
the next election in November of
twenty twenty one with top
a little bit of the
demonstrations you might not
need to go back to the last four
digits so this actually keeps
them from experiencing changes
and potentially keeps sentencing
for the voters Brian options at
this.
And.
Because then chairman and and
senator Ivey Soto that's because
the the provisions of the bill
that we we used in the last
election expired is that what
happened.
Madam chair and and senator bill
that's correct the provisions of
that were passed in Santa Fe
more than welcome to the twenty
twenty general election repealed
automatically on December thirty
one twenty twenty the thinking
at the time for us Hey we've it
was a special session we didn't
want to be able to think we're
trying to take advantage of the
special session on the pandemic
to to make these permanent
changes that we what if they
what we would come.
In this legislative session for
the more prominent changes but
we want anticipating a special
congressional election to take
place that's the gap we're
trying to fill right now.
But I can see that the madam
chairman and and and senator
there are some of the changes
you you inserted in here though
that would only apply to this
one is that correct what is the
the the challengers in the
sayings of the.
Removing the last bill that
would only apply to this one
election.
So madam chair and senator the
that are not like us my
understanding is that the the
conversations between the county
courts and the secretary of
state's office with regard to
the provisions that will
ultimately be in Senator words
is bill.
What actually provided this as
as as program.
But again we don't expect the
bill to go into effect until
June and if there's a special
election it will likely happen
sooner than that because the
statutory time frames are
fulfilling a national rates yes.
Thank you thank you madam
chair and thank you Senator Ivey
Soto
Senator has been.
Thank you Senator
as I think Senator Baca had his
hand up first Senator Baca.
Thank you I was just looking
here one of the issues that we
have.
On the last election and and you
know it was anecdotal but we we
saw issues with counting you
know and and deep in the night
here and so on page eight
I I see there that you have that
the lection the the voter
election board Mr chair madam
chair and senator there to
recess at eleven and and then
not continue again until nine
thirty and that leaves the
ballots basically you know
unprotected on unsupervised at
that point and you know there
was a lot of contention in the
last election over some of that
late night activity up when
there was supposed to be a
recess and there wasn't or what
have you were you know was
alleged there was counting going
on when it should not so is what
what assurances might we have
the you know we're not gonna
have that sort of thing.
Madam chair representative
Baca and and representative I'm
I'm I'll ask them as fast as to
to our follow up I pray give my
answer on that issue so Mr thing
so in this and so this general
election was the first time
actually that we imposed a time
frame by which everybody would
go home that had not been the
case in the past and so for
example in the primary you have
to several counties that
continue counting until one or
two o'clock in the morning and
during the primary we we changed
the process for the general so
that the election board's would
stop County at eleven PM in fact
they did stop counting and
eleven PM in the general
election now some of the results
of that accounting had not yet
been loaded into the software
and that's often that did take
place on October eleven o'clock
based upon the work that the
election boards have done but
well actually but there's no
pointing that took place
Representative eleven PM.
And our that are everybody to go
and get a good night's sleep
come back in so so in action I
think in the end that was a
process that worked out really
well in terms of being able to
do that we're also note that
that in the election because we
do find that of the shop our
Public Enemy is tasked with
monitoring without with securing
the balance
Once the once the voting period
has started so that so that in
those counties we are the
election working and not yet
since the war I'm eleven PM the
ballots were secured and there
was a chef deputy that was
assigned to
There was a sharp deputy who was
assigned to our to observe and
secure the ballots overnight
until people came back the next
day this must just let me on
your to your if there's
something I missed on that.
Mr chair thank you very much I
think you've covered everything.
All right thank you.
Senator
I appreciate the answer and I
appreciate your assurances of
you know however that that
paragraph does really make me
nervous of the extended period
of time that this can go on we
saw some of these elections
being counted just endlessly it
seemed like weeks we have to we
have a district attorney
election of the thirteenth
judicial district that went on
costs I want to say two and a
half three weeks you know before
it was finally also done and and
although was a narrow margin and
and that sort of thing it was in
the even prior to that a to
getting the final count and then
having to deal with the
narrowness of the margin was a
long period of time so I would I
would proffer open amendment if
it's appropriate at this time
on the line on page eight line
six I would a strike on election
night comma.
On one seven I would strike.
The earlier completion of I'm
sorry the earlier of.
And insert a period after
completion instruct the
remainder of the section eight
through eleven or section L. so
that it would read the absent
voter election board show recess
upon completion of its war for.
That was just suggestion that
yeah that's the intent of what
you wants this problem of
introduce employee unlimited
subsection how on the other.
Because that would be the status
quo in the election code if we
don't have subsection out.
Don't get to the same place of
the way.
I appreciate that Senator I and
I think I feel more comfortable
with with the what what I
suggested there seeing as how
this is in addition to what to
the election code in its its own
it's addressing its own special
circumstance it would be
appropriate so I I do I do well
with respect to your suggestion
I appreciate that but I would I
would like to go with the
language I suggest if that's
okay.
What
there any debate on the
amendment.
Let me let me just say that it
would it would not be a from
sponsors prospective it would
not be a family member and and
we just expenditures apartment
and that is our that that
when you have a close range.
You have you have frankly you
have to make sure you get a
report rights and and what I
have seen when election boards
continue to meet until two three
four o'clock in the morning as
we have had in the past is that
is that people get tired as
they've been there for eighteen
to twenty to twenty two hours
straits and they start making
the state's and so this is a way
of ensuring that we that we
treat our customers a little bit
more dignity and humanity as
well as making sure that we
don't end up with are people
making stupid mistakes as a
result of being operating that
entire as are doing that work.
Thank you Mr Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair.
So.
So my question I think is to us
Senator Ivey Soto and that is
even this provision and your
bill is part of the mechanism
that will and at the end of this
year is that correct.
So madam chair of the the best
thing in this bill that is in
front of us.
Representative year olds as of
December thirty one twenty
twenty one this is only in case
we have a special congressional
race during the calendar year
twenty twenty one the program
policy our bill is which is the
one being discussed between
secretary of state and county
parks is is what will carry us
into permanent policy committee.
So madam chair I don't so you're
referring to another bill that I
don't I know nothing about.
Okay I just wanted to make sure
that you know this even the
provision that Senator Bob is
trying to amend is part of the
temporary provision of this year
to deal with COVID nineteen all
right thank thank you and you I
understand you said it was not
exactly friendly amendments that
correct it is it is it is not
open enrollment at this time
okay thank you thank you madam
chair.
Anyone else wish to be
recognized on the amendment.
I see no one I do we do a roll
call vote on the amendment.
You have on that.
Yes.
Senator Lopez no.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Do with yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart no.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Ingle.
Yeah I'm sorry.
yes.
Senator do.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr Chairman.
Madam Meister but but didn't
legislative finance yes
apartments really you would be
able to.
Yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino what
what have.
Thank you madam chairman I'm
sorry I was distracted and and
wound I would like to vote yes
and vote no on this measure this
amendment.
In that case senator the motion
is five to six to five.
The amendment does not pass.
All of our time.
Mr.
Thank you think we're we're back
on the bill now and I believe
us Senator Baca you so.
I have nothing further thank
you.
And.
chairman of medicine the state
representative if if there are.
Concerns that you may continue
to have in terms of that gap on
how we manage that I'm certainly
open and happy to have a
conversation with you maybe you
this process can get together
and talk about that to make sure
that those of us.
Thank you thank you.
And representative more as you
you have had your hand up but I
see that it's down now I didn't
know if you still wanted to
speak on the bill yeah I was on
the bill so I'll turn it down
when we're on the amendment so
thank you madam chair thank you
this sure
Couple other issues I want to go
services so Senator Ortiz you
Senator talked about this is
more are really working in the
congressional district one of
our potential races might not
happen what's the legislature.
Representative are all and so.
Nation is going to slow down a
little bit with what's happened
with our the whole be put our
nominations from people's
Montana.
Center from Jan but anyways
Pratap.
Sometime in March but the way
you're going to.
Roger I fully support our size
political opposition having a
secretary of interior from New
Mexico only benefits are
statements Lee as it did when
what long was
but a couple of questions
issues insurance broker euro
court you too are.
joyous
third laptop from funding.
You have talked about it here
The world or about.
Cations with either their role
or lack internet service again
since is CD one assume you're
talking more the eastern side of
Bernalillo county maybe Torrance
County a Tory or places like
that are over you have in here
that it is or I remember
correctly not in and so that.
New Mexico action or their rural
the you clued both of Sixers of
places in New Mexico and CD one
specially that our world but not
necessarily have.
And internet connection the
committee this will allow the
county clerk's into a change
that there is a reason to have
that awards set of in New
Orleans server war drama find a
different route.
Our so that
madam chair senator Wirth thank
you in a page to.
your.
Line eighteen all right then
present those in New World so
this is specific to our Indian
nations present problems.
Our and the
And so it is our I'm sorry no
I'm sorry the action isn't out
there.
Subsection season emissions from
also
provides is that is that alright
we're locations not where
operate as being centers so that
anybody in the county may vote
in that the number of minutes
are on the and so that's of the
same language that we used in
the our in our over the summer
it's I do agree it's not as
apple Google I think with regard
to CD one
And in fact I don't know that we
would have any.
I don't really have any
Following locations.
That would that would qualify as
not doing a written waiver from
requirements of subsection forty
five days with lection and it's
for a specific location unable
to meet the data connectivity
requirements but that is are
there are I think six counties
that will be impacted by this
correction this almost all of
Berlin county not quite all of
Torrance County all there's I
think three precincts and Santa
Fe if I remember correctly
there's a few in Santa a couple
of the ones you're not and I
think there's one or two and see
what is how we get to the six
counties that are involved but
But given given the geography I
don't know that actual be
operable language also I think
that's but that's that's the
parameters for not being
available actually recent.
It is not appropriate for not
being recommended so.
It
is right that that would be are
using online nine after the
cycle.
As all that goes together my
line from the semicolon down to
the period online nineteen
thousand issue.
I Kerrey chairs and chairman
Jerry what are your thoughts on
the issue with the looking at
the specific for CD one
And madam chair.
As an issue of what to try for
talking on the Sandia's of the
district I think a little bit of
this letter is
no sentir Senate is not in the
district C. one
treacle talked about that.
Senator Wirth thank you for that
that question
So what the language does is if
there happens to be a precinct
in CD one that is unable to meet
internet dated connectivity
issues then they are able to be
exempted from operating as a
vote center and that and they
would become an all male
precinct which means everybody
in that precinct is provided a
notification and then and then
mailed a ballot.
and I agree with Senator Ivey
Soto I don't know if it's even
applicables this up this
election we probably have data
connectivity in in every in all
the counties were speaking of
but just in case I did send a
little little note to our state
elections director just to ask
for verification but just in
case I think that language is is
that covered if we do find that
there's a a polling location
that may not be able to have the
internet connection needed for a
vote center.
You're more comfortable if we
took out that the order remote
systems we're talking about
specifically for CD one
that we have the ability to
not have a I get the the
connectivity issues I can I can
see exit exhibitions in
serve RC one even soft belly of
the places that there might be
an issue but that doesn't
necessarily mean we should be
going to all out civil service.
Mokhtari owns.
Yeah so Madam to give it back to
Representative of the concern
that senator Morris is raising
it would be on page two line
nine.
Our after the word center.
Smart from there down to page
two line nineteen.
Through the work County.
And that would be a family
member.
So.
And Mr I I apologize I Senator
that well if it's a friendly
amendment do we do a roll call
vote on our our first does
anyone.
What is.
First ask if there's any
questions of there's no
questions you can attempt to see
if there's any objection okay
are there any questions on the
amendment.
The repeated.
madam chair and senator Stewart
Sir Moses amendment is page two
nine nine.
Start
immediately after the work
center so you start striking at
the semicolon.
Page two one nineteen.
The work County.
Thank you.
Any other questions on the
amendment.
Any objection to the amendment.
I see none the amendment is
adopted.
Senator Moores.
Thank you.
Thank you so much appreciate
that
Go back to the other area.
What are is on pace might pay
for money to the I will talk to
them about
Addresses appeared before on
there for four years ago
if they have voted more ask for
election
is already over what what we
talked about how still on number
years.
This process has that number
then
you this is what we're.
As our servers you cut.
Not I'm sorry Sir.
I'm sorry correct that certainly
so that
right so that is I don't want to
be on that at all but with that
simply is.
Who would not be receiving the
notice so if you haven't read it
in the last four years you
should have the right to vote
but we're not we're not going to
send you this because we don't
know if you're still interested
in an electoral process right
now.
It's enormous that was actually
created initially when it was on
the potential setting up a lot
about which is not included in
this bill are right but
none the less that's the.
Please enter yup the we struck
that provision effective it
would be that we would send out
to people from out of that mail
probably wouldn't actually get
to the intended recipient of the
notice.
So
the act of money versus reaching
out that kind of stuff.
Yeah my question I guess that's
my madam chair senator that
notice in with those folks be on
the list for.
Purging in the future.
Special election is matter
doesn't managers and more that
is correct.
On strongly also under a little
page six nine fourteen you
Shalit you're actually printing
the names on the we did that in
the special or the last general
of the voters Roadrunner
printing their names on that
Why are we continue to do that
we have that are COVID that seem
to work pretty well it's just
seen open it up if we're
actually creating the names on
our pre printed does open it up
for some issues with that are
COVID did work well from all for
more for.
madam chair senator Morris so
and the reason for pre printing
as a as a cause
then we send let's say let's say
you have you have Mr molars and
Mrs Morris.
And may be worse.
Question now ballots at the same
address they'll live there the
openness about similar just
collision right with Senator on
the kitchen table on top of the
bounce and then we put in the
envelopes people mysteriously.
Wrong I will.
And so having the the president
of the voter in need of an I'll
happen to ensure that the person
who actually signs the ballot
and provides the last four
digits matches the markup that
is on there so when the kind of
protest part of it doesn't the
the the kind of talk is it
looking at the information of
Mrs Morris but that's the
balance that that was intended
to be used by Mister Morris so
that's the reason why we did
that and and and given that.
It is not part of the
program notification requirement
notification is the presence of
a signature and the correct last
four digits of voters social
security number no there's no
security depredation by printing
the name are all that really
does is that it actually
disqualifies anybody else from
trying to use that are a little
more about.
One of them instantly since Mrs
Moore's Mister Moore's to vote
since Mr Moore's Mrs Morris both
differently for frequently
what what happened with that
about with it and be
disqualified.
What is one of two things
actually either they would each
be disqualified because of
coming to different times and
ordinary up that you guys do
such ballots were in three
separate Alexion board.
You're not that you to switch
ballots than they would probably
take that to a challenge before
the action got religion board on
it is certainly within the
within the discretion of the
election were not accounted for
within the discretion of the
election board to decide to
accept all of it so they can see
that everything's there together
but if they don't happen to
marry them up and in larger
counties the odds are against
them being married up then one
of those would act.
Let the main issue I have that I
thought Senator Baca was.
In that same area that he was
talking about was how to deal
with the money six point pay six
point four I'm sorry line eight
page I'm sorry page eight money
a lot.
mmhm so stop being counted up
there not really protected now
for some of the concerns of a
reference Mr seekers around the
country came from the concerns
that know that happened out
there we would prevent some of
that if we actually a better
security on those ballots were
no one's around
one of the ideas we had was that
actually apple's police balance
please walk box this is sure to
you for your professional work
to bring I on the by twenty four
hour surveillance video.
That would help some of those
issues that we saw coming out of
some of the other states.
What do you what currently
happens with those ballots that
night.
Germany certainly give an answer
limited for this process to give
an answer that on like I could
as well but since she's here and
and build process which is and
which is these are issues that
happen in other states that
impacted not happen in New
Mexico and
And and affect I think for about
minutes this.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for the
question so
the the great thing about our
absent T. provisions and in
general is that and and frankly
unlike many of the other states
where we did see those those
lengthy delays and counting is
there's provisions for the
absentee board to begin the the
process seeing an opening of the
ballots in the qualification
processes well All well before
election day so what we what we
actually saw on and that this
last general election where we
where we did have this this
eleven PM sharp cut off that we
had never had before is actually
a vast majority of the counties.
Were actually done by by eleven
or or before
and then there there were a
handful of counties that that
were in that we're not and I
think Senator Ivy Soto answered
pre previously and I concur that
the ballots are secured they are
locked and there is the
opportunity for the county
clerk's and the election board
to ask for sheriff's deputies to
be available
overnight so to watch over those
ballots and and tell the.
Absent work comes again that in
the next morning.
This press center sure German
Senator stresses but it's not
required.
You can ask but it's not
required that that's correct.
So how many of them actually ask
for that.
I don't have that at the at the
tip of my fingers but I'm I'm
sure I could kind of reverse
engineer and find out.
I think that needs to be
requirements for some of the
issues that we talked about
transfigured help articles of
amendments in the structure on
without having a pre drafted
It's a gesture.
And it was our markup that I'm
I'm.
As a cause I think this is this
is something we want to make
sure we get right.
And and I and and I do agree
that said this important issue
and and so
If if you're okay with are
working with me in this process
afterwards on on on on
amendments that would be
appropriate in terms of the
secure the ballots I think I
think you'll you'll find in in
both she and I a very willing
participants on that public with
you and Senator Baca.
Thank you.
Something drafted before but I
appreciate that thank you.
Okay so I'll work with you on
that afterwards Terry Senator
Madam thank you.
And and and and just in time and
I can I can give you up I yes
that that the that they're
struggling with that we come up
with that will that will make
sure that that it is properly
balanced part was secured I'm
not as an option yeah.
Thank you senator thank you
madam chair.
Yes in addition I would would
pass and actually it Mr chair
before you do I have one comment
Something that I saw during the
general and I mentioned this to
Mr chair about the rejection
notices being sent out when
folks sent in their applications
hi is that those rejection
notices were sent to people's
registered addresses but if they
were rejected it because they
have put in at a different
address they didn't get those
rejection notices and so I have
language that that I can propose
here or if you're gonna be doing
these other amendments which you
Judiciary we can include that in
those amendments for judiciary
but I'd like to see language
included in there to make sure
that when.
When the rejection notices are
sent out there sent out to both
the registered addresses and any
other address included in the
application for an absentee
ballots.
certainly and if I could simply
suggestions we're already going
to be bringing an amendment
working with centers more than
Baca we can do that as well
that's another security
provision that I think is
appropriate.
Thank the I'm saying no further
discussion what's the to pass.
More I'm.
Seconded by Senator Lopez and
Miss Vigil would you call the
roll Senator Baca.
No.
Senator Lopez yes.
We're not in the rec room to
pass.
yes.
Senator Ortiz amendments.
Yes.
I don't know.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth.
He's passing at the moment.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Senator do.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
So tell me again what we're
voting on.
Since then.
I vote yes.
And.
Yes ma'am.
Your vote is seven two to.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much committee
and a Centers marketing course
we will work on that and insure
that
that is properly included in the
in the bills was followed so
with that the US Senate rules
committee is in recess and there
will be no meeting on Monday on
Wednesday given and
of the four sessions and people
traveling as well as the caucus
meetings and we we will
alert us to Friday schedule
thank you all very much.
Thank you.
