same Senate bill two eleven.
Senate bill two eleven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Interstate Stream Commission
providing other terms of holding
office on the commission Senate
Bill to twelve.
Senate Bill to twelve having
Senator Candelaria and
potentially leading to crime
prohibiting a defense based on
the defendant's discovery of
knowledge about for the
potential disclosure of a
romantically proposition in a
non violent or non threatening
manner by a person of the same
gender or person who is
transgender Senate bill two
thirteen.
introduced by Senator Campos and
act making appropriation for
construction and equipment of a
pipeline for the acequia Madre
de las Vegas.
I hope that you just grab for.
No.
Not here unit.
That's okay.
Well just remake.
President.
Senate Bill.
Senator Gallegos I mean Senator
Gonzales.
Making appropriation to increase
provider reimbursements in the
the Senate health and public
affairs committee that Senate
finance Senate bill two fifteen.
Senate bill two sixteen
introduced by Senator Candelaria
and act relating to crime
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee that Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two sixteen.
Senate Bill to seventeen
building code requirements.
Senate bill two seventeen.
Senate Bill to seventeen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
to the multi state tax compact
eliminating a taxpayer election
to apportion and allocate income
pursuant to the model version of
the uniformed division of income
Senate Bill to eighteen Senate
Bill to eighteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
proof of citizenship or legal
residency requirements for
certain professionals allowing
for submission of an individual
taxpayer identification number
for certain occupational license
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two nineteen Senate
bill two twenty introduced by
senator service and act relating
to law enforcement providing
Senate bill two twenty having
been read twice by title is
ordered printing referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill two twenty
Senate bill two twenty one
introduced by Senator Padilla
exploitation of an elderly
disabled or vulnerable adults
and unlawful use of a power of
attorney providing penalties
Senate bill two twenty one.
Judiciary Committee that Senate
finance Senate bill two twenty
one Senate bill two twenty two
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to health care
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health of public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senator
twenty two Senate bill two
twenty three introduced by
appropriations authorizing the
New Mexico finance authority to
issue certain additional revenue
bonds for the University of New
Mexico hospital and the
comprehensive cancer center at
second special session chapter I
section one they keep making
appropriations Senate bill two
twenty three Senator T. twenty
three having been read twice by
Lopez and after leading to
gotten gun safety creating the
crime of failure to secure a
firearm providing a penalty
Senate bill two twenty four.
twenty five introduced by
senator Munoz an act relating to
public school finance
eliminating local revenue in
federal revenue from the
calculation of the state
committee Senate bill two twenty
five Senate bill two twenty six
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to taxation
allowing certain municipalities
municipalities and counties that
did not have an effect on June
thirty two thousand nineteen a
hold harmless gross receipts tax
are exempt from the phase out of
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two twenty six Senate bill
two twenty seven introduced by
Senator Lopez and act relating
to law enforcement providing for
the inspection of law
a public officer or public
employee enacting the law
enforcement officer procedures
act regulating the use of
physical force by officers
establishing a duty of officers
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two twenty seven
Senate bill two twenty eight
through community engaged
curriculum and high school and
community college public facing
programming.
Senate bill two twenty eight
Senate bill two twenty eight
And after leading to economic
development connecting the
healthy food financing act
creating the healthy food
financing program in the
Economic Development Department
twenty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation department
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill two twenty
to identify assess and decrease
institutional racism providing
criteria by which state agencies
shall implement such policies
providing duties for the state
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two thirty Senate bill two
thirty one introduced by Senator
pope an act relating to
homeowner associations requiring
that no less than seventy five
removing exceptions for master
planned communities Senate bill
two thirty one Senate bill two
thirty one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health of public affairs
an exemption from immunization
for a child whose parent or
guardian disallows immunization
for reasons of conscience Senate
two Senate bill two thirty three
introduced by Senator Lopez.
and act relating to public
education and acting the student
bill of rights.
to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate bill two
thirty three Senate bill two
thirty four introduced by
Senator Pirtle.
thirty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two thirty four Senate bill
two thirty five introduced by
list Senate bill two thirty five
Senate bill two thirty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two thirty five
independent community college
Senate bill two thirty six
Senate bill two thirty six
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
of chartering authorities in
monitoring charter schools
allowing a chartering authority
to sanction a governing body
which may include corrective
action and suspension clarifying
the public school code
Committee then sent Destry
Committee Senate bill two thirty
seven Senate bill two thirty
eight introduced by senator
committees and act relating to
public health eliminating
bill two thirty eight having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate Bill.
malpractice amending the medical
malpractice act clarifying the
definition of health care
provider raising recoverable
limits prohibiting disclosure of
certain confidential information
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two thirty nine Senate bill two
forty introduced by Senator
Pirtle an act relating to higher
education and acting the
vocational training scholarship
committee Senate bill two forty
Senate bill two forty one
introduced by senator how to
meal and act making
appropriation to the local
administration assistance to Rio
Arriba Los Alamos Santa Fe Taos
Colfax more and San Miguel
counties Senate bill two forty
To the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two forty one Senate bill
two forty two introduced by
Senator Kernan an act relating
to substitute Care defining
terms in the citizen substitute
Care review act providing for
staffing of the substitute care
Advisory Council providing for
and annexing sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
Senate bill two forty two Senate
bill two forty two having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health of public affairs
Introduced by Senator Hickey and
act to relating to taxation
removing the requirement to
install solar energy systems on
the property for which the
system provides heat hot water
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred.
To the Senate conservation
committee then Senate tax
business and transportation
committee Senate bill two forty
practitioner stating that
immunization would be
detrimental to the physical
condition of the child Senate
bill two forty four.
Senate bill two forty four
Senate bill two forty four
Senate bill two forty five
introduced by Senator Pinto and
senator Ortiz Y. Pino an act
relating to human rights
creating the governor's
providing for cultural
competency certification
requiring all public officers
and employees including all
branches of state government
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee that Senate
finance Senate bill two forty
all registration vehicle plates
Senate bill two forty six Senate
bill two forty six having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
introduced by Senator o'neal and
Representative Hochman Vigil and
act relating to juvenile justice
prohibiting the imposition of a
sentence of life without parole
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two forty seven
Senate bill two forty eight
introduced by senator Neville.
And act relating to public
or may occur in a public school
or that involves a school
employee or student Senate bill
two forty eight.
Senate bill two forty eight
having been read twice by title
representative Allison and act
relating to public school
finance eliminating impact aid
from the definition of federal
revenue Senate bill two forty
nine Senate bill two fifty
introduced by Senator share an
act relating to the environment
and acting the industrial
facilities remediation and
restoration Act providing the
operational or the owner or land
title holder offers the property
for sale requiring remediation
and restoration plans providing
for enforcement prescribing
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate finance
committee Senate bill two fifty
Senate bill two fifty one
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act relating to
taxation and revenue department
to maintain applications with
those completed statements in a
statewide donor registry Senate
bill two fifty one Senate bill
one Senate bill two fifty two
introduced by Senator Diamond
and after leading to tort claims
X..
Ending definitions in the space
flight informed consent act
making the provisions of the
Senate bill two fifty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate tax business
libraries and institutions of
higher education to provide for
internet access Senate bill two
fifty three Senate bill two
fifty three having been read
to elections and acting new
procedures for filling a vacancy
in the office of United States
representative.
Providing for special major
political party primary and
pay a filing fee or file a
nominating petition in lieu of
fees making conforming changes
amending repealing and enacting
and Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two fifty four
Senate bill two fifty five
introduced by Senator o'neal.
Providing immunity from criminal
liability for possession of
items necessary for safe
consumption of controlled
substances amending the
Senate bill two fifty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
the fire protection grant Fund
providing that the fire
protection grant Fund shall not
revert at the end of a fiscal
year removing the requirement to
stipends for volunteer
fifty six Senate bill two fifty
six have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee then Senate finance
for petitions for alternative
placements for delinquency
placements ensuring that
placements for Indian children
provide access to cultural
practices an acting requirements
Senate Indian rule.
Cultural affairs committee that
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two fifty seven
Senate bill two fifty eight
introduced by Senator Baca and
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee that Senate
Judiciary Committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
spouses Senate bill two fifty
nine Senate bill two fifty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
legislatively requested task
forces the subject to the open
meetings act Senate bill two
sixty Senate bill two sixty
having been read twice by title
introduced by senator Munoz an
act relating to health adding
pandemic disease to the list of
conditions presume to be
approximately caused by
employment as a firefighter.
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two sixty one Senate Bill to
sixty two introduced by senator
Munoz and act relating to
welfare benefit plan.
Senate bill two sixty two Senate
bill two sixty two having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
relating to adult diplomas and
acting the adult workforce
diploma programme Act
establishing program provider
qualifications and requirements
establishing contract guidelines
sixty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two sixty three Senate bill
club may allow another nonprofit
organization to use its
facilities Senate bill two sixty
four Senate bill two sixty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
act relating to jurisdiction
requiring traffic citations to
be filed in the county in which
the violation is alleged to have
been committed Senate bill two
sixty five Senate bill two six
Senate bill two sixty six
introduced by Senator Ivy Soto
and Senator doing an act
relating to non partisan
judicial retention staggering
the terms of District Court
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate rules committee that
Senator committee Senate bill
two sixty six Senate bill two
sixty seven introduced by
definitions or categories of law
enforcement officers providing
for insurance costs for members
of the New Mexico mounted patrol
making appropriation Senate bill
two sixty seven Senate bill two
Senator pope and act relating to
the state auditor changing
certain audit reporting
requirements Senate bill two
sixty eight Senate bill two
sixty eight having been read
introduced by Senator Ivy Soto
and act relating to financial
institutions exempting loans
that do not accrue interest from
certain provisions of the New
two six and I am having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two sixty nine
public purposes providing for
specialized registration decals
for supporters of where the
public purposes making
appropriations Senate bill two
seventy Senate bill two seventy
having been read twice by title
Introduced by Senator pope and
Senator Hemphill.
An act an act relating to public
veterans and active and reserve
members of the military and the
National Guard Senate bill two
seventy one Senate bill two
seventy one having been read
twice by title is ordered
An act relating to public
schools requiring school
districts and charter schools
thank.
To allow military families to
enroll school age children prior
to their physical presence in
committee Senate bill two
seventy two.
Senate bill two seventy three
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
to the Senate Indian rural and
cultural affairs committee then
Senate health and public affairs
committee Senate bill two
seventy three.
Senate bill two seventy four
resulting in great bodily harm
or death providing for an
independent investigation Senate
bill two seventy four Senate
bill two seventy four having
been read twice by title is
Senator Padilla asked.
Senate bill two seventy five
introduced by Senator pope.
An act relating to Veterans
Services providing that the
bill two seventy five Senate
bill two seventy five having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
assist with hazardous materials
accident response declaring an
emergency Senate bill two
seventy six Senate bill two
seventy six seven min read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate
act relating to taxation
providing an income tax
exemption in an amount equal to
thirty thousand dollars of
military retirement pay Senate
bill two seventy seven.
is ordered printer for to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two seventy seven Senate
bill two seventy eight
introduced by Senator Shendo and
Indian child welfare act
providing additional
requirements governing child
custody proceedings involving
Indian children amending
repealing and enacting sections
have been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate engine in rural cultural
affairs committee that Senate
judiciary committees that Senate
medicine act amending the
Medical Board act to exercise
authority over osteopathic
physicians and osteopathic
physician assistants increasing
certain fees transferring
seventy nine Senate bill two
seventy nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health of public affairs
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill two
issuance of severance tax bonds
for planning design and
construction to complete Paseo
del Norte north west in
Bernalillo county and widen the
road wait to two lanes making
bill two eighty Senate bill two
eighty one introduced by senator
Neville and act relating to
economic development providing
for contract re negotiations for
the Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate Bill to anyone.
Senate bill two eighty two
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to medical records
Senate health and public affairs
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill two eighty
two Senate bill two eighty three
introduced by Senator Woods and
act relating to real estate
eighty three Senate bill two
eighty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two eighty three
Conservancy districts Senate
bill two eighty four Senate bill
two eighty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate and in rural consul
affairs committee that Senate
medical technicians or emergency
responders to transport a person
for emergency mental health
evaluation and care in the
absence of a court order if the
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two eighty five Senate bill two
eighty six introduced by Senator
held during the Corona virus
disease two thousand nineteen
pandemic in two thousand twenty
one.
Providing a delayed repeal
declaring an emergency Senate
bill two eighty six.
Senate bill two eighty seven
introduced by Senator Lopez and
act making appropriation to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration to promote
economic development and
printed and referred to the
Senate tax businesses
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two eighty seven Senate
bill two eighty eight introduced
by Senator Pirtle and Act
to cannabis establishing duties
for the department of
environment creating the
cannabis regulation Fund and the
road safety fund revising the
local DWI grant program and
emergency Senate bill two eighty
eight Senate bill two eighty
eight having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred.
To the Senate tax business
transportation committee then
one even though Senator pearls
not here did it say making
appropriation.
Senator all read the the title.
to cannabis establishing duties
for the department of the
environment creating the
cannabis regulation Fund and the
road safety fund revising the
local D. W. I. grant program and
appropriation firing an
emergency.
And the committee that was
assigned to Senator was sent as
a.
Senate tax business
transportation committee then
Thank you senator Wirth.
Well I guess I better yield
center portal since it's his his
bill first.
sent to taxed judiciary as well
thank you Mr president.
Senator Wirth yeah Mister Mister
chairman I think Center pearls
up the right that's that's the
pull it back let me take a look
at it and visit with center for
rural and we'll get it figured
out.
By the end of the day.
focus on special education
providing powers and duties
requiring accountability
amending repealing and acting
and recompiling sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
is ordered printer for dissent
Education Committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
two eighty nine Senate bill two
ninety introduced by Senator
Tallman an act related to
capital expenditures creating
Senate Bill Tennessee having
been read twice by title is
ordered print referred to the
institutions requiring
inspections are privately
operated correctional facilities
Senate bill two ninety one
Senate bill two ninety one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
Economic Development Department
to manage and support small
business incubator centers
throughout the state Senate bill
two ninety two.
Senate bill two ninety two
bill two ninety two Senate bill
two ninety three introduced by
Senator Candelaria and act
relating to business
restrictions providing for the
refund and waiver of license
fees to certain businesses whose
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business and
transportation committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two ninety three Senate
bill two ninety four introduced
and certificate Senate bill two
ninety four Senate bill two
ninety four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
public funds amending repealing
and enacting sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
related to disaster funding
limiting how money in certain
and public affairs committee
then Senate finance committee
Senate bill two ninety five
Senate bill two ninety six
introduced by Senator McKenna
and act relating to the
for violations non compliance
and failure to correct for non
compliance to account for
inflation.
Senate bill two ninety six.
Senate bill two ninety six
introduced by Senator Stewart
and act relating to procurement
allowing agencies to enter into
contracts to purchase renewable
energy for a term not to exceed
the useful life of the
conservation committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill ten ninety seven
Senate bill two ninety eight
introduced by senator Wirth and
act relating to elections
including candidates for the
distribution amounts for major
party Miner party and
unaffiliated candidates amending
sections of the voter action act
to remove references to public
Senate bill two ninety eight
have.
Okay.
Senate bill two ninety eight
having been read twice by title
The.
Senator going back to Senate
bill two eighty eight.
this is sponsored by Senator
Pirtle it's a referred to Senate
Senate bill two ninety nine
introduced by Senator Moores and
act relating to special
registration plates requiring
the taxation and revenue
department to establish a design
nine Senate bill two that in
line having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee that Senate finance
paid time off corporate income
tax credit Senate bill three
hundred Senate bill three
hundred having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
creating the energy storage
system income tax credit
requiring the taxation and
revenue department to provide an
annual report requiring the
energy minerals and natural
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill three oh
one Senate bill three oh two
introduced by Senator Sedillo
Lopez and act relating to the
Avoiding exceptions establishing
burden of proof for defenses
requiring workers compensation
reimbursement in certain
situations Senate bill three oh
two Senate bill three oh two
Lopez and act relating to the
educational retirement board
changing the membership of the
board Senate bill three oh three
Senate bill three oh three
having been read twice by title
Senator McKenna and act relating
to elections directing the
secretary of state to collect
and make publicly available the
geographic information system
data for each voting district in
Senate health and public affairs
committee Senate bill three oh
four Senate bill three oh five
introduced by Senator Campos and
actually need to capital
expenditures and acting the
Fighting for an annual capital
outlay expenditure proposal
providing for an annual state
capital improvements plan making
appropriations Senate bill three
five.
Senate bill three oh six
introduced by Senator Campos and
act relating to passenger rail
service amending the railroad
planning and projects act
seven been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three oh six.
payment of gross receipts tax to
school bus contractors Senate
bill three oh seven Senate bill
three oh seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
enacting the Elizabeth white
field end of life options act
amending a section of chapter
thirty article to NMSA nineteen
seventy eight to establish
rights procedures and
life options act Senate bill
three oh eight.
Senate bill three oh eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
distribution of Kate N. ninety
five masks or equivalently
effective masks and for a robust
statewide public education
campaign about the importance
Senate health and public affairs
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill three oh
nine Senate bill three ten
introduced by Senator Steinborn
an act relating to crime
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
three ten Senate bill three
eleven introduced by Senator
received for lobbying making
technical changes to the
advertising campaign reporting
requirements Senate bill three
eleven Senate bill three eleven
having been read twice by title
introduced by Senator Steinborn
an act relating to wildlife
renaming the department of game
and fish as the department of
wildlife conservation renaming
the state game commission as the
license fee to hunt bull elk
eliminating the outfitter and
guide special draw license set
aside revising the special draw
license percentages for
residents and non residents
Senate bill three twelve.
bill three thirteen introduced
by Senator Steinborn an act
relating to public finance
connecting the public banking
act creating the public bank of
New Mexico establishing a board
the state treasurer to deposit
and maintain a certain amount of
public money in the public bank
of New Mexico.
Requiring a certain amount of
the severance tax permanent fund
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three thirteen Senate bill
amending section two dash eleven
dash seven NMSA nineteen seventy
eight the laws nineteen seventy
seven chapter two sixty one
section seven as amended Senate
Senate bill three fifteen
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to public employee
retirement including certain
state police division officers
under the state police member
correctional officer member and
appropriations process parole
officer member coverage plan one
providing for the adjustment of
certain service credit earned
prior to the adoption of the
Senate bill three fifteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered friend referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee that Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
data pertaining to sexual
orientation and gender identity
Senate bill three sixteen Senate
bill three sixteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
committees a joint resolution
oops.
The school we got the wrong way
this is this is Senator
resolution three seventeen it's
So we have.
Right we have no three seventeen
introduced by senator RTC fino
and act relating to public
schools requiring notification
to charter schools of property
available for their educational
revolving fund or the charter
facility Fund modifying the
terms applicables to requests
from the public school capital
outlay fund for leased
facilities.
Pacifying the date by which
Senate bill three eighteen
Senate bill three eighteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
eighteen.
restraint providing what
restraint techniques schools
cannot use banning the use of
seclusion and schools providing
public input for school policies
and restraint.
defining prone restraint Senate
bill three nineteen Senate bill
three nineteen having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
creating new types of liquor
licenses altering the
requirements and powers
conferred by certain liquor
licenses Senate bill three
twenty.
Senate bill three twenty having
Senate bill three twenty one
introduced by Senator Griggs and
senator Byrd an act relating to
courts and acting the county
court house bonding act
authorizing the New Mexico
to certain counties record has
projects providing a tax
distribution to the county
courthouse courthouse banding
Fund Senate bill three twenty
one Senate bill three twenty one
bill three twenty one.
Positions Senate bill three
twenty two introduced by senator
committees and act relating to
zoning authority requiring
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee and then
Senate tax business
transportation committee Senate
penalties Senate bill three
twenty three Senate bill three
twenty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
proposing an amendment to
article eight section two of the
constitution of New Mexico to
impose a statewide millage
dedicated to public school
funding Senate joint resolution
eight.
the Senate rules committee then
Senate tax business and
transportation committee Senate
joint resolution eight.
Senate joint resolution nine
prohibiting the state counties
school districts and
municipalities from pledging
their credit or making a
donation to or in aid of any
person association or public or
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill two.
Senator excuse me Senate joint
constitution of New Mexico to
provide that the secretary of
state and county clerks are
elected in a non partisan
election in odd numbered years
resolution ten having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate joint resolution to
Senate joint resolution eleven
in the judicial department and
office of Family representation
and advocacy Senate joint
resolution eleven Senate joint
resolution eleven having been
read twice by title is ordered
amendment to article four of the
constitution of New Mexico to
limit the legislature's ability
to increase general fund
appropriations for the
operations of state government
the limitation Senate joint
resolution twelve Senate joint
resolution twelve having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
the department of public safety
to the department of
transportation of all tracks of
real property and improvements
they.
Iran on which are located New
transportation committee Senate
joint resolution thirteen Senate
joint resolution fourteen
introduced by Senator Pirtle the
joint resolution proposing to
amend article nineteen section
Senate joint resolution fourteen
Senate joint resolution fourteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee.
amendment to article one of the
constitution of New Mexico to
establish procedures to allow
counties to petition the
legislature and Congress to form
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate joint resolution fifteen
Senate joint resolution sixteen
introduced by Senator pope a
joint resolution proposing an
veterans and their widows and
widowers to veterans with less
than a one hundred percent
disability and their widows and
widowers and basing the amount
of the exemption on the veterans
then Senate tax business
transportation committee Senate
joint resolution sixteen Senate
joint resolution seventeen
introduced by Senator pope a
joint resolution proposing to
district may violate by a law
rule or practice of the state
and public school districts that
produce disparities in student
academic outcomes are
subordinates or subordinates
referred to the Senate rules
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate joint
resolution seventeen Senate
joint resolution eighteen
introduced by senator committees
closure of a business while
allowing another business in the
same industry to remain open
Senate joint resolution eighteen
Senate joint resolution eighteen
introduced by senator Shannon
Pinto a Joint Memorial
requesting the United States
Congress to forward fund the
bureau of Indian education
Senate Education Committee
Senate Joint Memorial on Senate
Joint Memorial to introduced by
Senator Pinto a Joint Memorial
requesting the United States
government to based payments in
president referred to the Senate
rules committee then Senate tax
business and transportation
committee Senate Joint Memorial
to Senate memorial number two
national infrastructure bank to
finance urgently needed
infrastructure projects Senate
memorial two Senator Mario to
having been read twice by title
Senate memorial three introduced
by Senator Campos a memorial
requesting that the importance
of raising awareness of fentanyl
overdose deaths be recognized
and requesting state agencies to
Senate rules committee then
Senate health and public affairs
committee Senate memorial three
Senate memorial for introduced
by Senator Stefanics a memorial
requesting the secretary of
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate rules committee then
Senate health and public affairs
committee sent a memorial for
Senate memorial I introduced by
elevate the vital importance of
Hispanic culture traditions and
perspectives in strengthening
the advancement of the
conservation of public lands and
waters for future generations
Senate memorial six introduced
by Senator Hamblen they memorial
requesting the aging and long
term services department to
six having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate rules
committee then Senate health and
public affairs committee Senate
memorial six Senate memorial
corrections and justice and the
interim committee that addresses
issues of economic in rural
development to study strategies
to mitigate the economic
consequences of closing private
memorial eight introduced by
Senator Pinto a memorial
requesting that the United
States the state of New Mexico
and the Navajo Nation
collaborative Lee take proactive
proposed Gallup Indian Medical
Center.
Senate memorial eight seven
memorial eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee then sent
division of the department of
finance and administration to
convene a task force to study
the economic benefits of
southeastern New Mexico relative
business and transportation
committee center memorial nine.
This officer Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president and many thanks
senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president just for all the
committee chairs now's the time
to make the announcements and
we've got some I know we also
until Wednesday February tenth.
And during that window
membership be looking at the
tenth through certainly Friday
we're back so ideal to other
members for announcements
miscellaneous thank you senator
Wirth run that order business
analysis miscellaneous Senator
Baca thank you Mr president I
Senator bill.
Yes thank you Mr president of Mr
president members your Judiciary
Committee will be meeting
thanks entail Senator CENIC's
thank you Mr president I have
two request today one for a
change of the bill and one to
announce the committees
procurement act it is Senator
Stefanics and senator harm meal
I would like to take my name off
as the main sponsor and leave it
Senator that makes it just
identification do want you to
want to have the name removed
completely or do you want to
just have it.
So I'm Mr president I would like
Si no objection.
So ordered okay thank you and
your Senate conservation
committee will be meeting
you thank you so this annex
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president
built to to get through so thank
you Senator Shendo Senator
Lopez.
take note that of course today
is February first and as you
know there are designations for
different months throughout the
year to recognize the diversity
of our country and today happens
Thank you Mr president Senate
education still has three bills
from the last time they were
ready in for Wednesday but I
members it will be webcast but
we will have the secretary the
nation there I think we were all
of a little taken back or not
quite prepared when the governor
in our state of the state
from other schools and school
boards what does this mean to
and then hopefully Wednesday
morning at eight o'clock in the
morning the.
Senate finance me to every day
and so we don't get those days
off like other committee so we
we we drink from the fire
hydrant almost every day I think
trying to get through agencies
regulation and the public lands
commissioner so we can figure
out what the federal leasing
stuff is done to us and so we
appreciate that members may want
Thank you senator Munoz Senator
Ivey Soto thank you very much of
this president's present your
Senate rules committee will not
be meeting tomorrow will be take
the day off but when we do bid
the module that was introduced
today so just so everybody knows
will be hearing Senate memorial
one of which is Senator Hempel.
Senate bill one sixty which is
senator Wirth.
And then we'll also be hearing
Senate joint resolution three
legislators Sedillo Lopez thank
Tuesday's agenda we has SB fifty
five Senator souls and SB
seventy Padilla and SB one
eleven Lopez thank you thank you
Santo Senator Stewart.
consent that we change the
originals bill sponsor for
Senate bill two ninety seven.
That was listed under my name it
objection certificates.
Say no objections so ordered
Senator.
Senator Tallman.
Wednesday at one thirty and for
this coming Friday also at one
thirty thank you Senator Tallman
any further announcements
Senators Senator.
So so we've got this federal
land leasing issue coming up and
I just wanted to point out that
Hey oil and gas isn't just fuel
process that cotton and the it
used used oil and gas to get
there and so this is much bigger
than the thirty or forty percent
unemployed in your in your a.
Areas there
and it's certainly going to
drive up the cost of close to so
if we're really looking at the
you know the full effect of
this.
announcements.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you the new people haven't
Which is passed in nineteen
seventy one and went into effect
in nineteen seventy two the
protection of the state's
beautiful and helpful
environment is hereby declared
the air water and other natural
resources of the state
consistent with the use and
development of these resources
for the maximum benefit benefit
of the people has added November
second nineteen seventy one
Si no further announcement
senator senator Wirth.
a moment to pause and really
think are incredible staff who
have made this is been it's it's
different for sure and again as
director Burciaga on the
Legislative Council huge thanks
is is also well deserved
David to check on all the
sergeant at arms thank you to
all of you and also a huge thank
you to Lorraine Montilivi hail
and my office of the work that
the staff thanks so much.
Senator Wirth and certainly Mr
appreciate that a bunch so with
that unanimous consent that the
Senate stand in recess until
eleven o'clock Wednesday
