Personalizing your contention
that that the second gets taken
off the commission.
Okay so and also Mr some people
have let us know who you are how
do we get to this position and
all along with serving and kind
of a to work is been on the
commission yes thank you Senator
Ivy Soto my name is is is empty
I've been involved in the
construction industry for over
twenty years and a lot of that
involvement included having
regular OSHA training OSHA ten
OSHA thirty following all the
guidelines that OSHA puts
forward
and now as a business
Representative my local union
with the sheet metal workers
having to follow those
guidelines and assure that
all of our nine hundred members
throughout the state of New
Mexico are following these
guidelines as well
moving forward with
disappointment I would
Keep those steam same standards
moving forward and make sure
that everybody's at hearing to
those guidelines through the
ocean
Information that we've and and
how long we've been serving on
the on the question.
Well I I've it's been a month
just a month okay very good and
there's been a lot of a backlog
on some of the so some people
been there like three four
years.
and and okay very good let me go
to questions from the committee
I know that I've got a couple of
questions for you all to the
people first.
Senator bill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Zemke
I'm I'm just reading through the
but the occupational health and
safety review commission does.
And it is.
Pretty big.
Do you have any idea of what
we're I mean why do we need this
and are.
And what do they do.
Basically the whatever learn
from our first meeting was the
commission takes on any
violations of any of contractors
or businesses out there that may
have violated these guidelines
and they take a vote of the
commission and do an
investigation to see if those
incidences were
wrongful doings or not and then
we make a judgment call based on
the information that we have
given.
So so Mr Chairman and Mr David
K. then you have
Can you can you impose fines or
penalties of some kind at the if
you find them wrong or what what
happens if you if your
investigation and then your
during determines that the
infected did violate the the
standards I'm still fairly new
building only a month in to this
OSHA board so I you don't have
the answer to that question at
this moment.
Yes it it is curious to just
three members.
Of the board to you you you
you're going to have quite a bit
of the story is you know and and
responsibility
how often do they meet we're
looking at meeting quarterly and
that's B. as soon as of now and
hopefully we'll be able to meet
in person in the future.
Do we have Mr Chairman do we
have somebody from from the
staff of the commission is going
to be on here with us to reach
out of we we don't we do have
missiles are up the governor's
aboard the commission's person
on this item but we don't have
the staff from.
the Christian Health sept which.
Okay well thank you you mean
your background seems like it's
perfect for this position it if
I had a better idea of what the
position did that
it's.
So you are you are you we were
required to have such an agency
by the federal government sounds
like that my understanding is
that this is this part of state
implementation the federal
officials now we just we just we
have to have one I don't know if
the if there's nobody here to
tell us we don't know exactly
how often they've found somebody
in violation or.
Whether it's here but we have to
have it in your some of your
good background point of I would
certainly support your.
Your point.
that about that actually serve
under the environment department
there are there are some
division within the apartment
apartment building the
environment there but the.
Thanks for the administrative is
that they have the special
committees to that yes.
But also very mind environment
among other things for example
that they they up regulate food.
They regulate you know a variety
of other things not just what we
think about in terms of you know
the sometimes the strangely
perking conditions exactly
not wearing hard hats and things
like that.
Okay.
Sir with Mr chair or in just a
minute later but just a just one
question along those lines I
know that we had the issue with
the.
tragic death on the movies that.
And I think you're agency also
has some overseas that's a
workplace condition of my
correct that that's within the
purview and I'm just curious.
What action it assuming that it
is kind of if you all are
looking at that issue
during our last quarterly
meeting with there's a backlog
of a basis that we need to look
at and due to the pandemic and
this vacancy on the commission
we still have the there's still
a lot of pending cases we have
to look at and will be meeting
in February actually next month
to go over a lot of those cases
so I haven't seen that one cross
the table yet but I would only
assume that that would be up the
purview of the commission.
That is yes I appreciate that I
just think it follows up on what
Senator Ortiz Pino was asking
just about kind of that scope of
the jurisdiction issue and sell
okay yeah that's all I have said
what I I will consider his
funeral note that even though we
don't have anybody from the
staff here for the commission
right now as it turned up
committee secretary in a
previous generation for long
tenure in state government used
to be the hearing secretary for
this commission they would hold
hearings and we're under NMED.
under the the office of public
hearings.
and so yeah we did and do they
have these goals I thank you if
that how often with the hearings
take place.
Just as cases where as cases
would come up committed and that
they've had a an impartial
hearing officer that would sit
in and do the I
find the facts and conclusions
of law that could.
The judges right sect.
But yes thank you thank you for
being here today I'm just of
the.
I.
Yeah.
No.
This is a get I I appreciate
very much your your service and
and and I agree with the Senator
Ortiz you know I think I think
you got the right background for
this and and this is one of
those things where
You know it's the right it's the
it's the intersection
of a healthy workforce and the.
And and
you workforce right because the
unions to a lot of the training
for people wind up going out of
contract of a unit contracts in
various places and and and that
trading them
that in many cases used to be
done at at you know if this is
like DVI or other places really
for the most part is is been
taken over by the unions and no
cost to the taxpayers and so and
so part of part of occupational
health and safety starts with
Patrick.
And and so and so I'm you know
it's not just enter the sheet
metal both but also in terms of
the drinking out of the other
the other unions as well you
know the trade unions is is a
that's it's really an important
leadership position that you're
going to be having in terms of
embedding a lot making sure that
a lot of this gets embedded in
the in the training aspect.
that separate from I think your
duties as a commissioner this is
the right thing to do but it but
it puts you kind of at that
intersection of a lot of the
stuff you know and and the
making sure that the.
that the conditions under which
people operate our state I and I
think I think Senator Wirth
raises really good point.
On the you know on the
on the film films that you know
we're a lot of people are asking
the question why do we even need
what technology today why do we
even need to have.
guns capable of propelling.
An object whether it's a bullet
or something else when when they
can use one that that that can't
and anything else can be added
in post production.
and so you know
and so that's you know I think I
think I think you you guys have
a you have a dual role in terms
of the hearings a to do.
and that the hearing officer
does make recommendations to the
eyes but also in terms of the
rulemaking that you all to.
And make sure that rulemaking is
rulemaking that's proactive.
for for health and safety
because after at the end of the
day what we consistently here in
terms of economic development.
Is a skilled workforce is needed
in New Mexico and where we have
a skilled workforce directly
fell as well as places where we
have a skilled workforce.
And we pay people to come here
we've got provided industry.
And and you know that even if we
pay people to come here and we
did not additional workforce
that would come in the building
where the school workforce and
so we see the benefit of the
skilled workforce and
you know but but part of having
a skilled workforce is people
having a safe environment which
they operate.
and and so anyways I want to
thank you for your willingness
to serve.
we work together number projects
over the years and and I know
how hard you work and and and
and and your ability to to work
with folks in terms of of
listening to people and and then
also making you know following
through with things what not and
so I'm excited about your
service in this I just want to
thank you very much thank you
chairman maybe so to appreciate
the US are are we thank you so
much it's so good to see you in
person and not just in Facebook
the pandemic has kept us all the
way for a long time so I want to
thank you for that no one thing
I truly like about the
commission is the fact that you
talk to general industry
construction and agriculture on
hazard communication I
appreciate that and so the staff
operations manager who oversees
and representative unions I
thank you for that part so I'm
happy that you have a voice that
can bring in a voice for unions
in this commission and I'm
thankful for that not my only
question Mr chairman is do you
by any chance work with the
COVID nineteen workplace safety
plan through your commission.
being so new to this commission
I will have to get back to you
on that
and I can make some phone calls
after this and get you some
answers perfect but I would only
assume being that a COVID is a
safety measure that that would
be part of the occupational
safety and health commission but
I don't have that answer at this
moment thank you Mr chairman the
reason why I ask is small
businesses if you look at small
business in rural Rio Arriba
county who may need a lifeline
to to reach out to when it comes
to these COVID safe practices
with their business interesting
cases increase it be nice to
know if I could call Mr thank
you for some guidance or point
to my small businesses in his
direction of the commission's
direction but I think you'd be
great that as well Mr chairman
with that no further questions.
Very much appreciate that and
and that is certainly you know
actual beach to.
To read what the US Supreme
Court said.
About the federal OSHA inability
to enforce.
mandates.
Verses maybe perhaps
incentivizing.
some of these COVID say
practices or or or you know.
Other things that that can
really save lives and and part
of it could simply be a function
of state law versus federal and
it could be that that at the
state level we can do things
that the president so but it is
Mr okay thank you very much
appreciate you being here for
the hearing so we will be
actually have all the paperwork
finalize for the various
different
Conferees we will then be taken
the votes during the session and
committee and then we'll be
scheduling these on the floor to
the extent that we know in
advance you know how the session
works to the extent that we know
in advance will let you know
hopefully you'll be around in
the session anyway and and then
that way if it's a moment we're
able to to to the nomination
when we do the confirmation on
the floor it'll be
you'll be you'll be invited
you're not required to but
you'll be invited to come and be
on the floor of the day just to
that.
Thanks very much appreciate it.
Chair yes.
Before we start the next that I
wanted to bring up an issue that
my son in law raised last night.
He's a.
The Human Rights attorney from
the news port and and and
educated in Chile he's an
American citizen now.
And he was reading the paper
yesterday and saw where the
governor is.
The drop from the game and fish
commission one of the
commissioners that we had
confirm.
And he said no you're on the
rules committee are will they do
do you have to concurrencies in
the termination from these
commissions.
I said no we just confirm them
and then they serve at the
pleasure of the governor.
And his perception was that
that's that that's the.
Very unusual in the
international scope of things
that in most countries.
That it's that it's it's if
somebody has been confirmed by
the legislative body.
Is going to be dropped that the
legislative body has to compress
it will you know the problem in
New Mexico we're only here for
thirty days when you're sixty
days of the civil who couldn't
you have those hearings in
between times I just raise that
because it did it did I had
never thought of it in those
terms before but coming.
I'm such a different perspective
that he brings to the it did
seem to him that maybe we we we
out of.
Consider the possibility that
that the legislative branch and
I have some say in whether
somebody gets done.
The people actually serve for a
term yeah we're that they serve
for a term and they can't beat
them this is other suggestion I
mean I mean what sort of what we
do is is is also somewhat
consistent with the
confirmations that happen at the
federal level.
Where people are are confirmed
by the US Senate do bills with
the big differences is is in the
federal system that cannot start
serving until they're confirmed.
But then once they start serving
their their their their subjects
that service being controlled by
the president.
But even even at the federal
level elected post to.
The you know the the Postmaster
General so that is kind of us
now I guess to our highway
commissioner are all partisan is
secretary enough right where
where they've they've got the
special deal with the postal
service stuff like we have a
special deal with the with the
transportation commissioners and
that position so that that's
that's kind of a unique one.
that doesn't follow the normal
rule and you know part of it is
is is just to assure your son in
law that in the United States we
like to preach process we don't
like to actually follow it
ourselves.
I think he's beginning to get
the picture yes.
So okay let's let's move on to
the border Authority.
and so we're going to have
And if you all could activate
your cameras please as I call
your name Linda's McCloskey.
good morning Linda
Sallee Starman so lease.
Good we have and madam madam the
agency silo connect.
I am on a.
the trash and and that's.
And Alexander is here for that.
Very good and then we also have
medical gonna have a who is the
director of the New Mexico
border Authority.
A good example thank you all for
being here and so of the way we
will conduct this hearing is
will ask each of you to
introduce yourself gives Google
words in terms of
Kind of what what's your
background so for things what
your background is what brought
you to the to serve on on this
authority.
how long we've been serving and
then the fourth is tell us about
your experience on the
commission so far or some of the
projects we've been working on
during your service for those
who been on for a little bit of
time and so we'll start with
Alexander center.
And go ahead and mute.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning my name is Alexander
Sierra
I am the plant manager and
corporate.
requisitions manager for acme
mills is something that just New
Mexico I've been employed by
acme mills since nineteen ninety
two I am located in.
something so since that time so
I'm the old man on the hill.
There's only one chair of.
Who's been here longer than I
have.
Also serve on the border of the
border industrial association so
in that capacity I am kind of
the conduit for the business
isn't something that just a to
the border Authority.
issues that that the
That the business is maybe
having I can do that the.
If you will that kinder to the
state so there's issues we can
resolve.
One of those being a few years
ago the overweight so.
So in that capacity I served
both the state and businesses.
And the it's been a pleasure to
work with Markle in the group
I've been on for about a year.
And we currently are working on
two major projects and have a
third one in the works or
planning one has been the the
flood zones around the.
The port of entry in Columbus
the St Francis high we
extension something just to get
traffic off of.
One do you do to manage the
highway.
Wirth bottleneck you know passes
and then the third is we're
looking for funding.
to renovate the port of entry in
something that just as it is has
met.
port
we need to improve the.
Ingress and egress from that
point for the commercial truck.
Thank you.
Thank you very much I appreciate
that let's go to and in this
regards Caitlyn how are you.
And go ahead mute.
I think you are muted but for
start hearing you.
Nope nope nothing at.
You can if you want you can just
talk and I can provide some
alternate audio.
While you're speaking.
While you're working on your
audio you might need to log out
and log back in.
To give it a try will go to
Sally's time and so lease.
I am stockman's lease and I and
the president CEO of Starman
sitting in Los crucis Mexico.
How we farm.
Over thirty two hundred acres of
the console vertically
integrated.
to have a selling plant and we
sell all of our product in the
wholesale market.
I was asked by the governor's
office to.
To be part of the border
Authority to be on board.
I can't remember exactly how
many months it's been but right
around the time Alex.
Has been attending meetings and
Been very interesting is
something that I'm not.
Really used to looking at has
got me out of my box but it's
We have been looking at various
infrastructure projects and I
believe that the border is
already.
Very important to this to New
Mexico in this part of the
country.
I think we can.
There's a lot more than then
they can we can do that we can
do.
The the projects that Alex
mention is basically what we've
had we've just had I think we've
had maybe three meetings in the
past.
Here so and so it hasn't really
given us a big chance to get our
our feet wet too much.
But I'm excited to to work with
Markle and.
And all the rest of the board
members I think that.
This can be a.
Great thank you to to bring
economic development to this
part of the state.
Thank you very much appreciate
that
while we're waiting for
and then make a reappearance
let's go to.
just Martinez a solid back who
hasn't taxable.
resume and a questionable choice
of sponsor but that's okay go
ahead.
Good morning madam chair
Committee members my name's
Ramona Martinez telepathic I
also am from Los crucis
I am a practicing attorney I
have my I'm a solo practitioner
here in Los crucis I practice in
the line contracts
litigation and criminal defense
I have as served in a public
servant prior to practicing law
for quite some time as you know
chairman
I am looking forward I have not
said that I was only recently
appointed to the border
Authority yet not yet and then
attended any meetings at this
point as there's not been
scheduled however I am looking
forward to serving on this
Commission I know the potential
and the importance of this
commission that has to the
border with regards to economic
development to the border
having lived I'm obviously
coming from
region seven or The New Mexico
and having now living in
southern New Mexico there so as
miss Stein stated there's so
much potential and that the
border Authority has with
regards to economic development
so I'm looking forward to
serving on this commission thank
you.
I thank you very much appreciate
that and were.
Melissa if you could see if you
could work with this us us
property to get to to help you
get back mothers we go there's
Linda.
Let's property can you hear me
and are you able to speak and to
have strong enough internet to
activate your camera if not.
All I see you're calling in and
your dad and you're logging in.
Very good.
So.
And just because he can hear me.
And can you speak.
Okay we can see you using your
phone.
Star six star six to on mute if
you called in.
And.
You're free to just.
Start on a sense of the rules
will come back to
a secretary please I thank you
for joining us this morning this
Authority I believe is under
your department is that true.
Mr chair is yes thank you I'm
sorry I'm late.
No problem at all we were a
little bit more efficient this
morning than we have in the past
and so you had a reasonable
expectation of coming in we knew
that
and could you give us a little
bit of orientation as to kind of
what's going on with the for
reporting what the work is and
the extent to which they
interface with maybe a summer
thirty on the other side or.
of the border or please go ahead
yes members of the committee I
thank you for having us
and for considering these
nominees for the border
Authority all of them I have
strong roots within that area
and it's a real pleasure that
they are following during their
time to serve on this board so
it's a very exciting time
actually down on the border a
lot is happening
for the past year and a half
this is David one of my main
priorities working with director
for Hannah and also
collaborating with that New
Mexico G. R. T. on Jo dela Rosa
has been working with a sense of
late and let me tell you a
little bit about what's
happening
because of the political
situation in China and in Asia
and also to to Brianna Bivens
build back better there is a lot
of energy about movie
manufacturing companies into the
United States particularly for
us on that New Mexico Mexico
border and we call that the
center on the area so recently
we have been able to sign three
economic development deals with
Taiwanese companies this was
following a trade mission that
we that we did prior to the
COVID and our focus now is
really getting that's a
structure down at the border
that it needs so I'm sure you
are all aware but most recently
the legislature approved the
Saint Francis extension.
And would like to thank you all
for that this is a she wrote for
economic developments in that
area they not only approved it
funded it's to the tune of forty
million dollars this will allow
the labor force from New Mexico
to get into that Santa Theresa
area with marquise so we're very
excited about that.
In addition to rector for Heda
was very instrumental in putting
together a federal request with
our delegation to extend the
century supports so we are
waiting for that to go through
the legislature on the federal
level but that will really be a
game changer in that area and we
are currently looking at putting
together a funding request for
the Santa Teresa airport to
allow cargo to go into that
airport so really it is fast and
furious down there we're waiting
for some legislation to come out
of the five ministration
regarding trade tariffs and if
it is positive then I think that
for the next eighteen months
this will probably be the
biggest growth area in New
Mexico so thank you for the
opportunity to chat a little bit
about what's going on on the
border of the people that you
our nominations they really are
Representative great job of
picking people from a lot of
different sectors that have
different knowledge base in that
area and were extremely grateful
to them for their service so
thank you very much Mr chair.
Thank you madam secretary and
actually let me let me just.
Ask.
Your question one of the one of
the other people I'm I'm less
falls in the purview you mention
about the sentries airport but
I'm also aware that the.
city Los crucis is wanting to
beef up the Los crucis city
airport so that people are not
always.
Depend upon I'll pass so.
for coming in and out of Los
crucis of making and it into
more of a regional airport
how do those two projects
dovetail and and and and and
what's the resource the
potential resource allocation
between those two.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee we have that with
the legislators in that area and
also with the Los crucis airport
regarding this project we're
waiting for a formal application
from them so we don't know
exactly how much they'll be
asking for but these projects
are not in conflict with each
other Senator is a we are
looking for cargo in order to
services manufacturing companies
and in Los crucis that would be
more of a passenger expansion so
very supportive of using
utilizing both of these assets
in the and areas.
And that is the problem with the
air space between the two.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that's a great
question I don't have the
expertise to answer that but I
can I can call the important
thing is that.
Okay okay and then just one last
thing is I would sure hate that
we that we expand the comic
activities there and then shut
down the air space for
For the space for at the same
time but by having more traffic
there so you know we I like like
how all those things coming
together would be nice on the
other hand it would certainly
seem like people would have a
lot of lot of backup options if
anything goes wrong so.
Mr chair that's a good flag for
us because you're right there's
a lot going on in here.
So okay thank you very much
let's see if Linda has our audio
working.
Can you hear me all my goodness
you sound fabulous.
Want to get on my phone for some
reason my computer's not working
I do apologize but so yes I I'm
glad you can hear me.
So go ahead and give the
committee a little bit of a
background
And the and also how long you
been serving and kind of what
your what your take is a report
kind of things that you're
working on a vote recount.
Sure okay I'm a Luna County
commissioner now but my
background is I support for
public service company for
twenty five years in the Dinning
area and in that capacity I did
a lot of marketing as well as
Economic development projects
and and spent a lot of time in
Santa Fe doing that but as after
I retired I ran the pin are to
help center in Columbus for five
years and then went to work for
the city and did economic
development and we we have that
we are in an empowerment zone
through the USDA and and took
care of that requests for three
years
moved from the city to the
county and economic development
and marketing for them retired
and now I'm a county
commissioner and one of the
things that I like to see is the
expansion of the jobs and growth
in Luna county so that I
actually serve on the work force
the southwestern area workforce
development board as well New
Mexico association of counties
and I share the economic
development infrastructure
Policy Committee putting all
that together my heart is in
Luna county and so I'm so glad
to be able to serve on the or
have been able to serve for
little over a year now on the
the border Authority because
Luna County is actually the
fiscal agent for the development
of the terminal the projects
down there and many County has
the only twenty four hour port
into Mexico so we see a lot of.
Potential and we've been working
on the county has been working
very closely with them Marco and
the border Authority as well as
the serving on the border
Authority so I'll stand for any
questions and I hope that kind
of explains why I'm.
That happy and want to serve on
this board.
It certainly does thank you so
very much let me go to Mr but I
have not to
to also supplement what US
secretary Keyes was talking
about in terms of where you guys
are and and then we'll open it
up to the members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mister chair
members of the committee.
I apologize.
My bill is been acting up a
little bit I just want to thank
you for the opportunity to
address is important committee
we're incredibly excited
we have an amazing team working
down here and the secretary keys
that were really rocking and
rolling when it comes to
moving our infrastructure
projects trying to promote
economic development growing the
border Authority increasing our
revenue streams and increasing
our influence so we're very
happy we're looking forward to
adding a new member here
hopefully pretty soon to the
board that's also exceptionally
qualified
you know but again you know to
say that were we're making some
huge progress and looking
forward to another good year
thank you.
I thank you very much appreciate
that and just real quick also
you Mr gonna have a or secretary
K. how long has this authority
that in existence.
Does anybody know if and and
it's just if it's been like
around for twenty plus years
that's one to seventy eight.
Was a great help.
Mr chairman of turn to they will
also has been in the border
Authority longer to see if he
can if he is our budget analyst
so.
There are pretty content we're
thinking about fifteen years Mr
chair.
I
was very.
So.
Mr chair I apologize what we
want to get you the correct
information so we we we plan to
follow up that's quite a right
hand and about fifteen years is
that's awful so let's let's go
to questions from committee
Senator how to me Mr chairman
thank you so much and for all of
the members for your willingness
to serve thank you I really
enjoyed reading all of your
packet but I have to say I was a
little partial to the amount of
Martinez who's an Escalante high
school alum and so the Escalante
high school with my district
from honestly you can't hide my
local pride on the Senate floor
I make sure that I'm aware of
local maps once in awhile so
thank you for for signing up and
and being willing to work on
this but brought it would you be
willing to become a sponsor
absolutely yeah I I I think it
could be a better spot to
Ramona.
Thank you all for you.
The one thing I want to thank
all of you on it is I know that
you work at a number of
activities that contribute to
the development and productivity
of economy at New Mexico's
border but I was wondering do
can anyone of you even if it's
you a cabinet secretary give me
some examples of trade
opportunities that are currently
happening between the Mexico the
New Mexico border.
Mr chair members of the
committee I will speak to what
we will call for direct
investments that happen that are
happening but are you more
interested in trade between
Mexico and the US and the goods
going back and forth.
What to that tree in New Mexico.
Okay
Mr chair members of the
committee Marcos director had a
do you mind speaking to this and
the I'm out of trade that's
going on through the point right
now.
Sure the the amount of trade
continues to grow we're we're
expecting another banner banner
year this year we may even top
twenty nineteen because of the
the issues that we've been
having bringing supplies here
it's causing some issues as Alex
can attest and bringing supplies
but even though it's causing
some issues right now we believe
the chain supply issues are
going to be an opportunity for
us also as the New Mexico opens
up to fuels that's going to be
an opportunity for us here in
the states
you know we've been saying as
secretary Keyes knows.
We've been attracting more
business from China so we have
several opportunities you know
we have a very important real
because of facility union
Pacific up and and the key one
for Luna County is really
getting this berm done I mean
nothing's going to happen out
there unless we control the
major flooding that's going on
on a reoccurring basis so you
know the projects that we're
involved in with the same
Frances extension the firm
project of the port of entry the
airport all of these projects
combined with what we're seeing
outside with the supply chain
issues the issues getting
computer chips to up companies
down in Mexico all of that are
combining to really make us an
important hub you know into the
future but Alex I don't know if
you want to talk about the
supply chain issues you've been
experiencing.
yes thank you mark or members of
the committee Mr chairman
The the supply chain has been
disrupted by the the operations
in the Long Beach and Houston
point both of those are major
suppliers to those on that there
is a and the reason why the
union Pacific is here in order
that that just.
there will certainly be
addressed they've been working
twenty four hours they've been
moving trains as fast as they
can working longer trains so
that is helped us out
tremendously we expect to see
that situation
the result the middle of the
year twenty twenty two
but I will speak to the trade
that still happens we have the
disruptions but of the two
hundred and some odd companies
and something that just.
Almost I'm gonna say ninety
percent of them.
Have customers for twenty plant
operations in Mexico somewhere
in Mexico
that that's the case correctly
mills ninety percent of our
business is in Mexico and we are
a unfortunate Michigan company
I'm trying to get him to move
but it's been a long struggle.
But the yes as working pointed
out the the need for the highway
extension the need for the
expansion of work the need for
cargo the land.
At this airport is all related
mostly to the trade in Mexico.
Thank you for that and so Mister
chairman it's really exciting to
hear that we could supersede
twenty nineteen I thank you all
again for your willingness to
serve Mr Chairman no further
questions thank you.
Thank you Senator Mario and and
also I'm informed by solid fact
that.
That the the step up so this the
staff was about to nineteen
ninety one.
In the board of the self yeah.
very good and other questions
from the committee senator is
going to.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you all for for being
willing to serve on the on the
border Authority the
My question is to do with it of
the description we have for the
border Authority says that there
would be seven voting members
with the secretary being the
chairman.
And a voting member and the
lieutenant governor being on the
on the thirty but nonvoting ex
officio.
Are there still vacancies after
the four of you and then the one
person that Mister but I have
the indicated is is being
considered for appointment would
there still be other vacancies.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm going to ask Miss
the Salazar to chime in here but
I believe we just have the one
left and fell less is that
correct.
Mr chair committee yes that is
correct we are.
Still looking for one member for
this authority.
Thank you thank you missiles are
and and Mr chairman.
In reading this description that
we have of the border Authority
it has incredible power.
It has the authority to.
Sell bonds impose taxes
electoral.
it really is you know of of the
this is a a real authority we're
not talking about some advisory
group and I wondered what the
current status is of the border
project fund.
Is that still operative do we
still do that the madam
secretary.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'd like to go ahead
and ask director head up on his
TV give us an update.
Yes Mr chair on a turned over to
our budget analyst David to talk
about the borders of good
morning committee members
basically it is an act of
account
we secure funds form nieces that
we have and parking fees of the
parking for of the city that
where for the past.
it currently has around eighty
thousand of the council
presented to to
components ten percent of the
funds that can collect it.
Our food
different account
and is a member of the and
that's use specifically for
border infrastructure
projects.
Which we've made use of to help
our communities and the the
other component the ninety
percent of.
It we can with the funds in
there throughout the year that
help the operations of the
border Authority along with the
general fund that so sites the
four.
And Mr chairman to Sir do we
ever sell bonds to finance
projects.
We have of course committee
members we have inquired of our
legal counsel in the past about
selling bonds however we do not
have enough of.
The funds in our accounts to
back built up so we've never
gone into selling bonds.
Thank.
Well I I appreciate the
willingness to work and we have
potentially here
mechanisms that.
You know could be of great value
to you and furthering the work
that you're doing
and if there's some a
legislative assistance that you
need to do that if you need some
authority or or.
This with the infrastructure
money that's coming in this
would be the year to try to do
some some some really innovative
things I would think so I would
hope that you that you wouldn't
hesitate to bring those to our
attention and to try to get
support for financing if you
need that but thank you for the
work this is really is as
secretary Keyes said a very
exciting dynamic part of the New
Mexico economy the one that
seems to be growing the fastest
and we really appreciate of all
that you're doing.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much.
And I'm and I do understand that
there are plans so that the
people come.
When goods and services come
into New Mexico at Senator so
they don't immediately go into
Texas and not realize how the
state of New Mexico and also
that would be nice.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm
also excited about all these new
plans you have in the future for
this authority I have a question
from a Salazar MERSKI Paypen is
supposed to be on the authority
is she on your authority now.
I'm Senator Stewart let me just
check that for you give me just
one second to pull out my
roster.
What you're looking for that
I'll ask if I can US secretary
keys I think you're the person
to ask for this so I have been
getting communication from the.
Hi one time one embassy in Los
Los Los Angeles that is saying
that they want to build a chip
manufacturing a place down at
the border and I'm just
wondering if you all just had a
state have reached out to the
border Authority for this that
project.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for that
question we have actually been
working with bounces ciation
extensively and just signed in
and you with them up to.
Further our relationships so
there are multiple chip
manufacturers that are looking
in that area but if you don't
mind giving me your contact I
can follow up specifically.
All right great I was very
pleased by that letter because
they outlined all kinds of
things and they said they were
in
communication with the
administration and that you all
were working with them so if you
can just send it to my email
Mimi dot Stewart animal like to
stop the like everyone else I
would appreciate that.
Thank you.
Mr chair Senator Stewart I do
not show her on our roster and I
do not show her having been on
on our roster going back to
twenty twenty.
In a Mr Chairman AC see is
someone that I just point to it
I have an appointment to this
authority and so you should have
received that letter
And you know maybe there's two
border Authority.
Committees or maybe it's another
one but I was pretty sure this
is where she wanted to go so
I'll follow up with you on that.
Senator Stewart and I'm looking
at the US statute which creates
membership and the membership
consists of seven voting members
six of who are appointed by the
governor with the secretary
being the seventh so I do not
believe that this is the correct
of Floridians for that
appointment.
All right well thank you for
that I've I've probably got the
name wrong and all reach out to
her and make sure they are done
it right so thank you so much
for that yes thank you so much.
So it's been a thank you Mr
chairman I forgot to ask one of
the questions that I the head
you've spoken about the berm and
how important it is for the
control of flooding in the area
of is that is that currently
under construction do you have
the financing for is that
something we ought to be
providing through this
legislative session.
Mr chair members of the
committee that project is
designed fully decide we have
enough money to construct it.
right now we're trying we're
negotiating with the major
landowner to acquire land that
we need to actually build the
last hurdle to get this thing
done were were hoping to get
that done pretty so.
Very good okay so so it sounds
like the matter as well and and
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you members of the border
Authority who of our agree to
serve.
Thank you all right I think a
certificate any other question
committee.
Thank you all very much for your
willingness to serve in this
capacity and we as with the
other conferees we will be after
the all the paperwork is
finalized will be taking a vote
during the
and Canadian once we need them
legislative session and then
following that we will be
scheduling time on the floor for
the border Authority if we're
able to anticipate in advance
when that is we will let you all
know so that you have the option
of coming and being on the on
the day is on the Senate floor
when we do the confirmation.
Those who are not required to do
so but but that is a courtesy
that we do extend conferees and
and otherwise thank you all very
much for your service.
Thank you Senator have a nice
day we're going to move on now
to to people The New Mexico
mortgage finance thirty
official Sullivan and hello
actually you know what.
Actually do we have if if we've
got Andrew savage since we've
got Secretary keys already here.
can we can we promote point
seven that way we can do the
regional spaceport Tax district.
Real quick and then Secretary
keys can can get back to
creating jobs.
and what she does personally and
then
We will that will go to
Mr Ramos and the solvent on the
mortgage finance authority
Mr savage thank you very much
for being here today
thanks for your willingness to
serve on the regional spaceport
Tax district if you would be so
kind as to introduce yourself to
the committee a little bit about
yourself and your background
what brings you to the districts
how long you been serving New
what you've been working on for
what the work of the district
has been we've been there thank
you Sir.
Can you hear me we can't by very
good it works it's always good
morning works Mr chair members
of the committee pleasure to be
here
I am New Mexico I got here as
soon as I could when I was
twelve years old and I have been
in and out but I've been back
permanently since two thousand
seven I have about thirty five
years of experience and industry
managing and overseeing large
capital projects for many years
in the semiconductor and gas
identical industry starting in
two thousand seven I had the
the pleasure to work for a firm
AT
and we were the leaders on
development of the spaceport
project I was responsible for
the budgeting scheduling
development and management for a
com and works very closely and
have worked closely with all the
specials board director sense.
another similar work for New
Mexico State University and the
executive director of the
European research for.
And we focus on attraction of
new tenants under companies to
the region as well as supporting
the growth of our entrepreneurs
in our local businesses and
focused on the large focus on
regional economic growth.
so that's my background my
current work I've been on the
spaceport Tax district board for
the last year we met a couple of
times and taking care of some.
Demonstrated issues but the
purpose of the tax district
board is just really to support
and development of spaceport
America.
We work with the space for
leadership as well as the
spaceport Authority board to
identifying to fund
infrastructure development needs
out there at the site.
and then is required we work
with New Mexico finance
authority and others to issue
bonds
the biggest issue in a recent
nearer has been the change and
the in the direction use of
excess revenues.
That issue has been settled and
we know that the spaceport has
future growth plans and
infrastructure needs in the
years ahead.
And for myself but also for the
other members of the tax
district board we look forward
to working with leadership there
to support that process are we
can.
Sounds simple questions please
thank you very much and and
again the securities is this is
a state on multi county district
or what is the what is kind of
what is the jurisdiction of it
and then and then kind of give
us a lot more.
Background information Sir thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee and thank you for
taking us a little bit early and
also going back and forth to a
budget here and so I really
appreciate you promise and I
appreciate you prioritizing us
over the finance committee.
Always.
So that has some of the money
that we is an institution within
the economic development.
Community
and has really been strong
stable ways down in that region
so thank you for considering his
nomination and one of the things
that we alluded to is the excess
revenues from the G. R. T. share
and when we did the
investigation into the spaceport
this is a real issue as those
revenues excess revenues we're
not supposed to be used for
operational expenses which they
had been in the past so one of
the recommendations from the
Attorney General was for us to
establish a formalized process
between the spaceport and
regional tax district and how to
use those funds applied for uses
those funds and have a very.
Transparent process so that has
been really one of the main
focuses between the relationship
between the spaceport and and
this regional tech district
commit Committee and that has
really been our main focus and
feel very comfortable with that
we feel like the taxpayers
should know exactly and it's
Dona Ana County in Sierra County
Mr chair we feel like those
taxpayers should know exactly
what those funds are being used
for and public would support
that so thank you for your
questions.
Thank you very much questions
from committee center to
subpoena thank you Mr chairman
and and yeah there's there's no
listing in our board in our
inventory of executive boards
and commissions for this so I'm
and I take it this is a new idea
this just been develop census
inventory was published madam
secretary.
The idea of the of a
gubernatorial appointment to the
regional spaceport Tax district
this is a new thing.
Mr chair members of the
committee I do not think it is a
new thing I'm going to defer the
question to Melissa Salazar
Melissa.
Mr chair Senator give me just
one second I'm pulling up the
documents on its creation one
second please.
Next.
Mr chair all members of the
committee the of formation was
actually January twenty third
two thousand and nine.
So.
The cells are Miss Mister
chairman the cells are.
Besides Mr savage who else is on
the Tax district
Board.
With that roster I can answer
that from from Sierra County we
have Jim Paxson and tribal state
and then from Dona Ana County we
have the chair of taxes to board
right now Shannon Reynolds of
transmissions general's and also
county commissioner Diana Maria
Trujillo.
And and are you of a
reconfirmation Mr Senator or
have you been on a long.
I've been on for the last year
so this is a reconfirmation yes.
Very good so this is the only
gubernatorial appointment to the
to the district is that is that
correct.
There is one other person from
from Sierra County that was
appointed
but to my knowledge he hasn't
been active recently so I don't
know what his status is.
The cells are.
Sorry Mr chair Committee the
other member who was appointed
to the district did resign his
position last year so we are
working with the secretary to
identify the second appointee to
the board.
Thank you thank you Mr savage
for being willing to to do this.
All your other great work thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much additional
questions from committee.
On this saying none
Well Mr savage thank you very
much for your service to bring
your expertise and the of and
the one of the wants to know
history that you have.
on this regarding these issues
to bear witness appointment with
thank you very much we will be
up once all the paperwork is
finalized during the session we
will be doing the votes of the
committee and then this will be
going to the floor
assuming we're able to figure
out in advance when it is going
to go to the floor you'll be
invited to come if you would
like to be on the dance that is
not a requirement but it
certainly is a courtesy that we
extend to people who are
involved in public service on
behalf of the state so but it
was thank you very much has
secretaries thank you very much
for all the various different
authorities and commissions that
you Rangel and coordinate and we
very much appreciate
all the work that you do on that
and and I and I just have to say
also secretary I appreciate the
detailed understanding and
knowledge that you have the each
of these they have come up
and so clearly you're very hands
on with the work of the
department so thank you very
much thank you Mr sack well now
go to New Mexico mortgage
finance authority Patricia
Sullivan and federal right yes
if we could.
Demote promote appropriately.
in that in a technical sense
only.
Okay very good and so.
let me see we have
And is it angel race or
hazardous I'm here yes thank you
good morning Mr chairman morning
and then we have a picture sucks
a some of them and we have he's
a little bit on this.
who is here all of from the
staff perspective the Mexico.
I'm respondents thirty so we're
gonna start off with with the a
Vigil them and Mr Vegas each of
you if you'd be so kind
and separatum to kind of give us
a little about your background
kind of what brought to to serve
on the record Mexico mortgage
finance authority of the third
thing is how long we've been
serving and then the fourth is
into what projects have been
working on or or what is your
sense of the work that you've
been doing or if you just got on
what are you looking for working
on a wire there after that we
will go to Mr non this to give
us a little bit of an overview
of kind of where things are with
this authority and then we will
up to current freeze of both to
the committee for questions to
the conferees so that missile
that was.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Patricia and I
just all of them I'm a native
New Mexican from Moriarty New
Mexico I lived in New Mexico my
entire life currently working in
New Mexico State University I've
actually been there for thirty
nine years in various capacities
I served my role in New Mexico
state is I I work extensively in
our region and economic and
community development projects I
currently am associate dean in
the college of engineering and I
serve a joint role as director
of the office of strategic
initiatives in the chancellor's
office in that capacity I
oversee public private
partnerships and strategic
topical areas that aligned
faculty needs and research areas
with the university with
community needs some of the
specifically working on economic
development and workforce
development I served with the
mortgage finance authority back
in two thousand to two thousand
four I was appointed by former
governor Gary Johnson and in two
thousand ten I joined the tax
allocation subcommittee with the
mortgage finance authority which
I've served on until my
appointment to by the governor
in November of this last year to
the committee I'm very
passionate about housing in New
Mexico I think my primary thing
that I I I take away from my
time with the mortgage finance
authority is the ability to
expand housing across the state
and specifically in areas that
sometimes aren't always on
people's radar so being able to
address issues in southeast New
Mexico and northern New Mexico
some of the colonias in southern
New Mexico and then include
being able to influence areas
that address housing and
equitable areas such as
integration of green housing
standards or renewable energy
where they make sense so I'm
very.
Excited about this appointment
and I stand for questions thank
you.
Thank you very much for service.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is on here
rates morning raised in casting
Mexico presently I am the
chairman president CEO of
central bank and central bank
shares I've served on the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority since two thousand
eleven from twenty twelve to
twenty nineteen also served as
the chairman of the allocation
you committee overseeing the low
income housing tax credit
program.
Twenty nineteen I was appointed
chairman of the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority to
continue to serve in that
capacity today
during my time on the board it's
been a tremendous opportunity
and privilege advancing the
causes of creating affordable
housing opportunities in the
state and finding additional
resources to bring into the
state to go beyond housing to to
serving those are less fortunate
are most vulnerable I've had the
opportunity to work with jays
are previously and was part of
the committee that identified
Garcia his successor which that
is director non this is doing an
incredible job since him being
in that role and I think that
the privilege and opportunity to
work alongside this is sold in
on the allocation you committee
and continue to look forward to
all the great work that in the
face doesn't state in New
Mexico.
Thank you so very much.
so let us go to your staff
director and if you'd be so kind
service to give us kind of a
little overview of of kind of
where the authority is in its
life right now
and and kind of what the
challenges are in which we're
taking on please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee can you
hear me we can't.
Thank you good morning.
MFA is the state's on housing
finance agency we operate over
thirty programs for affordable
housing and we do the full
spectrum of affordable housing
ranging from providing monies
and services for homeless
shelters all the way up to home
ownership and everything in
between
we do that with the assistance
of over two hundred partners
across the state but here at the
MFA we see us the how can we
find is more than just housing
we see it is obviously a very.
Has a great economic impact in
the state and there's also a lot
of social impacts we see housing
as the foundation for a strong
communities and private families
there's a long list of of those
social impact that occurred last
we need to last year we were
able to serve over eighteen
thousand families with over six
hundred and thirty eight million
dollars across the full spectrum
about housing
one of the big things that we've
done over the last couple years
obviously with COVID we live in
the resistance of some funding
and we want to thank the state
legislature for appropriating
some funds are way we've been
able to assist over seven
thousand households with some of
those funds both for rental
assistance homeownership
assistance and then also
providing shelter to some of the
folks that got maybe homeless so
that is a real quick in a nut
shell to some of the big picture
items for MFA I think some of
the
the challenges that we face is a
certain some of those areas
across the state that that that
we may not be serving as as well
as we'd like there's a this can
never enough funding to serve
all of the needs across the
state in the various things that
we do so looking forward to
gaining more of that and I just
of being able to provide more
services to more New Mexicans
across the state that definitely
able to answer any questions
that you may have Mr chairman
and members of the committee
I'm sorry I I do want to say
that we are strongly supportive
of both of these are
appointments
and look forward to working with
the board both the board
members.
Thank you very much I always
appreciate hearing the words of
support for confirmation of the
person's last last winter to
the.
questions and comments from
committee.
On these coverages center how to
move thank you Mr chairman and
so as all of you know affordable
housing is something I came into
the Senate really on my radar
and wanting to help in northern
New Mexico when it comes to to
housing and so I'm very thankful
that you partner with that local
realtors with local governments
tribal communities nonprofits to
offer programs and services
available to New Mexicans when
it comes to housing and I'm so
thankful for that one question I
do have Mister chairman is might
it chance you offer any
education to families who are
looking at purchasing a home
because I know that's a big step
for many some jump in maybe not
knowing what they're getting
into is there any education or
training that you offer
families.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Senator how to meal we
do require that training be
obtained and we operate in and
pay for for folks are coming in
to be a first time home buyers
so and we do about just under
three thousand households and
become new homeowners every year
so we do offer that training
form there is a limited amount
of a non profits if you will
that provide the training across
the state the that is an area of
growth that we want to improve
on.
Very good thank you for that Mr
chairman I also want to just
thank you miss all of into Mr
grant for your willingness to
serve I know this is something
big and important to somebody
New Mexicans I just want to
thank you for that Mr Chairman
no further questions or
comments.
Thanks very much by the way is
it possible to work on
affordable housing for
legislators economic sentiment.
I'll take that.
well other questions by members
of the committee what what is
the is there any activity by the
by this authority.
in terms of the foreclosure
crisis that we have.
with regard to foreclosure
eviction presently have with
regard to people trying to keep
up with payments during the
COVID and what not.
Mr chairman I can address that
question as well we were the
recipients of about fifty five
million dollars from the state
treasury that came to be FAA and
we have a contract with DFA to
administer those funds but those
funds are for homeowner
assistance spoke to me of
falling behind on their
mortgages and utility assistance
for those same individuals part
of the funding is allocated to
be used for for closure
prevention and defense and so
that plan was just recently
approved by the state treasurer
or by the by the US treasury and
we will be implementing that
starting here in February.
Hope that addresses your
question.
It does thank you very much and
I do think that's an important
issue that we that we be able to
follow up with them and what
we're discovering for the thing
else is that people just don't
know.
What is out there and and what
what assistance people may be
able to access some point so
but but thank you for that
the any other questions from the
committee for the conferees at
this time.
Our state nothing right now I
want to thank both of you seven
Mr Davis for your service and
your willingness to continue to
serve the state of New Mexico
New Mexico mortgage finance
authority
and and so we will be as I think
you probably heard me say three
four times this morning will be
I once all the paperwork is done
will be a voting on these up
recommendations here in the
committee once the session
starts and then to the extent
that were able to figure out the
the timing on the floor to the
extent that we have advance
notice will let you know in the
of the divide as courtesy to
come and join us at on the dais
and and but but that is not a
requirement but we are frankly
up more than anything else just
interested at that point and
saying thank you for your
service.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee very well so the.
At this time of the rules
committee is going to take a ten
minute recess we're gonna come
back at eleven o'clock this
morning to deal with discussion
about rules during the session
and at that time also in the
members of the rules committee
as well as a pocket staff
members who would like to
join in either by person or by
zoom out will be invited to do
so at that time and and so we
will so we will recess again
until eleven o'clock and with
that.
we'll see everybody at a level
