Stationary room changes in
addition we will approve
hopefully the committees that we
have late we will lay out today
I want to do everything else
first up front and then we will
get to the committees and I'll
pass out to everyone copy so.
So you see thank you Lenore for
putting together the agenda we
we were having to kind of
estimate of what the Senate will
need just for house bill one we
are trying to increase our
postage
and we are also trying to have
funding in that budget for some
of our
staffing needs so we don't
really have all of that here and
I don't believe we have to
approve this this is just really
to let you know what we're doing
and to answer any questions.
Your questions will come we're
looking house bill one this is
just to tell you what we've
tried to do for house bill one.
as I said we are trying to
increase the postage in
particular.
if you look down at five the
room assignment changes
that's just the.
Shares needing to move into
their propria rooms you've
already done the floor seating
and we will not have a composite
picture during this session.
Might be able to do it during
the redistricting session.
Because we need a new composite
picture so that's very brief are
there any questions about
anything on this list other than
number four.
Yes Center.
For those of this committee.
Before on
this on.
All our services for your
business for this article this
call for this committee during
the.
The Senator Ventus I'm not sure
about that no no thirty day this
committee has to meet almost
every day because our job is to
determine germane ness but this
isn't after today essentially
our work is done now we could
convene if we wanted to you know
if we had issues but generally
we don't that's why we don't
have secretary that's why we
don't we don't take public
comments it's just really a kind
of procedural Committee and I
apologize I should have asked
each of you to introduce
yourself well we we our webcast
so
Senator Lopez start with you and
if you.
Your microphone and your button.
Very very.
Thank you very much thank you
very much madam chair I'm Linda
Lopez Senator district eleven
southwest corner Bernalillo
county.
I'm asked senator Katie do Hank
add district ten which is
northwest Albuquerque New South
America.
Thank you madam chair Peter
Wirth Senate district twenty
five in Santa Fe.
And then wanted to do to.
Not on the on the Senate chief
clerk of the Senate.
Joseph Cervantes Representative
fourth of Dona Ana County
including the southern part the
borders Texas Mexico thank you.
Good afternoon a state senator
Benny Shendo district twenty two
heinous Pueblo New Mexico.
Good afternoon Greg Baca
district.
Early went to county so the most
Bernalillo county.
The madam chair.
Lands on Santa Fe County.
For
more.
Senator click Vogel Senate
district thirty two Chavis Eddie
Montero anything that.
City.
All right we get everybody thank
you I apologize for not doing
that up front.
So if there's no questions.
About items one two three this
is basically budget stationary
and postage
that we need to do our business
rural changes floor seating and
then our Senate composite so
we've talked about that we do
not need to take any action but
we do need to take action on
item number four I'm passing out
right now the committee
assignments.
Also if you.
Reach them.
And now for the public.
I'm not the the names on the on
this
All happy that you're getting
are are not accurate.
We are changing the times of the
committee so that morning
committees have a longer time to
meet in the afternoon committees
the say.
Usually on a regular session
it's hard to keep up with the
exact times we are going to
change that for virtual so we
will be announcing the times
that the morning and afternoon
committees will be meeting just
for the sixty day after we meet
with our chair.
So first I tend is conservation
put Cherry is Senators to
phonics vice chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator David guy Ecosse is
ranking member other members
Senator serve on this Senator
Hamblin senator Neville Senator
hope.
Senator souls and senator
smitteez.
One thing that name right
Senator Paypen Schmedes thank
you.
Tax business and transportation.
we have changed the name of this
this used to be our
corporation's Committee tax
business and transportation all
will be meeting Tuesdays
Thursdays in the afternoon I
apologize conservation will be
meeting Tuesdays Thursdays in
the morning and as I said the
times we will get to you later.
Tax business and transportation
chair Senators Shendo vice chair
Senator Padilla Senator Kernan
the the ranking member other
members are selected France
Senator Briggs Senator Hamblin
Senator Hickey Senator had a
meal senator Sanchez Senator
totalement and senator Wirth.
Education will be meeting Monday
Wednesday Friday in the morning.
Senator bill souls will be the
chairman Senator health will be
vice chair the ranking member
will be Stephen fill senator
Neville other members Senator
France Senator Hickey Senator
Kernan Senator Padilla and
senator Penn.
Finance will be needing.
Monday through Friday in the
afternoon.
Chair Senators of finance will
be senator George when Yost vice
chair will be Senator Rodriguez
ranking men member will be
selected share other members
will be selected for Senator
Campos Senator Candelaria
Senator diamond Senator funds
are less Senator Hemphill
Senator Steinborn and senator
would.
Next we've changed our Indian
cultural affairs to Indian rural
and cultural affairs.
The chairman will be selected
Shannon Pinto vice chair senator
Leo had a meal ranking member
senator Ron Griggs other members
will be selected McKenna senator
Sanchez and senator Shendo.
Indian rural and cultural
affairs will be meeting Tuesdays
and Thursdays in the morning.
Senator Judy.
Judiciary will meet Monday
Wednesday Friday in the
afternoon Sarah will be selected
to serve on this vice chair
senator o'neill Senator Pirtle
with the ranking member other
members are Senator Papa Senator
do Senator Ivey Soto Senator
Lopez Senator mortars and
Senator Stewart.
Public affairs will become
health and public affairs and
will move to the new day Monday
Wednesday Friday in the
afternoon.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino will be
that chair senator bill Tom and
the vice chair.
Senator Gregg Schmedes will be
the ranking member.
Other members Senator K. eight
those Senator Ingle Senator
McKenna.
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator Stefano.
Rules will be meeting Monday
Wednesday Friday in the morning.
Share with the senator Daniel
Ivey Soto vice chair will be
selected to head.
Senator Ingle will be the
ranking member other members
will be selected Baca Senator
Lopez senator Morris Senator
o'neill Senator Ortiz penal
Senator Pirtle Senator Stewart
and senator Wirth.
And the remaining committee is
the committee that we're in
right now.
Senator.
Senator Wirth I would make a
motion to approve the committees
that you have laid out.
I thank you have a motion to
approve in a second there any
questions.
Seeing none is there any
opposition to the motion to
approve the.
Saying we have approved the list
of thank you all very much.
I need the work of the
judiciary.
yes hopes.
Good thing we have in our here.
This is all.
If you see a number for.
Our new senators probably still
know what this is but this is
essentially the judiciary and
rolling and grossing Committee
this does not require you to do
that this is the Judiciary
Committee staff ensuring that
the bills are correctly
enrollment growth and then if
you are on this committee you
will get a report on the floor
of the Senate that you'll sign
and that we then we'll adopt
that committee report so
Anybody here wants to be on any
I don't really know who to pick
in our I know when I ride it
took some poor person office put
me on their so I'm still on
their Senator share has been the
best member of the committee
because he's willing to and move
the committee adoptions
and
composta forces are still are.
well okay well center back who
would you like from your office
to be on.
Senator.
All right Senator Pirtle.
You said you're assigned Senator
Pirtle.
Let's leave Senator Campos on
there just for some consistency
and if he tells me walks off and
I'll have to re convene and will
change it
so one more yeah.
Let's see how bout we put
Senator Hamblin on here.
She looks like she's ready to
