public schools changing the
definition of building system in
the public school capital outlay
act Senate bill sixty three.
Senate bill sixty three and then
Rodriguez and act relating to
public finance clarifying the
types of federally insured
obligations in which county and
municipal treasurers may invest
certain public money.
Senate health and public affairs
committee then Senate tax
business and transportation
committee Senate bill sixty four
Senate bill sixty five
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
of existing resources available
in New Mexico to people with
acquired brain injury.
Survey comparable services
provided in other states and
make recommendations for the
health and public affairs
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill sixty five
Senate bill sixty six introduced
by Senator souls and act making
relating to financial
nineteen fifty five requiring a
license for certain lenders
changing certain reporting
requirements Senate bill sixty
six.
Senate bill sixty six Senate
bill sixty seven introduced by
Senator souls an act relating to
energy requiring facilities
constructed for new and
replacement energy generation
Senate bill sixty seven having
been read twice by title is
printed referred to the Senate
conservation committee then
Senate tax business and
transportation committee Senate
five NMSA nineteen seventy eight
building was nineteen oh seven
chapter forty two section five
is amended to establish
canvassing boards for board
elections updating provisions of
forfeiture rules for the chili
Lee Land Grant Merced are
substantially similar to the
definitions qualifications for
the board duties and powers of
the board elections procedures
nineteen seventy eight Senate
bill sixty eight.
Senate bill sixty eight having
been read twice.
To the Senate conservation
committee then Senate rules
committee Senate bill sixty
the crime of abuse of a child
with a disability creating a
presumption of knowledge of a
child's disability for a parent
guardian care taker or person
charged with the care of that
committee then Senate Judiciary
