Mr chair members of the
committee we are online very
well thank you very much Mr
Roberts welcome everybody to the
Senate rules committee.
R. we're glad to have everybody
joining us here today we are
going to start off with
The New Mexico institute of
mining and technology are in the
care is for the board of regents
for that institution and so
we're going to do the same as we
did for the university Mexico
border regions which is we're
going to have each of the.
R. Sanchez introduce their
region candidates let the region
can maybe have a couple of
minutes to say a word or two and
then we'll go to the next
Bonser.
And and and after each of the
candidates as I have a chance to
just a couple of words will then
do questions to all of the
region candidates for that
institution and so with that
Senator one else if you would
like to leave this off with
Jerry Anthony I recall.
Morning Mr chairman members.
Right well I'd like to introduce
Jerry army ho graduated from the
New Mexico state Mexico State
University with a BA BA in this
space list iterations
you know that Mexico university
law school graduate there with
his juris doctor in nineteen
eighty four.
Made the dean's list in nineteen
eighty four Mexico yes ma'am.
He was meant to the bar in
nineteen eighty four and work
for the United States District
Court in nineteen eighty five
but different lines of Attorney
work throughout his life and his
experience he serves on quite a
few boards and commissions which
is really interesting I think
the committee should ask about
that how much time it gives an
in what he does for that
institution and he's going to be
reappointed to.
He's got his wife is low in she
worked at New Mexico tech all
her life and we have three
children and one turning so.
We appreciate that Mr Chairman
will stand for questions your
you want to say a few words Mr
may help is now at this I meet
yourself first.
Lujan Grisham for the for the
appointments are not only for
myself but all of the nominees
are I think our if you.
Well first of all this is my
fourth time going through the
confirmation process and this
one is different and it is
different because of the of the
extensive experience each of the
nominees is bringing is bringing
to their respective universities
and I think it is the governor's
recognition
of the condition of higher rate
right now it's it's very
challenging there needs to be a
lot of that that Tatian going on
on each campus and I I feel that
the governor recognizes that it
is imperative to appoint regents
who although we serve six year
terms
it's imperative that we began
work this week and not have the
luxury of two years of our
region training before before we
can be productive so this is
going on all over all over the
state and I also would like to
recognize that the Senate rules
committee has many members who
have extensive higher read
policy experience for example
Senator mowers
you have graciously attended all
of our meetings the higher
education regents coalition
meetings for the past several
years and we've had some very
good discussions with you and
and and shared information and
by the way we will be hosting a
another meeting shortly and and
you will be invited and if any
other members of the of any
other senators on the committee
would like an invitation please
please let me know one of the
one of the important things that
just come out of our
organization is for the first
time in in history of.
The regents have had direct
communication with legislators
and and we are accountable as
regents to you as well as
policymakers therefore we need
to have this direct
communication with you so we
will I look forward to that in
the future and I will defer the
rest of my time to the question
and answer session that's a very
important part of this process
so what thank you again.
Thank you very much Mr may help
we now move to presentation of
Mister David look pretty by us
Senator Ingle he's a new person
and tell us about your country
please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee it's certainly an
honor for me this morning to be.
Introducing David were pre to
the committee if you've been the
legislature very long you know
David he has been not.
In state government for many
many years.
We started by back in the early
nineties in the LFC is working
the LFC in different categories
you don't work for the new FAA
is that a man that has been a.
Just unbelievable source of
solid information on New
Mexico's finances.
This is certainly one of those
things that
For me I was just talking about
colleges are facing things that
they've never faced before and I
think his knowledge of of of
state finance commission state
money and his experience in
state government will be
valuable to all of regents of
New Mexico not just the ones
that New Mexico tech but.
I'll let him speak for himself
because she is she is very well
known to most of us here and I
can tell you one thing I'm very
proud to be his sponsor and I
know that here will do a great
job in New Mexico tech thank
you.
Right.
Morning Mr chairman.
The members of the committee can
you hear me OK.
Yes thank you.
I really appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you I
know that there's a lot going on
we want to get to a question and
answer and.
Senate and is certainly has a
lot of work left to do so I'll
try to be brief in this this is
my first time through this
process.
I think it's important for me to
say a few things about myself so
you know we are dealing with
that and that a person you talk
about trusting with
disappointment I also want to
thank Senator Ingle I started to
in Santa Fe.
in nineteen eighty nine by then
Senator Ingle had already been a
state senator for I believe for
years I just in the B. Myers my
sponsor because I respect them
so much and I want you to know
that I've also been in touch
with Senator Hemphill who is the
New Mexico tech resides in her
district we have corresponded
she's been very gracious maybe I
look forward to working with
her.
I started my career
Well we back up second just the
brief bit about family I get my
work ethics from my parents my
father was a heavy equipment
operator very blue collar family
worked very hard at an eighth
grade education.
My mother once you got the five
of us I boys out of the house
she went back to work to support
the family she worked as a
public school cafeteria work
all five feet one inches over
looking heavy pots are working
very hard they both came home
dog tired at the end of each day
and so and I never remember them
taking vacation so when they sat
down with me and said we want
one of our children to go to
college I certainly didn't have
the heart to say no to them and
off I went and I've been going
to college for a very long time.
I started my career as a public
school teacher and I learned my.
since the of public service and
the idea of continuous
improvements in my experience
that worked as a high school
teacher for fourteen years in
the Bernalillo public school
district about the a program for
at risk students are probably
one of the first in that school
district I have a sense of the
needs of my students I had been
a a US history teacher for
number years I saw some gaps in
what they brought into the
classroom as you know
students have to pass U. S.
history to graduate from high
school this is at a time when
the government was added as a
graduation requirement in
schools back in the early
eighties.
And we had an opportunity to
back up that one half of twelve
a one semester course with
another one so I proposed an
idea my principal he allowed me
to run with it and I spent
number of years working with at
risk students.
It was a great experience for
me.
I learned a lot from them and
and I can tell you I could go on
and on speaking about that that
experience with those students
but.
One of the things I learned is
that.
Every student has a story every
student comes to us in the
school setting with a different
set of issues a different
concerns and family problems and
so on and so forth.
I had a student named Rudy for
example I was lecturing in class
one day and reset in the very
back of the classroom was a big
kid.
and very quiet unassuming and
when this when the bell rang for
losses it changes so Judy every
kind of jump up a little bit and
get ready to leave the room he
had actually not at all.
Of course being a brand new
teacher at that time I was a
little bit startled by this and
concerned about it does I
thought I was working my tail
off to try to do really good job
and keep these kids interested
try to keep the material
relevant.
And as the class filed others I
stopped reading so I need to
speak with you for a second.
Process so that you had noted
not off the back of the
classroom you know you're
working hard really I care about
your education what's the deal.
And and really stopped and and
Osterman and they said.
Mr little pre.
My dad tend to go out at night
any gambles any sometimes drinks
and when he loses he comes home
at a pretty bad mood any tend to
take it out of my mom.
Yes I said I spent a lot of
nights waiting for him to come
home.
So they can protect my mom.
I'm sorry.
My eyes to what public service
is about what it means to be
responsible for people
responsible for the kids to come
to us.
Another student Wendy had a
parent teacher conference with
her mom single mom.
When he was a really tough heavy
set girl she would fight at the
drop of a hat a boy a girl and
then it didn't matter.
Talk to your mom one time and.
Her mom said that she revealed
to me that when he had attempted
suicide.
You know you hear these stories
every student has a story and
you really begin to understand
what public service means and
and how important you are lives
in the trust they have to put
it.
Last story was a student named
John.
He was the class president he
was a captain of the football
team he was valedictorian.
He thanked me in his a is.
This is speech was valedictorian
speech for what I had done from
I spend time with them the this
is a really young man who who
was over extended and he was at
the as with setting was running
out of gas and you needed some
help in terms of how the plan is
time and and you of all the
parties in this life we talked
for awhile he thanked me for
helping with that.
John passed away about three
years ago.
He became a teacher.
And it became a coach.
And it was amazing young man.
Of the baseball field that said
the high school where he taught
was named after they thought so
highly of.
These things touch our lives in
this let me.
Further into my graduate work I
study the educational
foundations I want to be the
best teacher I could be a study
things like human growth and
development learning theory
testing measurement so I could
try new strategies in the
classroom and measure the
outcomes of those things that
was that's what led me to
offering the at risk program.
And then I continued on with my
education the doctor degrees in
educational administration I
found my way into educational
finance which is really what led
me to Santa Fe the year TFA in
seven years at legislative
finance committee.
Finally I was approached by the
council university presidents
then president pack at UNM.
And the president at that time
of sort of informal relationship
with each other and they want to
formalize that they want to
collaborate more they want to
have somebody to represent the
various meetings and to be
responsive to legislative
requests and so on and they
offered me that opportunity I
thought it was an exciting
opportunity that for nineteen
years.
That's where I retired at the
end of nineteen years may first
two thousand and sixteen.
I work for a number right people
very impressive people in some
cases for short time in some
cases for a longer time to work
through twenty six presidents
over the course of nineteen
years.
And I observed a lot it was not
my job to evaluate the but I
certainly learned from how they
handle their experiences at
those institutions.
And so I think that by the trail
of my experience and my
educational background
especially with the legislative
finance committee.
brought me to this point.
And I am ready to serve I
understand the responsibilities
of regents.
I understand it's a the trust
that if the Senate gives me this
trust I can take with me to the
institution.
I feel my experience is brought
me to this point of trust and I
will commit myself if confirmed
to work very hard in the
interest of the state of New
Mexico.
And to every live that is
touched by New Mexico tech with
that thank you Mr chairman and
I'll use my time.
Thank you very much appreciate
it and we now move to Senator
correct helpful for our
presentation of the students on
the board of regents of Mr but
early cost estimates.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee it's an honor to
introduce for Annika Espino
stuff for reappointment for
student regents at New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology she stands out as one
of the most outstanding hard
working accomplished and
determined students in New
Mexico she's currently a PhD
students and mechanical
engineering at New Mexico tech
on target to graduate in twenty
twenty five she graduated with a
bachelor's of science in
chemical engineering last name
for New Mexico tech.
with highest honors and Veronica
attended Colorado school of
mines majored in chemical and
biochemical engineering
she also participated yet she's
out bilingual and was a
translator during bio chemical
engineering trip water project
in Guatemala in twenty eighteen
if I have that right she has
also worked on several research
projects at the shock and gas
dynamic laboratory the institute
for complex additive systems
analysis and the UNM nanoscience
and Microsystems are you program
she's received several honors
awards and scholarships
throughout her educational
career and I have no doubt that
Veronica will use her skills
talents and experience and
intelligence to change the world
and continue to make New Mexico
proud so I want to thank the
governor for making this re
appointment and thank running
for her willingness
and continued service and with
that it's a privilege to stand
in strong support of necessity
no sat for student region at New
Mexico tech and I turn it over
to her to introduce ourselves.
Just please of mutual self
interest it.
Thank you senator for that kind
introduction good morning Mr
chair and members the committee
I do see some familiar faces
from two years ago the for those
who weren't in the committee two
years ago I kind of just like to
give a little more background on
me so I was born a Paso but
lived all my life and someone
park so I truly consider myself
New Mexican
and I called to court my new
home I went to something just a
high school and during my senior
year I received the gates
millennium scholarship so that
allowed me to go out of state
and decided to go to Clark
school mines because I heard it
was the engineering school the
last.
Two years after that I realize
that money was in the school for
me so I said come back and I
knew tech was just as great as
mine so I decided cancer New
Mexico the tech and finish my
degree in chemical engineering
and I love taxed so much that I
decided why not stay another
five to six years and do my PhD.
In mechanical engineering with a
dissertation and intelligent
energetic systems.
I know that the position of
student region poll a great
honor and prestige but it is
important to realize that as to
the region you are a servant of
the student body you know this
individual has to have the
responsibility of representing
student values and have the
passion to serve and help others
I want to be seen region again
because I believe that I have a
diverse background of being not
only being a transfer student an
undergrad student but also now a
graduate student at New Mexico
tech and I feel like I can bring
a lot with these very
perspectives
I believe that New Mexico tech
where regions will benefit from
having an unrepresentative
graduate student perspective G.
my current term I thought what I
struggle to really connect to
with the graduate student
population just because I wasn't
fully immersed into the
community and I not only I will
only became relations committee
once I started doing my research
a with Dr Michael Hargis there
this is where I had a lot more
the communication on more
interaction with graduate
students and I was able to you
know hear out their concerns
I also you know having been a
graduate student and a transfer
student I believe that I will
continue to serve the students
just as I have for the past two
years I would as a resource for
students on the university for
for universities state
legislative matters as such as
clarification for the
opportunity scholarship
and also not currently for
Resources and
just the new normal for the
compound emic I'm one of the
things that I did help address
was on one of the board of
regents meetings there is
consideration about eliminating
some of the journal
subscriptions and I was one who
was my opinion about that this
is something that's very
important for students
especially since research just a
huge part of New Mexico tech and
that these are should be
relatively about herbal and we
don't and not be it not have to
pay out of pocket for these
journals.
I do realize that after for two
years that of the Houston region
there's a tough decisions that
have to be made especially over
diverse topics I know it was
really hard for me to have to
vote on a tuition increase for
New Mexico tech
but I based a lot of my
decisions on that there is a
many outstanding projects the
nurse had to do and just limited
state funding and can coming
from classical mines I mean a
school just the same caliber
that twice situation
I felt that that was in the best
interest to
for that tuition increase to
avoid any budget cuts that would
envelop that ability eight year
cut in resources and situations
like these are not going to be a
common Christian regents and
it's something that you know as
generation should be prepared
for but also Committee working
with administration to help
provide those spider solutions
it's been an honor to serve as
student by as soon region for
New Mexico tech and if confirmed
I'm looking forward to work out
with New Mexico tax board
regions and its administration
again for the benefit of the
state of students and the
institution thank you.
Thank you very much appreciated
I will note that is actually
fairly rare for us to see a
student get reappointed to the
board of regents so that thanks
for having.
We now move to to questions for
all action over got public
comments on on the New Mexico
this just for money technology
Ford of region candidates are
Miss Vigil if you will manage
the public comment I would
appreciate it.
Mr chair first we have Steven
wells.
Good morning
Charlie Soto and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak on behalf
of these nominations I am can't
tell you how pleased I and see
the Rian lawmen ation and right
to ensure employment the jury
army hello he served on my
search committee when I came in
about five years ago and has
been remarkable and his
leadership.
And the history Is brings to me
and to the university so on
behalf of the the faculty staff
and students we strongly support
his reappointment.
And we also I can also speak to
doctor look three I'm aware of
the rich history that he brings
not only in higher education but
working in the state government
and having a passion for
education again on behalf of the
faculty staff and students we
strongly.
Really support is appointment
and I look forward to working
with them over the next several
years.
And then finally again I.
Strongly support their the
reappointment of rocket Espinoza
who has done great wonders for
her student body serving as an
advocate for them holding my
feet to the fire on a variety of
items that are important to the
student and I have enjoyed
working with her learned a lot
from her and continue to learn
from her and look forward to
working with her over the next
several years and I'd I just
might add for clarification we
are not raising tuition this
year so if there's any question
on that I wanted people to know
all the tech has taken that
step.
So with that thank you very much
for this opportunity and I want
to thank the governor for her
nominations and bringing these
candidates for thank you very
much.
And next we have Deborah
peacock.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee member peacock and
the chair of the region's at New
Mexico tech I'm I'm very very
happy that you're here in the
house a reappointment as you
know he's been a region for
eighteen years and I've had the
privilege of working with hand
nine years on the board it's
very important for small one
there's only five of us and he
is yes of course I'll use a
community leader and he's
essential for these university
community interactions J. Sri
spec full he's not following
he's not afraid to bring up
issues I'm to the regents and in
addition to his work every
chance he's on the foundation
board he's instrumental in
fundraising and he was able
recently to bring in a multi
million dollar gift from that
community with his relations
with the community I strongly
recommend at his confirmation
I'm David let me I'm I haven't
known David I've talked with him
and and I'm very excited for him
to join our regions with his
extensive background and
education including higher and
again are small board and his
finance background will really
round out our board skill set.
I'm Veronica Espinosa very very
happy about her appointment as
the student regent she's very
engaged with the regions and the
student body and if you look at
email marketing video that New
Mexico taxis out there with her
enthusiasm and advocacy for the
university so I am I the
governor's appointed in the to
re appointments to the New
Mexico tech regions and highly
recommend their confirmation by
the Senate thank you.
Okay and next Mr chair we have
Max Baca.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the all rural the Senate rules
committee my my support for Dr
David the pre of worker doctor
pre for over two decades and he
is such a stellar and have
stellar professional and the
work ethic and I I thank the
governor for his nomination and
I won't take too much time thank
you very much.
Next we have marks of Asia.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee thanks when we speak
in support of the Mexico tech
region appointments this morning
personally stand in support of
reading the reappointment of
region are New York I had the
pleasure of working with Mr you
know for the last six years and
has rejected Dr mentioned
present wells it's been a great
experience in terms of the fact
that he is very balanced the
lessons I'm very thoughtful he's
very easy to work with he cares
not only about New Mexico tech
but the community of Sapporo as
well is dedicated in terms of
his years of service for New
Mexico tech and so I think you'd
be a great.
We appointment and to continue
serving New Mexico tech.
Also extensive work of Dr David
create
you know as as it's been
mentioned by sponsored Olympic
sponsor for bringing this to the
committee is that he's been no
day for almost twenty five years
what was causing Davis a mentor
when you were to bless the
finance committee as director
and also the interim director
and then also nineteen to twenty
years with Mexico County
universe presents you pretty
much along with Dr Dan bills the
cop and he's also I would say
the architect of the current
funding formula for higher
education
and then when I was the person
in Mexico is he was incredible
mentor in terms of learning
funding for the program and also
just in general this is
knowledge and not just only in
the state but nationally for
higher education in terms of
what he added and what he
brought to the council
university presidents this very
honest use very hard working
very sincere and I just can't
tell you in terms of you know
James what
did you ask Miss Vigil beach New
Mexico tech as for the student
raise also I think we work a
little bit I'm last year on the
option scholarship and may know
very impressed in terms the way
she hound solved in the way she
supported her students and I
worked with the governor and the
legislature on the options
fellowship amongst other things
that affect
the the universities in New
Mexico so that's members of me
I'd like to send support of all
three regions and so I think the
governor and the sponsors for
for bringing these three
incredible people to the
committee today thank you very
much Mr chairman members
committee.
Thank you next we just.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Madam chairman members of the
board of of the US Senate rules
committee I'm Steve gamble
I appreciate the opportunity to
talk about David pre and in
support of this nomination as a
our region to New Mexico tech.
I was president for sixteen
years eastern New Mexico
university and for thirteen of
those I have the pleasure
working with the able pre he
impressed me and in in many ways
use very organized his
interpersonal skills and is
packed we're we're we're
wonderful.
Excellent work ethic and
When it comes to integrity I
know of no one in higher
education that can exceed his of
his integrity.
Mr pre was an exceptional
executive director of the
caps of university presidents
and I don't think you would find
a president that would have
anything to to say that is is
ill about David with three.
I highly recommend David look
review for the region's position
at New Mexico tech honestly and
truly I know of no better person
that I would work on the board
of regents thank you.
Thank you and next we have
Barbara Daman.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you so much
my name is Barbara damn right
well the chief government
relations officer you that
professor there the school of
medicine college of nursing is
my honor here because doctor the
pre asked me to to speak in
support of him I'm happy to do
that also want to thank governor
Lujan Grisham for her nomination
if each of these three great
free agents I also think Senator
Ingle for sponsoring Dr the pre
before I say if you see a doctor
doctor look created I do must
also say in great support for
Jeremy who are me ho while work
quite a bit to years past so
glad to see that he's paid
reappointed it is wealth rock
Espinoza so happy to see that
you're be reappointed as well.
I don't drive the pre that for
years and I was cabinet
secretary as it's been said many
times here drive the pre
functions with total honor and
everything that he does is
interested that several of us
have the word integrity that
we're speaking about when it
comes to drive the pre because
everything he does he does with
full integrity and with full
attention he's very thoughtful
in all his deliberations hi
doctor pre kid right incredulous
like you cannot believe and he's
at a crunch a lot of numbers in
his day as the architect of of
much of what we're still doing
in higher ed today of already
heard about his great tenure as
executive director for the
comes of age university
presidents and also his work LFC
it is really my honor to stand
here in support of my good
friend a wonderful man it will
be a great region to tech drive
the pre thank you all for your
time.
Thank you and next we have J.
What can you when you get there
you go I don't want to sit your
last name wrong thank you good
morning everybody Mr chairman
members committee thank you
my name is Jake Gooch surface
pros involved in university I am
no doctor look pre for a twenty
plus years of first met him in
the year two thousand when I was
president New Mexico State
University I have to tell you
and listening to the discussion
on the three candidates that I I
wonder if all three of them be
willing to move to Alabama and
serve our governing board here
those are excellent.
That's up I would just the echo
a lot of the other comment so.
Obviously the injury dedicated
these person of good character
extremely thoughtful mention
just a few points that the in
forty plus years of working in
our education that they really
stands out in my mind numbered
several people mentioned I have
never met anyone that is more
knowledgeable about current
funding up understands the
numbers the details.
Fans of you might one little
change in one area the impact
that it has another this update
has deep understanding of
accreditation requirements for
our both what are called
regional accrediting bodies as
well as specialized twelve H. so
to me that's extremely
important.
Is very current home trends that
are occurring at the federal
level certainly as well as state
level to his ability to see what
an executive order in Washington
the this and what I change in
simple legislation mainly for an
institution the NMAA is so
extremely important.
I have to the after I left New
Mexico with the university of
Houston them all burden I have
used them as a advisory
consultant throughout that.
I'm constantly reminded of one
of our early meetings which they
one of the the the the purpose
of higher education is to help
people achieve their hopes and
dreams that's about as good a
definition may issue these are
certainly a believer that
education at all levels is what
contributes to the quality of
life for people.
In conclusion I would just
simply say it's got a great
sense of humor the enjoys the
give and take I think that's
necessary to serve only
governing board and surprising
to me is a university
administrator these always
express the add some interest in
serving as a region one but so I
would certainly support David in
anyway possible and certainly so
thank you to those other two
individuals awfully impressive
backgrounds thank you.
Okay next we have Sam Minner I'd
like to remind the folks in
public comment to make the
comments as brief as possible so
that we're able to get through
the other confirmations as well
thank you.
Thank you very much my name is
Sam interim president New Mexico
highlands university one of the
first individuals I met in the
higher at secretary when I
arrived in New Mexico more than
five years ago now was state I
knew when I met him I was a very
good place rock solid integrity
all the way a real start terms
of the New Mexico higher
education I urge you to control
please.
Thank you and next is bill
Garcia.
Think about that next we have
bill Garcia.
Okay we'll go to Joe Sheppard.
Good morning Mr chair good to
see members of the committee
thank you for allowing me to
talk here this morning on behalf
of these outstanding.
Candidates I am president of
western New Mexico university
and also the chair of the
council of university presidents
and I'm here to speak of
primarily about David look free
but I'm gonna fight doctor
douche of in the and the
operator Tigers for all three of
you it's a extremely good group
and I think it's both well for
New Mexico higher education with
Dr look free I've got to know
him of course to the council
University presents when I first
came in two thousand eleven he
was the chair he was the
director of that organization
and I I learned a tremendous
amount from him you've already
heard about is accu men his his
ability with numbers and so
forth but I'm gonna give you an
additional insight to suggest to
you that higher education in New
Mexico needs to change in the
leadership you have before you
to confirm as regents is is
precisely the kind of leadership
we need to move the state for
doctor pre in him you will find
that stable leadership you'll
find that insightful thought
you'll find a person of
diligence and you'll find a
person of course who has.
Just the the whole package to
move New Mexico tech as well as
I think higher education Mexico
for so it's with one hundred
percent support good to see
doctor pre and all the best to
the New Mexico tech into the
committee thank you.
Mr chair we have one more person
on he's under the name I had I'm
not sure who you're here to
speak on Sir.
Is it any of these.
Good morning.
Can you hear me yes.
Good morning.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Dr grant
Garcia and I am testifying on
the character of Dr Frank side
just for the position the border
region Ms university I've known
for the last forty years he's a
good friend of mine a wonderful
mentor he's educated
distinguished consider it didn't
giving man I've known to being
encouraging person to too many
he has personally mentored me as
well as many others in our
community yes experience and
knowledge and wisdom to guide
the university in the right
direction
I want to thank the governor up
for re supporting that doctor
fate such as for this position I
think it's a wonderful
appointment thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you doctor Garcia we were
not quite at doctor sentence yet
but we will come back to you
when we when we get there get
well what is going to take that
as for doctors but we get to the
okay.
Everybody who's up for the
public comment as most of the
regions candidates and your
presentations we now move to
questions from committee would
begin with us are more point.
Thank you senator.
congratulations everyone with
forty two to work with many you
appropriate it's the sight
seeing familiar faces again
yeah I think member some of you
especially you on the system our
partner some of these questions
we do a standard I don't see
Senator our rural on here's you
there Mr chair.
Also you saw us as professionals
so that we use pretty standard
first offered three again thank
you for your service he has a
lot to yes Kelly built those so
those questions.
In New Mexico are explained any
conflicts all through any
conflicts of interest that you
might have that we need to be
aware of disclose them the kind
of contract you might have with
the university or anything any
Bender the university that we
need to be aware of.
And it's it's not it's not got
you question is more about it
disclosing conflicts states yes
I think it's just important for
the public to know they existed
how we handle those complexes
for we're chart we're we're
driving with this.
Who are our your search.
Torie I'm sorry three one search
one concert questions directly
ahead toward you are to come
arrest you two years ago I lost.
I'm sorry reads morning Mr chair
because I do want to ask you
with your little bit different
situation you work through your
story about PhD students are you
an employee of the university on
about are you are.
Yes I am but as far as I know my
salary or my stipend is based
off of federal contracts I'm
under a I Air Force contract
work with why we're working for
my project and I am aware that
there's a conflict of interest
my boss is I'm also he's the one
who also reports he's chair of
the faculty Senate so he's want
someone who reports to the
regents but that's something I
mean he's been my boss for the
two years that I've already Sir
so this is something
conversation we've already have
where it's I mean when I am in
the lab I and his student hit I
am This advisory so there's
nothing with I'm concerned you
border regions that point but I
mean of course when it's not
something more official for
border regions and then that
changes so that's it's a
discussion I've had with him
already in discussions I have
with other.
Equity members other people of
the administration
It's it's it's an interesting
position you're in the system
also because you're now the
bought your boss's boss boss.
It is an interesting conflict
that you have there so it sounds
like you're boarding director
position of four separate should
be cards to continue to fight
for the student regents zero to.
Yes there is.
Maybe we'll start David.
Mr chair thank you senator
I have no such conflicts I have
been retired for going on five
years now factor in the times
I've been retarded been
approach to work on a contract
and consulted those sorts of
things and I have not done that
I wanted to keep a completely
independent to happen of any
financial ties to state policy
state finance so that I can be
in a position to be composed the
object thank you senator.
Your.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee senator Morris.
Similar to our to drive with pre
I have well I have no conflicts.
Right.
Yeah it's it's not that we don't
have conflicts will it's
conflicts in which are you to
schools this conflicts that
supports us to people's money
as you forced to abort to the
three for this requests and
studio Committee this March
could be directed doctor created
a hostile issue it's about the
competitiveness of you remember
New Mexico higher H. medication
your higher educational models
nineteenth century model of the
COVID really highlighted the
fact that we're students are
different right now your
constitution as a university and
they are also school mining
school in structural don't
school start time
you know this dramatically
changed educational department
has changed at the last hundred
years I would think are quite
frankly track is called it will
want to stay true to its mission
with all the other once a
conversation about looks like
chopper which you guys still
have an engineering background
schools schools between small
regional universities here in
the state pretty much identical
to what they offer so talk talk
to you about what you're doing
have done the last two years
modernized where your your
University to be competitive in
the global market for higher
education.
Yes if I may begin this is our
this is Gerry army ho.
Yes your thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Moores you
know every you are Senator you
you raise the issue of of the
The efficiency of the higher ed
system as a whole and I'd like
to I'd like to speak so we on
behalf of New Mexico tax
role in the in the system itself
and and I I would like to
reiterate
our position as regents which
has been a consistent position
that each of our institutions
maintain and then the and that
border regents that is that is
critical for the success of each
of the schools and mostly to
ensure that each school carries
out their own individual
missions and that there is
accountability by us as regents
to our to our stakeholders so
and and tax example we are when
we continue to adapt
The challenge that all of higher
ed faces right now it's two fold
number one state funding is our
is is a challenge and will
always continue to be a
challenge so we just
institutions need to figure out
how to continue delivering
quality instruction and quality
services to our students
without consistent increases in
state funding and and New Mexico
New Mexico tech our our our
approach is two fold we number
one we do a lot of research at
New Mexico tech and and through
our cost recovery our research
dollars it we're able to use
those for the benefit of the
campus as a whole so we're we we
really focus on growing our
research dollars and and that's
a competitive environment dollar
for certain but that is that is
our mission the the other thing
that's going on and on in higher
ed is demographics of our
students have changed over the
years we have a more diverse
student body it looks our
student body is looking more
more like the state of New
Mexico which is sure what we
have more female students we
have more first time students
coming to us.
But the and those are challenges
those are those are realities
and we welcome those the
challenge is that more and more
of our students are coming to us
underprepared.
And and that's where we have to
work diligently and creatively
to to.
Get those students are college
ready they they will succeed if
they're given they're given the
proper to during advising and
financial aid but it's up to us
as universities to create
pathways academic pathways and
financial pathways so that are
diverse students are can can
succeed so so those that's an
example of some of the things
that we're doing that New Mexico
tech we're we're constantly
we're constantly revising our
our long term strategic plans
and implementing new ideas and
and we look forward to
continuing that thank you thank
you members of the committee the
jury.
You're on mute.
Sorry thank you Mr chair Senator
of course I'm new to the bowl
orders with my forty four years
of experience education the new
kid on the block
I can tell you that when I first
worked at the legislative
finance committee
seventy percent of the students
letter Latin was a president New
Mexico tech at the time seventy
percent of the students at tech
came from outside of New Mexico
now seventy four percent of the
students come from within New
Mexico and I think that's a huge
change the student profile the
institution and the institution
has managed while doing this the
only to maintain but perhaps
enhance its national reputation
and rankings a number of
categories.
The New Mexico tech is a center
of excellence for cyber security
and I know that the leadership
of New Mexico tech is working
hard to look at
Expanding the New Mexico state
workforce because that's been an
issue of the students who
graduate from this great
institution drawn away recruit
out of state
I always I as I indicated in my
earlier comments no matter how
good we are there's always room
for improvement.
And if confirmed by the Senate I
will work with the
administration there.
To do everything I can.
To spend these new initiatives
that the institution and to
maintain the standards while the
same time next bending
the diversity of New Mexico
student population that Mexico
tech.
Right and Ramikatz it's a usual
have the student region as the
pattern on the border region so.
Well but your your answer
special what's your perspective
that you felt out of high school
being one of the best students
in New Mexico the so what you
have to leave on New Mexico to
get a quality education on the
way back
so appreciate your in your not
only are we your school is a
competing against stated were
also in the state UNM on you're
also getting a school of mines
we are also competing gets
online education programs now
and so why why does coro we need
to the states here see are still
of surgery so um you got a
degree from.
do online are a great
engineering school that's not
providing online education with
the huge international operator
so white white what are you
going to do to make kids go to
tech and so state are at home we
get a degree from Purdue.
thank you Mr chair and Senator
Moores so I know this pandemic
has brought on president and
really fasted and making and
making sure you're adapting
I know for especially for a
research institution
it's important to market the
research experience to get us
here at tech
as long as it being car school
minds I didn't really.
have the.
Resources are didn't know where
to look for those opportunities
and when I came here to tech I
remember It literally within the
first three months hi was roped
into doing a competition in
Mexico for a Act creation so
this is where sometimes as soon
as you just come in tech has a
faster that a community that
collaboration and it was also
easy for me to even to just
have go to faculty members and
ask for a research if I can work
in the research projects so it's
important for New Mexico tech to
market those experiences and
something that New Mexico tech's
currently doing as
Chair madam chair peak not have
brought up about our marking
marketing videos
also something I want to
reiterate from region army
Mexico is that diverse city
aspect
I know that president wells last
regents meeting mentioned that
we're number four for Hispanic
serving college and that is an
important thing for me being at
school mines
there is not much of a and I
don't know from from to your
this must be now what like three
years ago since I was at on
campus at school minds there
wasn't much of the minority
present that's something that I
really struggle with as being in
living and someone park which is
basically a committee of Matt
Mexican Americans and you know
you for your Spanish holiday
time and just all this and
having this culture shock of
moving to golden and I'm the
reason why I picked in New
Mexico tech to when I transfer
not only just because it's an
engineering school but visiting
some of my friends here during
breaks
rural feeling that community
And feeling welcomed and that's
something that we should
definitely keep marketing keep
telling students I mean
something I always tell the high
schoolers when I go visits and
that that just that and give
talks it's let him know like you
know something really if
community something really
important to you you should
really check out local schools
if you really like engineering
she always you should consider
tech
but that's not to say that
there's not things that we need
to work on when it comes to
adversity and which is something
I'm very happy that present laws
has taken into Nishant of now we
have the office work I
appreciate the equity inclusion
office and there were just doing
amazing things putting on
programs for each month I know
for this month women's monthly
there's a lot of activities
going on and something that we
should keep pushing for.
Right right answers sure thank
you and lastly I just want to W.
purpose before
you know if you're and I
actually disagree about the
governance of I read it Mexico I
think it should be Moores hires
streamlined and much more
coordinated than what you said
earlier but I lost that argument
a hundred ten years ago
Iraq's constitution and the
constitution it's clearly states
that the governor can appoint
you the forty two of us can vote
on your confirmation once you
are in the constitution creates
these victims are in kingdoms in
the case of your mouth that you
are in charge in and separated
from political influence and
power you could not be fired
except for by malfeasance and
spring court so when you get
those text text calls political
pressure from the forty two of
us and from the fourth floor
remember your constitutional
duty you are constitutional
officer was not answerable to
also politicians in your job was
to take care of which University
soccer need to remember that.
Don't get on the supreme court's
right are so they can remove you
for for something but you cannot
be removed and fired right by us
for the governor to do what's
right for your university for
the state of Mexico which for
thank you for your service and
support student supports you.
Thank you.
Next we go to Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Can you hear me.
Yeah.
The program.
Well you know that's the beauty
of the twenty first century as
senator Morris was speaking
about I can be a breakfast with
my family and still participate
so I appreciate the indulgence
of the committee I have my
standard line of questioning
which is have the any of the
conferees or their close family
members receive.
Donate did they donate to the
governor the governor's campaign
or tax.
Mr Chairman stable pre the
answer is no.
Mr chairman this is Jerry are
may have on the answers yes I
donated to our the governor so
Alexion campaign two years ago.
And if you don't mind how how
much did you donate.
Senator Mr chair I don't
recollect I would say in the
neighborhood of fifteen hundred
dollars.
Mr chair I nodded in the
governor's campaign nor any of
my close family members.
What about the Mr chair and and
countries what about any members
of the legislature.
Mr chair this is Dave a
preconception R. have not made
any campaign death donations at
all thank you.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle this is
Jerry are may help I have not
made any provided about campaign
donations.
Mr chair this is Veronica
Espinosa and no I have not made
any provided donations nor any
close family members.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee for let me ask my
standard questions.
Enjoy your breakfast
Are there other questions from
committee.
Senator not.
Mr Chairman you know I hate to
tell you shortly we have a long
agenda and I am so impressed
with the this group of nominees
that would move the.
Passed on I guess location in
order so I would moving to pass
on this for our meal.
When is the nation.
When you're not going to make a
nomination are emotional.
Then I would move that we did we
find a thank you yes to the
governor's nomination Jerry I
mean hundreds of pre and running
as you know section The New
Mexico tech border regions.
Okay specter all through those
sure.
Have a motion researching the
panel a second from Senator
Moores I will note that in this
particular case to the three a
reappointment so we know you
fairly well
Mr look pretty we know your from
your service at the.
I hear the legislature and
really the only questionable
thing Mr little pre that we have
which would take a little too
long to delve into would be
associated with the following to
oculata.
but we'll let that go for now
and
but otherwise our state nobody
else sticking up for this time
Mr hill if you would please call
the roll on Jerry Anthony and we
hope for the New Mexico tabs Act
board of regents as a
reappointment.
Senator Baca yes Senator Moores.
Yes Sir Senator o'neill.
Senator TCP.
Yes I want to say just a few
words are encouraging trace lane
where would Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator Duhigg.
Yes and senator Ivey Soto yes
ma'am congratulations Mister
me how you have been a you have
a depressed recommendation and
the formal consider your
replacement later today.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
We now proceed to the vote on
the new appointment of David
look great to the board of
regents.
Of our New Mexico tech and oh
I'm sorry Senator Ortiz Peter
did you want to spend about an
hour at the end of all the
votes.
Very well
so Miss Vigil please go ahead
and call the roll.
Senator Baca yes senator Morris.
Yes.
There are forty two Pino.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator yes and.
Yes ma'am.
Graduations Mr liberate you have
they do pass recommendation and
that Mr chair.
When we now move to the vote on
the reappointment of the student
on the board of regents and as I
indicated but we're dealing with
UNM regents note I did not see
the student regents.
The student on the board of
regents because you are a full
regions.
and so please go ahead and call
the roll on but only got just
because.
Senator Baca.
Yes Senator Moores yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Ingle.
Yes Senator do it yes and
senator.
Yes ma'am.
Regulations must Espinoza you
have a a do pass recommendation
the board of regents this is
this is a club and sign language
that's former.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and senator.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to say
The New Mexico tech ascension
gem in the state and widely
recognized national incidents
are.
Marvelous golf education is
available there and it was just
really need them we had an
opportunity to.
To hear from a student student
has been on the board of
regents.
Something we rarely hear to
here's kind of feedback about
what they've been able to
accomplish as a as a student on
the board of regents and it was
a good opportunity to hear that
mostly.
Mr Chairman their option their
careers or further education
but it was great to be able to
do that so thank you thank you
all for being willing to serve.
Yes this is actually the the
relief valve the quality of
rigid candidates that we have is
very outstanding and along those
lines we now move the
consideration of the region
candidates for
The New Mexico State University
board of regents and this is one
where I am looking forward to
the answers to Center portals
questions on at least one of
these candidates
So we are so let us begin
Senator Moores with your
sponsorship of.
Mr Burke.
I wonder which candidate you're
waiting to hear the answer from
Mr chair from.
Chris is probably wrote not only
act here actually all right so
this is this is an honor for me
to to be his sponsor are we all
many of us know Chris.
He did get his undergrad from
the New Mexico college of
agricultural and mechanical arts
in Los crucis are you did wise
up repeated his law degree from
the university of New Mexico.
Very active in my part of town
for a long long time.
As president currently a Spanish
national Hispanic
We see on there there are not
occur each Donald gross so good
friend of all of us here with
you here is answer to corals
question I don't know the answer
to that are in L. liquor student
Kristen second ask questions for
you if you're dressed some of
the questions I typically asco
small help modernize that cal
college themselves.
Thank you thank you very much
Senator of Mr chairman members
of the committee.
It's really an honor to be here
again this is I believe my
fourth time going through this
process but it is my first time
for this position for a region
position at New Mexico state and
that really does have special
meaning to me because New Mexico
state has special meaning to me
I'm I grew up and was raised in
frankly the same neck of the
woods as a business but also
that being the cast and school
districts although I'm guessing
we you know couple decades
probably separate us it is not a
little more than that of of
basically grew up in a small
community call Senator those of
you somewhat familiar with the
area.
Right off of I. ten between Los
crucis and I'll pass so you have
a roll of Kerry's and you have
some truck stop still Senator is
kind of smashed between the two.
Looking back at my childhood I
think about New Mexico state
because my parents first my
father and then my mother
attended New Mexico state.
Going for their degrees in a of
elementary education when I was
in elementary school.
It wasn't in fact that I was in
middle school that both my
parents were than in their
careers my father are and
elementary principal mesquite
elementary and actually someone
part for a period of time my mom
taught elementary school in the
Los crucis school district.
The tradition of New Mexico
state then went to the kids my
older brother like legionnaire
ninety two New Mexico state.
She's now with IBM I'd love to
tell you this title but I'll
just say the big wikis he keeps
changing any does well my
younger sister ninety six
political science she now
teaches political science Texas
state and Austin community
college I was ninety four New
Mexico state and I think I have
also done okay.
So to me New Mexico state was my
family's.
Opportunity it was our vehicle
for social mobility and in its
true sense I think you look at
where we were then and where we
are now and I am just so
thankful for the opportunities
we received.
At New Mexico State.
Of course having.
It personal having a passion to
serve the university is not
enough I think it's really
important to have the skill set
to do so and going to Senator
Moores and I know some of his
concerns I want to talk about
that a little bit of first I did
have an opportunity to serve as
a regent I was and am
appointment in twenty eighteen.
For New Mexico state so I know
what to expect I know the
challenges I know the
commitment.
I know not only the challenges
of higher education but of New
Mexico state specifically.
This is another way I know what
I'm getting into and I feel good
about it.
The second is I guess what which
prepared me for this is my
professional experience I do
know many on
On this honorable Committee
I know others who who are just
part of today's process.
Because I have worked within the
state for more than twelve
professionally twenty two years
now.
And in doing so I have
Representative I I'm gonna say
at least fifteen different
departments or offices within
the state different disparities
different counties I'm and I
have done so on many employment
one matters labor matters
contract matters procurement
matters.
Open meetings act.
I'll cover it.
So we give me an opportunity to
participate on the board
Knowing where problems develop
where they go off the rails and
frankly not only how to avoid
them but if they do have a
public how to fix them so I I
offer that to the board and I
think it will be.
But again now going to higher
education specifically.
You know there are many
challenges obviously for higher
education some
In general deal with
accessibility
you of course have the economics
of it and the funding for higher
education the rules for higher
education for over a decade now
has been trending down New
Mexico state.
Stop the trend before the
pandemic and I'm I was very
pleased with that and that
really matters it really matters
because without that of course
you cannot serve the students
I'm.
But I look at it a little
different and and I offer this
you know to the committee and to
senator Morris I think the most
important part of the university
is really three steps you start
with the role you have to bring
kids not just local kids not
just the cream of the crop but
those that are willing and able
to serve the community you have
to bring him into the university
and you have to attract others
from out of state.
To to the community.
Get em in the university the
second step is retention because
getting on here doesn't matter
if they then leave in two years
without a degree and with
student that you have not helped
student you have not helped the
community so.
Have to provide the support to
them get them through get them
to graduation and the third is
that to get a job so we cannot
only educate them for the sake
of education that we have to
educate them so that they can go
out into the community get a job
have a career support the
families support the community
and be active members of the
community so we you know with
those three steps the pandemic
has offered a of some challenges
is also offered an opportunity
to kind of kick started every
institution in remote learning
or at least having that option
available other schools have
been doing it for decades and
doing very well I'm very.
When I do expect that that will
be an option moving forward for
some others will benefit more
from an on campus Syrians and
that must be there as well and
I look forward to addressing all
of these challenges all of these
concerns and.
The ever changing environment of
higher education and with that
Mr chairman and committee
members I appreciate your time.
Thank you I believe the chair
has it goes into a house
committee thank you
and Senator pope to introduce
our meal but see.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members it's an honor
to introduce no bit seen as a
nominee for students on the
board of regents of New Mexico
State University is a
constituent of district twenty
three and a fourth year student
at NMSU pursuing a bachelor of
science in engineering physics
what the supplemental major in
applied mathematics and a minor
in aerospace engineering.
What is background the story is
much more than that it begins
long before his first day of
college one can trace these
beginnings to the New Mexico
State University journey was
grandfather Joseph it's the
senior born in nineteen twenty
five.
In the nineteen thirties there
were very few colleges that
serve the higher education needs
of young native American
students like his grandfather
and grandmother.
In decades past most education
programs and training available
in native Americans consists of
the vocational programs with
little to no emphasis on
obtaining higher education
degrees but is grandfather
ensured that all of these
children would eventually
graduate with a college degree.
Neil has eight aunts and uncles
six cousins brothers and sisters
were also attended New Mexico
State University when he
graduates he will become the
fifteenth person in this family
to earn a bachelor's degree from
an issue.
And M. S. U. as in part of his
DNA throughout his entire
childhood adolescence and young
adulthood filled with memories
of visiting NMSU meeting with
his dad's old professors and
walking the corridors of
engineering halls and attending
many NMSU campus events.
NMAA you mean so much to know in
this family and this given him
so much he believes to those who
much is given much is expected
he also believe the student
region position allows for
unique perspective that
insurance decisions made at the
highest level represent and
reflect the needs of students I
stand in strong support of this
nominee I would now like to give
the floor to note.
Good morning Mr chairman and
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is no but see
I would first like to just say
how incredibly honored I am to
be in this position right now of
just being considered for the
position aboard a student on the
board of regents.
Senator pope said a lot of that
essentially my animus you story
I was able and fortunate enough
to tune into the UNM board of
regents confirmation and I I
watch the whole process happen
right before me an hour ago for
New Mexico Texas and
I think yes as see humans and I
say that right include myself as
if I'm not human hi but I think
we spend a lot of our time
pretending and we we we don't
really share.
Anything with each other we
share what I call our stats you
know like what what what what
school did you go to
doesn't really tell me anything
tell me about your occupation
give me that time we put down.
Doesn't really tell me anything
and staff can kind of very few
occasional location I think in
LA it will be what what car do
you drive do you drive a Lexus
or Tesla if you do then I know
who you are but that really
doesn't tell you who I am
and I it doesn't give that.
Justice and so I had Senator
pope speak to you about my in a
mystery story and rather than
talk about what I've done here
and miss you in the many add
things up involved in like you
said my name is the story begins
long before my first day of
class in August of twenty
seventeen and I do trace it back
to my grandfather who him and my
grandmother ensured that one day
every single one of their kids
graduate with a college degree
and they would invest in their
kids future at the time by
investing in large herds of
livestock cattle sheep and wool
and every single year that my
aunts my uncles attended and
misuse you would bankroll their
eight years of college tuition
by selling it and I am with
extreme pride say forty eight
years later as Center pope
mention I am the latest person
in my family to attend this
university that means so much to
me
and when I do graduate with a
bachelor's here and miss you I
will be the fifteenth person in
my family to attend this
university for now at least
My family strong lineage to MSU
has never been just a matter of
when my father went there so
I'll go there to it has been.
Everything from what Senator
pope said to attend visiting my
for college my my my my father's
professors walking the calls of
the engineering complex to this
day I still attend lectures and
Gardner hall in the same lecture
help holes that my aunts my
uncles sat in and I visit my
professor's office hours the
same way they did it
And a lot of people tell me how
I remember all of that and well
it's not.
A whole lot to remember it's
just that I value what to
remember that every member every
memory why I remember all those
things that and why that stuck
with me a sort of a testament to
who I am that's more telling to
you that story tells more about
me the tenacity of of my family
the commitment I have to this
university even just the
securities that I can feel about
trying to live up to my family's
legacy all of that the vision
that I have and have had for I
needed to be at four and five
that follows through those who I
consistently am I'm consistently
that person
I always have to ask my past
myself I I really believe to
those who much is given much is
expected and I every day I ask
myself what can I give in return
for so much and during my time
here and I miss you I have
served in the capacity that I
was capable of in any capacity
is capable of the different
positions but when this
opportunity open itself for me
it was the largest platform that
I could be afforded at this time
in my life to make real
institutional change and
continue to contribute to the
continuation the diversity of
and miss you as the minority
serving institution that strives
to be me being a minority even
beyond ethnicity allows me to do
that and.
The thing is I am not a prodigy
nor my exceptionally gifted in
any field when I am however is
passionate I am hard working and
I am ambitious I'm a lover of
the growth in the challenge.
Service of others is the path
that I want to take it's the
career I strive for instilling
which I speak and the life no
matter how challenging I want to
live and I intend to live I am
I'm not normal but I'm not
abnormal either all I know is
that I am different and I can
make a difference I work hard I
work smart and now I just want
to show you because I'm ready to
get to work apart from that
thank you for your time and
that's all I have to say.
Thank you Mr thank you senator
probe Vigil do we have a public
comment we do we can start with
miss Davis following.
You are on mute.
Sorry about that good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is a native of
the study and I serve as vice
chair on the board of regents at
for the New Mexico State
University system madam chair
members of the committee I stand
in strong support of Mr Christie
process data the confirmation to
the board of regents of New
Mexico State University Mr says
it is background in finance and
business law will add a lot of
value to our boat the fact that
he's in Aggie first doesn't hurt
either this is a state of come
through a path of lineage of
Aggies as many of his family
members says he has set attended
New Mexico State University he
has a passion for serving our
state and I University as
evidenced by the fact that she
his previously served on the
board of regents at NMSU I
strongly support his
confirmation and look forward to
working with him I also stand in
support of Mr needed but see the
confirmation a student on the
board of regents at New Mexico
State University Mr Betty comes
from a family of Ag piece that
has spent as he has set his
formative years roaming the
corridors of the engineering
halls of an issue that is that
the tending many animals to
campus events he has deep roots
at New Mexico state and I'm
excited to see the fresh eyes
youthful enthusiasm and unique
perspective that he will bring
to the MSU board of regents I'm
sure that his goals and
ambitions taking part in life
and I feel proud knowing this is
Jenny in higher education
started at New Mexico state I
thank the governor for upgrading
these fine gentlemen the
confirmation to the board of
regents and thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee to affording me the
opportunity to speak into.
Put up and thank you.
Madam chair next we have do not
check on return.
Good morning Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
Yes we can hear you thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee my name is Tina
Chacon Reitzel and I served as
the chairwoman of New Mexico
State University board of
regents and I stand in support
of crystal said those
appointments to the New Mexico
State University board of
regents Chris is a low a low oil
of New Mexico State University
his legal expertise as well as
his successful fund raising
experience as a board member of
the Hispanic cultural center
will be an asset to our board I
have had the pleasure of meeting
Chris and I know he will be a
great addition to our board and
I look forward to welcoming him
to our team I also stand in
support of Neil Bitsy's
appointment to the New Mexico
State University board of
regents Neil is a physics major
a proud member of the Navajo
Nation a graduate of St Pius
high school and has been raised
in the cattle industry these
credentials say that he is hard
working he can handle the rigors
of the student regent and he
will be an effective school
member of our board our student
regent is to the point I sent
years on campus I have no doubt
that he will be a valuable team
member of our board and I look
forward to serving with Neil on
the New Mexico State University
board of regents I thank you for
allowing me to stand in support
of both Chris sounds Santo and
Neil BC to be.
Exceptional members of our team.
On the board of regents at New
Mexico State University thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
Canadian go axes.
And next we have marks of Asia.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee in March of
address yes I'm here stand in
support of
by Chris sauce at all to be a
region New Mexico State
University and just also make
clear Chriss Bender region for
New Mexico State University with
that you know it's been
mentioned about where he grew up
in terms of his involvement
community I just also want to
point out that he's also very
successful hard working attorney
here in the community in
Albuquerque
as regards the staff cultural
center and his time as a region
New Mexico state when you know
what the committee realizes that
he's come in to these positions
and some hard times
I don't practice Medical Center
scared me because it's in my
office where I grew up and when
he took over the board I'm in
that lets could center was
experiences and financial
hardships and he was actually
able on with the board to turn
that around and and now it's in
and and and a place of stability
and it's actually striving to
the state so I want to commend
in New Hampshire's work with
what the staff cultural center
then also we can in New Mexico
state as a region number years
ago it was after
number years of cuts that we
experienced and so he again
coming and now is a regents for
someone in the same situation
again thanks to the members of
the Senate and the legislature
for the cover work you've done
and getting us out of this
situation from last session but
he's this is also those
definitely shown leadership and
and taking on some pretty
challenging times and and turn
things around as I think you'll
be able to do that along with
the current board of regents of
New Mexico state is also
dedicated father and husband and
dot
the only thing I get more time
is his son will go to because of
the crowd by will not occur to
high school in Albuquerque and
then also just he's just his my
experience then he listens.
He's balanced he sees the big
picture and I thank god you'll
be a great asset to the board of
regents to Mexico state so
that's had a sense of port of
crystal settle for region at New
Mexico State University thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
Madam chair next we have money
Martinez.
Good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee
for line me to speak today I was
more Martinez and I'm a student
Mexico State University and the
president the same type during
treaty at NMSU today I'm here to
support the confirmation of Neil
Betsy and his appointment to the
to the New Mexico State
University board of regents I
meant no but see when they're
both freshmen and we're joined
the fraternity as pledge
brothers throughout our
friendship friendship in our
collegiate career I learned that
Mr Beatty exemplified the values
of the fraternity is everyday
life is courtesy to others is
Cali pursuits as high ambition
allowed him to win over fans and
create a network of students
they cared about the collegiate
experience.
Meals best attributes is his
ability to listen to others and
right apple advice and helping
hand during his time the
fraternity you know it's been
one the most reliable brothers
no matter how big or small the
task is is always the first to
show up and the last to leave I
believe that Neil's appointment
to this board of regents will
benefit the strange greatly
since he is involved in our
community is empathetic.
And it is a practical problem
solver has been on a privilege
for me to be able to grow and
develop alongside Neil NMSC is
very fortunate to have a student
like Neil to have the
opportunity to represent St body
on the board of regents I
strongly stands to support his
confirmation.
Madam chair lastly we have Luke
Sancious.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Sanchez the
soon to be former student region
New Mexico State University I'm
here today to speak in favor of
the appointment of Mr now that
you can NMSC border regions my
earliest memories of Neil traced
back to high school an assembly
during my senior year at St
Pius.
where New Jersey junior at the
time and gave a speech on behalf
of the student council to the
entire school I remember along
with some witty in workplace
references to parks and rec
his speech was incredible and
inspiring and I member do to
myself that this guy was someone
with immense capacity for
leadership a true and genuine
desire to make a difference in
this community and with someone
that I wanted to associate
myself with.
Yes for two my time in an issue
I've come to know you know well
John my days as an undergraduate
students I know that he is a
dedicated students reports the
maximum effort in the classroom
and out is stocked full minded
and continuously aims to be
capable leader in person every
passing day asking himself how
we can be better at the end of
the day.
I'm beyond honored to stand here
in front of all of Houston
individuals and be advocate for
New I wholeheartedly believe he
will discharge the duties of
being a regents to the best of
their abilities knowing full
well the great privilege
responsibility and legacy of
being all for voting member on
the board and an active student
I am very proud friend today and
without any reservations would
like to stand in strong support
of the confirmation notice you
to the New Mexico border regions
thank you for your time.
Madam chair that was our last
comment thank you thank you very
much we will go to the
committee.
Senator Moores.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Chris thank you really
appreciate your stepping up and
and just so you know as local I
will.
The constitution's has a complex
over crack I continuously make
is that the missile constitution
so workforce in one section to
work that school down south as
New Mexico college of our
cultural botanical art so that's
what I will always call it.
The other crack is famously a
bear Bryant steals of you never
see the work all Burke always
for it to all programs that call
how college across the state so
it's always good just to use my
brothers down south of special
really appreciate all on Chris.
There's some memories there that
I can never forget
seriously I just really
appreciate all you guys so
that's the deal a quick question
you said your fourth year
student correct when I graduate
so after do agree degree I I
don't think I'll be graduating
in till December of next year
but beyond that I was already
planning on pursuing a master's
degree and missing which would
allow me to complete my term
here the two year term that I
would be up for.
Thank you for that answer we
have had other student regions
will graduated and moved out of
state but still stayed on the
board
and so continue to focus on what
you are saying to or.
Back all college and so.
In helping them continue to grow
thank you for that answer you
were my other question you not
have a lot of concerns or
questions
from people down there crucis
talked about the confusion that
the decision couple years but
higher two different people at
chancellor and president you
know I guess the question is
who's in charge used was the
cost on.
It is I'm sorry madam chair and
members committee says that
question for for me.
All of your okay
I think they're both in charge
it's confusing to use the
chancellor of the head of the
how does the president.
I think the question is
I would have to make a parallel
to the wave corporation runs in
that there's the board and then
there's the CEO who is the face
of the company.
Personally I believe that when
you if you make translations
over to the academic side the
chief academic officers the
provost the chief executive
officer the face of the company
the face the university is the
president and I think the
chances are just it he he's
another chief executive officer
but of just higher capacity and
I'm I would say the chance to be
in charge I'm not sure if he's
to you right now and if that
present force tuning right now
too I apologize if I'm saying
and chances are these your boss
but I I.
That's how I interpret it.
Well usually it's who can fire
who is the boss to fire the fire
the chancellor.
If if you will see center happy
to jump in there I was so madam
chair and and members of the
committee
the chancellor is at the top of
the system and reports to the
board of regents the president
is responsible for main campus
and reports the chancellor and
board of regents
the way I look at their the
distribution if you will of
really day to day operations the
chancellor is very much we're
looking and the president is it
weird the president deals with
main campus with New Mexico
state in Los crucis and the
chancellor of course is out
there with the New Mexico state
system branch campuses obviously
included without also just
responsibility for main campus
much more outward looking the
that's my interpretation I
believe that is correct.
so to my knowledge earlier in
the chancel choir the president.
With outboard I would say no.
Who are so you are you high
profile fiery like about
football or basketball court to
do that part who's I'm I'm the
confusion is who's in charge
what the president is in charge
of main campus so if the
football coach was fired Bassil
coaches fired the president
would do it up to chance.
I believe that is correct.
See your maps are more confusion
I think it's I believe it.
Thank you all much respect I
have for you Chris you're you're
amazing Leader budget there but
I just I'm at Rio it's confusing
within the community across the
state about actually charge and
ultimately I'm just part of my
staff about earlier about who's
in charge do you guys
constitution which you would
charge on you guys so governor
points you would inform you
constitution is putting you guys
charge to work to make those
decisions runs University so I
hope you keep that in mind if
you miss for their own people
can remove you from office as a
Supreme Court you and for health
reasons so the on.
Not us not the governor can also
you guys are in charge what
you're sure this so this
decisions are yours
responsibility sure sure so keep
that in mind as you for Jessica
to amazing of peoples to read
your loyalties universities as
flawed but I understand maybe to
get into your amendment stat
Really respectful to you and
don't so I want to actually do
what Los crucis and start it up
to us thank you thank you for
your service.
Thank you senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you.
The
nominees congratulations on your
nomination thank you for being
will answer to tackle something
the other day the interaction
with the university to.
I just wanted to get your
reactions to we had a couple of
these legislation
they'll bring up the years the
the bill would separate the.
National and she in Carlsbad
Representative separated from
the university system
of that essentially a
communities knowledge.
Our community college
and.
There were some.
Confusion least among us on the
floor as to what the
administration's stance was on
our on that day favorite or do
they oppose it where they new
totally neutral and then just
let the chips fall where they
may and I wondered if if that
issue and had service with you
all and and what your position
is on that particular issue more
broadly on I'm just the the last
sorry it's in we experience as
to whether the university has a
position on a given matter
amount.
Madam chair of Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino members of the committee I
appreciate that question and
that's a difficult situation I
have tried my best to educate
myself on that matter over the
last few days and I think what's
very clear is there is a or was
at least a week significant
communication issue I know the
community of Carlsbad
Is very much in support I am at
least from what I have seen and
from what I have been told of a
change and I I should rephrase
that
because I think the actual term
use with stakeholders and its
stakeholders excusing so what
that's not quite the community
the that perhaps as much more
the branch campus itself
but they clearly expressed from
what I have seen from what I
have heard that they were left
out of the process that they
were left out of an operating
process I have not spoke however
with the chance for the
president on this issue so I
cannot tell you their position I
know there is an issue however
that they have not spoken on
decision on this issue all I can
see that is I I think it's a
really difficult time right now
because
There is a conflict between a
branch campus and the system and
the main campus and New Mexico
state system toward the repair
that in in some way moving
forward whether it is a
separation or whether it
maintains a active part of the
New Mexico state community I
think remains to be seen but
whatever it is I think this is a
tough situation so my.
Yes and that's always dangerous
to do I guess but I I'm gonna do
it here my guess is the silence
is actually respect to the
Carlsbad branch community and
allowing them to perhaps express
their concerns that they clearly
feel they have not been able to
do up to this point so we it's
more of silence to allow them to
speak and again that is.
What I am reading the tea leaves
that's what I see I may be off
but that's what how is it.
Thank you for that answer
it is it was kind of an awkward
situation for us because we we
were of two minds on on on that
matter certainly the the this is
the the stakeholders of the when
the spokes people for that for
that initiative seem to indicate
all these manages all behind it
and yet there was this the
uncertainty about well are we
getting the full picture in the
in in in a situation like that
we would look to the the
university administration and
and the the system
administration the.
Then the regents to give us some
some guidance as to what what
their position was and and we
just didn't get at that time.
But I but I really of
respect each of your nominations
and I want to thank you for
being willing to serve and and
all to the communication with
the legislature might be might
be enhanced so thank you very
much thank you madam chair.
Thank you anyone else on the
committee.
Madam chairman Senator Ingle
thank you madam chairman I
New Mexico state has a different
situation in their in their
executive branch you have a
chancellor and I am the
president of.
What are the what are those two
positions were both to cost.
Of thank you madam chair of
center with one of your answers
are done making years to me I
just.
What I I appreciate that I I
will take a shot at it if you
don't mind and thank you madam
chair response and and thank you
for that and I do not have the
specifics hi if.
Memory serves from different
materials so forth I believe it
is a roughly of five hundred and
four hundred but and and again
that is those are rough numbers
but generally I believe that's
what it is
Well the package of the state
it's it's well over a million
dollars.
To the
president.
From the president
I believe the base is just under
a million I believe it's closer
nine hundred let's say find
great the based on a state job
doesn't include the forty
percent of the benefits that go
with state employment
absolutely centering on I would
just we got the best in the
country and that's fine there's
nothing wrong with that but just
to let you know that's what the
four percent radar but anyway I
I was a I
I sometimes.
Find it interesting to see that
we've got a basically a million
dollars and and that the two
positions on the rest of the
universities are.
I'm gonna say from two seventy
five or three hundred to four
fifty or something like that but
and the housing the head of the
house the the housing school
with those positions the help of
our house is furnished by the
university.
I know the president is.
Well I am thank you madam chair
senator Ingle I was about to say
just that I am aware that to the
president
does live in New the president
presidential search install
approach and tribal home
furnished Dutch and that's fine
I was just curious if if if the
if the other person responds to
home to.
I I apologize but I do not know
okay thank you well anyway I
just a.
I would like to if you if you
win you I find that out please
let me know and nothing formal
just let me this call my office
here let me know or we'll
business at some point in time
but New Mexico state is
certainly a great university and
and not
so it should.
real real tickle the to all take
affect our job on and the very
often people on board of regents
are are looked upon as people
that are just kind of fragmented
and really don't have to make
many decisions but anymore that
is not the case the board of
regents our our our trust to do
make some really really hard
decisions and the thing about
higher it all over the country
as we're just running out of
students we just don't have the
folks that the kids going to
college because our birth rate
has fallen tremendously since.
What you call the baby boomers
which your.
One of those in that part in
schools were didn't have enough
room for anybody when I went to
school in the in the sixties and
now we've built all illustrious
all these things and are where
are we have a lot of room
sometimes on our campuses what
the kids live off campus to show
me why thank you for doing a
thankless job and if I can ever
be of help you please let me
know thank you thank you.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
congratulations to the both of
you for your nomination to the
New Mexico college of
agricultural mechanical art very
valuable university to the state
of New Mexico and you know I
think the biggest issue for me
has been
especially with with the New
Mexico a and M. is that the one
or sometimes you lose focus on
one of the most important part
of being a border region with
that university is
The responsibility with regard
to agriculture and keeping that
focus.
That you guys you are the act
school and you have a very
important role in research and
all of the things that go into
research with Ag in New Mexico
and I just want to ask that each
of you commit to maintaining
that focus with regard to your
duties in agriculture and the
second largest industry in New
Mexico.
Mr chair if each if each member
what's the address
it's Capri wants to address.
Their duty that the region and
and how they see of the
university going for with regard
to this their duties with
agriculture thank you.
If I may madam chair.
Yes.
I suggest that question I'm
coming into the position I was
aware that any agency you had a
very unique the special border
regions are very unique.
Responsibilities and that the
New Mexico department
agriculture falls under the MSU
board of regents
and responsibility like that and
I I know they were just like
joking and and talking about
agriculture but and misuse
agricultural school it that
mechanical engineering or
engineering generals were found
on yes I would contribute to the
continuation of fostering the
New Mexico department
agriculture under the Mexico
border regions I know I'm just a
temporary occupants of this
office by design for two years
but.
It's up to us to leave the
instruments of our position at
least as strong as we found them
and
That would be I would I would
continue to contribute to the
agricultural
Industry here in New Mexico
through the board I hope that
answers your question.
Yes thank you.
Madam chair Senator Pirtle I
appreciate that question and I
completely agree and frankly New
Mexico state is probably an
agricultural institution it's
it's part of land grant mission.
It is a core principle of a land
grant institution and it's
always been it's a of.
It's always been.
A focus if not and identity of
the university and again I think
it is the the universe and can
be very proud of that of course
you have and and that extends
not only in the education it
provides with reserves it does
as well you know everything from
different grazing techniques to
of course Chile you know it is
it it's reserves in Chile is is
nationally known I think that is
a you know very exciting
Senator Pirtle I know being from
the eastern part of the state
and you know eastern New Mexico
you're also surrounded by
Terry's and cal's so you know I
understand why it's important to
you and I can just say that is
also where I come from so I
appreciate that I appreciate the
concern but I can say it's
always going to be part of
university it's always going to
be a proud part of the
university and you know we will
continue I think to attract
persons from of the eastern part
of the state to New Mexico state
because of.
are exceptional.
Education on of and research in
agriculture.
And and thank you for for that
answer you know it's sometimes
we lose focus especially with
universities and try to compete
with with others and you know a
lot of times most of our
universities have kind of lost
their unique identity and I just
hope that you know NMSU doesn't
doesn't ever do that and and
maintains that identity that we
can find other degrees and
things but the main focus should
always be at again and
Our reserves and all of those
things I really appreciate that
you know coming up you guys will
probably be hiring the next the
secretary of ag.
And so I hope the moving
forward.
You know.
Secretary Stewart he's been an
amazing secretary.
Work really well with him but
eventually someday he's going to
retire and and so we're gonna
have to replace them with
somebody that's a just as well
qualified that has the past year
and for New Mexico AG is he has
Very very important the decision
that you guys will make an and
so I hope we don't take it
lightly it'll have huge impacts
on many family farms in the
state of New Mexico so I I
appreciate the answers that we
can stay focused on on ensuring
that agriculture has the tools
necessary to be successful.
Of on to my my standard
questions did either of you
donate to the governor or the
governor's campaign or packs.
No.
No I have not.
have either of you donated to
any members of the legislature.
No I have not.
I did I do not believe I didn't
twenty twenty.
I did contribute to.
Oprah primary candidate for
Congress I did contribute to the
United States Senate kind of it
and in years past I have
contributed to madam chair
members of of of of the
legislature so of.
I guess it would be a long
answer but I I have contributed
to many I have also and I should
I I'm putting this out there
again to get full disclosure
it's on my the information
provided also done a number of
representations for different
legislature's different
additives so forth
I guess it was in twenty twenty
I did represents a in the
primary a congressional
candidates
and actually that became a
reported decision it was
basically on a.
Nominating petition challenge so
I I and that does not quite in
response to your question but
again in full disclosure I just
want to put it out there and get
a list of legislature's over the
last twenty years I.
It's there's a few.
And and madam chair countries I
I appreciate the answers that
that's what we're doing here is
just full disclosure that way
you know the information is out
there and and we can make an
educated well thought out
decisions so I appreciate the
answers thank you very much
madam chair.
You any other members of the
committee.
Thank you both for your
willingness to serve as as the
other members of stated
yeah we're we're really lucky to
have
folks of of your caliber who who
are willing to serve and and we
appreciate that what is the
pleasure of the committee
Senator Moores for my sisters my
confirmation due to pass on
Crystal sit on.
This will have a floral due to
pass on your Mr.
And is Phillips let's do the
will call on Mr sensitive first.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez.
Okay.
Senator Morris.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Ingle yes and Senator
Lopez are you.
Okay we'll just pass senator
Dick yes Senator Ivey Soto yes
ma'am.
Congratulations.
Mr did you want it back over
although I think you're gonna
find a.
All right and us since
Senator Moores a native Mr Betsy
Miss Vigil let's call the roll
Mr Betsy.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca.
Yes Senator Lopez.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator.
Yes Sir Senator Stuart.
Yes.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes in the.
Yes ma'am.
Congratulations to you both I
believe Mr chair I'm not sure do
you know when they will be up on
the floor.
Are they should be on the floor
this afternoon or this evening.
Thank you.
Thank you both so much thank you
thank you very much thank you.
And Mr do you want me to
continue with the highlands yes
please.
Right am I it looks like
Senator Campos is here for for
both the conferees for New
Mexico highlands.
And is Senator Campos here.
Yes.
Thank you Senator Campos I'm
please I.
Please proceed.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the Senate rules
committee it is indeed an honor
to be here with you today we
have two excellent nominees from
on the Las Vegas area who are
being considered for appointment
and reappointment to the New
Mexico highlands university
board of regents the first of
course is Dr Frank centrist.
Representative has a very
compelling story and of course
I'm gonna let him tell that
story in a few minutes.
But to give you an idea in terms
of its commitment and stability
to the community of Las Vegas.
To the state of New Mexico and
more importantly to New Mexico
highlands university.
He served for thirty three years
as a dentist as a retired
dentist he continues to be very
much involved in the community
of Las Vegas and so many of the
small communities that surround
Los Vegas that's New York
County.
He has served ten years in this
is from nineteen eighty one to
nineteen ninety one as a member
of the New Mexico highlands
board of regents.
During that period of time we
always talk about modernization
and we talk about inclusion.
At the time regions Sanchez.
Focus so much on student
success.
The campus was a bustling campus
with students.
Not only there on campus but
working in the community and
many of them stayed started
their families and continue if
you will with that to.
Particular form of support.
For a community and a lot of it
is due to Frank and Joanne
Sancious Joanne his spouse has
just been beside him through
thick and thin over all these
years as they continue to offer
so much to the people of the.
To continue to fundraise for
many where the.
This is.
So many students because of the
generosity have been able to go
on either to dental school to
become professionals and to
start their own businesses and
families and the communities.
So they've given not only of
their personal well but if their
time commitment within the
community and that's what
definitely makes New Mexico so
you mean when you have people
that are willing to give back
again on that drive Sanchez tell
a story.
The other thing I'd like to
close with this and I could get
into his pretensions.
Throughout his life as you can
tell there's instability.
And that commitment to community
and to our children to are you.
But through its hospitality
through his generosity.
Through its encouragement.
Most importantly through
everything that is done to keep
up if you will what is best for
our state.
Dr Sanchez continues to be a
cornerstone cornerstone leader.
Of Las Vegas in New Mexico
highlands university.
People want to get things done
Las Vegas or New Mexico
highlands.
They turned to Frank enjoyment
Census.
So madam chair members of the
Senate rules committee with that
this time I'd like to defer to
drive Sanchez.
To tell his story thank you.
Chair and members of the
committee can you hear me.
Dr thank you
so I was born and raised in Las
Vegas New Mexico the first eight
years of my life I lived with my
grandma and grandpa which live
next door to my mom and dad I
have that opportunity to live
with them and that gets funded
ram one particular
both of them spoke Spanish and
so starting out in school first
right I didn't speak English and
so I was very appreciative of
the teaching staff at the.
The school had guided me and and
help me help patients stick to
help me to learn to speak
English.
I still don't think it will
help.
Anyway in in high school I was
are.
Involved in sports and my
coaches were my mentors and will
and.
Education.
So much so just give me the
opportunity to learn how to be a
player how to have respect for
others members of the team and
another team.
Always at the end of the game
you know congratulations the
other team.
What are.
So I learned from what could you
stand.
How does it work.
Yeah I was a.
Inspired by my professors to do
hard work and to always be my
worship and research thank.
Spend time and make sure that
you're not doing but I needed to
do to get ahead studies the fact
that they were.
Making sure that I was attending
class extremely my word.
Very important that is the most
years of college in dental
school I learned how to
communicate with medications
because of my professors taught
me how to deliver the the work
that I need to December so I
appreciated that very much.
So my interest is
making sure that we realize the
importance of it will also
that's been my main focus
throughout my careers mentoring
other young but like I was
mentored and so I have that the.
Really need to do that are
interested and so that's where I
try to.
Okay tension or and so I'm
honored to be has to be on the
border or three hundred to four
agencies I have worked with the.
The university of the passes
Senator Campos Lujan I was in
border regions from nineteen
eighty one to nineteen forty one
it was a great opportunity for
me to give back a little bit and
to learn more about the
educational system and so I'm
proud to chair.
If I'm confirmed and thank you
guys for this opportunity.
I have also asked Senator Moores
group pro to sponsor me and I'm
not sure if maybe he are still
still have an opportunity to say
a word to
I I do will.
Quite well and have worked in
the past I had an opportunity to
work with the.
Six six.
The legislature before the
surgeon arms rule for one year
and so I got to know a lot of
the folks there and so I
appreciated that I saw how her
hard work and I thank you for
your hard working always being
on call in Ollie's helping out
but New Mexico so thank you.
I also have an opportunity I
should work just to allow
who are to see are a little bit
more of the insides of the
capital works in and it's
amazing I appreciate the hours
that and in the time to continue
with I thank you for that.
I'm honored to be considered
hello thank you for the one.
Thank you.
Thank you doctor Sanchez and
Senator Campos before we go to
public comment if you and I
introduce Mr will of ari then
we'll do.
Together.
You very much madam chair and
again in the your again is a
another on.
I share the term compelling
because we all need in the rules
internalized within our families
and our communities but Mr
Christopher only about eighty.
My gosh an outstanding students
the credentials are impeccable
and let him describe of those
credentials yes very strong
insightful leadership within the
community of Las Vegas it was
from hard working families again
humble beginnings as Dr Sanchez.
He's committed to academic
excellence in research in fact
he's not a very inquisitive
within that he loves to solve
problems it comes from highly
respected.
We.
Families but.
A highly respected group of
student leaders of New Mexico
highlands university.
This is a reappointment and as
president of the student body as
a leader as a person who is very
inclusive.
Who continues to gather input
signals outcomes you can tell
that with everything that he
brings to the table.
He really wants the university
to thrive to succeed and so
within the decisions that you
just have to make.
That is really research before
he's made those decisions he has
shown that he is thoughtful
these hardworking diligent and
most importantly as it goes
forward he is very concerned
about student success both of
these individuals but students
success or printer everything
that they do that's the way
we're going to continue to build
Mexico so madam chair members of
the Senate rules committee back
I respectfully referred to
Christopher right to also tell
his story thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator chairman and
members of the committee
I hope you can hear me people
yes.
And yes thank you
It's an honor to be here today
thank you for your time
So I I grew up in honor of New
Mexico
my family owns a small candy
store in Las Vegas
Through throughout my life I
wanted to give back to the
communities that we have raised
me.
As such I am currently sitting
at a hundred and some.
Three major jealousy history and
political science I hope to be
able to serve the community as
that has served passed
Finally enough is actually the
one here anniversary of my
internal point as a student
regent
So I'm I've been incredibly
honored to serve on the board of
regents I hope to continue to do
so
Last year at St sure your over
has been very difficult for the
university and the state as a
whole
We we certainly faces challenges
of support and I hope that with
If indeed I am confirmed the I
can help University of my
community heal from.
A COVID nineteen at the.
Challenges it has for.
Post office
Pardon me I.
As as of last year I I.
I've tried to step up for of the
students in particular
The our students that weren't
wasn't able to hold elections so
I sought the appointment as a
vice president of the
students Sierra than what our
president resigned so I it feels
like it's to the student body
president it has been an honor
and I am.
I think it speaks my commitment
to the student body as
soon region type order to
include both of the voices of
the student body but also the
faculty I feel and particularly
more entrenched in the
university and can actually
speak on both of.
Their behalf because of course
the rest of the board is made of
community members and I I.
It's just really.
I'm honored to be in this
position.
To be speaking from this state I
I believe that's thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
and and as you can tell the
intellect and the humility of
both of these individuals is
just it it radiates and the
again we appreciate the
opportunity presented before you
thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator Senator
Moores.
You madam chair and we had a up
three weeks I.
But I'm sorry to interrupt you I
just realized that we forgot to
public comment for okay so we're
still on the commission's.
I think we are.
But we're going to go to public
comment before going to the
committee sorry about that that
that that's that that Mr Hale do
we have public comment for these
countries madam chair we do for
our Dr Frank Sanchez we have
doctor Clemente Sanchez.
Dr Sanchez please proceed.
Okay madam chair we might be
having some technical
difficulties are we going to
Mexico.
K. and we've already heard from
doctor Randy Garcia I don't see
Max Baca any longer so we'll go
to Mr William Garcia.
Mister sea I think you are
muted.
Okay sorry.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the rules committee
my name is bill Garcia I'm here
in support of the nominations
and confirmation of doctors
lunches as well as Mister or
anybody.
I recently completed my second
year as a region and serve as
the vice chair of the board of
regents at highlands I've known
doctor side just for over thirty
years he is an accomplished
individual as you have heard
from Senator compasses
introduction and a member of a
very distinguished family within
the Las Vegas community.
He has served with distinction a
variety of community
organizations helping to build
and expand the University of the
community and the also the
university.
As you heard he this includes a
previous stand as the highlands
university region.
He is well known within the
community and brings a
perspective based on that
experience and knowledge of his
community to the board of
regents we look forward to
serving with him as a colleague.
With respect to crisply buddy
he's been nominated he is a
student regent R. he I have had
the opportunity to work with
him.
As he was support appointed to
fill the term previously of a of
the student regent who who
graduated and and and left
school.
He is thoughtful and has an
aggressive schedule with his
three majors and all the work
that he does is the student
Senate president.
He studies the issues I found
him to be always prepared and
vocalize is his opinions and and
decisions is well grounded and
important in student views and
perspectives and I would
recommend his confirmation thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
Madam chair we have Sam
internet.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee seminar on
president New Mexico highlands I
stand in support of both of
these nominees sigh I know them
both they are both in my mind
servant leaders to the
institution as well as to the
state of New Mexico they've
guided me mentored me they've
helped me in so many ways I look
forward to working with them
into the future to make islands
even better and to make the tire
sector higher at sector in the
state to better that it is great
so I urge you to confirm.
Madam chair that is our last
comment.
Thank you Mr helps us Senator
Moores.
Thank you madam chair thank
Senator Campos and approval and
I have a three way fight so to
you could just be the
confirmation Sanchez start
percentages are Senator Campos
one obviously but I think it
just shows the admiration so
many of us have for true
gentleman.
Mexico no not sprint R. Sanchez
for many many years our previous
life cell dental world
and truly great friend and
mentor in I would like you to
have someone like you the true
servants to New Mexico and
biggest for a long long time so
I'm not gonna go through the
normal shtick to questions I
usually ask for you just because
we have those conversations
person which I know are hi would
do so great D. as with
in Chris did you go through
confirmation before is this your
first confirmation not recall.
Center this will be my first
confirmation still so if you
ever so just in the state of
time groups on my questions
earlier one question I have for
you is what are you going to
graduates what will you do if
you leave campus.
My current track puts me on
graduation and may twenty twenty
three so Mister of my full term
excellent could you just talk
about little bits you for some
of those questions I had earlier
about
making sure highly ending that's
been around since the late
nineteen eighties factor they
might have thought of that for
you and now about the same time
hospitals on your home screen
for New Mexico and but how how
do you see as a student Garcia
was attracted you to go to
school how do we make sure
highland is competitive in the
next hundred years on this world
changes it has radically changed
especially sped up with COVID
what what is high we need to do
to make sure I guess I would
just add in international higher
at market place.
I definitely Senator so
Certainly a question of things
all of our meetings how do we
remain competitive
I think we're on track we've
added multiple degree options
now including that a doctoral
degree in nursing
I I.
Believe highlands is.
The system will school be
certainly.
Had rough times in the past
separate feel that those are
clearing up we recently because
of foot position but
H. ET al.
These so.
This is a conversation among
friends groups so the time and
what we're working with you over
the next couple years.
I appreciate that
I
see highlands thanks are
expanding in our curricular
curriculum
I'm very happy with how many
degrees have been recently
brought to the board for a vote
and I'm looking forward to.
Expanding the crit especially
The students at the student body
president have been looking at
our constitution and how we can
best reform that so.
To present all student voices
and I truly believe that was to
representation comes more
students I.
I feel that a strong force
incumbents is necessary for our
growth is in the city.
Yeah I think that's a great
answer because your job is to
fight for the students not just
you and your friends with the
students come for that's why we
have a regents that is a
students on on that on that
board is to make sure and again
are you sure you heard me before
that your point about governor
we vote on your confirmation but
once you're in there
constitution is very clear that
you are in charge New in Frank
doc Sanchez of the same go on in
your jobs a little bit more
portages fight for the students.
Your job is to make sure that
you're you're that student
voices for students activities
for so always keep that in mind
issue four yes you are a
constitutional officer which
formed so it's something the
product or service thank you
Chris for sauce that stepping up
once a year Dr snatches always a
pleasure to see for.
Thank you senator Senator
Pirtle.
You are.
Madam chair members of the
committee
thank you to the.
Sponsor Senator Campos for
bringing both of these the.
Nine candidates forward as
senator Morris said there was
definitely
three way fight over.
Who got to present the doctor
Sanchez for for good reason and
I think that speaks a lot to his
character and and the type of
type of man that doctors had
just is and you know basically
the way this works is Senator
Moores and I ended up our
seniority in and added up to
half of Senator Campos and so we
were basically
trump the trump card was played
in but happily happy that I was
even considered you know I I
think it's this is one of those
moments being on rules that
Really it's it's a proud moment
when we can vote and nominate
and put someone forward to the
caliber of of Dr Sanchez.
And so I'm I'm happy to to be a
co sponsor unofficially today
his passion for Las Vegas is
definitely it definitely strong
and and.
It really goes to the heart of
what Las Vegas is and and that
highlands university is a large
economic driver and it's a very
important part of the community
and so he will he will
definitely do it very well to a
very good job of of ensuring
that it sixty.
And so I I just want to support
the confirmation today thank
you.
Senator Ingle
chairman doctor Sanchez.
Just had a question for you in
the past history of New Mexico
the state of New Mexico has
helped we don't have a dental
school here to train to Dennis
do we still.
have a system where we can pay
help pay the tuition for.
Of.
People are are and and becoming
a dentist and then that we can
help them with their tuition out
of state for another
Representative dental school we
still have that.
Chair just pulling all yes I
believe that the page program
still available you know I
haven't personally looked at
that in the recent past.
When I went to school of course
it was an option and so if you
place it was like five different
institutions throughout the
country that would allow you to
to apply to which appropriation
would pay out of state tuition
as it turned out for me I went
to Howard University we help
which is located in Washington
DC so it's not a state as well
as state tuition Michael's and
so I do need help for which
program but many of the Dennis
that would screen it the use of
which program so I understand
that still available and I think
you had a couple of schools
recently the fact that we don't
have a dental school in New
Mexico does make it challenging
because you have to go away.
But when I attended school.
In seventy three the university
of Denver was starting dental
school approved small nearest
location with the United States
that accepts students the print
out of state first two years I
know that
Senate and been working with.
The university of well.
I'll pass so to try and and see
if the court needs of some
efforts to.
Get some of our students are
educated or and I'm not sure
what the progress of that is I
have to at least but it's going
on the road I think that there
would be some other
opportunities I know the
university of Phoenix it has.
No school in expected those who
are not and so if we can
coordinate region and respect I
think that would be helpful
students that are graduating.
School and going to dental
school so I would be interested
in.
According that effort if there's
possibility do that.
Doctor you're you're still
you're still where we do have a
program that that takes care of
that tuition for them.
For the for I thank god for
students reporter for dentures.
Yes yes that that yes I
understand that that.
Are they under an obligation to
come back and practice any
length of time in New Mexico you
know that.
No I do I don't know that for
act I would have to research
that I'm not sure.
Some sort of a.
Thank you for five for five
years but I I couldn't and.
But I wasn't sure exactly you
know how how obligating it was
because H. dentist a.
I live in poor Tallas and now.
My goodness research we've got
folks coming in there from all
over New Mexico we just don't
have dentists in our rural areas
and a dental practice issues you
know ours you don't set those up
for fifteen cents.
Then the resale value is pretty
tough to sometimes sure
it's a profession that we really
do need in New Mexico and and
thank you so much for being one
of our our dentist there are in
rural New Mexico for show all
those years.
Because it and you've done
wonders with Senator Campos a
smile.
If you could just there were
teach us how to dye his hair it
sure would be nice would drive.
You should do it but we all know
he does anyway and bill Garcia.
Like my good then you and I go
back a long ways and we both
were much she used to be much
slimmer and had very dark hair.
Thank you I thank you so much
for taking the positions and
Chris thank you for being a
stern reject and you did a good
job here today and the.
It's a it's a job that the
really is amazing but that to I
remember when we passed that on
the floor Senator Eragon passion
and I think when he put together
to the floor you didn't think it
would pass but it did and the
it's been a real service for for
all our all our universities to
have stirred region on their and
thank you for serving because
it's not a job that to have as
much glory with it sometimes
does it because you're the one
that gets the first complaint I
can tell you that so thank you
all very much and you certainly
have my support thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle and.
The Salazar had had wanted to
give a clarification about Mr
will Baris confirmation micelles
are go ahead.
Thank you madam chair committee
I just wanted to
give a little information on his
previous appointment of Custer
for Christopher with the body
was appointed after our last
session and his interim
appointments expire on December
thirty first of this year can't
having a reappointment so I just
wanted to clarify that for us
Senator Moores as he had asked
the question if you had appeared
before.
Thank you.
Thank you missiles are.
Any other members of the
committee.
Well I drive Sanchez Mr it was a
very thank you so much for your
willingness to serve
what is the pleasure of the
committee
press.
Individuals.
Hello would you please call the
roll for some doctor sentenced.
Yes.
Senator Lopez.
Yes the madam chair I also
wanted to second the nominations
for the past.
Thank you senator of as senator
Morris yes Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Ingle yes Senator do it
yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
Thank you doctor Sanchez you
have a due passi alert.
Is this I'll do.
Number and I'm Miss Vigil we are
please call the roll for Mister
Bari.
Senator Baca.
Yes Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Moores yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Ingle yes Senator do it
yes and so the.
Yes.
Congratulations to you both I
your nominations will be up on
the floor later this afternoon
the madam chairman.
Yes chairman they both need to
know that they'll get an
autographed eight by twelve
black and white Senator Campos.
Thank you madam chair members of
the Senate rule.
Sorry we couldn't help but.
Thank.
Thank you so here we have
fifteen minutes left in our
meeting
what I would like to propose is
that we go to
the regulator the J. Vigil all
Taylor task force.
which
you know it's presenting right
now House Judiciary but I'll be
happy to present that for him
and then we will go to and hope
that we can do this quickly
that'll give us some time to be
able to consider
how strict resolution of three
if we don't have it anymore all
will at least have gotten
through the The presentation and
some initial discussion so that
we can we can we can resolve it
today if we get result today
will will come back and and and
that would be the first of the
bills that we consider when we
come back up at our next meeting
but the manager will put the J.
Paul Taylor early childhood task
force has been in existence for
several years J. Paul Taylor was
incredible leader in New Mexico
in early childhood education I
first met him when I was
actually working on education
policy in Washington DC even
before I came to New Mexico.
He was a a national leader in
this area he was on a long term
state representative and of the
this early childhood task force
continues its work and they're
simply asking for we
authorization for them to
continue to be can building
through the University of New
Mexico and with that if there
any questions.
Thank you and I have Miss Vigil
is there any public comment on
this.
No madam chair there is not.
And members of the Senator
Lopez.
Madam chair this committee this
task force is done such great
work over all these years
they give us how should I say
much of their expertise and
information to guide us I would
like to move it to pass.
And so we have a do pass
recommendation Senator Moores to
do have discussion yes thank you
madam chair of chairman Ivey
Soto I know we've done this I
think every year since I've been
here why do we always have to do
this every single year commences
and.
Done throughout the new services
or ensure committee up we have a
new.
Memorial every year.
Madam chair that is sort of
course
That's the structure that had
with the J. Paul Taylor early
childhood task force I think in
December to integrate its
repression that they don't try
to make themselves a a permanent
structure but that we continue
to we can be them and and the US
of a continued reestablish the
relevance.
Calling on.
Yeah just part of the state
that.
But okay yeah I'm honored to do
it continue to us but it's we do
it every year so just always
curious every year why we do the
same memorial every year so.
Thank you for your answer.
Our.
Mr
All right any other members of
the committee.
We have a due pass motion from
Senator Lopez I will second.
Miss Vigil would you please call
the roll by Senator Baca yes
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Moores yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Stewart yes thank you
senator Senator Ingle.
Senator right yes then Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Mr chair you have to do that.
And that just.
Very well madam chair we would
Mexico and several more up to
us.
But it right resolution.
Authority and let me just
explain to the committee this
now that is a policy of the
rules committee not to hear the
same bill twice.
We did hear a bill dealing with
the veteran
tax deductions are are having
property tax
exemptions excuse me this is not
the same bill that we heard
before so with that Mr.
So madam chair of the sponsor is
present so that you can find
correct.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee house joint
resolution three as broad I'm
bringing this forward on behalf
of the Military and Veterans
Affairs Committee.
What it basically does is this
allows a.
To increase the property tax
exemption for on the honorably
discharged members of the armed
forces and other widows and
widowers from four thousand
dollars in thousand dollars.
The four thousand dollar I'll.
I do mount listed two thousand
and technical group in two
thousand five that hasn't been
changed since then property
values throughout the state the
rest of the considerably and
we're hoping that that instead
we didn't let the voters decide
the of the our veterans you to
get a better rate with that Mr
chair I will stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative and
Miss Vigil is there any public
comment on I'm just madam chair
there is not.
Members of the committee.
What madam chair I will notes
first of all not only is it from
the interim committee.
Of that as we look at the
vehicle impact of this of this
particular more.
But we do have the issue of the
of the yield control as it
affects local governments.
particularly of as to the state
government most of it is is our
bird.
This will have
This will have about an eighteen
million dollars our chefs in
taxes overall but this this goes
from here to the Tax committee
are I think that's an issue that
they can deal with their I've
always been a little bit suspect
putting actual dollar amounts
and and the constitution of
however that's the structure
that that that that general
Colin found
already there and.
Chairman I I don't know if you
want to respond to that at all
or there's.
Response seven I'm just I'm just
going with what we've got will
be that we can go forward.
Thank.
Chair.
Any any any other members of the
committee wish to speak on
that's.
Senator Lopez and I'm sure I
really do pass.
The motion very do passed
noting that Senator has has
stand up but I would I will but
I would second.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair and I
agree with Senator Ivey Soto
that was actually the only issue
that I had if we could just
write it in a way that that
given the legislature the
authority to do exemption so
that the next time we need to do
that this property values rise.
Due to inflation throughout the
years we can do it through
statute that up having to amend
the constitution every single
time thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator we're on a
motion for do pass from Santo
Lopez seconded by Senator Ivey
Soto.
if there's no further discussion
Miss Vigil would you please call
the roll Senator Baca.
Senator.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
With senator Morris.
Madam chair we lost quorum I
believe it Senator Baca is not
there.
I believe we have court we have
five of us here we need set
along with you Senator Baca
response will have the sex if
not with the presentation we can
think about our next me.
Senator Baca are you there.
Madam chair does not look like
he is there.
All right well then we will
eight.
At the next meeting
we are we are honored to pass
motion on this so we will not
need to go to public comment and
the and the sponsor doesn't need
to come back and we can just
simply take them out so we can
