Okay we're gonna go ahead and
begin.
would you have gallery view on
that thing this place up there
on this it's got.
Okay thank you all for being
here and for your patience this
morning.
and appreciate your willingness
to come back this afternoon.
my name is Daniel A. Ivey Soto
on the chair of the Senate rules
committee and we have also
Senators store worth and how to
meal.
here right now we have other
members will be coming in and
out throughout the the hearing
today we're going to be doing
we're going to begin.
With a hearing on the Senate to
have it on the state
personal board.
And so we need to so let's see
hi I am.
Mr.
Are you.
Are you here Representative.
Yes Ricky Serna here thank you
okay very good and then.
Also can we have elevated as a
panelist just the people who
work for confirmation for the
personal for please.
Give us just a moment.
It was just a moment here Paul
Pala jobs we are just trying to
carry a couple of technical
issues.
Due to the manner in which we
are meeting
Which was not previously
anticipated.
I don't think it's on that one.
Found on the cell such as cell
you.
The host right okay for those
who got upset with what on the
floor from the view.
Representative.
Mexico.
Okay yeah.
I just.
Okay.
That.
And then also there's a way that
all of those and see.
The.
Posted at again.
All.
We are yeah okay Ronald that she
should still be able.
R. yeah.
Okay very good thank you all
okay so we have.
Let's see Laura
this would.
Thank you Carol Parker.
And David Cunningham yes my
understanding is that Kristin
Hans bluesman will not be able
to make it this afternoon is
that correct Mr stern.
That's correct Mr chair she had
on a previous a appointment she
couldn't she couldn't miss okay
fair enough we'll make our
decisions life
So we will what we will do is
so miss list would your sponsor
happens to be in the room and
Mister Cunningham your sponsor
happens to be in the room.
And miss Parker your sponsor
should be stopping by at some
point soon because I know that
she was she was waiting for this
this morning this one make sure
to build speak
up in support of your.
placement and now the social if
if if she doesn't make it what
we're going through this.
A hearing she has contacted all
of us on the path
so Senator Wirth if you'd like
to just a couple words what
about Laura list would and David
cutting him what we will then do
after that is we will invite
each of you to say to introduce
yourself to the committee give
us a bit about your background a
little bit about your activities
since you've been on the
personnel board as well and how
long been serving and then if we
can
after that I'm gonna invite Mr
srna to kind of give us an
orientation as to kind of where
things are with the person board
overall
and and for what calendars
personal board has right now or
or what issues they've been
working on and then we'll open
it up to the committee so with
that said with.
Thank you Mr chair and
To list Liz would and Mister
Cunningham thank you for
agreeing to serve and being
appointed to these positions I'm
honored to present both of their
them for confirmation today let
me start with agency listing
would we as a.
With our constituents of mine
here in Senate district twenty
five she has a an extensive
resume in.
Diversity in leadership
Work and presentations over the
years with specific focus on
increasing
the role of women in leadership
and she's consulted
internationally on diversity
include inclusion for a variety
of different groups of
particular relevance for the
appointments she was at Goldman
Sachs in New York from two
thousand one to two thousand
sixteen where she was the
managing director for global
leadership and diversity for
twenty three thousand employees
at the investment bank with a
focus on assuring a diverse
workforce and career development
for senior executives and issues
of diversity during her career
she served in a number of
different capacities and
different leadership projects
for women in the workplace and I
think we'll find a very
important voice on the state
personnel board I think
certainly support governor Lujan
Grisham's point then this list
with the server one thing I
would note that I think we
normally do have is in our
packets are the actual.
messages from the governor and
so I don't see those in here so
that would be a good thing to
have because I think it's always
important to understand.
Who's been serving you hasn't
been serving and whether it's
and I think these are new
appointments to the confirmation
process but it doesn't mean you
have been serving for a while I
see Mr Sarna shaking his head so
I think I would just ask when we
get to miss list would just let
us know how long you been
serving and kind of your take on
the whole on board process and
if I could Mr chair I'd like to
go ahead and introduce Mister
Cunningham as well yeah please
do so this this would I I just I
was remiss in saying also is has
a law degree from the university
California and Davis and a
business MBA from Harvard
University
Mr Cunningham is also a fellow.
A lawyer and constituent here in
Santa Fe
and.
Basically a Stanford grad and
Hastings college R. J. D. he has
had an extensive career in both
New Mexico and previously in New
York I know him as a lawyer in
private practice here in Santa
Fe and certainly can speak very
highly of his work as an
attorney he also served in the
criminal justice system for the
New York County district
attorney
and and then has done work here
in New Mexico for the Zuni tribe
which he did for a period of
time in the late eighties and
then is back again as council
from twenty fifteen to the
present.
So again I and I know Mr
Cunningham.
Again from my life practice here
in Santa Fe New and certainly
recommend him highly I think
these are two very good
appointments to this very
important board so would
recommend them both and with
that Mr chair ideal I thank you
very much and so let me go ahead
and let miss list would.
introduce yourself to the
committee what brought to to the
personal board your background
as well as how long been serving
on the board in which experience
on the board has been so far
then we'll go to Mr Cunningham
and then to miss Parker so
business with.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
very much senator Wirth up for
your support and recommendations
to the the member of the state
personnel board I am currently
acting as the I am the chair of
the state personnel board I've
been a member of the board since
late twenty nineteen I came to
the board additionally through
some the acquaintance of Pam
Coleman who was then the
director of the state personnel
office a this Coleman and I work
together when she was at the.
In the Obama administration when
I did quite a bit of work for
diversity and inclusion for the
administration hi
Also just to add a little bit my
background which I think helps
me think through some of these
issues is that.
I retired as of armed reserve
police sergeant.
In after thirteen years of
service.
As a police officer and after
the events of nine eleven I
joined the police department.
But that has given the
additional perspective on some
of the issues that that often
get rates around these things
I've been privileged to serve in
this position both as a member
and then as chair I have as
indicated by the Senator very
interesting initiatives around
leadership diversity ensuring
that the state of New Mexico
through the state personnel
office.
Is you fully embraces diversity
equity and inclusion of which I
see from the acting director Mr
stern there's certainly a strong
effort not pardon certainly
supporting the governor in her
efforts from this issue in
addition you know I found of
serving on this board number one
to be great privilege but also
to be able to.
Help
insure that.
The best and the brightest which
is what this state needs are
recruited and how we can best to
ensure that and also as we can
look at issues that get raised
around yield so center that we
support can act.
As a.
Senator voice in that so again
it's been my privilege to serve
and I certainly will stand for
any questions that you would
like to ask me.
Thank you very much Mr cutting
him.
Yes.
The thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Wirth for the your kind
words.
I worked in Manhattan as a DA
from nineteen sixty nine to
nineteen eighty two
there I am.
Started as a line assistant but
ended up chief of trials and I
reform investigation division
some three hundred people I have
extensive experience in and
supervising lawyers police
officers and investigators in
that job hi the I was new York's
expert witness for the
president's commission organized
crime I appeared several times
before Congress as new York's
representative on the
wiretapping statutes
and I came to New Mexico in
nineteen eighty three and
started Senator practice
I just served as a mediator for
the court of appeals judges on
numerous cases I started with
governor Lewis's journey in the
late eighties and basically did
all kinds of types of worker one
one area of this person and
trying to get person.
Rules is a tribe and then using
the models any tribe using at
Hopi and Navajo
so had a lot of experience there
and I have served as a special
assistant Attorney General.
For providing key when he first
was elected he had never run a
common vision and I spent six
months teaching revenue
provision
I have been a special DA on the
on to to terrible homicide cases
one father Rivera Juan Carlos
the hill where I was the special
prosecutor in those cases
in private practice
All kinds of cases but important
for this position I've done a
awful lot of the.
K. we're Ivey the representative
employers or of an
Representative employees and so
what that means expertise I
bring to this board is an
ability to look at the.
there are numerous cases pending
that employs a broad and to look
at the look at the decisions by
the administrative law judges
and helpful for the board and
kind of looking through the
issues and trying to get that
get that drive more current
Also look forward to working on
this.
Issue facing this board is the
fact that there's twenty three
percent of the.
This is the FTE positions are
open and trying to figure out
how to get more employees back
to work
and the house had a figure of
that conundrum I also services
volunteer as head of where
president Quayle run which is
basically a thousand members and
we have the same issues
and I I have been very much
involved in writing COVID
regulations for the tribe's
since there was little or no
help from the from the the U. S.
on that and also writing for
Quayle run so that's my
background and I hope to serve.
Thank you very much and miss
Parker.
Well without the introduction
that my my call members have
received I guess I have to give
you a little bit of a run down
my background is in public
health not in law not in
criminal justice and I a hold of
Ph.D from Walden university and
Minnesota in public health I've
been working in public settings
both hospitals and for the
American hospital association in
the implementation of
the kinds of community based
programs for health that have
been very helpful particularly
in rural states like New Mexico
I've been here since nineteen
ninety three and I been here I
have also begun a nonprofit that
works in northern Tanzania of
supplying support for people who
are living without the kind of
educational or public services
that are necessary for them to
live well
I've been a cough up a court
appointed special advocate for
children in district one
northern New Mexico advocating
on behalf of those who are in
the system for having cases of
abuse again there are parents
I have also been a tutor in the
school of New I am looking
forward to next week's session
as I have a legislative analyst
attached to the health and
public affairs committee I think
that's what I bring to the board
is a public health and public
affairs approach to hiring
firing employment issues of all
time
especially during the COVID I
have that expertise and
awareness that helps us to
formulate and to really mediate
all those difficulties that
occur in a large workplace like
the state government
surrounding family leave and of
ADA kind of accommodations and
other sorts of problems that are
involved in hiring and retaining
and having a happy workforce
I have really enjoyed working
with the my call members because
I find that they are not a
rubber stamp kind of bored
where's some I have served on
have been.
They are re investigating the
issues of why is it taking so
long for the appeals process on
issues of suspensions and other
kinds of workplace infringement
to be resolved so that those
departments can move on why are
we having so many difficulties
with hiring and in this
environment to all crossed
the United States both public
and private.
The issue seems to be not so
much about jobs Hey what about
lifestyle issues and flex time
and the other things that really
are in my wheel house and I'm
passionate about so I think that
those are the areas of expertise
that I bring to this board and I
really enjoyed what we've
accomplished so far I've only
been here since may and I look
forward to serving in the
future.
Thank you so very much
appreciate it.
so Mister Sir not if you would
be so kind as to give us a
little orientation as to where
things are at with the person
board I.
To agencies right now your
acting director person and what
is the other regions of the
trip.
Thank you Mr chairman acting
secretary Department workforce
solutions got it so so you are
you are acting in two different
capacities.
And the
We appreciate what a good actor
you are and so if you could let
us know what's going on with the
state personnel board
and we will then chat with the
coverages this please proceed.
With.
Members of the committee
as as you've heard of the board
is a highly professional people
qualified group you'll see the
same when you have a chance to
meet and interact with number
he's awesome and she our
background much like these three
of course is just a real perfect
an appropriate fit for the state
personnel board so the the level
of experience they bring to the
table quite frankly is really
setting high expectations the
state personnel office all the
with a very big job right now we
employ under forty workers and
and we're really only short at
this point one of one staff
members so we are what I'd like
to say really lean and mean
machine just an oversight and
how the agency for the state of
New Mexico essentially ensuring
that the state personnel board
rules are are followed and to
whatever extent necessarily are
are part of the document that
this group is responsible for
maintaining changing and
modifying is necessary are very
quickly our critical priorities
in the sport has been integral
to ensuring that there's follow
up with a strong plan for
addressing the steady increase
in vacancy rates for state
government much like every other
large employer in the nation we
are competing with this priest
increased wages station wide
increased opportunities for
state or for New Mexicans to
work outside of New Mexico
remotely without having to leave
the state and certainly the
opportunities for work
flexibility telework has created
a very competitive space so
we're we're working to bolster
employee retention we have a
number of initiatives doing that
and of course we're working to
streamline the appeals process
as number Cunningham in our
mentioned this of course is the
final administrative appeal
process for state workers for
everything from disciplinary
action to termination and their
expertise in law enforcement and
litigation and and of course in
the spirit of what's right.
Workers has really challenged us
to to do that were also very in
tune with of what we need to do
and in a government to be very
competitive and we just as
you'll hear over the next month
we are going we were the the
lead agency on preparing the
compensation recommendation for
the executive recommendation on
state worker pay not only are we
going to elevate the part
minimum pay rate to fifteen
dollars our but we're going to
do something that addresses
action really does move the
needle for state workers enough
long term meaningful way and
then of course
we're really trying to identify
through data collection where
the gaps are in state government
as relates to policy and
training and so we played a
leadership all over the last
year in understanding through
appeals through conflict result
are through appeals to
arbitration mediation with our
union partners for the gaps in
and policy and training exist
across the government and
through our collaborative of
parameters of state agencies
working really address those as
we see fit and and to help
encourage agencies to
participate in those activities
we certainly have started to
quantify right what that
governments can really cost
organization like the state of
New Mexico and how we can become
cost efficient with Jess
exercising policies for probing
efficiency so I know that's a
mouthful Mr chair but there's a
lot going on as you can imagine
and this board is keeping us on
point and the holding our our
feet to the fire with clear
expectations in very short time
lines.
Thank you very much appreciate
that Mr chair not and and so let
me pull the members of the
committee.
and and and actually well the
members the committee looking
for this I I just hi I have a
couple actually kind of esoteric
questions for miss Parker.
One is what is I would just open
up that I think yours is the
first resume in some time that
that expresses knowledge of word
perfect still.
Except that little known fact is
that the the state legislature
does our bills still and we're
perfect.
So.
Yes.
So so you actually if things
don't work out of the at the
state personnel board we
we may have have a good use for
you here
The up.
The thing is.
Could you explain to us the the
promoter project and how it is
you got involved with Tanzania.
Yes yes.
I
completed my master's in public
health at the university of
Illinois of Chicago and at that
time I was living in Chicago and
I was very interested in other
parts of the world and how they
were implementing there are
delivery of health care it was
at the height of the aids crisis
and I found a volunteer
opportunity in Tanzania to
participate with a group that
was doing aids outreach into the
villages and after that month
long experience I had completely
fallen in love with the way the
Tanzanian society embrace there.
Of sick and dying and supported
them in home based settings and
neighbor helping neighbor and I
wanted to be part of that
effort so I began my efforts to
support As orphans in their
educational growth and
eventually grew into resource of
development of all types
including safe drinking water
vocational training for.
Kids would drop out of school in
welding and in tailoring and we
have partnered with communities
to build of the all
dispensaries
little clinics in villages all
across northern Tanzania
if work of love.
Fantastic fantastic hi that's
just.
Wonderful thank you.
very well a questions from the
committee regarding the state
personnel board.
Senator Wirth.
thank you Mr chair I think just
like to follow up a little bit
on the on the vacancy issue can
you give us again that the
percentage that you stated I
assume these are these are
funded positions that are simply
not vacant but what was that
percentage and maybe that was
the you Mr stern are laid that
out.
We're Mr chair Senator Woods
right now the vacancy rate for
our state of New Mexico
executive agencies is with just
under twenty three percent.
I just think it's important for
Mr chair for members of the
committee the public to hear
that so twenty three percent
which of course is.
You know it's indicative of what
all all employers at every level
are facing given COVID
and the reason I wanted to just
highlight it because one of the
things that that I certainly.
Support that's in the LFC
recommendation and in the
governor's recommendation seven
percent increase in state
employee personnel wages rates
because I just think we we are
behind and being competitive
it's absolutely critical that
that these positions do get
filled does the.
Person board itself deal with
anything with respect to vacancy
rates or is that just kind of an
issue off fact it's relevant to
person at the state level.
Mr chair Senator Woods there
there are a couple of areas the
state personnel board is
directly responsible for final
approval on classification and
compensation studies that are
done on the heels of
calibrating classifications in
state government right with
market competitiveness so when
we identified for example that
group being soft classified
workers for example correctional
officers social workers health
care professionals are
essentially are being under
compensated relative to the
market the state personnel
office is responsible for
conducting the classification of
compensation studies those then
go to the board for review
consideration and approval
before we execute the
implementation points then or
more appropriately placed those
classifications at a competitive
rate of pay.
And Mister chair I appreciate
that because again I think this
is one of those.
Areas again representing.
A huge portion of Santa Fe with
so many state employees I just
know that the issue compensation
is one that's absolutely
critical in getting those pay
bands Rights is is super
important I just want one of the
things that I want to talk to
highlight and I just wanna make
sure again Mr stern I understood
your.
What was your statement about
the fifteen dollar minimum wage
Mr chair Senator B. R. the
commitment from from the
governor moving into our the
compensation recommendation is
to increase the minimum rate of
a for state workers to fifteen
dollars an hour which which of
course presents a secondary
priority which is to address
compaction rate that would occur
by just taking that group and
chunking them into that zone so
we've worked over several months
not only partnership with DFA
but with our labor with ask
needs you to be a
representatives to really create
up a mechanism for raising that
bar addressing compaction and
moving the needle for all
workers.
Hi Mister I appreciate that
we've had a discussion within
our Senate democratic caucus
about the importance of the
fifteen dollar minimum minimum
wage and I certainly commend the
governor for for her willingness
to the point that but I also
think that something that we
Either need to do through
statute or through the budget
process for you know not only
state workers but also
educational employees I I again
I just think it's I know the
issue of compaction gets gets
brought up and it is a relevant
issue for sure but I just feel
like
This is just such an important
signal that gets sent to those
who are doing actually critical
jobs especially in in the COVID
environment that we're in and we
need to do this for our work or
sell I commend the governor for
that thank you Mr sort of
working on that and certainly
thank you to the Senate nominees
for agreeing to continue to
serve in this capacity I thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Wirth Center
honeymoon then Senator for
participate.
well I'll come back to
Representative go ahead.
Senator Pete.
Okay yes I thought it was sent
out for you looking in mirrors
look at you okay.
To I'm very impressed to Mr
chairman.
Thank.
I'm very impressed Mr chairman
with with the caliber of of
appointments that we see for the
personnel board and I just want
to thank the governor for for
stepping up and really bringing
people to this thanks very
important position with the
background the that our current
nominees said before us have my
question really has to do with
something that came up during
interim committee hearings of
the.
Health and Human Services
Committee this summer we were
looking at the.
division of vocational
rehabilitation it's a piece of
the currently it's in Public
Education Department.
And I think the committee left
that meeting stunned by what we
were told which was that they
they were they were they had
vacancy rates in excess of forty
percent during that hearing.
The reasons given were that they
had.
Simply not been able to to hire
people.
They require a certain level of
credentialing and they were able
to hire people that the salary
levels we're paying for that
that level of credentialing so
they it reverted to hiring high
school graduates whenever they
could find them but that even
high school graduates we're
proving reluctant to apply for
those jobs because there are so
demanding and the pay was so low
and and this goes beyond just
the need for a seven percent
raise it really does and I
wanted to direct this I guess to
any of you who wanted to speak
but specifically to Mr certain
as well.
How do we how do we change those
bands the the payroll then seem
to be the problem that we're
requiring.
Credentials.
That go beyond what what we can
hope have any hope to attract
people for at that those levels.
Senator if I may.
that that's a great question and
that that they were going that
agency in particular right has
been a very much a focus of ours
for some time for the reasons
you just stated in because some
of those position requirements
are very much managed by their
federal funding agencies right
so there's like there's very
little room of there's very
little flexibility for us up a
couple of things one is we agree
wholeheartedly so on the heels
of the the recommendation that
we've therefore increasing rate
for state workers is of the
movement of the rate that
significant shift to the price
of the a bands to artifice
sensually do two things one is
addressed competitive just for
the future for hiring in the
future but who is to present
should be our do what we need to
do to get out to aligning those
with we're now the new workers
will fall after we give them
their pay increase so it's going
to it's going to address a
couple of things like that
secondly what we've got to do is
we need to identify pipeline
opportunities for workers in the
spill understanding how we back
map where we need them to be and
and for some of these workers
not only is it a minimum
qualification with degree in
education and experience it's
also in some instances PED
licensure so how do we identify
where we need them to be at the
end create classifications
within the state personnel
office and get those approved by
the board that help us bring in
a freshman in college right at a
certain level and they moved me
to another level after they've
obtained additional course work
that helps advance their work
that alternately help them
identify with the pathway to
where they're going to be post
graduation but at the same time
gives DVR a workforce while
they're becoming right educated
and licensed and so are the neat
thing is obviously put.
Education department to be a
partner in getting us where we
need to be replaced ensure
options and possibilities are
temporary licensure right or
provision a licensure so there
there's some work to do there
and we a lot of conversations
about how we can get that done
and that was some of what is
compounded like what was
mentioned earlier of course is
you know the competitiveness for
social workers or trained
educators are in various sectors
throughout the public.
Mr chair Senator I could add to
that in terms of what the board
is looking at increase of two
of the acting director and to
show is that issues around one
of the accident of you saying
when we lose people whether the
recruiting programs that are
being set up and I know it's
supposed on some some very
innovative kinds recurring
programs but then the question
becomes how long does it take to
them get from from someone CENIC
putting an application into them
response and hiring a timeline
and what does that look like
what it as a member Parker
mention one of the work life
balance issues that need to be
looked at
that certainly the pay bands and
the comparisons and all of that
are essential to this and what
are the pipeline opportunities
and also are we insuring that we
are reaching out to the the
personal.
groups within the state to
ensure that we are making making
sure that we have the biggest
pool of applicants that that are
qualified and also looking at
some of these issues route is
what is saying being needed is
that actually what is being
needed for these jobs and
sometimes we know from private
sector work in other work and
that doesn't always match so
just to let the board of the
committee know that the board
itself is quite aware of these
dynamics that are going on and
and within our purview of trying
to help get over this kind of
thing before in competition as
you know with the private sector
with other government agencies
with not for profits in this and
what we need to be able to
ensure that CPO is doing the
best practices not only within
the state of New Mexico but one
of the best practices nationally
that we can we can embrace.
Thank you I I'm I'm really glad
that Mr chairman to hear these
these comments and and look
forward to seeing some some real
and improvement
I understand it's going to cost
money I mean.
But the whole point is not to to
do this is as
cheaply as possible but is most
effectively as possible for the
citizens of the state and and I
know from personal experience
when I was at in the child
welfare Agency and had a
different name in those days but
when you had taken positions and
the supervisor had to to cover
those vacancies.
This I'm sure happens in every
in every department but then
they're not available to the
supervisors for the for the new
workers coming in and it becomes
very difficult for the new
workers to feel like they're.
Like their learning like they're
really benefiting from the
presence of the supervisor in
the supervisor so busy dealing
with the emergencies that that
have developed in the covered
caseloads so that that issue of
the twenty three percent vacancy
rate to me translates to
ineffective operations of many
departments well maybe they can
get the basic work done.
By scrambling and by having
people do two or three did jobs
but we don't the overall quality
of performance that we would
have if we could fully staffed
up with appropriately
credentialed people I I'm I'm
glad to hear the that this is
something that you recognize and
are working on and I really
appreciate the caliber of the
appointments the governor's
maybe thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman and I want
to thank all of you for your
willingness to serve on the
board I have two questions and
it it whichever board member
would like to answer can go
ahead and jump in so my first
one is our vacancy rates higher
because we're saying that state
employees are jumping from one
agency to another and so we're
seeing this musical chairs where
we're leaving one position to
fill another for more money and
that's how come we're seeing
those rates are high because
we're seeing that it's attrition
within agencies.
Have it real quick us sorry
before you of before gonna
answer that I do want to
recognize that.
Kristin Hanes Bozeman has been
able to join us and as long
amendment and so mistimes will
spend if you'd be so kind as to
introduce yourself to the
committee on everybody else to
this before this is up to the
committee let us know what
what's your background is a
branch of the personnel board as
well as what you been your
activity since two but on the
board.
and then and then also what was
your favorite song as a child I.
Right to the left.
Thanks Lente
all right it is so good
afternoon thank you so much I
apologize for being late I was
actually here much earlier than
it appeared but I was somehow an
observer and that couldn't
couldn't get through so I thank
you director start up for
getting me into the meeting I
appreciate that so my name is
Kristen hand spas lemon I am the
R. the department head and the
principal at R. E. D. W. in the
HR consulting Department I run a
team that manages both
compensation consulting and HR
support services I started my
career as a litigation attorney
at the Montreuil firm and that
specialize in employment
litigation there I then left and
went in house for of a large
client seventeen hundred plus
employees as they are H. R.
director ultimately vice
president of HR in general
counsel has spent six years in
that role and then when I left
there I started my own firm with
a proactive legal perspective to
human resources consulting and
that did that for a little over
a year and was merged into R. A.
D. W. as a merger and
acquisition last year in that
January of twenty twenty and
I've been doing this since
in terms of of my work with the
board you know first I I was
Drug kicking and screaming by
Mister mark Fidel to join the
board I'm kidding I was it but
it was brought to me by him as
an opportunity to apply that
both my legal background as well
as my HR consulting background
and sat you know HR experience
and I think that that's what
I've been doing I've
particularly enjoyed assisting
with.
you know bringing my perspective
to our discussion of education
as you know not only someone
with that legal background but
also with the practical HR
experience and so I believe
that's what I bring to the board
And as far as let's see my
My favorite song as a child.
The state a probably as sweet
Caroline.
Well that's a good song.
okay ever sing no I'm not going
to reserve that
nobody wants to suffer that.
Now we'll all just all to go
us a phone phone phone.
So
very good Senator how do you
a letter to proceed and then
also I need to step out for just
a moment so I'm gonna ask
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino if you'd
be so kind to continue chair
while I'm out of the room thank
you all very much thank you Mr
chairman so my question was are
you noticing that a lot of your
vacancies are from state
employees who are moving from
one agency to another or for
higher rate and so it's not that
we're truly losing the employees
they're just it's kind of
musical chairs for the shuffling
from one position to another.
Mr Mr chair Senator hi to me
good good to see you
and and of course some of the
representative from the valley
boarding race still living in
Espanola valley so it's a
pleasure to see you there if I
may I question
the vacancy rate surely there's
mobility Senator in fact we we
look at that mobility again as
as a measure for compensation
right really looking at
compensation typically we we
really like when state workers
move our within state government
especially when that we move
allows for promotion ability.
And we see a lot of mobility
from one agency or one position
to another within the same rate
that then what that points to is
really an effort to increase
compensation right that mobility
meaning that they may be able to
move laterally but still receive
us a decrease Hey the vacancy
rate in particular points to the
number of workers that are
needing state government all
yes so really does capture
really the quotient behind total
number of authorized FTE right
being divided into vacant
positions
and so we can track mobility
impact we know that in FY twenty
one our.
Fifty percent of all they can
see spill were filled with an
existing worker so part of the
challenge there is if you have
ten vacancies and your field on
average it's going to create I
hope we can seize the bill
because I of those will be
filled with existing workers so
there is some trouble hiring
that of course encourage when we
do that and it's good to allow
for promotion ability but we
believe that some of that
mobility has to do with a desire
on the employees part to find a
way to increase our compensation
lateral lateral need thank thank
you so much for that and just
one last question Mr chairman is
there by any chance a plan for
the dress of a salary increase
to make up for compound losses
of call up over the last that's
a twenty years.
Mister chairman Senator I I
think that's been the that's
been a focus of the
conversations right or a number
of years arming including right
just a couple years ago the lost
the increase rate due to some
uncertainty about doctor ready
so what we what we did is a
centerpiece really try to do two
things all at once and none of
them are really called cost of
living adjustments but they're
oppressed so for example when we
move up worker from from eleven
fifty right now but even before
we were working on this the
minimum wage is ten fifty we we
mobile workers and fifty fifteen
dollars an hour that takes a
forty plus percent increase in
compensation right so in the in
the recommendation that will be
discussing over the next on the
wall in committee moves of
workers anywhere from four
percent to forty plus percent
depending on where they are on a
bend and where they are relative
to the mid point in those events
and so we moved away in this
recommendations from that flat
percentage increase across the
board because even if you give a
worker making ten fifty ten or
fifteen percent increase thank
it's still only gets them a
third of the way a fifteen
dollar an hour minimum we want
to do is propose setting an
aggressive increased a total
compensation but we want to we
want to really shift the bulk of
that increased to the lowest
paid workers while at the same
time raising rates of pay range
for all state government.
Thank you so much for that good
to see you to the cabinet
secretary Mr chairman no further
questions thank you thank you
Senator anybody else any other
comments.
and so of.
Senator Wirth the the plan is to
try to do these during the first
week of the session you want to
address that.
Thank you Mr happy to so what
we'll do is I understand from
the chair is during our first
week of the session will come in
and just take the vote in
committee to affirm have the
action that we've done here as a
subcommittee and then we will
most likely.
Not these out on the floor of
the state Senate during the
first week I'd like to get all
the work that's been done by
this committee through the floor
of the Senate you don't need to
be there when when your
confirmation comes up on the
floor of the Senate but you
certainly are welcome to with an
asterisk obviously given comment
that may I'm I may have spoken
too soon things are evolving and
we're actually gonna discuss the
Senate rules in this committee a
little later this week but we
will do them on the floor and
you certainly can be there the
zoom on the floor as well I know
need to answer questions on the
floor it's just your sponsor
presents are you to the full
body for a vote and we'll do
that generally on the same day
that we hear it in in the rules
committee.
Thank you senator and I want to
thank you all for your
willingness to serve the state
this is a critical job that
you've tackled and we'll have a
lot riding on it so thank you
for really you're willing being
willing to to use your
experience and your expertise in
this fashion thank you Mr
secretary director of the office
of this bill thank you very much
so members go now to the next
the
board the employers mutual
company board of directors.
And then we have for those this
afternoon.
Let's see if we can get the
money can we can we bring the
men run to kill any of those
issues.
Correct.
Okay.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Good.
Is.
This is Maria Griego Arabia.
Good okay.
Did you say that Mr Ritchie's
okay there is good so where we
start Mr Ritchie with the with
you giving a little bit of
background about the
Employers mutual company and
then we'll ask each of the
nominees to say a few words of
million rising us with their own
backgrounds and and what they
would like to see there your
patience to the work of the
Employers mutual company.
so go head to the gym I you get
a start.
Thank you Mr chair I plan to
stand today and support the
governor Lujan Grisham's of
nominees all four of them
together and it was suggested I
find some background so as many
of the members may already know
New Mexico mutual was created
by the legislature to provide
an affordable workers
compensation insurance option
for employers in the state and
to stabilize a workers comp
rates for the state through a
dedicated competitive New Mexico
based insurance carrier so New
Mexico mutual is not a state
agency and of course unlike the
majority of appointees that that
this committee is asked to
To confirm these these members
will not have any kind of policy
making or regulatory authority
they they are they're appointed
to ensure that the New Mexico
mutual casualty company is
managed in a responsible way and
to ensure the success of the
company are providing that
oversight and and governance.
in order for New Mexico mutual
to fulfill its mission it's it's
subject to a number of
regulators and also third
parties that evaluate the
strength of its governance and
and you know.
Probably the key among those is
A. M. best who who gives
insurance companies a rating
based on their financial
stability and strength.
and one of the factors that A.
M. best will evaluate is the
expertise
the experience of the stability
of the company's board of
directors and so we've had the
pleasure of working with these
nominees over the past two years
and in turn capacity and during
that time and invest in our
other regulators have evaluated
the board of these members are
found to be qualified.
and and the confirmation of
these appointees will provide
for can continuity and ensure
the company's and capable and
qualified hands for the next
several years so I stand in
support of of the governor's
nominees here are individually
and collectively they have the
integrity of the business acting
then and the diversity of
professional experience to
successfully oversee the
company.
Look great thank you Mr Ritchie
now we'll go to each of the
nominees in turn in the order
that that the they're listed on
the agenda and so we'll start
with you Christina Campos good
to see.
Very good to see you good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee it's an honor
to come before you this
afternoon
I am not Christina Campos
administrator Guadalupe County
Hospital and centers in New
Mexico and also my husband
former representative set
compass and I on a couple of
restaurants one of them which is
closed now and the loan which
will probably be closing for
about a week or so because of
the rising COVID basis and
unfortunately some employees
that have been exposed or tested
positive.
I have been the minister for
eighteen years now I have served
on several committees for the
New Mexico Hospital so ciation
the American hospital
association and other rule
regional health care
organizations I have also been
serving on this committee for
about two years and and it's an
incredible learning experience
it is a highly professional
organization highly regulated
and very successful my
hospital is not covered by this
company but my restaurants are
and and I can assure you that
they've done an outstanding job
of of supporting small
businesses throughout the state
in the last two years.
Right thank you.
Up next to run to give the land
Lopez.
Nice to see you Mr chair thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee I just want to
thank you for this opportunity
and I'm honored to have this
opportunity to serve on this
board I am a administrator of
the self insured group fund for
the last twenty five years so I
work I work in the workers comp
world every day serving on this
board I have to echo Mrs Campos
and the fact that this is a
highly regulated for that
follows the rules to a T. and
it's it's nice to be able to
learn things from them I
appreciate what they do and one
of the aspects I love about
workers comp because most people
think it's boring is that I was
raised in the work comp world
most of you know my father was a
lobbyist for the unions years
ago and he was part of the re
write and so I've been able to
say that I've been educated
since the re write occurring up
until today and it's ever
involving and I it of all the
and I appreciate the fact that
it's a delicate balance for
workers and business owners and
this company New Mexico mutual
does that perfectly thank you
secretary.
Thank you run that
and then Maria Griego Raby good
to see you Maria.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I
appreciate the opportunity to
use it before you today and I
want to say that I do appreciate
my fellow members as well having
the opportunity to work within
the past couple of years as
governors Christians appointees
I.
I have
Work with another inch local
Insurance Corporation for over
ten years they're not a worker's
comp company but they are of PNC
company so I do have some
experience in the realm of
insurance companies but actually
more important that I own my own
small business for over I think
it's thirty four years now are
almost thirty four years so I
feel like it's the the work that
we do is frightening portent to
our community and small
businesses and I am also policy
holder and so I have had the
good fortune of receiving this
the services from New Mexico
mutual over many years so with
that I stand for any questions
but I am honored to be before
you today.
Right thank you and finally Sam
Baca is another nominee.
Thank you Mr chairman it's an
honor to be here and it's good
to see up some of my colleagues
on screen of their smiling
faces.
my history with New Mexico
mutual goes back to around two
thousand ten these are
approximate years and the way I
got involved was
New Mexico mutual at that time
had a another CPA on the for the
fellow by the name of Tom
Broderick senior unfortunately
Mr Broderick passed away during
his term and had about two years
remaining and so the board I
contacted me and asked me if I
would fill out his term which I
did and that and then after that
I was eligible to serve a six
year term
which I was elected by the
policy holders and I completed
that that six year term so that
would take us to somewhere
around the two thousand eighteen
been my understanding the rule
is that the one must sit out for
at least a year before being
eligible to be reappointed
reelected to the sport I sent
out a about two years and then
the governor appointed me about
two years ago to an additional
six year term
I currently chair of the audit
and compliance committee for the
board and actually I did that
during my previous six months or
six year tenure also so that's
very interesting position to be
in a very important position of
the and one which I am I relish.
from a personal professional
point of view I am a certified
public accountant to have been
one for over forty years I'm
currently the president of Bach
and how're PC our local
Albuquerque New Mexico from
I work with many small
businesses trust to states
individuals various kinds of
entities and terms of doing tax
planning tax compliance work and
tax compliance work I also do a
great deal of expert witness
worked in my practice I worked
in business valuation basis and
I work on on a number of
different kinds of litigated
matters and so I very much enjoy
that that part of the practice
So the company I I just treasure
the company and that's one
reason that I was anxious to get
back on the board having served
total of eight years prior to
this I I feel like I I learned a
lot about the industry
complexity
the importance of.
Companies mission and
have a great deal of respect for
senior management of the firm
and avoid things organized and
we businesses conducted so you
know I would.
Honored to to be up
ratified confirmed whatever the
process is to
another six year term.
You Mr chair.
Well thank you and and thank you
all for we're.
Being willing to speak to serve
the state and and and the people
of the state in this capacity
your company is.
There's always been pointed out
to me is as the
Is the uniquely New Mexico
solution to the issues of
workers compensation and one
that's working well
let's see if they're members of
the committee of any questions
Senator Stewart.
Mr Chairman.
And also thank thank you to all
of you who are willing to do
this work
Rhonda haven't seen you in
awhile good to see you thanks.
More state Christine.
So I guess my question is
because I don't I'm not I am not
aware of any other agency that's
not a state agency where we
confirm members and so I I sort
of need a little bit of
education and how we got started
with this this way as not a
state agency and yet we're
confirming the members of the
board for.
So
Whoever can take that on.
Wanted to tackle that Jeremiah.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator for the question
that.
New Mexico wasn't unique in and
creating what's called the state
compensation fund many states in
response to exploding rates they
they were seeking ways to ensure
that there would be an insurance
company that was more
accountable to the employers of
that state and an insurance
company that wouldn't be able to
simply leave the state or
withdraw from that market when
things got tough or they didn't
like you know the way things are
going there so New Mexico
created the company and then in
order to shield itself from
liability they they create the
state compensation funds as not
being state agencies their
intended to operate as a mutual
domestic insurance company and
they do that however you know I
I guess the the hook so to speak
to to ensure this company
remains in New Mexico and
committed to New Mexico is that
it's organized by statute and
and it's only allowed to do
workers compensation business
with a few exceptions within the
state of New Mexico so I think
that's the design is is that by
creating a company by statute
they ensure that it will stay
here.
And then
part of that is that five of the
eight.
Our members are appointed by the
governor three are elected by
the policy holders and then
together those eight board
members elected president and
CEO.
I hope that helps answer the
question.
Does Mr chairman thank you very
much so.
So is this unique to to New
Mexico no other states do this
like this.
Having our own mutual company.
For employers meeting I'm just
curious about that.
Mr chair Senator Stewart I'm I'm
sorry I'm I missed out I
misspoke it it's not unique to
New Mexico many states have done
this
some of them and that you know
they've all done it maybe a
little bit differently but the
idea of creating a domestic
mutual work comp Kerrier is is
one that's been done I think you
to edit it even as early as the
nineteen twenties Senator
Candace and more existence more
recently and and in our state
senator was formerly the
nineteen ninety two legislative
session
thank you into this in nineteen
ninety three so it it's it's not
unique they may all have some
different characteristics but we
were not the first to do it.
All right thank you Mr chairman
I thank you Mr misunderstood so
you have eight board members
three are elected by.
Thank you so.
Mr chair Senator Stewart the the
policy holder so it's it's a
mutual company so the assets are
owned the company is owned by
the policy holders so when you
purchase an insurance policy New
Mexico mutual.
Much like a life insurance
mutual company you are then the
shareholders so we're
accountable to our our policy
holders they on the assets of
the company and and they like
three of the board members.
All right and then the other
five are are nominated by the
governor confirmed by the
Senate.
Yes there are there any a
requirement for those I that the
governor chooses.
There there are a number of
requirements that that spread
across all of the members I
mentioned earlier you know
there's sure requirements on
expertise but the most critical
pieces ensuring that we have
members that are qualified to
operate
you know successful insurance
company and we look largely to
the A. M. best ratings agency to
make sure that we have
adequate governance and and
expertise there.
All right well thank you thank
you so much at the end I've
served here twenty eight years
and I'll learn something every
day even though you've been here
this long so I really appreciate
the explanation thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Stewart
So I I'll just follow up with a
couple of questions for you on
based on what Senator Stewart
asked.
So would you say that it's
working well right now are we
are we are our rates being held
down to the point where they're
affordable and that the system
is still producing good results
for the for the workers who
suffered injuries on the job.
Mr chair I'll offer that one and
let them but also deferred any
the board members of may have a
different opinion but
we sing by and large that the
system is it continues to to
work that workers receive care
in a timely fashion
employers are able to control
their costs within reason
they're always pressures on the
system in either direction
they're always basis you know
individual cases are
accentuating circumstances that
may not yield the result we all
want but by and large we feel
that that that grand compromise
that was stuck struck in the
early nineties continues to
serve the state.
Continue to serve the state well
you know.
COVID will be an interesting
test to see we've we've seen on
a downward pressure on on rates
for the last six or so years now
and and we haven't yet seen the
impact of the decrease in pay
roll and you know kind of the
the economic downturn in the
last couple of years so that'll
be a challenge but I think the
companies in in good shape it
continues to have the the
fortress balance sheet strength
that it needs to to pay its
obligations and and it'll be
able to respond to you know
whatever comes next so.
Anybody else up the the nominees
want to make a comment about
this issue.
I would I would way and helping
out any chair of the audit and
compliance committee for a
number of years now I continue
to be impressed with how well
the company is managed is Mr
Ritchie was saying there's been
not downward pressure on rates
and despite that but the company
has remained
solid in terms of its balance
sheet and and I think very
consistent in terms of
chair of.
Assignments
it seems like that management
this is works very very hard to
to run the company on a daily
basis and and that and I'm very
conservative and and not a
professional manner so
you know despite the downward
pressure on rates the company
does continue to wrap.
Possible and that's to the
benefit of.
the policy holders and the
citizens of New Mexico.
Yes.
Yeah Mr chair as the policy
holder with a small restaurants
and and you know we we've got
issues around COVID we have had
issues around I'll just regular
business of restaurants finger
lacerations and such and I have
found that New Mexico Mitchell
is very responsive to my
employees names and to provide
me justice Barry small business
they've done some really
innovative upgrades in and
technology making policy
application a lot easier making
on it's a lot easier for the
small businesses of the rates
have been very affordable I
think they were very fair with
us and I'm speaking from the
perspective of a policy holder
not just a member but they have
been very fair I believe to my
business still that you know the
added pressures of of our
increasing expenses haven't
really been reflected in our
premium cost so really
appreciative appreciative of the
organization in in that manner
and and I also as as a on the
other side is a health care
provider today are prompt payers
also to the to the health care
providers like I get to see both
aspects and then I guess the
third aspect is a board member
but they are very high
professional they're always
looking for better solutions and
better ways of balancing the
needs of both the employees who
are covered and employers to
provide insurance to the.
so this is an unfair question
for you Christina but.
It we were just commenting could
this be a model that we would
use.
For the issue of.
All medical liability you know
the we we just went through the
whole
Controversial issue of the of
the.
Raising the caps and and the
changing the the the
Ms for the insurance medical
malpractice insurance for
hospitals and for doctors and
and and now we're finding that
there is very few insurance
companies willing to tackle this
it's not a profitable area
unless the rates get so high
that.
That they become unaffordable
would this model possibly in
your mind could we adapt this
model somehow to that issue and
create our own mutual of medical
liability insurance company.
I think it would be you know
it's it's very very different
because when you're looking at
the at the things that are paid
out very very different when
you're looking at and then
malpractice claim is supposed to
ensure in you know unemployed
entry claim so you would have to
get actuarial to get in there to
see if that's something that the
state could even sustained and
and it's it's unfortunate that
you know my hospital is not
under the met Mel Act it's under
the point claim act because
we're governmental but we did
see an increase of thirty
percent and our training for not
practice insurance in October so
the insurance companies and at
least amend militias companies
order as an opportunity to
hard in the market and many of
them pulled out of New Mexico
even though those increases in
the cap limits that did not
affect my hospital we did see
that increase in premium so I
mean it's an incredibly complex
issue and and you know you have
to see how to fund the pull it
probably would be kind of like a
stand on what's already being
done on the issue compensation
fund but a lot more complex a
lot bigger
and in so many many ways a lot
scarier.
Yes well.
Any other comments is.
Then then the.
Once again I just want to thank
you all for.
For for tackling this it is very
important work doing such a good
job and and to let you know that
we're functioning as a
subcommittee today so we won't
be taking a vote today as
Senator Ivey Soto is explained
and senator Wirth
emphasized of what we'll do is
wait till the first day of the
session and then we'll we'll run
through and we have a full
committee here will run through
and take votes on all the
nominees of the period before us
this week
you won't have to be here for
that we'll just go ahead you're
welcome to join in on soon if
you would like but it'll be a
fairly
pro forma activity and then of.
Sometime later in the week it'll
appear is a committee report and
the and and and maybe even the
second week but before we get to
it probably the second week of
the session and and that'll be
when the Senate votes on the
floor to confirm you
you're welcome to come to that
if if we're still not even sure
if we're going to have an in
person session or if it's all
going to be done virtually that
education could participate
virtually if you do if you care
you won't be able to say
anything we'll do we'll just
take the vote on the Senate
floor
but I want to thank you and
thank you the Jeremih Richie for
the work you're doing is as the
what are you the president of
the director what we call you.
I'm sorry yes I I felt introduce
myself I and and I and I
interact with many of you in
different capacities Fund
general counsel vice president
and general counsel for New
Mexico mutual and and thank you
for having us the general
counsel very good thank you so
much thank you all for being
with us.
Absolutely thank you so much
thank you thanks to you all.
Thank you next we'll go to the
nominees for the construction
industry commission we were
deleting John Stroud from that
list these not able to be with
us today.
so we have the Tim nicely the
liberal media's.
John McKinstry Pamela front.
And James Porter echo.
Yes to the construction industry
okay great.
So we have the John McKinstry
joining us welcome.
Thank you.
There is Mr Amit is.
This front.
To nicely good to see you tend.
All we lack is there is James
border go very good.
So Mister Bailey we we
understand you have some the
position that the this like
oversight of this a could you X.
in.
And explain what the
construction industry commission
does.
Mr chairman members the
committee thank you for allowing
us to be here today I am the
director of construction
industries division of these
individuals that you have before
you today that are looking to be
confirmed what sat on that
commission.
On our commissioner CSE
Commission we meet every other
month there is a oversee the and
when we bring up kind of
contract remained for punishment
or somebody needs to look at
license renewal they oversee
this they also were C. and and
approve any new rules that the
more over the division brings
for they are huge part of that
either approving or disapproving
it sometime soon and we back out
from work more hearing sometimes
not like I said they also stand
in place of revoking and
suspension of our contractors if
if we need to for that type of
work as many people as we reach
out and touch the construction
industry there's always somebody
that we're having to deal with
so Senator these folks have said
on the the hearings when a
contractor so chooses in order
to have a hearing as opposed to
accept and what the penalty or
think it's coming their way they
thank you the judge at hearing
and go through that comes.
That thank you.
Thank you Mr Bailey.
What I'm gonna do that just give
each of you a chance to to
familiarize the members of the
subcommittee with your
background and and also to share
with us if you have some some
thoughts about ways in which you
would like to bring a particular
emphasis to the work you do on
the construction industry
commission or if you have some
suggestions for legislators
about ways in which our process
season our policies might be
improved so let's start with you
will just go in order just as
they're listed on the agenda and
Tim nicely is first.
Thank you Mr chair
representative the opportunity
to speak it's been an honor to
serve on the CAP board the last
the last while
I'm a community development guy
I am the a license
representative on the board my
roles students to Representative
the the the people that hire
contractors across the state of
New Mexico
Ground executed element economic
development working in the Rio
Grande nonprofit Rio Grande
community development
corporation and the south valley
economic development center work
on economic development
initiatives with social
entrepreneurs and and for profit
entrepreneurs for the last ten
years last few years I've been
in real estate myself working as
an investor so it's very
interesting sitting on C. ID and
voting and on policies that
directly affect the
profitability of my business and
trying to find a balance
between.
Of social responsibility and you
know in improving roads and
Yeah I guess social
responsibility and personal
profitability are an interesting
line occasionally in our I want
to work
I'm also the board of gross
community coalition and small
business regulatory advisory
board for the City of
Albuquerque I'm personally very
interested in the intersection
of regulation and Oscar ship and
how we can support New Mexico
being a business friendly state
without throwing out our
corporate responsibility as
business people and its
contractors and as a state
entity.
Thank you.
Thank you Tim.
then we go to Philip from it.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Philip from Eunice I have
been working construction for
twenty years over twenty years
in my families plate business
I'm currently a project manager
out my father's company we do
mostly industrial construction
which is national laboratories
and then we do also do occur to
public schools
I have had the opportunity to
work
with national labs performing
various projects I have been
leading our family business as
project manager since two
thousand sixteen I currently am
the qualifying license GB ninety
eight commissioner for the
state.
I have been serving on the
commission since November of two
thousand nineteen I'm honored to
be serving on this outstanding
commission with my fellow
commissioners we do look at
policy codes
finds licensees we also oversee
PSI
working on trying to ensure that
we have contractors licensed and
performing licensed work.
In twenty twenty I have the
honor of serving as the hearing
officer for the twenty eighteen
international conservation code
change
We were
in the twenty I believe the
twenty twelve code and we
brought it up to the twenty
eighteen I was I made the
recommendation to adopt this
code as the commissioner for the
hearing.
On January of twenty twenty one
I was voted by my fellow
commissioners to serve as vice
chair for the C. I. C. up and
the state and I have been
appointed
to serve as a sub committee to
oversee any complaints that come
in from the state towards
contractors that have failed to
meet the criteria set forth by
our codes and performing
unlicensed work in the sub
committee
we review the
non come contemplated actions
the NCAA's and a look at the
various by elections that these
contractors have and with the
subcommittee we myself along
with
the investigators we sit there
and we go through
Pretty much the the notice
not knowing who the contractor
is up to save face that I can to
to meet quorum on some of these
actions pretty much what they
bring forced to is the violation
the response of our.
Of why the violation happened
from the contractor and then the
findings of code violations that
we find adopted in our state
statues from there
myself along with the
investigators we bring up a
recommendation to the commission
when we go enter executive
session to discuss if we are
going to find
The contract companies are we're
going to.
Meets with a.
Like us.
PNC eight point the settlement
agreements and we present these
to the commission and then sit
there and discuss and I do that
discussion and and and express
our.
The significance of the
violations of per our state
statute calls.
Thank you Mr chair felt
committee members.
Very good thank you Mr Amidu's
up next is John McCain street.
Who is in a like thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John against eight I've been
in the industry for going on
thirty years I've been part of
the I was a trustee for the New
Mexico JTC a point of principle
many also I'm a member of the
national elector contractors
association
been serving on this commission
now for a little over two years
like my colleague share I wanna
say it's been an honor to do it
in a learning curve
but.
I really enjoyed the opportunity
to to ensure that our industry
status within Spain Schardin
Clarke providing.
The right regulations the right
policies in order to keep the
consumers with a good product
and a safe product and I'd like
to.
Give kudos to director Bailey
his team for what they do it is
not an easy job amount of
permits the command on the
previews a to amend the
complaint states
you were asking for a
recommendation I would recommend
that we look hard into his
department to help give him some
additional staff to cover the
state in New Mexico then the
work that's in the state we I
sail theme musk
early over work and this has a
lack of.
Person we really probably should
shore that up other than that I
would just be echoing my
colleagues on what we do but I
just wanna say I would.
it's a privilege and an honor to
be on this board and thank you
for your time.
Right.
Thank you just a quick question
following up on that Mr Bailey
you're you're the construction
industry.
Commission is part of is it part
of our all day or is it part of
the General Services.
Mr chairman members committee is
part of our LDS.
And and and do you have they
could positions are you just
need more positions is that.
Well we have this we have thank
you position someone funded they
could positions but we're
constantly in need of you know
with the amount of construction
is going on right now it's it's
over and run over the top so we
we also obviously we do needs
new positions to to help shore
up the not only you know
frontline staff but inspections
a group to thank you so.
Well that's a recurring theme
we've heard that from Senator.
Several of the different
commissions today talking about
the the dilemma when the state
carrying a overall they can see
right which was shocking to me
of twenty three percent.
We have some really
redeployment of our of our
resources to try to change that
it sounds like you're to
division is is one that's been
particularly hard hit by the by
the building boom that's going
on right now.
Mr chair that is that is correct
and another thing that you need
to see ideas want to a local
jurisdiction falters and areas
not like Rio Rancho Albuquerque
but they're seventeen or
eighteen out there when they
falter and they drop and they
lose inspectors I have to on the
drop of the hat pick up all
their work load is not an option
saying you know it's not my job
now I've got to try to gather up
all that extra work put into a
hole with the rest of it and try
to make it work so it's been
three years been extreme
challenge with COVID adding to
it and you know other agencies
are are other building your
jurisdictions where they only
have one or two employees they
lose their employer and then we
have to step in and I don and
county was a big one I mean we
took their electrical over for
three months in in a minute that
was a heavy lift force thank you
for asking.
The we're not the budgeting
committee but we can certainly
express this concern to the
people who sit on finance
committee or the Appropriations
Committee so thank you very much
for bringing that up Mr
McKinstry.
next is a Pamela front.
Chairman and the committee
Pamela for online I
Representative architect the
trucking industry commission.
I have had my own firm.
More hearing out for since
nineteen ninety four are we
focus on energy efficiency and
eco friendly design.
The with.
Representative November twenty
nineteen and if it has been an
honor to.
Top through all of these cases
we can we go over dozens of
cases every time we need what
and.
The construction industry.
Right trying to cover all of all
of this work and our group.
Really consider the Hey.
Delays and trying to protect
both the homeowners and educate
that the contractor.
Very good thank you.
Then finally to Mr bush regular
James Borrego.
Yes thank you.
my name is James Borrego my live
in Santa Fe New Mexico I've been
married to help but chuckle for
over thirty five years now.
I am a degreed engineer coming
out of New Mexico State
University.
And I've been licensed as a
general contractor since
nineteen seventy seven.
My company we Y. Cohn with my
two brothers are licensed that
and then wanted to and in E.
ninety eight.
We started construction in
nineteen seventy seven in Los
crucis
With my brothers when I was just
getting out of college and since
that time I have the pleasure of
be appearing before the Senate
for confirmation two other times
other than this I was
Appointed to the New Mexico
prison board by governor and I
am.
And I acquired confirmation at
that time and I was also
appointed as the region for
universities and schools by
governor Richard St and
reappointed by governor
Martinez.
As for my work history.
Currently I represent the board
for the housing.
that.
Section of the of the.
Construction work.
But in my work history we have
built waste water plants we
have.
Worked at the white sands
missile range building the Mars
facility down there we've done a
number of facilities up in Los
Alamos in secure areas.
We were the project manager for
the Santa Fe County jail which
was over twenty six million
dollars.
We have developed over fifteen
hundred
residential and commercial
building lots.
And probably constructed over
twelve hundred houses
residential housing.
Currently we are still doing
housing and development but
we're also working at
commercial construction we are
the.
Contractors for the lows family
who are who owned the flicking
sent to per se VREs throughout
New Mexico Arizona Colorado we
do all their commercial
construction.
And
I would side with Mr McKinstry
Industries that construction
industry is extremely short
staffed.
Since we work the entire state I
am all of these requesting
inspections and I know that.
Our inspectors are overwhelmed.
So I would suggest having a.
Our look at staffing for the
industry.
But I would stand for additional
questioning of the committee.
Very good thank you Mr border go
and and.
Senator Wirth just a comment
that that last point you made
about the the shortages one that
Mr McKinstry
also made earlier and the Mr
Bailey pointed out that they
again have a very high they can
see right.
Having a hard time covering
the work that there is signed
but also they have to pick up
the ball when the small
community has nobody to do the
inspections I'm gonna send
somebody up to Uniserve I don't
know where else so it it's a
recurring thing we're hearing
from one of Department.
We'll go now to questions from
the committee and and we'll
start with the Senator how do
you thank you Mr chairman that's
what my question is I work for
the foremost national laboratory
and we're seeing the same issues
when it comes to construction
trying to find employees within
the state are we sure that
needing to bring people from out
of state the way the laboratory
is to get these jobs completed.
We do a lot of work up I do
personally but a lot of work up
in Los Alamos to and that's
I think it's a struggle because
it depends on on on who performs
or almost because a lot of times
you have the laboratory itself
that so performs the work and at
that point I do believe that it
is that in this.
Potentially on then but at the
same time I think with COVID
right now in the different type
in that and I'm not trying to
pull mandates and involved
anything so please don't take it
that way but what current
mandates and and how people's
police are on on the vaccine is
made a big it's made it
difficult on everybody to to
provide the.
The right person that they need
so I would suggest that.
We've learned that when you try
to bring in different
contractors that work at Los
Alamos they have a hard time
because of of of the labs in the
requirements that it isn't very
rigorous to work there so.
At it's it's tough to say I
think what amount of work that
we got in the state I think for
the most part we're we're able
to get a man.
But a lot of that depends on
incentives on depending on which
side for example you have an
Intel boom that that's going to
potentially give incentives to
bring person to to invite person
over so at this point we're
fortunate that the in Los Alamos
because the pay range different
in Los Alamos to the to where it
is logistically so hopefully
that that answers your your
question thank you one last
question Mr chairman when it
comes to continuing ed classes
is that the commission that that
approves let's just say if it's
mechanical or electrical courses
does this committee approve
those trainings can continue
that.
Mr chairman members at the allow
me to answer that question
yes we are the ones that are
approve any
education classes for the
construction industry division
director made his team the
bureau chief spring accredited
courses for us to review
electrical mechanical General
all types of of course is to be
able to give us an edge on the
on the ever changing our styles
of construction right you know
from safety to electrical Mexico
changes to safety OSHA you know
We also work you know with with
with local organizations you
know local unions
US training facilities like ABC
contractors all to get up.
Certified apprentices to to to
perform this work through the
training most of these most
these person that we do hire
locally go be anywhere between
four to five year class you know
CNN has a
A great program which you know
unfortunate to sit on the the
HVAC and plumbing advisory
committee and and the the local
unions have been able to work in
conjunction with them to find
the ability for you know
eighteen year olds nineteen
rules to have opportunity to
make more than just a middle
weight and and and that's
enticing that's helping us bring
in the labor to try to fill up
the the the areas that we're
lacking for manpower and and
like Mr McKinstry and miss able
and all of that have stated in
the commission is you know we
are with with the boom that's
hitting New Mexico you know
Intel Amazon
Facebook of Google you know
there's so many things coming
into the state which is great
and and now we're trying to
ensure that we can find ways to
fulfill the needs of manpower
and you know with the support
of.
Of the state you know helping us
meet the demands when it comes
to inspectors and investigators
you know that's that's where
it's crucial I know that there's
one thing that I wanted to bring
up is you know sometimes we.
Have unlicensed work and.
Some of the criminal fines are
in the in the tens to hundreds
of thousands of dollars and.
Those fines go straight to the
state obligation fought and and
you know.
What what some people have
mentioned is maybe trying to
keep that within the C. I. C.
commission Division the
construction industry division
to be able to us to help bring
in some of the resources that
they need to break it thank you
Mr chairman the reason why I
asked that question is northern
New Mexico college's bringing
and trades and construction in
an effort to ensure that we can
feel the jobs in northern New
Mexico we're we're seeing a lot
of employees that can fill those
positions thank you so much to
this commission from the to do
and thank you for taking the
time to answer my questions
thank you Mr chairman this thank
you senator Senator Wirth you go
next just just a quick comments
and I apologize for being a
little bit late jumping in and
out I just wanted to thank each
and everyone of you for stepping
up and being willing to serve
and I must say I saw Mr break
goes name on this list and why
the number of different rules
you have served in over the
years regents and it goes all
the way back I think to the and
I administration so I just I
want to personally thank you as
a fellow Santa Fe in for.
Seven up again to be willing to
help in this manner so the these
are.
Sometimes thankless positions I
think we can relate to that to
some extent.
Given what we're all doing here
in a volunteer capacity but it's
really really important and as
someone who does you know not so
much now actively practice
construction law but I do a lot
of mediation so I see these
cases and see the disputes that
happen and I just think having a
system that's that's really
they're enforcing is critically
important to kind of prevent the
bad things that can happen and
and and all of our constituents
can really get hurt when when I
was on licence folks and
different things get out of
control so again thank you all
for stepping up and really
appreciate it.
Thank you for Stewart.
Thank you Mr chair can you hear
me yes
so thank you so much of the
because Mr Borrego who started
to talk about the inspector
issue I have been hearing about
this for many years and it's not
just that we don't have enough
it's that we seem to have too
much regulation around when they
go out what they can do who can
be in the inspector and who
can't and I'm just wondering in
Urals conversations about this
if you have come up with some
things that we can do to make
this better means not having an
inspector
as you know this much better
than I do through out a
construction project just slows
everything down you can have
things just trying to a halt and
we're about to get so much more
money for construction so what
can the state to what the
legislature to what do we need
to turn the corner on this is
just for me it's not yes having
enough or having a salary that
will attract them it's also the
the red tape that we have put in
place around these the sector
jobs and all taken answer from
anyone.
Mister chairman Senator this is
clear after that's always
challenges you know one thing
about the inspector it's the
final line in the strand right I
mean they are required to be
more educated and are are maybe
not so much more educated look
more up experienced out in there
because they're doing the final
call for the last person that's
going to be there for you to
have the there are commercial
building or house or any of that
safely and put in place we have
a lot of great great contractors
but we also have a handful that
can sure cut some corners and
causing problems we look at you
know bring him on trying to
train more early a lot of it's
just the manpower in the work
force and how many we have back
there behind us it seems to be a
constant issue and it always
will be part of that goes back
to the fact that by the time you
get to the inspector grade you
know you're you're getting
toward the tail end of the
career stated the front end I
mean if if I get an inspector in
here in just forty cents that's
a great thing but generally
speaking they're still out you
know just to our turning
wrenches swing and hammers and
building it and and make the box
that they that's what they're
doing and then as they start
aging and you know where they
can come up down the ladders I
start coming over to our side.
Most recently the real challenge
has been though is this shortage
not just an inspector but as
we've talked today about the
shortage within the industry for
help so for the first time since
I've experienced this compete in
you know I'm Losin staffing to
say industries that are able to
pay more now the used never
right mine sectors but now
industry right inspectors to
they're all coming after ten
twenty dollars an hour higher so
it does go back to a lot of its
financial.
When you're trying to hold these
positions how old I'm always
concerned about we can the
requirements in an inspector for
the reasons I said that were the
final line where the I mean
everybody to make a mistake
you're hopeful that the
inspector the final person out
there is very aware of his
responsibility and what he needs
to do to make sure that the
product is completed and
finished.
I hope that answers it somewhat
thank you.
Right now.
Thank you with that as we call
it that we can't find the
solutions to you know what to
look at it in a different way
because it's really keeping us
back so I want to add my thanks
to you all for serving in this
capacity to thank you Mr
chairman.
I'm in thank you Senator Stewart
I'm intrigued by the.
By the idea of of
Mr Amidu's I think running for
the.
Retaining the finds some
hurricane defines in using
those.
Maybe maybe that's something for
us to explore away potentially
for you to hire
term basis inspectors who could
help you cover those areas of
the state that that suddenly
come up short and and and rather
than have to use your regular
staff you could hire somebody
more locally who is an
experienced contractor and and
get after it.
anyhow it's intriguing I don't
want to at the same time create
an incentive for you to to deal
with staff problems but by
living larger fines.
Avoid that would be good.
and I want to thank you for for
your your willingness to serve
at a quick couple of quick
questions that I would put under
the label of idle curiosity and
then my first one is for pan
front.
Those wonderful amazing off the
grid.
A solar houses west of the.
Are you and bridge is that we're
we're you work do you do a lot
of work out there with those
incredible.
Ship.
I did work there in the early
nineties but it's been quite
some time.
But I did learn that day or
about have you.
Have you completely operated but
we no longer use higher.
When bill group ram there and
and the Dobie and super
insulated frame but also do
solar panel are passive solar
heating for homes are hello I
have a lot more.
That we're we're very happy that
New Mexico is making so many
great strides toward operated
power.
And are you looking at community
solar installations is that
something that that you've
identified as a possibility.
That large we're more on the.
Do it more in an individual
basis we're.
In my particular office.
Second to idle curiosity
question is for Mr bordering on.
You share a name with the with a
NBA basketball coach is he any
relation of yours he is a
graduate of Albuquerque academy.
He probably is a real
Representative relative of mine
we've become the the weeds over
here for two or three hundred
years already.
It is not a closing of relative
that you you that you mentioned
in that our claim them in
anyway.
There are.
The last.
All right well thank you and I
want to join all of my
colleagues on the committee and
thanking you very impressive
group we really look forward to
to be continued excellence in
the in the work of the
commission and and Esther Bailey
we we we we can figure out a way
to get to some some help with
those inspectors
as as we mentioned before we
will be voting on your
individual nominations today
were just functioning as a
subcommittee today up next week
when the state session begins
during one of our rules hearings
will probably vote on all of
your nominations and that'll be
done I imagine virtually so you
could join in but we wouldn't we
wouldn't be asking any questions
or even give you a chance to to
make anymore statements then
probably by the second week of
the session will be a floor
session where you were will have
the committee's report on you
will.
Done by the full Senate.
And and again
we're particularly if we're
dealing with this virtually
you're welcome to join in but
you won't be able to say
anything and if if we're if we
have an option for having
visitors come in you you could
come into the session and be
recognized at least in person.
in any case you could be
recognized on the zoom we have
the big zoom screen up and if
your we we would be able to to
acknowledge you and and and
thank you for your work it
assuming you your vote clears
and and and it's always very
touching go on these boats.
Your board thank you all so much
for for being here and and being
willing to to serve the state of
New Mexico.
And the and the one member who
wasn't able to join us today
Mister Stroud we have every is
the reschedule.
We'll do him during session the
next week or after that so thank
you all very much.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
NEC thank you thank you thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
go now to the environmental
improvement board we have two
appointments to that.
Karen Garcia.
And William quits hunkered.
Those Mr Kirk and carriers here
good.
Thank you all for joining us.
Thank you for for stepping up
and and being willing to serve
we were functioning as a
subcommittee but we would love
to hear from you
some of your background what
what what makes you interested
in serving on the environmental
improvement board and then if
you have some issues that you
here's a golden opportunity for
you to identify some things that
you you wish the Legislature
were taking more seriously or
you wish they wouldn't take it
quite so seriously depending on
your views but but the you've
got the opportunity here to
speak freely with us for a few
minutes before we ask questions
ourselves so let's start with
you Mr Seah Mr chair yes hello
you I am good I am a sponsor and
again I I'd like to say a few
words because because miss
Garcia is someone who actually
we know very well from all her
work as an analyst for the
Senate Democrats on the Senate
conservation committee and
during the time.
I believe it overlap the time
that I was the chair
yes I see a shake of the head we
got a chance to work with care
and on it when I saw.
Her name come through and her
willingness to step up and serve
I just I do want to say a few
words about her background
because I think she really is
someone who is perfect for the
environmental improvement board
and I thank the governor for
this appointment Karen has a
long background of working with
the Environment Department
energy minerals and the
department of health and
training in specific areas of
environmental science
she also served as the deputy
cabinet secretary of the New
Mexico energy minerals and
natural resources departments
and again I think what what you
know what we're looking for and
what the governor's looking for
with the environmental treatment
for is someone who has the
ability it's the and work with
some of the technical issues are
that that come before that board
and understand the consequences
of some of the actions that
that.
Related decisions made by the
environmental improvement for
that I just again having worked
with caring for number of years
and.
Seeing what she brings in terms
of background think this is a
fantastic pack so I appreciate
just being able to say a few
words and maybe with Mr chairman
Coble just transition right to
the Karen herself as to why
she's qualified and willing to
do this and and kind of issues
for the environment improvement
board and and I just want to
note that TV Selena is doing
this and and are you with the E.
ID.
Are you.
Mr Chairman members of the
committee I am I am with the
environmental improvement board
on the current chair of the
environmental improvement board.
So after we've after we've.
We're not confirming you though
you are are we confirm you know
you just want to speak on behalf
of these to well let's let them
eat speak them of we'll go to
you than the sweet thank you.
Go ahead care.
Thank you
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and I thank you so
much Senator Wirth as well
reintroduction so I'm very
honored to the on the
environmental improvement board
I was appointed in August of
twenty nineteen and so I've I've
been able to serve for a little
while now and to give you a
little bit of information about
my background I have a degree in
wildlife biology from New Mexico
State University.
And our as Mr as senator Wirth
mentioned I worked in the
environment department for many
years and also in the energy
minerals and natural resources
department so I have a really
good handle and
Regulatory issues and the world
of regulation and how it works
and
most of my career was as an
environmental regulator intact
and because of my science
background it's very helpful in
understanding many of the
complex issues to come before
the board of there's a lot of
very complicated issues that
come before the board and and
it's very helpful to have this
background to be able to
understand the issues that we
face and I'm very honored to be
on the board thank you.
Thank you Karen Mr of.
could contract.
Thank you Mr chair and and.
Any members that by the way
consists month Milan which
usually gets amended I don not
know how to act so prominent on
the on the list of attendees
that it's it's way more or or
bill Hocker at.
And it's it's an honor to appear
before you today and like ms
Garcia I've been serving on the
environmental improvement board
in my case since February of
twenty twenty one it's been a
great honor to serve with with
my my co members
Mr Burciaga chair Selena and and
the others I've found them to be
Very smart very engaged very
committed the astute questions
and and it's it's been a great.
Great honor and pleasure of
serving with them
by what way in my background I
have a bachelors in
environmental science from the
university of Oklahoma in
nineteen seventy five masters
and learn of science from the
university of Texas at Dallas
nineteen eighty five I am a
registered professional engineer
in the state of Texas.
And I worked forty two years for
the US environmental protection
agency all of it in Dallas in
the region six office which
handles New Mexico and for other
states.
During my V. a career a worked
in just about every program area
I started and ended my career in
the water program handling
surface water drinking water
wetlands and other water issues
I spent sixteen years in the
hazardous waste program
nine of those handing are
hazardous waste program of
permitting program dealing with
facilities like Los Alamos
Sandia.
And that in fact handling the
initial permitting of the whip
facility in Carlsbad
I also add the regions of clean
air act enforcement program for
two years before coming back to
the water program for my final
does dozen years or so with the
agency where I was the deputy
director and then the director
of the water division for the
region
And so that in the course of
that experience on I not only
got a lot of understanding of
the technical ins and outs and
regulatory ins and outs of of
ETA's program but I also dealt a
lot with the state of New Mexico
with issues at the state and
local level here dealt with both
the
NMED and the energy and minerals
department over this course of
my career also dealt with a lot
of the pueblos and tribes on on
water issues especially in my
time I retired at the end of
twenty seventeen move to proceed
just and while I'm not a native
New Mexico and.
I give you an understanding of
how I how I've gotten to the
familiar with and and pointed
with environmental issues in the
state during the course of my
EPA career also personally I
became.
Enamored with the state with my
first job assignment with the
EPA back in nineteen seventy
five and already was thinking
about moving here at that long
ago
So as I said I've been serving
on the ideation separating of
twenty twenty one I found that
are very rewarding way to apply
my career of service to the
issues that are now being before
the board which are some some
very substantial and
and visible issues that that
affect New Mexicans throughout
the state so I would appreciate
your support and continuing my
service on the board and I think
all of you for your service to
the state thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Hawker
then let's go to this we know
that to see if she wants to say
anything about these two
nominees.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
appreciate the opportunity to
provide some additional support
and words in support of both
miss Garcia Mr hunker
do over the years I've served on
the board with miss Garcia have
been a wonderful and I'm honored
and humbled to be able to serve
alongside her she's provided a
wealth of experience expertise
and background on a number of
issues that have come before the
E. ID and as we continue to
navigate the upcoming issues and
those that are on our docket
right now I know she has
provided you know really well
framed questions as to the
issues and really thorough in
her analysis as well as her
background how should that
incorporates in her
recommendations for decisions
that we've had to make on
regarding that yeah I'd be
issues and as I shared a moment
ago a goal that we have some
ongoing issues that really the
board relies a lot on her.
Experience and expertise on
those particular issues that are
that we are continuing to move
forward to resolve and to make
decisions upon and and Mr hunger
as well I've had the honor and
pleasure of.
Meeting a number of his letters
and documents as when I have
worked out that Los Alamos
National Laboratory with his
oversight and are running the
EPA programs and some of the
hazardous waste bureau programs
from EPA when I used to work at
the laboratory so it was a
pleasure for me fast fourteen
years after I first read those
letters that Mr hunker sent to
the laboratory taxing meat the
individual that had had written
those letters and also a
pleasure to serve alongside
Mister hunker again as you've
heard from his background a
wealth of experience in the
repertory round which is
something we need for our our
regulations and rules here in
New Mexico to have background
and to know how things fit
especially from the federal
level to the state level that
experiences it is just so is
central on the board so for the
both of my fellow committee
members that I've been serving
with I support their appointment
and Mr chairman and members of
the committee I I appreciate
your service to our state of New
Mexico and thank you for the
opportunity to provide some
comment thank you.
Thank you very much miss we.
Well then we'll go to members of
the committee the.
Question Senator how many of the
start with you thank you so much
Mr chairman and mine is just a
comment Mr hunger I was the
chief of staff at two fifty five
and work with you closely at Los
Alamos National Laboratory and
so so good to see you on the
screen today and knowing that
you're continuing to serve the
state of New Mexico we miss
seeing you at the laboratory and
I know you bring a wealth of
knowledge to this committee and
I'm so happy to see you again
and I want to thank all of you
for your service my name is just
a comment thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman
What great candidates we have I
wanted to do a shout out for
a few the sweetness of Phoebe.
a tribal member she's an
engineer and she served with me
and Benny Shendo and Terry
Sloan.
And and Idaho Republican on a
panel at the council of state
governments on water in the west
and tribal consultation.
It was so phenomenal and I was
so proud that I had appointed
Phoebe to Rita renewable energy
transition act to allow her to
have that kind of audience you
could you could hear a pin drop
in that room listening to Phoebe
and Terry and Benny Shendo in
particular it was so
unbelievable so I just wanted to
thank her for that I have for
bought your chair of the
environmental improvement for
property you're busy.
So it's great to see you and and
thank you to billing care and to
this is the environmental
program four is one of our most
important point in my estimation
and what we are going to do in
the session to try to pass again
the clean fuel standard that
will come directly to the
environmental improvement board
over the next two years for
there to help to have them help
us figure out how we're going to
do that market face credits for
the clean fuel so thank you to
all of you good to see you again
Phoebe and the thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Stewart.
Anybody else I I just wanted to
see if either of you had any
comments for the legislature is
about concerns you have issues
we may of the not been paying
adequate attention to.
Mr chairman I would I would only
echo what many of the previous
Folks today talked about which
was the vacancy rate also with
the environment department is a
very serious speaking to right
now I know that as they come
before the environment
improvement board they are very
overwhelmed with the amount of
work they have in not enough
bodies so it's I know it's an
ongoing issue across state
government but I just wanted to
mention that as well thank you.
Yes.
Yes Mister hunker go ahead yeah
I would just second what Karen
says
the
a lot of our work is dependent
on the staff work that NMED can
get to us and that is obviously
impacted by by the staffing
issues that that you heard
earlier
from personal board candidates
are are throughout the state
government so anything you can
do to help that would be great.
Thank you both I suppose you you
did over here then during a
previous hearing the figure
twenty three percent vacancy
rate across state government and
the the kind of ripple effect
that has on the effectiveness of
of what we try to do in state
government.
Well we will be voting on your
nominations today is a mention
is subcommittee but
we will when we the.
Meet during the session next
week I I suppose either a
Wednesday or Friday hearing next
week we will vote in the
committee of the whole not
committee the whole bit of a
full committee and to and then
pass it on to the floor probably
the second week there would be a
hearing on the floor of where we
would of have the full Senate
vote on your on your nominations
and you can very welcome to
attend those virtually we're
still not sure about in person
but certainly virtually you
could attend and and be
acknowledged we would be able to
see you on the screen and and
you you'd be there in electronic
person of all the vote on your
nomination so thank you again
thank you miss we know for your
work and for your comments today
and we hope to see you next week
or the week after.
Thank you very much thank you
elected me is the final nominee
today is for the labor
industrial commission and it's
it's James Edward Baylor I
course.
Good to get to see the strikers
and we have with this
of your London Montoya Cordova.
Good to see you.
why don't you what we start with
you you wanted to say a few
words of so we have a background
in will give Mr
Baylor I course you go by Baylor
I course to pull both names or
just by Eichorst.
Unfortunately both thanks in
part.
It is it to name person myself
but I understand.
The unit yeah Ivey Soto.
This is all right so let's go
and we have Montoya court of as
well so this is we're becoming a
little more prominent to.
The go ahead you'll want to give
us a little bit of background
yes good afternoon members of
the committee thank you so much
for the opportunity to present
our nominee for our labor
industrial commission this
commission is important to to
our agency for the department of
workforce solutions as a group
that helps us and hearings are
when we can't get to agreement
and we'll look at those
situations when we have
a dispute months to
an employee employer relations
and they help us with those and
we were really fortunate that
Mister I course is interested in
being part of that commission
it's a it's a pretty active we
definitely have on going
meetings and we appreciate his
willingness to serve.
And you want to hear that you're
the deputy secretary yes I
apologize yes a lot of into a
court of the W. secretary for
the department of workforce
solutions and in my oversight
also oversee the labor relations
Department which this is
connected to and so with labor
relations we have oversight for
wage and hour on public works
projects and as soon to be
adding HB twenty around paid
sick leave.
Thank you want to so Mr Mr
Baylor Eichorst here's your
chance to familiarize us with
who you are and what you bring
to this post and also to to do
this opportunity if there's
anything you want to bring to
the attention of the of the of
the of the random group of
legislators who are gathered
here.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
I'm here today
I'm not iterations manager for
JD Anderson construction based
Albuquerque New Mexico
we specialize in high tech
government nuclear semiconductor
projects like building and HVAC
fabrication shops and operatives
well we're currently in the
process of building another
twenty five school twenty five
thousand square foot of
fabrication space right now for
some of the.
Growth of the states in we
currently have projects
throughout the state from caps
to units on the member of the
mechanical contractors
association American
subcontractors association
market general contractors
association and several others
kind of the lack of in the in
the construction industry for
over twenty nine years now have
a vested interest in ensuring
we.
Of all of our New Mexico
contractors training employees
fair and paying what they
should.
This is basically what the labor
industrial commission does in
the best someone fails to pay
their employees correctly.
Based on the same page
terminations we arbitrate it is
our company we've had the
misfortune of going in behind
some unqualified contractors in
the past.
And had to make required
corrections to try to bring the
soldiers of the code where.
Contractors should have never
been qualified project for
actually in the door.
Your question issues any issues
that the legislators are to be
aware of that that need our
attention.
You know I'm gonna say the
biggest issue that the that we
have right now construction as a
whole is manpower we've we've
already started bringing in.
Out of state folks because we've
seen huge banks at Intel's the
Facebook stuff like that and one
of the things it's really been.
Hard for us to deal with right
now I think the COVID things
been our program to build
by the board but.
Trying to figure out how to
attract people to the state.
And on top of that trying to
attract people that are
vaccinated has become a little
bit rock
we have the majority of our
company is vaccinated.
But when you start bringing in
folks from Texas from Arizona
from Colorado we're seeing more
and more folks that are not and
so it's really kind of tied our
hands on some of these projects
that's the only thing I that's
the biggest issue we've got
right now just manning our
projects.
Okay.
Thank you very much of Mr Baylor
I course so let's.
Go to the committee then for
questions from the committee.
Senator Pirtle.
You start as a.
Thank you Mr chair can you.
Talk a little bit more what was
the the issue with.
The projects and vaccination so
what are the requirements for
for these jobs were requiring
vaccination status to get these
contracts in my understanding
that correctly
yes Sir more and more facilities
requiring some form of
vaccination from Facebook to
entail they're all kind of
following.
What the federal mandates are
kind of on hold right now for
but because of that it's we've
got some folks that are willing
to come in because they're not
sure how it's gonna play out.
there some of our projects there
that they're allowed to do
weekly testing on we got a
project in Eunice New Mexico
where whether were vaccinated or
not our folks after yes twice a
week.
And that's just a vaccination
status on on that side it is yes
sure it's it's a pretty critical
site and they want to make sure
that no one.
Comes in and says everybody else
all and that that I appreciate
that the that actually makes the
most sense of of any of some of
these crazy.
US policies that have been put
in place because in the in the
most recent months we've seen
that even the vaccinated can
contract COVID which is what
we've known for for quite some
time but now finally the media's
is reporting it and so I think
that's the best thing we can do
I'm not sure how we get the
Facebook and and some of those
and so we don't want to stop
progress but if we just test
everybody equally treat everyone
as equals you know as as people
and as humans we can move along
and and get through this and all
in a much more cohesive way so
hopefully more more communities
like that if you Eunice I think
is what you said I understand
that to keep everyone safe we
need to test everybody equally
and that if somebody chooses not
to be vaccinated the only person
who's putting is put at risk is
is that individual that makes
that definition or that decision
so I think that's the best way
is if we test everyone in
understand that everybody can
pass of COVID that that you know
will be able to move along so I
do appreciate that thank you.
But.
Anybody else.
I had a question for you Mr
Baylor Act first on on the
pipeline the the the
apprenticeship programs and so
on or are there ways in which we
need to figure out how to get
more people into the the trade
the construction trades
particularly the the the the
ones that did that that you're
familiar with.
Yes yes Sir actually I don't
know exactly how to do it but I
know we do a lot of work with a
lot of the unions here in New
Mexico
And.
I know that there's a few of
them actually receive state
funding for some of their
friendship programs the problem
with that is it kind of ties
their hands on certain in
certain cases when they're
trying to bring in new
apprentice if we have just for
instance if we have someone come
knock on our door I'd like to be
in the trade I'd like to be a
well and we have the ability to
put in the work
it's included on the hall in
say you know could you please
there's there's a long process
to get on that on that list so
if there was some way to to help
help those kind of associations
to streamline that effort get
the guys in faster
I know they've done a ton of
stuff to try to recruit and
recruit.
But these days there's not that
many kids that really want to go
down this road I think the.
That kind of way that the
schools and everybody else is
kind of course people for years
is now the only way you're going
to succeed in life is to go to
college and get that degree and
there's a there's another option
for a lot of lot of folks back
when I was in school I was
always told you in the
construction that was you know
everything else failed you can
go to this is your fault.
But I know that I I work with a
lot of folks that have the
grease and and.
we've got a lot of folks in the
construction trades that have
degrees I have nothing to do
with the construction trades but
they came into this because I
like working with their hands
and they were making better
money than what they want
school.
I recently heard
that talk in Albuquerque by.
A young man who would.
Been sent to prison at age
seventeen.
And was released after eighteen
years in prison this is an he
was in in Angola in fact in
Louisiana.
And
During during his time in prison
he took advantage of every every
training that came up first you
guys need to do then you got a
degree in Bible studies then you
got a degree in counseling then
he got auto mechanic
certification then you got H.
back certification and what do
upon his release he was
immediately hired by the H. back
contractors.
Who.
Now is promoted in the now you
know now he's he's is
essentially running the company
for this man.
the past the success that he
would never of had but he took
advantage of everything that was
offered and I and I would love
to see our our correction system
get with that and start offering
as many.
Traits as possible the training
in as many trades as possible so
that when they got out they
would have a path to success the
that wouldn't be in the.
Handicapped anyway by any record
that they might have had for a
crime committed when they were
much younger.
Yeah but.
Yeah well Senator Wirth so I did
I just as I'm looking at the
statute that created this
commission I see that it's
relatively new twenty sixteen it
do I have that.
Correct that the commission was
actually created in twenty
sixteen or was that a where we
changing the statute in twenty
sixteen and.
Yes I'll have to get back to
what I think we might have been
changing it because I know that
it's existed I've been over at
DWS since two thousand sixteen
but I know it existed prior to
that so they might have just
been so rule changes that I'll
have to verify that and I can
get that information for you.
That I just trying to figure out
exactly what the.
So the commission is three
members do I have that.
Yes Sir and the function of the
commission is it is it advisory
or does it actually have do you
guys actually do do hearings in
front of the commission whether
testimony taken.
It's the latter we do that it's
an actual hearing we we actually
hear the case and a decision is
made that's why it's three
members so it couldn't be a tie.
And so is the decision of the
commission Mr chair the decision
the commission.
Binding or the done as a
recommendation to the secretary
had hands that just putting a
lawyer have here I'm just
curious about how it works you
know I'm gonna have to get back
to you on that one too because I
think it's a recommendation to
the secretary and then secretary
just out here is that and then
it becomes finding after that I
believe that's the function but
I'll clarify that for sure you
know I appreciate that and I'll
just say of Mr Baylor I parked
Eichorst yes Sir much appreciate
you being willing to step up and
take this on top of all the
other work you do.
You know in your in your daily
life this isn't the more
important roles and again we
very much appreciate the state
level willing to do this and I
think certainly commend the
governor for appointee you for
this position that's all I have
Mister chair thanks.
Well we will be taking at a vote
today we're we're of functioning
as a subcommittee.
But at the first meeting of this
Senate rules committee after the
session starts will probably at
that time go ahead and finalize
the the the recommendation on
your nomination send it to the
full Senate and I imagine in the
second week of the of the full
Senate there will be a
a vote taken on your nomination
on this of the Senate rules
committee's recommendation about
your nomination and that would I
imagine be virtual and and you'd
be welcome to join us for that
you're you're you're we would be
able to see you on the big
screen and and you could receive
recognition from the Senate
during that event if if you can
get away from your other work
but we'll keep and keep in touch
with you about that.
And again thank you so much for
being willing to to do this work
it's important in the whole
state benefits from.
Thank you Mr chairman Senators
and you want to thank you thank
you so much and thank you deputy
secretary of monthly a core of
a.
Thank you.
