Senator Hemphill here.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Paul.
Senator Rodriguez.
Be quiet okay.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
There.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
church of Santa Fe and please
remain standing for the pledge
of allegiance to be led today by
Senator pope the pledge of
allegiance and Spanish to be led
today by Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
Mr president I believe that.
Our Reverend is there and just
efforts on behalf of our state
in these extraordinary.
I know that you watch the news I
know you've seen the graphs in
the charts of oceans rising and
to imagine anything else and I
know that that makes your work
are more fraught and more
But what different future where
possible.
classism thanks for democracy by
the erratic behavior of I'm in
rural.
In a moment to the fragment of
this essay she wrote.
Pandemics have forced humans to
break with the past and imagine
their world in New this one is
right to participate with our
Abaris our data banks into debt
ideas are dead rivers and smoky
skies behind.
What if we are not heroes
challenge instead of lightly
through that portal for the
future with things have turned
imagining schooling and housing
and energy and health care
access to.
And living wages protecting our
wilderness and transforming our
economy.
Simply working vented dystopian
future is exhausting and
dispiriting and difficult state.
Moving toward a future which is
of you to join me in and imagine
just for a few moments.
At each.
The one where you push the work
of this session and it
eyes and imagine that
are not you Royce speaks see it
clearly make it as real as you
possibly can and then if you
future in related in part of the
wise buses you have made the
session.
Positive act as you.
Representative.
Your voices and conversation
bird song the last.
You the breeze against your
cheek and the warm sun on your
C..
Thank you you.
Who is there with you.
Take a breath.
And come on back to twenty
twenty one.
What was it like.
That future use.
It makes your heart sing.
insurmountable as I know there's
some funds.
Refresher resolve.
I closing your eyes and walking
back to that imaginary door and
children's children the laughter
of our children's children's.
I the decision.
Then.
Pledge allegiance to the flag of
the United States of America.
And to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
Well done I love under the law
system.
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
We are order business announces
miscellaneous thank you Mr
have a diverse representation of
in vocations and spiritual
thoughts at the beginning of the
session and I particularly
appreciated getting a chance to
take a break from twenty twenty
Members and the public if I
could.
So regarding capital outlay and
this is important for the public
to hear as well as members the
o'clock so we have a week to do
that to fill out the form
online.
And then to sponsor capital
outlay requests the deadline is
basically we all need to sponsor
the items that we want to
present.
Are the deadline for requesting
bill drafts by the Legislative
Council is Thursday February
One other announcements of we're
going to do a certificate of
condolence.
For the family of father Richard
all forty three twelve forty two
in the lieutenant governor so I
do think you'll be appropriate
for all of us to sign that
certificates.
And basically what I'm gonna
want to give a heads up on that.
So I'll deal to other members
for announcements before I do a
kind of road map what we're
hi I want to comment on river
mariners.
Prayer and yeah I really
appreciate the fact that she
affirm life.
And the fact that all life is
precious.
An interesting thing happened
when when that came to my home
my wife opened it up and and you
all know I have a three year old
grandson that's that's living
with me at least until this
weekend.
and.
Conception.
But we still own a baby that we.
In our society and we and our
state.
sacred that all life is to be
valued.
And even my three year old
grandson who would revert really
even talked about this issue.
that it's okay to murder that
life to take that life.
So I really appreciate the
affirmation of life that all
life is sacred.
like our constitution says life
liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.
Yes everyone needs to be treated
equally.
some even after that to take
that life.
So I do appreciate that I
appreciate the affirmation of
life and I hope that we will all
remember that every life is
sacred.
president members of the Senate
unanimous.
Consented to excuse except for
purposes of the call Senator
Say no further announcements
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so just a
road map for the members and the
About a hundred and sixty plus
bills to introduce we have some
committee reports to do what
we're gonna do first is go
break to allow our our reader to
keep his vocal cords solid and
also everyone to just get a
chance to use the restroom at
center and then we'll come back
and finish the introduction of
basically obviously this is new
for all of us.
And we've had you know
interesting import some credit
some critical some incredibly
to keep working on the process
presume that's something that
will continue and I just want
again a stated up front just ask
for patience as we work our way
that order business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
Senate bill I introduced by
senator my nose and act relating
to business amending definitions
imposed on certain economic
development projects may be
provided as public support for
the projects changing the name
of the local and regional
economic development support
businesses to reimburse rent and
lease payments from funding
transferred to the Economic
Development Department from the
severance tax permanent fund
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
Bill I Senate bill twelve
introduced by Senator Ivy Soto
and act relating to notarial
Torio notarial acts Senate bill
twelve.
Senate bill twelve having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
An act relating to controlled
substances and acting the
cannabis regulation Act and
acting the cannabis tax act
creating the cannabis regulation
division in the regulation
program creating the low income
medical patient assistance fund
providing for distributions to
local governments from cannabis
sales tax revenue amending
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee and Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill thirteen.
Senate bill fourteen introduced
vote or update an existing
certificate of registration
through an automatic voter
registration system.
Directing the motor vehicle
division of the taxation and
revenue department and other
agencies designated by the
opportunity for a person to opt
out of being registered to vote
making conforming changes Senate
bill fourteen Senate bill
fourteen having been read twice
three introduced by senator of
Roberto Bobby Gonzales.
And act relating to aviation and
acting the rural air service
enhancement act making
transportation committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one thirty three Senate
bill one thirty four introduced
by Senator Diamond and act
relating to courts providing
mileage Senate bill one thirty
four Senate bill one thirty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Garrett an act relating to
higher education creating the
opportunity scholarship act
creating the opportunity
scholarship fund providing for
loop lottery tuition
scholarships for certain
and referred to the Senate
Education Committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one thirty five Senate bill one
thirty six introduced by Senator
souls and act relating to liquor
control providing that a local
bill one thirty six Senate bill
one thirty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee then
Senate tax business and
transportation committee Senate
the New Mexico finance authority
to make loans or grants from the
water project fund for certain
water project declaring an
emergency Senate bill one thirty
seven Senate bill one thirty
by Senator Campos and act making
appropriation to the office of
the state engineer for statewide
dam projects Senate bill one
thirty eight Senate bill one
thirty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
appropriation to the public
education department for the K.
A. N. W. educational radio
station Senate bill one thirty
nine Senate bill one third.
introduced by Senator Kernan.
An act relating to domestic
affairs updating child support
provisions providing for the
imputation of income providing
providing duties requiring a
report providing that the health
care needs of a minor child are
an adequate basis for
modification of a child support
that fees relating to
adjudicating percentage not be
ordered to be paid later than
three years from the date of
filing for child support
providing that retroactive child
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
that Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one forty Senate
bill one forty one introduced by
Senator Duhigg an act relating
sanctions before imposing
carceral sentencing.
Senate bill one forty one Senate
bill one forty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
introduced by Senator Brandt and
act relating to crime making a
threat of a shooting unlawful
Senate bill one forty two Senate
bill one forty two having been
finance Senate bill one forty
two Senate bill one forty three
introduced by Senator Campos for
the legislative finance
committee an act relating to
public project enacting the
public private partnership
project fund authorizing grants
loans and bonds providing powers
and duties requiring reports
Senate bill one forty three
Senate bill one forty three
bill one forty three Senate bill
one forty four introduced by
Senator Campos for the
legislative finance committee an
act relating to education
including hardware necessary to
public school capital outlay act
requiring the public school out
the capital outlay council to
establish guidelines to fund
education technology
infrastructure to ensure that
forty four Senate bill one forty
floor having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one forty
five Senate bill one forty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee that Senate
finance Senate bill one forty
in the state defense force in
the case of certain events
establishing the New Mexico
state defense force amending
repealing and enacting sections
of the New Mexico military code
committee then Senate Judiciary
Senate bill one forty six Senate
bill one forty seven introduced
by Senator Gallegos an act
relating to motor vehicles
amending sections of the
mandatory financial
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee and Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one forty
seven Senate bill one forty
eight introduced by Senator
commission to develop a long
term plan to transform public
education in New Mexico making
appropriation Senate bill one
forty eight Senate bill one
forty eight having been read
Sedillo Lopez and act relating
to natural resources prohibiting
the issuance of the new
hydraulic fracturing permits
creating reporting requirements
Judiciary Committee that Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one forty nine Senate bill one
fifty introduced by Senator
Campos and act making
appropriation for local youth
programs in northern New Mexico
Senate bill one fifty Senate
bill one fifty one introduced by
Senator Gallegos an act relating
to higher education and acting
the instructional support
provider loan repayment act
referred to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
Senate bill one fifty one Senate
bill one fifty two introduced by
Senator Tallman an act relating
continuing Care Act reported
from any source Senate bill one
fifty two Senate bill one fifty
two having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
introduced by Senator Campos and
act relating to gaming creating
the capital improvements gaming
tax credit for certain gaming
operator licensees Senate bill
three Senate bill one fifty four
introduced by Senator Diamond
and act relating to property
allowing a public agency to
charge a reasonable fee for
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one fifty four
Senate bill one fifty five
abandonment costs to project
ratepayers to protect rate
payers amending a section of the
renewable energy act pertaining
to cost recovery amending the
appeal and re hearing filing
deadlines with court rules
Senate bill one fifty five
Senate bill one fifty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee then Senate tax
and acting the ratepayer relief
act providing for the use of
securitization financing upon
the abandonment of generation
bondholders providing duties and
powers of the public regulation
commission regarding
securitization financing
repealing the energy transition
act Senate bill one fifty six
committee that Senate finance
Senate bill one fifty six Senate
bill one fifty seven introduced
by Senator Campos and act making
appropriation for the center for
the education and study of
land grants into public
education curriculum Senate bill
one fifty seven Senate bill one
fifty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
solutions department for job
readiness programs for youth and
adults.
Senate bill one fifty eight
Senate bill one fifty eight
having been read twice by title
Gallegos an act relating to
higher education allowing all
New Mexico public school
teachers to qualify for loan
repayment of undergraduate and
graduate degrees in education
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one fifty
nine Senate bill one sixty
introduced by Senator Duhigg and
the number of registered voters
in a district making conforming
changes amending and repealing
sections of the voter action act
Senate bill one sixty Senate
bill one sixty having been read
introduced by senator committees
and act relating to taxation
allowing employers with fifty or
fewer employees to elect to not
withhold those employers
the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one sixty one Senate bill
one sixty two introduced by
Senator Campos and act relating
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee then
Senate finance Senate bill one
sixty two Senate bill one sixty
three introduced by Senator
three Senate bill one sixty
three having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one sixty
three Senate bill one sixty four
servicers license delineating
the duties of a student loan
servicer giving administrative
responsibility in enforcement
power to the financial
institutions division of the
regulation licensing department
borrowers equally providing
rights for co signers including
notice and access to information
providing for cosigner release
prohibiting certain acceleration
of private education loans
action providing penalties
creating the student loan bill
of rights fund making
appropriation Senate bill one
sixty four Senate bill one sixty
far having been read twice by
Senate bill one sixty five
introduced by Senator Pinto and
Senator Rodriguez endorsed by
the New Mexico finance Authority
oversight committee and act
five.
Senate bill one sixty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the Senate Senate Indian rural
and cultural affairs committee
department of environment to
contract with an organization to
conduct a watershed study
statewide to review water
infrastructure projects in
agricultural areas in
referred to the Senate Indian
rural and cultural affairs
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one sixty
six Senate bill one sixty seven
prescribing penalties Senate
bill one sixty seven Senate bill
one sixty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
gasoline tax and the special
fuel excise tax Senate bill one
sixty eight Senate bill one
sixty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
relating to higher education
creating a higher education
coordinating council providing
powers and duties giving the
higher education department sole
authority to approve capital
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one sixty
nine Senate bill one seventy
introduced by Senator Hemphill
seventy Senate bill one seventy
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate health
public affairs committee Senate
public schools should vote for
on campus instruction during a
time when the state has issued a
public health emergency order
including such orders issued
during the remainder of the two
Requiring each local school
board to make the determination
based on federal centers for
disease control and prevention
recommendations declaring an
emergency Senate bill one
seventy one.
seventy one Senate bill one
seventy two introduced by
Senator Pinto and representative
Allison and act making
appropriation to the Indian
to the Senate Indian rural and
cultural affairs committee.
Then Senate finance committee
Senate bill one seventy two
Senate bill one seventy three
Senate bill one seventy three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill one
projects shall not be accepted
unless the state or county or
municipality has accepted the
role of ask acting as fiscal
agent for the introduce project
one seventy four Senate bill one
seventy five introduced by
Senator Gallegos an act relating
to taxation providing a tax
credit for certain rural
then Senate finance committee
Senate bill one seventy five.
Senate bill one seventy six
introduced by senator George K.
Munoz and act making general
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate.
Finance committee Senate bill
one seventy six Senate bill one
excellence Senate bill one
seventy seven Senate bill one
seventy seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
feasibility study Senate bill
one seventy eight Senate bill
one seventy eight having been
read twice by title is ordered
print in referred to the Senate
health and public affairs
public finance clarifying the
definition of hospital care
facilities contract in the
hospital funding act allowing
the issuance of certain bonds
for county skilled nursing and
public securities declaring an
emergency Senate bill one
seventy nine Senate bill one
seven nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
resources and acting The New
Mexico reforestation center act
directing the forestry division
of the Energy minerals and
natural resources department to
enter into a joint powers
agreement with the department of
create the New Mexico
reforestation center to address
the impacts of climate change on
the state's forests and address
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate conservation
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one eighty
Senate bill one eighty one
introduced by senator say about
eighty one Senate bill one
eighty one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one eighty one Senate bill
two Senate bill one eighty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered friend and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
one eighty two Senate bill one
Senate bill one eighty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
syphilis in infants requiring
physicians to test a pregnant
woman for syphilis pursuant to
federal centers for disease
control and prevention testing
guidelines Senate bill one
four Senate bill one eighty five
introduced by Senator Stefanics
and Representative Ferrary for
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
making appropriation to the
Senate bill one eighty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee that Senate finance
committee Senate bill one eighty
transportation Senate bill one
eighty six Senate bill one
eighty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business and
revenue oversight committee.
And act relating to the tobacco
settlement permanent fund
requiring the remaining fifty
percent of distributions to the
tobacco settlement permanent
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one eighty seven.
Senate bill one eighty eight
risk youth Senate bill one
eighty eight Senate bill one
eighty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee then Senate finance
exploitation Act creating
reporting requirements providing
for the delay of suspect
transactions describing training
requirements for financial
institutions creating a civil
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one eighty nine
Senate bill one hundred ninety
introduced by Senator Hemphill
an act relating to disability
Renaming the developmental
disabilities planning council as
the developmental disabilities
council.
Senate bill one ninety Senate
bill one ninety having been read
ninety Senate bill one ninety
one introduced by Senator Lopez
and act relating to behavioral
health requiring the Human
Services Department to convene a
bridges across New Mexico
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one ninety one Senate bill one
ninety two introduced by Senator
certain actions against a police
officer certification for
failure to perform disclosure
duties or for hindrance of
another peace officers
performance of those duties
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one ninety
two Senate bill one ninety three
introduced by Senator Hemphill
and Senator Diamond an act
relating to rural communities
ninety three Senate bill one
ninety three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
and in rural and cultural
affairs committee.
officials creating the public
corruption Act providing
penalties amending and enacting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight Senate bill one
four Senate bill one ninety five
introduced by Senator Campos and
act making appropriation to the
department of transportation to
implement teen driver safety
training Senate bill one ninety
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one ninety five Senate bill
one ninety six introduced by
Senator Lopez and act relating
to children creating the
children's code reform task
then Senate finance committee
Senate bill one ninety six
Senate bill one ninety seven
introduced by Senator Lopez and
act relating to taxation
increasing the rate of the
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business and
transportation committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one ninety seven Senate
bill one ninety eight introduced
requiring rulemaking
establishing burden of proof
standards for retaliation cases
declaring an emergency Senate
bill one ninety eight Senate
bill one ninety eight having
Senate bill one ninety nine
introduced by senator Ortiz C.
Pino.
An act relating to redistricting
enacting the redistricting act
creating the state redistricting
participation in the process
providing procedures to appeal a
selected plan declaring an
emergency Senate bill one ninety
Senate bill two hundred
introduced by Senator Gerald
Ortiz Y. Pino and act relating
to health care amending the
definition of tele dentistry
Committee Senate bill two
hundred.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
referred Senate bill eight has
headed under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Elizabeth Stefanics
that the general reflect that
they were acted on individually
very no objection the reader
will read.
And Mister president you're
conservation committee to home
has been referred Senate bill
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairman.
Mr president I move adoption the
committee report as we have a
that all the committee reports
to be read.
No votes in one motion there's
two.
Mr president your conservation.
Yes
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth dependent chairman
Senate of annex Mister president
Mr president your Education
Committee to home has been
referred Senate bill thirty has
had under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and it's
referred to the finance
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee report that we
vote on them with motion that
the panel respect when they were
act on it.
it's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill forty one do pass as
amended and thence refers to the
finance committee.
Senate bill seventy seven do
passed and then referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill eighty do pass
immense referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
The committee report.
Senator souls.
Mr chairman president and I move
Mr president your Indian rural
and cultural affairs committee
to home has been referred Senate
bill forty five has headed under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass and that's referred to the
committee reports that we build
on them with one motion and that
the general reflect that we that
they were acted upon
individually see no objections
the reader to read Senate bill
committee and Senate bill one
twenty do pass and it's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Shannon D. Pinto chair
Senterfitt the I move the
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
Senate bill seven has headed
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended.
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflected they
were acted upon individually.
And Senate bill one oh I do pass
and it's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Joseph Cervantes
chair center o'neill I move
adoption Mister president of the
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill four has
headed under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
without and then with one motion
the journal reflect other act
fund individually no objection
the reader to read Senate joint
resolution to do pass and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee Senate joint
Committee and Senate joint
resolution seven do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Daniel A. Ivey Soto
I'm at the tax business and
transportation.
So saying of the president for
Senator will pull that up for
the reader to read.
That's the one title to the
bills.
Two four five and seven.
Okay.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
bill one.
Has headed under consideration
consent of the Senate agree to
be allowed to read all the
committee reports.
We vote on them with one motion
that they don't reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
committee Senate bill six to
pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
And Senate bill twenty five do
centers we have a motion to
adopt the committee report.
This is so we'll see no
objection committee reports have
been adopted.
Mr president your Education
Committee to whom has been
sold chair.
Senator souls.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
and then referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill forty four do pass
and it's referred to the finance
committee and Senate bill fifty
the committee report.
Senator has been a motion to
adopt the committee report.
Say no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr president your health and
pass an answer for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chair Senator DiSanto Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee report Mr
listening to the debate with
this it was often referred to as
an archaic bill the criminalized
women.
And I have an attorney general's
of.
Opinion here from nineteen
consenting woman.
And so I think that there's
certainly been some if not
misinformation certainly some
misunderstanding of what this
bill does.
not presented.
And the entire basis of this was
was the idea that it
criminalized women.
was was missed here.
Well I I don't think it happens
basis for approving this I think
is is illegitimate and so for
that reason I object Mister
president I believe there's
others.
for the public to participate in
this my concerns with the
limited comment but specifically
the inability for our doctors to
participate in the conversation
for legislation that ultimately
president.
This Senator smitteez thank you
Mr president I would also like
to object.
we heard testimony from multiple
nurse midwives a labor and
delivery nurses as well as
certified registered nurse
anesthetists who all shared.
protections in this bill.
I think it is in a bipartisan.
Theme that we would all agree.
We want to work together to
greatly endanger health care
access.
Because of the desire.
Unilaterally to destroy
conscience protections in New
Health care providers in this
state.
B. are we willing to go there is
it really worth it.
And so I strongly urge this body
access in New Mexico.
Can we Survey conscientious
objectors who are saying and has
said during the committee
hearing they will leave the
state.
opposition and I just want to go
back I think it is going to be
an imbalance in statute so New
Mexico twenty seventeen animal
cruelty statute thirty dash
on a baby that is alive so
Center and direction to this
bill on what is going to do to
Senator.
So Mister president I move that
we reject the committee report
on Senate bill ten.
we'll go through a roll call
just want to make sure and
explain the motion that is on
right now is to reject the
committee report voted yes is to
president Senator Ivey Soto this
president the actually with with
respect I believe the motion
that's on the floor right now is
to adopt the committee report
before us thus a yes vote would
be to adopt the committee report
no vote would be to
yes is to adopt the committee
report that was put forward by
Senator Ortiz panel.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Diamond Now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator guy a
goes no ma'am Senator Gallegos
not Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivy
Soto.
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator Paul the.
Senator for the year yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
songes senator Sanchez no
senator smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is no Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
yes Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Woods snow.
negative the committee report
has been adopted.
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
nine has had headed under
Y. Pino chair Senator DiSanto Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports.
Did we vote on them with one
motion and that the journal
do passed as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill twenty three do pass
and it's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee.
Senate bill forty six do pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill forty seven do pass
and it's referred to the finance
committee.
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill twenty seven do pass
and it's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill forty nine do not
pass but that Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
nine do pass and it's referred
Senate bill sixty do pass as
amended.
For.
And then referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill sixty nine do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill ninety to do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
And Senate bill ninety I do pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
Senator has been a motion to
adopt the committee reports.
Say no objection.
The committee reports has been
adopted.
And Mister president you're
engrossed prepare Torrez signing
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen and senator cliff R.
Committee for has been adopted.
They like to announce to the
members of the body that the
offices of the Senate have
signed an open session.
Senate resolution one as
Ask you Mr president so I think
what we're gonna do I know we've
got some members on our side I
want to go to their offices and
we've also had our reader been
going straight since eleven
o'clock so I think what we're
Our well I think we're gonna do
is in recess until one o'clock
everyone a chance to take a
breath and then we'll come back
and do the rest of the
