Senator Gonzalez present.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez Senator Senator
McKenna here Senator Moores.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope present.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
Thank you address the members of
I just remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be led
by Senator Brandt the pledge
allegiance and Spanish to be led
by Senator Stewart and the
salute to New Mexico flag to be
I have no idea what was in store
for us and it is probably a good
thing.
That is a counties of New
Mexicos now thankfully moved
This last year I had the honor
god working with some of the
finest people here in Santa Fe
the COVID unit our hospital.
are so dedicated to combating
this disease.
As we go forth creator of us all
remember those who have passed
in this year within our state
including father Richard Murphy
We're here today to ask you to
send your spirit into us let us
our tired spirits with your love
and generosity mold us so that
your will be done.
Let us rejoice knowing that
we're here so that we may Sir.
name Hey Matt.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
From the left that other than
data hello systematic.
Announcements and miscellaneous.
this extraordinary here and take
a moment of silence for those
who have died from COVID
Memorial that we're gonna do up
front once we get introduced
to recognize the extraordinary
life of Karen Trujillo.
get the memorial introduced and
we'll do that front.
The other thing that I mentioned
on Friday is Senate bill three
seventy seven which is the
junior bill Center millennials
are and Senate finance committee
the plan today is to do items
number one through six in that
order.
So Mister president what I'd
Senators were announces
miscellaneous with Senator
Brandt Mr president I would
excuse senator Mark Moores and
consent to excuse Senator Pinto
until she returns to the
chamber.
And then the also Mr president
members of the Senate unanimous
consent to excuse senator
Candelaria and senator serve on
this to both of them return to
in the gallery and on the floor
please yes Mr president members
of the Senate unanimous consent
to allow cameras both in the
chamber and in the gallery no
objection thank you senator.
Any further announcements
Senators.
introduction of legislation on
that order of business
section legislation the reader
to read.
Senate memorial twenty three
introduced by senator cliff R.
Pirtle.
A memorial requesting the
suicide prevention coalition of
the department of health the
behavioral health services
health and early intervention as
suicide prevention Senate
memorial twenty three.
Senator moral twenty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
memorial in memory of Karen
Trujillo Ph.D an advocate and
champion for the children of New
Mexico.
Senate memorial twenty four.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that order of business
that on today's calendar year no
objection Senator twenty four is
been removed from the
president's table Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president now being
show all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon session there's
no objection it is so ordered.
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
like to yield to senator souls
thank you Mr president I move
roles as teacher educator and
administrator.
And where is Dr Trujillo was the
superintendent of the Los crucis
public school district at the
time of her death.
And where is Dr Trujillo
initially served as interim
And where is Dr Trujillo was a
steady and compassionate leader
who led the district after a
cyber attack crippled digital
systems.
credited with bringing calm to
the district at an uncertain
time and where is Dr Trujillo
previously served as the
been a math teacher at all major
charter high school in Los
crucis a history teacher at
COVID high school in Bayard and
a math teacher at Las Cruces
high school.
And whereas in two thousand
southwest outreach academic
research evaluation and policy
center enterprise accomplishment
was creating the annual teacher
shortage report.
education and research director
for the colleges alliance of
advancement of teaching and
learning.
opened schools at all grade
levels.
And where is Dr Trujillo was
also recognized as a dedicated
public servant and in two
thousand eighteen was elected to
the board of county
commissioners of Dona Ana County
and shortly after taking office
calm and thoughtful manner.
And where is Dr Trujillo touched
many lives and hurt spirit and
compassion will be missed.
Where is Dr Trujillo survived by
her husband Ben Trujillo and
And be it further resolved that
a copy of this memorial be
transmitted to the family of
doctor Karen Trujillo.
signing on as sponsors of this
memorial unless there's an
objection.
Seeing no objection Senator cels
to explain.
Thank you Mr president.
incredibly hard for the entire
community
I'm not very good at doing these
kinds of things and most times
when they're memorials I stayed
pretty quiet because I think
it's kind of a personal point
memorial twenty four be put on
final passage subject to debate
amendment substitution.
no objections Center souls
Gordon explained.
to be your sponsor when she was
superintendent of the school or
of the secretary of education.
I very much I guess like to open
it up for debate from other
people and I'll have some
closing comments thank you
Center souls.
Thank you very much Mr president
and I want to thank senator
souls in the entire delegation
from Dona Ana County in the
areas with which drive through
the truck touched in a very big
was time to discuss things that
maybe we didn't agree on we
agreed on many things and most
things but even though there was
no time to time we didn't see
better and so I just you know
wanted to rise and and show my
support and I was devastated the
day that I heard I just
literally couldn't believe it
might like one of my cousins
you very much and we care for
you and you need anything from
us at all just you know we're
all just a phone call away when
you have a family that is so
invested in New Mexico like that
they you know they become part
district and you know hit a home
run where your academics are
concerned and everything else
it's important to you in your
school district at that home run
for drive through the because
that's what she would have
expected of you that's what she
probably expects of you right
Thank you very much Mr president
and course members of the
Senate.
As we continue through life
there are a few things that
families and if you will with
our children as we move forward.
Dr Karen Trujillo as she made
her way through.
through the work that she did.
Or through the work of her
family.
She had a great upbringing and
She always for again she move
forward and she always took one
step forward even under the most
arduous of times.
balance the work that she did
remain immersed if you will and
helping people to become better
at what they did.
Well that always came from one
thing that she had.
that's what educators do.
They give their heart and their
soul to everything that they do
and to serve our young people to
And in this case what Dr Karen
Trujillo has left each and
everyone of us.
Is unselfishness.
go forward to follow the example
that she had and that she leaves
us and that's one of the zest
for living.
And so with that Mr president
continuing to support the worth
the drive Karen Trujillo has
left for each and everyone of us
and that's to take care of the
next generation thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
on and I think Karen
Mr president more than gosh more
the most leaders moderate
leaders I can think of.
it's a and she's also a neighbor
of mine and she was my
constituents as this for her
husband Dan for wonderful
parents.
Gilberton Bernadette and.
president can was amongst the
brightest so shining lights a
really devoted wife mother
community member educator a
Leslie and we saw this during
the pandemic
a moment where we need leaders
where she created a program to
deliver food to the rural areas
even though there were questions
of our life and including not
just in Los crucis foreigners
are superintendent but also in
the community attached or her
kids went to school and she was
like a lightning bolt I mean.
The education world I knew her
but of course she then ran for
office she became the county
commission chair almost
instantly she became the
Responsibility.
this time to say a prayer for
her family she has a great
family you can imagine her
parents her husband her brothers
and sisters and.
For kids we just love them and
hold them in our prayers and.
listening know that Karen left
an indelible stamp that her
legacy lives on her
accomplishments and through her
kids and.
Remember a self.
Thank you Mr president thank
I thank the sponsor for bringing
the bill as a mention Education
Committee.
No Kernan and Dr Trujillo was
Education that they deserved in
the education that they needed
and we've lost a great pillar of
education our state.
Hi.
and the we pray for families the
deal with such a sudden death
and no loss of life is easy.
But when it's sunlight this and
pray for the community of Los
crucis at this great loss in
their school district thank you
Mr president thanks Senator
Brandt Senator Pirtle.
Mr president that we all come
together as a body.
And we really reflected and and
looking appreciate the
sacrifices that so many people
those confirmations that changes
you as a percentage is you as a
senator and it really makes you
appreciate those that that are
willing to serve in those
doctor Giorgio and and the fact
that you never had to question
her motives or anything that she
did because it was always about
And so I think you know this is
one of those times that that we
reflect on on everything that
she has done for the state for
her community and for her family
and we will remain remember Dr
Trujillo fondly and and god
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator for bringing the
memorial and of course I share
all of the the comments that
role as secretary and she had
experienced all the different
levels of education and I think
that's so important of course
educator just a community member
no new her that I can tell you
that the I would be very
difficult for any community to
served and so I just want to say
that I stand in support and
prayers go out to to all of you
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president and and I
didn't have the pleasure of
meeting.
The past secretary of of Ted.
We started how impressing it was
A tragic thing we are we never
know when our days are numbers
are up and what the
circumstance it is and it's
always hard on the families.
When they're relevant Fund
passes on.
And I can tell by the motion
And I just want to wish your
family the.
Love and the respect of the New
Mexico Senate that the.
other comments but I just want
to think that family for sharing
her with us thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator Woods Senator
Lopez.
sending condolences of course to
the delegation from.
to include Dr heroes family band
and the children are her family
the apple that this and many
others in our state of home Dr
Trujillo was part of and the Mr
president members of the Senate
And I know that the work drive
your done prior to becoming
secretary the public education
department and then becoming
superintendent of the Los crucis
school district she had a
profound effect in many
different areas and I know on
chance to chat from when I was
serving as the chair.
And in those conversations it
was so
enlightening for our you for me
to see and hear from her face to
face some of her love for our
children.
So I know.
With the shock driving home on
Thursday night I'm getting
notice of the tragedy.
It was a shock as is for all of
us.
Her soul continues to be with us
she continues to have an
influence and will continue to
Dr Trujillo.
Commissioner Trujillo.
Secretary Trujillo.
For those of us who are
occurring.
She is somebody who during her
confirmation hearing.
That that that is taking place
the raise timing of return to
Los crucis and I and I just want
to this story and that is that
the.
had a long time superintendent
who who got involved in.
Representative representing some
issues on behalf of the of the.
And the school district found
itself looking for a new
superintendent and they found.
A new superintendent who came in
from outside of New Mexico.
There is the school district was
in the news every single day.
From the previous superintendent
the end of his tenure the new
superintendent.
All district was in the news
R. decided the price was too
much I think or something along
those lines that is life is too
short left and and that just
happened to be right about the
And the school board decided to
hire.
Dr Trujillo to be the
superintendent.
And the most remarkable thing
district was no longer every
single day in the news.
All of a sudden the stories
about the school district were
not.
About who said what to whom.
were being reported all of a
sudden we're about children
being and.
That's the difference she made
in that community.
calm waters.
I was with the pro time on
Thursday evening when she got
I know Mr president she was she
did the same K. state program
you did that and I miss you the
same Ph.D program that that the
county clerk down there did.
in the state Senate and are
shocked.
Will participate.
The city of Los crucis Los
crucis public schools.
And that's cool board now in the
midst of their grief.
Is gonna have to find a new
leader.
That community.
Is going to have to adjust.
Thank you senator Senator for
bringing this and I have been
keeping her family in my
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president no.
I do stand in strong support of
some very ill very eloquent
words and statements have
already been said.
And the only part that I just
education.
And the back and forth and
Also all members some some very
family has been a very strong
killer of course the for many
many years.
And it was so.
strong focus in a very strong
commitment to how can we make
education better no doctor
Trujillo and myself on.
Sometimes we would talk for good
the resources to our state.
So very rounded you know and her
food into education and it is a
so thank you very much into
members of the body itself one
of those tragic things that
happens to.
To us you know when we never
expect something like this Madam
miseria rest in peace and many
Hold on I got to know doctor
Trujillo up to the success
partnership.
And of their you know we know
offers incredible educator and I
and I have to say when she was
But she was also this incredible
community member and serving my
capacity as the president of the
board of directors for the C.
Valley Community of Hope this
ago and I remember is is the we
were there on the weekend help
in the asylum seekers get their
resources get connections to
people who would be there
Sanchez turn for you fold up in
kids and underwear and socks and
toiletries and things that they
could take with them as they
were heading to their next
destination.
It's a fantastic idea.
Is that I need to connect to
with this organization that will
help provide you with
connections and resources and
And it many of you know that
that when I'm home on the
weekends building the something
building things and and and
cutting wood and sandy there's
something that provides my brain
And I'm almost finished with it
and it's something that's
probably going to go up if I'm
able to go home for a day this
She always gave of herself.
To everybody else.
know that it's going to take
time thank you Mr president
thank you center Hamblen Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
met her during the confirmation
hearings and then it was
interesting because now that
Now that Senator Hamblen
mentioned it's I do have a
nature.
She had such amazing such an
amazing talent to communicate
and to connect and see also had
and special person who had such
a deep love and knowledge for
education of our kids and I just
can't imagine I I also was
shocked to hear the news and I
And I give my condolences to the
members of the delegation.
who come from Dona Ana County
has well as of the members of
the house to do it it is a huge
Si no further centers sold to
close thank you Mr president and
that something like this happens
when it felt like we had alright
back in the leadership of the
Los crucis public schools people
were looking up and I would
again as we were coming to what
are never easy.
I did want to do this obviously.
But she was so special in our
community and Karen was a
parents two aunts and uncles in
and on and on and she opens our
house to people.
for the community it was never
about her he was always her
working towards others and so.
being teachers again and so in
the future when I get an
opportunity to carry a bill.
bill goes through and so Mr
president with that.
I'm not I move that.
to Senate memorial twenty four
do now pass I ask unanimous
The vote of forty three in the
affirmative on the negative Sen
moral twenty four in memory of
you care about every does that
you level.
Thank you senator souls Senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that our
Your president pro temp.
Your president pro PED's pro
temperance Stuart and members of
the Senate I have this day
Lujan Grisham governor.
The journal show the message
from the governor has been
received.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill one forty
five as amended by the house.
House bill two hundred.
House bill two hundred forty as
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk.
The journal so the master of the
house is been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house taxation and
House bill one hundred twelve is
amended by the house house bill
one forty one house bill one
hundred seventy eight house bill
house in requests the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received and
Mister president I'm directed to
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill twenty seven.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House labor
veterans and military affairs
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
the house general show the
message from the house has been
received.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill forty one
as amended has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
Sentiment us thank you Mr
present us and consent of the
Senate that the re to be allowed
to read all the committee
reports from going on with one
Senate bill one twenty nine as
amended do pass as amended.
Senate bill one eighty seven do
pass.
George K. Munoz chairman center
many of us thank you move
adoption of the committee report
centers we have a motion to
adopt the committee report.
Mr president your conservation
committee to home has been
referred Senate bill sixteen has
had it under consideration and
Senator Elizabeth Liz Stefanics
chairman finished of annex Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect their
acted upon individually see no
objections the reader to read
have a motion to doubt the
committee reports.
See no objection the Canadian
forces been adopted in the
journal so they're acted upon
individually.
Mr president your Education
Committee to whom has been
William P. sold chairman Senator
souls.
Just give us the Senate that
would be allowed to read all the
house bill twenty two as amended
do pass immense referred to the
health and public affairs
committee.
House bill twenty five do pass
and it's referred to the rules
committee.
Senator William P. sold chairman
Intersil's I move adoption the
committee report and as we have
a motion to doubt the committee
Ford's.
I see no objection the committee
for its been adopted in the
not pass but that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill sixty six do
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Joseph Cervantes
chairman.
lateral committee reports that
they be of upon with one motion
the journal so the rec
department Vigil the
interjection to retreat Senate
bill one twenty seven do not
pass but that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one twenty seven do pass
And Senate bill two hundred as
amended do pass respectfully
submitted Senator Joseph
Cervantes chairman Senator Ivey
Soto moved after the committee
for centers we have a motion to
that the committee report.
nine has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
indicate that their act fund and
visually see no objections the
reader to read.
Senate memorial to do pass
immense referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee.
Senate memorial nineteen do pass
and it's referred to the health
and public affairs committee.
Senate bill three fifty seven do
pass as amended and it's
Deborah K. Romero has secretary
of the department of finance and
Daniel A. Ivey Soto chairman
Senator Ivey Soto we would
potentially could report centers
has been referred Senate bill
eleven as amended has had it
under consideration.
And the Representative reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended.
chairman Senator Shendo.
Mr president I ask unanimous
read Senate bill eighty four as
amended do not pass but that
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
Senate bill two forty one do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill two eighty one do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
three twenty eight do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill one eighty nine do
not pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill one eighty nine do pass and
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three ninety four do
pass and it's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill one seventy nine.
Two passed as amended and thence
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Benny Shendo junior chairman
Senator Shendo moved up to the
committee report and as we have
a motion to that the committee
two hundred sixty one.
Has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
agree to be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually see
no objection the reader to read
Senate bill two sixty eight do
not pass but that Senate health
and public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy four do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill two seventy five do
pass and it's referred to the
recommendation as amended in
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
And house bill thirty five do
pass in this referred to the
and there's there's a motion to
adopt the committee report.
I see no objection the committee
report has been adopted in the
journal show that they're acted
upon individually.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too home has been
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen and senator cliff R.
Pirtle co chairman Senator
Hamblen Mr president I move the
adoption of the committee
report.
signed an open session Senate
bill one as amended with
emergency clause.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate finance
to signing by the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted senator Pete Campos
senator Kerry Hamblen and
senator cliff R. Pirtle co
chairman Senator Hamblen Mr
president I move the adoption of
signed Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill three
with emergency clause.
And Mister president you're
Judiciary Committee too who has
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen and senator cliff R.
Pirtle co chairman Senator
Hamblen Mr president I move the
adoption of the committee report
to announce to the members of
the offices of the Senate have
signed an open session Center
memorial one.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I unanimous consent we
go that our business
credentials of Deborah K. Romero
as who's been appointed
secretary of the department of
finance and administration and
the secretary of DFA this is
pursuant to Senate executive
message number four and it's for
state government over forty
years she has served in various
different state agencies she
testified this morning she is
you're someone who continues to
step up over and over again.
As I mentioned she was
appointed.
special session in June what she
was instrumental in and I think
her work in a collaborative work
that was done between the
executive and the legislature
morning and I'll just say a
little bit about her background
she's someone who uses a common
sense approach in dealing with
this is the most important this
DFA secretaries job to make
state government work.
So she has served as acting
She has served from October
twenty twelve to October twenty
eighteen as executive budget
analyst for capital outlay and
many of us have worked with her
over the years in that capacity
going back for all forty years.
I known her in the seventeen
years I've served.
is a tremendous leader and you
can hear that in the testimony
this morning when she talked
about the importance of.
Getting per team and those
around her to follow and
And support this confirmation
and carry this confirmation and
I'll just share one final kind
of fun story that she brought up
this morning that reminded me
our daughters both played
volleyball together years ago
really salt of the earth people
and this is a tremendous
appointment from within by our
governor and so I stand in
ministration will start with
sentiment us.
Thank you Mr chairman I guess I
have to but this closure for the
always call honor never gets
riled up about any anything gets
pretty level headed and tries to
explain to you the best way to
I'm glad the governor pointed
her the person that we can trust
and depend on to the to do the
job in the state
appointing her and her integrity
to the to the state into the to
the state government so thank
you Mr chair Mister president
center many of us Senator
specially in serving in so many
different positions you've seen
it all you work for so many
people you've seen pros and cons
you see some failures to see
you look at somebody moving up
the ladder starting from the
bottom and moving up that's how
you learn she was way before
even being a budget analyst I
know she wasn't state government
serving other capacities then
she becomes an analyst in a
than acting secretary and on and
on now it's her time it's her
time to be the secretary of
department of the department of
continue to provide the
experience that we need to see
this Department flourish and be
the transparent and dependable
Department that we all need for
our state budget is clearly
do apply to the governor for
supporting her and for about
the incredible incredible
the department but the state of
New Mexico succeed so I implore
the Senate.
To confirm her and to continue
to support her thank you Mr
president.
Thank you senator because
how well she works with the with
the LFC you know has been you
Hardest you know how departments
because so.
That is for the backbone is to
our financial part into the
responsibility and
accountability and instrumental
some efficiency and the very
very much you know into the
communication that's needed for
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president in strong
support of this confirmation
you know after the previous
secretary the objections that
down it was one of those
questions that a lot of people
just how are we going to replace
finance and administration I
think this is somebody with
extreme
wealth of knowledge
Supercharge worthy dedicated her
entire life to the state of New
you know we may not agree on a
lot of things but one thing we
do agree on is that there's so
much within the part in a
the money's and and the duties
of the the FAA are carried out
in a way that benefit all of New
Mexico all of the all of New
Mexico thank you Mr president
Thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate.
I to stand in full support of
this particular nominee
deprecate Romero to be our
secretary for the department of
finance and administration.
the well being of our state
regardless of the position she's
held please continue to go ahead
and do this with integrity with
accuracy that's a positive state
government leader and that's
essentially who.
Their prayers and she continues
to go ahead and move forward in
our great state and leading our
department of finance and
administration.
the W. in the E. that means we.
She has always been there for
the people of New Mexico this is
about how she is going to
One point that I really want to
capture is that over the years
when it has come to capital
outlay.
Debra has moved forward in a
very positive way to ensure that
we do have those guidelines and
of the Senate I really believe
that deprecated Romero as the
secretary for the department of
finance and administration we'll
continue to bring forward all of
again thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate
thanks Senator Campos further
debate Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr president this is
make and it's also one our
experience in state government
in New Mexico is absolutely
essential.
remember is that your name is on
the bottom of every check in New
Mexico.
And there's a strange look
happen to this person's face.
And
Mexico government is essential
because it's very central when
you're the to DFA secretary that
you know for the closets are and
the broom and a dustpan.
have just had the endorsement of
the Senate capital outlay king.
For Deborah and
I just wondered if she had one
Senator Wirth yield Mister
president I'm happy to yield to
my good friend Santo Domingo.
Senator Wirth who is a.
Secretary Romero aware of how
assure you that both the soon to
be secretary and senator Wirth
were behaving themselves at
those games as were our kids.
Mexico government in our
financial department and that's
what this is and
It's something that to.
Will serve this governor well as
I have I'm glad that the senator
Wirth to set down because he's
going to find out I'm going to
go with him again and he he'd
the state is always a concern of
mine and I do appreciate her
vast experience in this area
thank you Mr president thanks
you Mr president thank you
members I think Senator
Rodriguez perhaps said it best
it's her time she has done an
amazing service for our state
I move the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Deborah Kate Romero as secretary
of the department of finance and
administration and ask for a
roll call vote senators we're
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator sure on this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
economy of.
Senator had a male yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator pope yes Senator propias
Senator Rodriguez Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Sanchez
Lopez yes sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold to test Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth DS
Senator Woods.
Mr president.
Senator Missouri Mr president
excuse me animus consent to
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative zero on the
negative.
The appointment of Debra came
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico state Senate Senator
Wirth.
Thank you ladies and gentlemen
the Senate let's rise and give
our newest secretary Deborah K.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
seventy seven the fiscal impact
reports often handed out that
the bills are all in your books
and will do a few things to get
chair of the Judiciary Committee
just let everybody know house
bill two fifty five which is
liquor delivering liquor
licenses will be heard in the
Senate Judiciary Committee on
Wednesday.
one thirty PM tomorrow Tuesday
so they may be properly analyzed
and considered by both majority
and minority analysts before we
senator what's the accepted the
method of delivery.
Mr about the certainly Mr
president if it's if it's sent
down by eight counsel if you
to to number to be able to look
at and print out.
Thank you center so the.
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there is
no objection it is so ordered.
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president
committee to home has been
referred Senate joint resolution
sixteen has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
president present us as consent
of the Senate that would be a
lot of read all the committee
reports that they be voted on
with some one motion and that
the record reflect their act
fund individually.
See no objections the reader to
that they do not pass but that
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bills
fifteen and one hundred ninety
nine do pass and that's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
Seeing no objection the Canadian
forces been adopted in the
journal show that they're acted
upon individually.
Senate thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go about
our business and.
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
thirty one is reported without
recommendation and further
recommends that it now be
referred to the Indian rural and
adoption the of the committee
report centers we have a motion
to adopt the committee part.
See no objection the committee
for has been adopted.
reading again we're going to do
center money also be up first
with the Senate supplemental
counter number one that's Senate
bill three seventy seven finance
substitute for that and then
one on Senate supplemental
calendar number one Senator many
us thank you Mr president I just
miss consenus and that the
record show that all action for
placing the Senate finance
to explain the bill thank you Mr
president everybody seen this
bill these two or three times
and and you had and a chance to
view your language where when
you know there's some still some
local governments for agencies
and a wide variety of things
also in there is about a million
dollars redistricting a hundred
enhancements are caps securities
for next year and so with that
Mr president will stand for
questions thank you centerman
ascent as we're debating Senate
thank each and every member of
the New Mexico state Senate as
they continue to go ahead and
look and find what are the best
uses of resources for their
the resources to our
constituents and again I stand
in full support of this
particular measure and to let
the members of the Senate know
thanks Senator Campos we do have
further debate Sir share.
Thank you Mr president I to
stand in support of US Senate
think this was a very apparent
our.
A bill of transparent a bill
that of we all got to look at
multiple times and and move
Senator any further debate
Senators.
We will collect.
And see no further debate
Seminoles too close thank you Mr
president I just wanna thank at
it's all correct so.
I do think the transparency
process to has come become
completely open now of what's
getting added and amendments
incentive finance so that's a
to make sure that we're finding
that our agencies and not local
governments with that Mr
president I move that Senate and
with that Senate finance since
those and ask for postal.
I'm sorry yes by what we're
voting on Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill three seventy seven tier
seats.
yes senator Byrd senator Byrd
yes Senator Campos Senator
Campos yes senator from the
Mahdia Senator Candelaria yes
Senators around this.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Hermio Senator had a meal yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Sanchez Senator songes
yes Senators committees.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator sold yes Senator
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Thirty eight.
Senate etcetera Manulis thank
you Mr president we all just
income by for we start off the
rest of the day.
Thank you Mr president thank you
centerman us we are going on to
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
seventy one on final passage has
been taken and that that it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
presentation is Nicolas court of
us sovereign and sovereign Hager
from the Santo from poverty and
attorney Nick Madison all of
Your ex for witnesses are
proved.
Senator okay thank you Mr
president and I move a do not
pass on Senate bill seventy one
and a do pass on Senate floor
Thank you Mr president Senate
bill seventy one creates the
patients debt collection
protection act.
instituting a ban on collections
for medical debt for look very
low income patients folks who
are two hundred percent or less
of the federal poverty line and
it also institutes institutes
for uninsured patients two
hundred fifty percent of
Medicare this bill also seeks to
protect medical providers in New
Mexico by decreasing rates of
eligibility in both public and
private insurance and also any
patient assistance programs at
the facility might have in place
the main reason the folks who
are eligible are not covered is
because of the application
barriers because of literacy
issues language issues things
like that.
When collections are happening
it seeks to make those Sarah but
it does this by closing a
loophole that we have that would
be limited to in New Mexico.
And by making the language of
our collection agency regulatory
act come in line with the
language of the federal fair
finally what this bill seeks to
do is create appropriate
legislative oversight for the
use of indigent care funds in
public hospitals is are funds
that have been appropriated by
those funds are being used are
as intended.
And.
If any of this bill hand so you
all have in front of you you're
Senator share and also with us
Senator Moores.
And we worked really hard to
come up with compromises on this
is a mock up of that for some of
the folks can see exactly what
changes are being made in the
floor slab and I can.
Walk through what those changes
are.
referring to a collection action
of which would generally include
selling someone's medical that
to another person we excluded
Made it so that when we're
defining health care facility it
includes the practice groups of
those facilities prior to that
sure that if you have a let's
say you have.
Some of my Presbyterian who has
multiple urgent care facilities
that they weren't excluding
on page five of that markup is
that there's a definition of a
third party health care provider
in this bill and what a third
party healthcare providers is
that someone who's providing
we wanted to make sure that this
bill did not burden small
standalone practices in the the
family practice.
come under the provisions of
this bill specifically for the
purpose of the pricing parity
portion of the bill so for folks
who for uninsured patients would
be limited charging a hundred
the bottom of the page around
one twenty three.
The the superintendent of the
oversight is going to be doing
rulemaking around how you
They Might Be indigent Monday
very well paid the next and so
we wanted to make sure that the
rulemaking took into
consideration both temporary and
that that's taken into
consideration.
If you turn to page eight of the
markup there was a section in
this bill that required medical
Where we are we're trying to
make sure that bills that are
sent to patients give them all
the information they need in
order to make a good financial
decisions highs approach that
This is making this this is
solving a problem that Senator
share educated me on.
Where sometimes the so so folks
or there are these so called
credit repair agencies that will
request this information over
and over again it creates an
unreasonable burden on whoever's
having provided so this sets a
On page ten we took out and on
the information will be listed
on receipts for payments we took
that it was a right originally
said that folks would be limited
to charging just the Max
Medicare reimbursement rate for
uninsured patients and we
increased that to a hundred
twelve of the top of page
thirteen.
Originally this bill created
included a provision that would
automatically make a violation
of this act
what we have but what we've done
instead as we've maintains the
right to a private right of
action so you don't get an
automatic you PA climb just for
Then on page fourteen of the
markup you see so at the bottom
language is still in there it
was just moved.
beginning with section sixteen
more that's where we took out
more of that U. PA language for
a before there was a violation
of the collection agency
regulatory act would be an
agencies from five thousand to
twenty thousand dollars.
And and then we took out and
unnecessary a severability
clause but that's it.
this is still bill that does a
lot to protect our New Mexican
patients and does a lot to
reduce uncompensated care for.
was here in two thousand
fourteen with the exception of
one percent have you all voted
for this before there was a bill
two thousand fourteen is Senate
that passed with broad
bipartisan support and everyone
who was in this chamber in two
thousand fourteen except one
person voted for them so I hope
you will do so again today thank
one to Senate floor substitute
for Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy one amendment sponsored
by Senator Jacob R. Candelaria
and not just thank you Mr
seventy one seeing no objection
Sierra Senator explain the
amendment thank you Mr president
I'm one major reasons I'm
offering this amendment is
fundamentally disagree with the
remedy.
To to vindicate their rights so
let us assume and I'm gonna ask
you to imagine my case.
my gas bill electric bill and I
was in this chamber sitting in
this chair doing this work with
you all I couldn't afford.
Utilities.
Once or twice including once
And that wrecked my credit and
it continues to plague my
business to the state.
The problem Mr chairman Mr
Wanted imposes new levels of
bureaucracy.
But doesn't actually provide a
real solution to the people of
failing to protect.
The bill in its current form may
indeed give advocacy
some kind of administrative
complaint to set to the
insurance commissioner.
But as written the bill provides
no claim.
If you are actually the person
whose rights have been violated.
We're not actually empowering
the people.
Foremost farms so let's look at
my case.
The amendment before you.
Of deaths by a health care
provider to a third party agency
of violation of the unfair trade
practices act that's it that's
the only part of the bill.
I had long conversations with
negotiated with in good faith.
For the other amendments in this
bill.
Incorporate our doctors are
pleading with us to include.
was picked by advocates wasn't
picked by anybody but I
understand has experience
administering a hospital or
medical practice.
I don't think it's a conflict of
So I want to share with the body
some perspectives this bill
doesn't have to come to us the
way it's written.
There's no reason to impose a
hundred fifty percent Medicare
providers can't charge above
ordinary and customary chair
right.
And that way we don't have the
unintended consequences of this
bill.
doing the surgeries in New
Mexico.
So I want to go back to my
example.
Bill it would apply the on for
So let's look at my simple.
Let's say you NM when I was
broke.
And they did in fact do this
I'm the subject of that
transaction.
To emphasize again the for trade
practices only gives you a claim
For several hours last night
going through our case law to
share with the body information.
following along it took me five
minutes to provide this using
New Mexico one source which is
published by our Supreme Court
and that basically lays out the
state of the law.
began manufacturing and selling
several products including
magnets flasks and cards in
place of students with the
caption I'm gonna be the most
Court was wrong H. in keeping
all food out because the for
trade practices act gives
standing only to buyers of goods
or services and planter failed
to demonstrate how her plan
the U. PA.
Okay let's go to my simple
members in that transaction I
explained I'm not the buyer
seller.
According to the clear holdings
of our core I have no standing.
collections whose life is ruined
the total lawyer and say I want
you to bring a breach of
contract action I want you to
bring a breach of duty of good
Because those common law
doctrines don't apply for
shifting attorney's fees.
And so if you have a low income
person comes to you might hear
my office and says Hey my rights
have been violated under this
What we're doing is again
putting a lot of bureaucracy
without really focusing in.
We're supposed to help.
a few weeks ago dispelling those
notions on another bill.
So I'm not usually in either
camp on that issue I just follow
the fax.
The facts tell me.
When it amendments.
all other options pertaining
there too.
AS a motion.
To have a call the Senate.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Baca.
Senator Diamond.
Please notify all senators.
These any size to provide
financial assistance to retail
By ordinance you have to pass an
ordinance are there to to create
this G. R. T..
To create these funds and I
capped for thirty five thousand
to do this.
It allows the state to provide
financial assistance to retail
restriction that state funds can
only be used for a project that
is more than ten miles from the
closest municipality with a
the building not just the
construction under current law
for use of a qualified immunity.
President.
A minister polity of any size in
the state of New Mexico.
Can use.
It's it's a simple.
Concept that I'm trying to sell
today.
Already.
A.
Municipality under fifteen
thousand can do that.
So that's essentially what the
bill is Mr president.
And now stand for questions
thank you Center was we do have
a floor amendment the reader to
read Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
by the hour Mr president almost
on the floor amendment number
one to Senate tax business
process we had had this bill on
the floor and referred back to
Senate finance to try and have a
conversation and see if there
was a compromise.
And I have all the great respect
in the world from my good friend
going to offer in finance with
an offer them on the floor I
don't expect Mr present to be
this to be a friendly amendment.
But I do think we need to have
Be very strategic in our
under current law municipalities
under fifteen thousand can
already invests Lee to money and
you is it proposes a different
alternative for the Senate.
my respectful respectful what I
I'm not unsent insensitive.
To the needs of local
communities to have retail and
have grocery.
accepted is finally.
So with all due respect to
mistake we made several years
ago I think that language though
well intentioned was written on
the fly.
firm stance that leader dollars
are meant for economic based
jobs they're not designed for
retail thank you Mr president
that is the amendment thank you
CENIC are as we are debating
Senate floor member number one
Senator Woods
that a deal yes Mr president
thank you Mr president senator
to assist alleviate all of my
concerns with this legislation
Mister president senator Mr
president yes
this amendment is adopted no
lead to money may go for
is we've seen over time projects
that come up especially my
district we had a a great
project for a beef packing plant
and they were moved to the back
of the list received a bare
but yet Facebook comes in and we
drop everything we're doing in
angle cut ribbons and and and
the governor's there to take
pictures because it's flashy
it's fun it's exciting and so
our area because a lot of the
people that work at the beef
packing plant now they were they
employment so now we have
households making eighty ninety
a hundred thousand dollars a
year between the two working
Wasn't flashy enough to get the
attention of the executive
branch and so I think it with
Lita it's it's it tends to be a
to get front page within the
small papers and so you know I I
really stand in strong support
of this ammendment I think this
just don't know that this
accomplishes that goal and goes
against one of my core
principles thank you Mr
president thank Senator Pirtle
the border.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator.
Show let me be clear on and your
your amendment.
Tell those communities who
implemented the tax.
Mr president that is correct and
if the local government has
funds in their leader balance
that money needs to be re
prioritized.
I would submit in the way that
the statute intense which is
retail is a challenge I will I
will grant you as a you know
much more Alamogordo is not
something that a.
Urged to use.
Senator Pirtle if he would be
able Senator Pirtle deals.
Mr president I yield.
Thank you Mr president thank
Senator Pirtle do you know if a
real big on avid taxes so they
are are very very conservative
thank you Senator Pirtle because
I guess we're on I'm trying to
understand them when we talk
about the fact that
Because Russell hasn't imposed
the tax.
I would not have any opportunity
under Lida.
Chair Mister president and and
centers I want I want to tell
your story.
Want to tell you a story about
Alamogordo.
To grocery stores.
For a town of thirty the thirty
five thousand people.
The reason
In coming to Alamogordo.
That
that changed your.
Ask.
If we had any sort of economic
could offer that.
We told them that we did not.
They said that well.
We're trying to expand our
stores.
have places in Louisiana.
Who will welcome us and offered
sh economic incentives.
And so what that did.
They kept their interest in
Alamogordo.
But they chose to go to those
places who had told them.
of communities that might be
able to.
To have that opportunity.
The city commission of
Alamogordo because we realized.
Grocery store.
What we did.
As we passed an ordinance.
Store chain for the
construction.
They're building.
Once they built it.
Alamogordo did that.
Thank chain came down Gordo two
years later.
But had we not.
Now Mr president and senators I
just want to share that story
with you because we we make a
big deal out of retail.
We say that we shouldn't we
maybe happened in other parts of
of New Mexico.
Legislative what the citizens of
Alamogordo indicated that they
needed.
And I believe.
The city commission would have
acted.
What I do which is may be
somewhat different.
In some of the other other
senators here.
I know what it can bring I know
what it offers.
I know that every city council
If they felt like retail were
something that their community
needed.
They would they would exercise
opposition to your amendment
just because of that.
I believe that it's a valid
discussion Mr good discussion to
have.
But I think that that we are on
you Mr president thank you
center.
Thanks Senator Griggs any
further debate on the amendment.
Senator it's for a second time
thank you thank you Mr president
you know
And again I remind the body.
That this is local people make a
decision on what they want to do
with the local.
Is is the best government
closest to the people.
Or is the best government coming
from Santa Fe.
allowing her to say anything
about this bill if you would
allow I would yield and ask a
senators to phonics to yield to
yield in regard to the amendment
for the V. I. E..
I would I would like for to talk
on the amendment amendment
essentially distract retail out
Yes I've got a piece of paper
here that actually tells what it
does strike it's important to
have pages of fine printed.
So.
Mr at and I don't mean to put
Senator Stefanics on the spot
but if she would like to talk I
want to give her the opportunity
thank you Senator Candelaria for
bringing the amendment thank you
Senator Woods for recognize me
as a co sponsor of the bill
and I have been trying to
include retail for small
much thank you.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
Si no further debate on the
should be a place for debate and
discussion.
and we dwell too often I think
our politics has become to
perform if we're we just talk
about things about actually
having a discussion about the
thing we're disagreeing about
to make one point clear I don't
nothing against local
governments using other sources
of revenue for retail for all
these other incentives the
problem is the tool we're
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen no
Senator Hemphill.
a meal Senator had a meal no
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan passes Senator
Senator one else now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
part of the no Senator Stewart
no Senator Pinto.
No.
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez no Senators
committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator souls no Senator
Stefanics.
I know my my vote Senator
Tallman now senator Wirth
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Kernan now.
Thirty six for.
one number one has failed to be
adopted.
We.
Excuse me we did have Senator
wanted explains vote Senator
Tallman.
is at the bottom of the economic
food chain so.
They don't really need
with explain why that is but the
city manager we never gave out
New Mexico the entirely
different situation economically
India demographically so I
supported because this probably
different situation than what I
what I was used to and I support
More competitive thank you thank
you Sir Tom and we do have
another floor amendment the
reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
Amendment sponsored by Senator
Jacob R. Candelaria.
Senator are a thank you Mr
president of Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
tax and business and
See no objections Sierra Alfa to
explain what the amendment is
present no not on the at a
fifteen your lawyer but I'm
gonna try and do my best here to
And we're being asked to
appropriate tens tens tens not
hundreds of millions of dollars
to broadband.
my perspective not not in
leadership on a committee chair
I just here on the floor like
everybody else.
We'll get to that later.
Appropriates the money will get
to that later.
Now I'm forty Mr then I do hope
If we are we if we believe what
we say.
That broadband is the most
pressing infrastructure needs.
The faces the state of New
Mexico.
Then we should start
goes through the state Economic
Development Act the local
economic development act.
What it states in relevant
sections there and.
Is that.
Neither the state nor local
government.
Madam into any leader project.
So requires local governments to
prioritize.
Because the numbers were
hearing.
legislature gave executive and
local governments the power to
use leader money.
For broadband networks
Is basically everything you
could need to deploy broadband
network.
The fiber.
The the.
By that I and based on the
information I got from the
desert finance council
committee.
As we've not seen the state or
local governments prioritize
No later money now see the money
for any other project except
broadband until the entire state
president and and again I want
to thank Senator Candelaria to
four of spending a lot of time
and effort.
And sometimes a question of the
fact that.
The bill within itself.
self generated by local economy.
Be used for retail.
Now senator Candelaria thanks
well wait a minute we've got to.
Do broadband with that money
I guess I'm going to say Mister
president this is an unfriendly
amendment thank you.
Thanks Senator Woods further
debate on the amendment.
This is about priorities.
Without the amendment I offered
before what the bill before us
does is it basically allows any
okay fine we we have that debate
the discussion amendment and get
on but if we're going to blow
the doors off Lida when it comes
absolutely it does.
That's the nature of our federal
system.
we're serious about Vigil one
hundred percent coverage in New
Mexico or not present ask the
We're voting on Senate floor
member number one.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Candelaria yes senators have on
this.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
now Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg Mel Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen now Senator
Hemphill no Senator Hemphill now
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Hana meal.
Senator huh me on now Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan no Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores.
Senator monos.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
No Senator Pinto no Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
No Senator probably know Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator souls no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth I'm sorry.
Senator Brandt no.
Thirty.
affirmative thirty during the
negative Senate floor member
number one is fail to pass the
Senate.
We are that number keeps going
up and up and up thank you Mr
I think that there are some good
ideas in this ammendment but I I
agree that it is a different a
different bill and under our
Debate on the bill we have
senator smitteez.
Thank you Mr president will the
bill sponsor you'll please.
Yes.
How this works is a and it'll be
a local.
Decision a local election to
decide.
Order another yes or no no not
ordinance of.
that you have to have a public
meeting at that public input to
determine if that's one of the
ways you want to use.
This money.
You know this.
answer thank you know that that
makes sense Mr president center
so what I'm really trying to
understand now now that I
understand that is.
If there's a particular project.
A a prior decision ordinances is
that it doesn't make sense.
By the commission and they go
out in looking for projects all
the time they're out they they
travel as much as possible to
What this does this particular
bill does is where it was
described to me by the more.
Of Clovis.
That.
business they may want to track.
I would need to Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president center
the way it any of these projects
pass an ordinance ordinances are
heard twice so if the if the
shady.
Passions are the first time
which normally what you'll go
project for this dollar amount.
Then you've got two weeks later
that ordinance comes back for
final vote and that in
municipalities actually that
works so thank you Mr president
senator is I I'm thinking back
to the.
Initial debate on this bill and
there was discussion on
see related businesses
clear on this because there's
been some you know so much
discussion so that the none of
that changes I mean this is the
same version that we originally
saw on the floor is is that
Senator Griggs did you want to
speak to this bill.
Any further debate on the bill.
Si no further debate on the
bill.
transportation committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
nine.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes senator combos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria no Senator Candelaria
no Senator chevron is.
Senator Diamond.
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto passes Senator
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator mon LCS senator Neville.
Yes Senator for the year yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is now Senator
severe Lopez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator share.
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty nine has passed the
Senate.
Senator Senator Woods.
not one time I actually passed a
bill by voting against it.
Remember that I thought I was
going to have to do that again
I move the Senate bill seventy
five of the put on its final
passage subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Sen objection Senator Lopez go
ahead and explain what the bill
does.
director of the state personnel
office Marcella the is the
director of someone's and
Gabriela this month is legal
director for almost.
Seeing no objection.
Senator Lopez will explain what
the bill that's.
seventy five the non disclosure
of sensitive personal
information act.
This legislation is the result
of more than two years of work
legislators in key committees.
This bill would create a policy
for state employees that many of
us may have thought that we
state agency to anyone outside
that state agency.
This bill would require state
employees to keep confidential
orientation and gender identity
immigration status national
origin a person status is
recipient of public assistance
function of the state agency or
necessary to comply with an
order from the state or federal
court what is perfect permitted
personal sensitive information
may occur through an aper
response the scope of this bill
is to prevent intentional
disclosure by state employees.
measures by state agencies such
as a warning such as a
suspension such as a demotion or
incentives of firing for
violating it.
Their twin goals of this bill Mr
occasionally when this issue
comes up I have stood up and
said did you know there is no
statewide policy about
disclosure of information for
example in some in some agencies
at the price to disclose
information in some agencies
out public's essential public
safety and health services
offered by the state.
We know that in order for many
state governments to function
pandemic.
Likewise Mr president New
Mexicans have a reasonable
expectation that their sensitive
information will be safeguarded.
that Mr president I yield to my
co sponsor Senator Stefanics.
Thank you sense of onyx.
Thank you Mr president thank you
bill would protect you
personally it would protect the
information that might be shared
from your income income tax
returns your gross receipts tax
you have a relative that's gone
through Medicaid to child
support through snap benefits
this would protect them and the
disclosure of any of their
private information it would
protection thank you very very
much Mr president thank you
Senator phonics we are debating
the bill.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Thank you see no objections
senator Neville explained with
amendment as thank you Mr
president so under the bill
before us again if state agency
violates the fact.
the people and believing we
should pass laws that actually
empower individuals to bring
cases to vindicate their own
rights so what this amendment
simply does simply does.
did.
Last session with negligent and
intentional spoliation of
evidence in the context of the
All that can happen is a civil
fine that's not paid to the
person was harmed.
The government.
And and and yes I'm I'm somewhat
somewhat.
I believe that it would happen.
But unless we actually put
provisions in these bills that
We can continue pressing
memorials I respectfully submit
the amendment thank you thank
you so as we're debating senator
member number one the Senate
of the committee substitute
process on this bill we remove
the criminal penalties from the
bill because the goal is not to
criminally punish state
as the bill amendment US sponsor
indicated.
And I believe those are
sufficient penalties.
A private right of action and
waiving sovereign or waving
governmental immunity goes
beyond the scope of the bill.
Well I appreciate where the idea
Thank you Senator Lopez we do
have further debate on the
amendment Senator Ivey Soto I
thank very much Mr president
so Senator Candelaria I in
conversation that I had early
with the sponsor of the bill I
indicated that I would.
The what I was sympathetic to
this this isn't something I
thought that I would be
supporting on the floor but I I
just I guess I need to ask a
question because something you
said in your intro.
Who disclosed the information
personally liable.
Mr president that is action
question the clear answers now.
Chapter forty one dash four dash
four subsection B. of the New
Mexico tort claims act.
any torch that was committed by
the public employee will acting
within the scope of quote
unquote his duty but their duty
so much present to your question
Senator now.
party but they're not going to
have to pay that judgment the
state will and it doesn't
surprise me that state agencies
don't like the idea of waving
And so miss president and
senator Candelaria
so how.
Philosophically at least how is
consistent.
And and and I know supports
building economic the Florida
vote now at this point now but
to go to court.
The government has violated
their rights when they've with
like bush's think adventurous
because a game man think of it
under this bill we're saying my
information if I was an adult
I have no right I have to rely
on the state to file a an
administrative process to impose
a fee all membership penny of.
of this sensitive information
we're talking about.
Is people's immigration status
for example.
family.
Loses their home
recover their damages for their
entire life being being
disrupted is that the case Mr
president yes.
Okay well I I appreciate that
very much I I guess I would I
Yes Senator Lopez I'm all
confused as to as to your
opposition to this amendment as
a it appears to make the.
The bill stronger.
most of us.
Most of us who would be in a
might be at some point in our
lives in a position to enforce
this bill are probably people
wondering why it is that it's
that it's problematic to the
bill that we that we just simply
allow people to.
Whose lives have been injured by
Thank you Mr president the civil
rights bill is very specific to
the rights integrated in New
Mexico's constitution and so it
is it has a whole different
policy.
usually they do so because some
eight C. might have a at might
have a criminal penalty or some
agency might have a civil
penalty because it's all over
the map with regard to the
it would encourage sharing of
information if we suddenly have
a toward.
Action a waiver of sovereign
immunity for this
Government governmental
immunity.
Is important in terms of of
other policies and in one of
those policies is whether the
government can afford it and we
through the committee process
and because I've worked so hard
on this bill for two years I
don't want any kind of
unintended consequences out
future maybe if we had this in
place for a couple of years and
and and in fact government
government employees are four
years of five years if
government employees were still
administration Mr president has
been able to stop the.
The one authorise sharing of
president all of that thank you
Mr president.
Senator so the pandemic.
I I I hear just saying us
Senator Lopez I guess.
By the same logic.
bill isn't necessary at this
time either.
The bill is necessary at this
time to make sure that we codify
the protections that it seems to
Thank you Mr president.
Yes under prior administrations.
And with this bill is just
because right now we have an
administration that understands
the importance of the sensitive
sensitive information it is very
important to codify it because
that agency was disclosing
information authorized and so
this bill is necessary to ensure
that that it is clear that the
disclosure of this information
Lopez I I mean I understand what
you're saying but as long as
it's authorized.
The tort claims act would never
come into into a fact because it
be an authorized disclosure
would not be contrary to the
come into an effective somebody
were to do so and on authorise
matter.
There's another issue there and
that is if it were an authorized
it might be outside of the scope
of their employment and
Senator risotto.
Well thank you very much
Senator Lopez and I mean I I
hear what you're saying about
intentional violations of the
non disclosure of personal
information act.
So it seems to me that if
someone is is is providing the
You know and and so in that
regard
The whole point it seems to be
bringing this bill in the first
And people being able to to be
compensated if their lives are
disrupted seems to be a natural
awful from that so is president
I I will be supporting the
sponsor the amendment you'll
please return my good colleague
from Albuquerque thank you very
much Senator Mr president
senator.
okay thank you Mr president and
senator
I I'm I'm leaning toward
supporting the amendment I I
I don't really have any other
problem with with the bill as it
stands but my understanding is
really the original intent of
the bill.
government job and not be
sifting through people's private
information and and disclosing
that to people because they have
a problem with it.
And and so that that's my at
least my understanding of the
of the sensitive information and
is so I'm I'm picturing someone
that is tasked with you know you
know here's here's all these you
know records right here and you
need to send them to this agency
over here there's a ton of of
stuff in it
so what what is the is there a
that has someone's immigration
status or something like that
and they miss it I mean but but
there is I I believe a.
Process to sift through
can give let's assume a state
agency had a fund drive I had a
lot of people's tax information
home addresses everything this
bill seeks to protect let's just
information right under this
bill none of us would have any
rights.
To actually go say Hey
government you ruin my life
bad act could be considered in
the course and scope of
employment level for all of us
the Supreme Court and court of
appeals and answer that question
multiple times yes they have and
in the case is New Mexico State
University there was a case
university was shut under the
tort claims act and the Supreme
Court has been very very clear
on this point.
Yes.
Our system does Forces Group
just what it is is incorrect and
Mister chairman Senator to your
points in closing
you know I I'm really just
senator I continue listening a
bit I'm I'm leaving like
settling toward voting for it as
long as the the negligence stuff
is is not a huge concern and it
sounds like it's fairly clear
cut but I'll continue to listen
Candelaria yield the card is not
a deal yes Mr president.
Senator are a this is this
basically your amendment is
I don't even know where to begin
I think their dentures.
what you're trying to do here
and I have I tend to.
Tend to support it because this
is like so many things we have
here.
That are passed and basically it
like that porcelain New Mexico
we have such little clarity on
anything maybe this will add
Si no further debate on the
amendment etcetera come Lara
close on the amendment thank you
Mr president this is a good bill
but it needs to have teeth it
needs to have some way an
ordinary person whose rights
We're voting on Senate floor
member number one.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos now senator from
the Nadia yes Senator Candelaria
yes Senators around this.
Senator Diamond.
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg now Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez.
No Senator Gonzales now Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes senator
Lujan meal.
Senator had a meal now Senator
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto no.
Senator Pinto no Senator Pirtle.
Senator Sweetser yes.
Senator smitteez.
No Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator Steinborn number Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no.
We do have another floor
amendment thank you Mr president
thank you senator Candelaria.
Yes Sir.
Let me just find the.
The B. but I've been my
three between lines twenty two
and twenty three.
The reader to read.
I move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute Senate bill
seventy five.
See no objections center sort of
explain what the amendment as
thank you very much I miss
president agency president
Because section four of the bill
under enforcement has Attorney
General the district attorney in
the state ethics commission may
institute.
A civil action just to make sure
that's clear that stand out this
the nondisclosure sensible
sensitive personal information
act.
Thank you senator we are on a
Senators we're debating Senate
floor member number one anyone
else wishing the right.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president I now
understand why Senator Ivy Soto
further debate on the amendment.
Senator Candelaria.
is is clarifying the intent that
the ethics commission should
have jurisdiction here or is
this adding that is a new
provision to the bill.
commission has jurisdiction to
institute a selection District
Court of violations occurred or
to prevent violations of the
act.
And and what the penalties would
be so this just simply in
chapter ten article sixteen G.
set the section nine A. has the
various acts that they enforce
and adjust includes that it does
not give them.
proposed act also allows
jurisdiction for the Attorney
General the district attorney
the state ethics commission act
provides that where there's
to who will enforce what so it
it puts it within the context of
their work Mr Chairman at the
end of all of that of ethics
commission doesn't rustication
Mr president and senator
Candelaria on.
It no this does not change that
aspect of this prison are second
in a day now just talking about
bills are meant to protect
people like me.
these but they're trying to to
fix.
I'm just trying to stand here
and say we're gonna make this
commitment.
So actually solve the problem
guys about this what we were
elected.
But anyway I as for the moment
you want to point out again.
Steinborn thank you thank you Mr
president will propose
amendments sponsored please
yield.
Senator so the deal was present
I'm happy to thank you Mr
have any page numbers and I'm
trying to find a section you're
citing some just trying to
understand it would you please
kind of like to say where it is
on the bell and will slower what
Is sections one through four.
Is is the is the act that work
considering section five is
effective date.
like I said find that this is
one of the tax the over which
the state ethics commission has
jurisdiction which is consistent
with the language in section
Okay Mister president center I'm
gonna have to to study it thank
you for the explanation thank
you thanks Senator Steinborn do
president and I do appreciate
people bear with me on the hand
written amendments I was
planning to type it up during a
a a filibuster but apparently I
for Senate bill seventy I do now
pass and I I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate.
Senator steer seeds.
Debate on the bill.
Si no further debate on the bill
Senator Sedillo Lopez close.
wants to work on a different
bill in the future to have
consequences that are greater
than the consequences that we
worked out in the very careful
protect all of our information
state employees will now get
trained about what information
is confidential and state
employees will also know that
What is it.
Seventy five with the
amendments.
They'll be voted on do not pass
through now past and ask for
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the year.
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez senator Sanchez yes
Senators committees.
Senator share now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
By a vote of thirty four in the
affirmative six in the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy five as amended has
passed the Senate Senator
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all options for
placing.
Senate bill one.
Eighty one as amended do now
what the Senate bill one eighty
one does is it provides
flexibility in terms of people
having to pay fines and fees
so that we ensure that the fines
happy to stand for questions
thank you senators we're
debating Senate bill one eighty
one as amended anyone wishing
debate Senator Woods.
Mr president and senator.
So what are the consequences.
That we're trying to do here if
if is there a
Senator Ivey Soto thanks very
much as president and center
what's so so what we're doing
and this particular bill as a as
a couple things one is we're
making sure that people are able
provided because in fact what we
have is there some people who.
when they in a criminal
proceeding.
when they when they
And and so what what the law had
been was that they would get
credited for eight hours a day
while for every single day that
they were in jail but the
reality is there in jail for
the full number of hours in a
day that they're that they're in
jail
in order to work off their fines
and fees and make sure that we
haven't paid their fines and
fees it would cost us a hundred
twelve dollars a day to keep
them in jail and we would give
them credit of about forty two
dollars a day.
crediting people at all at all
levels so much less than what
our actual cost is if they're
actually incarcerated as a
it's for moving infraction in
addition to the fines and fees
were gone away from that we're
just simply trying to trying to
keep everything consistent in
terms of the direction we've
them an opportunity to pay them
if they can't pay it at the at
the very moment of the
conviction thank you.
And and with that Mr president
Certainly this president and
Center what's actually most of
the time for CDL license.
This would not apply because the
and fractions we have moved over
the last two years to being
civil proceedings to being fines
without jail time associated to
them so so this this but to the
off in installments and and so
what it does is that if you're
not able to pay.
if you're able to pay the full
amount of the time you're
so that every every thirty days
you you go ahead and and make
payments until it's paid off and
that way for example if you're
on CDL you can continue to go on
paid and that way you get
cleared out New Mexico yes Sir.
And and Mr president and
Senator.
You know I like that part but
Payment plan Mr president and
senator at miss president center
what's there is a warrant is
issued for their arrest and if
they are stopped then they are
money than it does the offender
so that it actually and for
example the CDL person they
would actually be able to get
along they're on their way a
little bit sooner after spending
not a good bar bargain for us.
Mr president and senator.
I just want to make sure that
But should we discuss what the
law.
All together.
Instead of saying well that's
not a bad enough law that we
If we're gonna say we you don't
have to follow that law that
that law is not necessary
anymore
show yeah you broke it but but
these laws are gonna say well it
makes no difference for whether
I try to enforce these laws are
not.
So that's that's my general
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I think Senator Woods
for the questions and he's going
Vontaze and Ivey Soto are doing
here because what's happened
we've created a system and a
shout out to our former chair of
judiciary was not here anymore
And the problem is once someone
gets sucked into this there is a
vicious cycle that happens and
the idea that someone can't pay
And I just think that you don't
want.
You know those who can least
afford to pay to get sucked into
the system and unfortunately
it's really on us to a large
and on off they go so this bill
just give some flexibility and I
think that's a that's certainly
a good staff but I actually
think we need to go farther and
we need to look at this this is
punishment and those that can
least afford to pay it gets
sucked in and and then we're
into as the point was made by
Senator the order of the cost of
kind of going through this and
questions and I'm gonna generate
some more for you probably
tomorrow and Senate finance but
I certainly rise and support the
bill thanks thank you senator
The senator will yield this
president center doing a happy
to thank you Mr president and I
was just looking at the
committee report on this it
looks like I was excuse when the
amount at the time of sentencing
could do so it looks like that
language was taken out Senator
to fear was why was that
language taken out and and is
that still the effect of the
bill.
want people if they can't have
that moment that they do pay but
then the judge is to engage and
David and and ascendancy
bill and it's something that is
essential part of what we're
doing with this bill.
Mr president of the center thank
you.
bill that still remains.
This president and senator do if
you give me just a moment I'll
be able to point you to the
exact place if you have another
Mr president will also arrive so
those looking for that the the
the court in this installment
agreement and so Mr president I
would just want to know if that
language exist somewhere else in
the bill or if that is being
that a person is able to to pay
off their fines are at an
accelerated rate if they so
choose.
Mr president thank you all.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president and what
the sponsor please yield Senator
that is the place for the
indigent to determination is
discussed but yes I'm happy to
yield Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president of.
confinement and that credit
looks to be
twice the prevailing wage of the
county municipal or hourly
minimum wage in my reading that
introduced our.
However I do believe.
And the second.
That was changed.
And that we also.
What we did was instead of twice
the rate of the prevailing.
Minimum wage what we did was we
clarified that we're talking
twenty four times if you're if
you're in jail for twenty four
hours.
So so Mister president if I read
Mr president and Senator Baca so
that was unclear whether it was
twice the range whether we were
reducing down to effectively for
clarified twenty four times the
rate of the prevailing state
county or municipal hourly
minimum wage whichever is
highest for each day or parts of
Of the twenty four hours of each
of those days so some Mr
president clarified and under
under this instead of twice of
this includes a Mr president of
times when there's no activity
at all they're just sitting in a
cell well they're sleeping
they're eating Mr president all
Thank you Mr president on on the
page two it talks here about
some additions that we're going
to give them credit for a it
that's new languages well it
appears.
Miss president Esther.
So Mister president and I think
this I see some of the value in
Mr president there actually
reducing the amount of their
obligation owed to the state
while they're attending that.
that you are incarcerated that
is that is for your community
service time so a lot of times
Mr president answer Baca someone
might be ordered to pay seven
aspect of it and the idea behind
that is we want to leave people
in a more productive place in
society then with the started
they are out in the to to get
out in the workforce and be
paying taxes as opposed to
second of tax resources that's a
good thing that's a net positive
that's something we want to have
just entry did on his own with
many people who had not gotten a
high school diploma or GED there
is that he would order them to
precisely under the philosophy
that that that if you're going
to be a productive part of
society this is one of the basic
things that you need in order to
go forward Mr president was that
GED all that sort of thing in
lieu of fines correctors it or
is it in addition to provide Sir
what have what what what would
what would we expect to see if a
and so then he gives them a
sentence or she gives them a
sentence of that would be this
type of community service.
also be required to serve a
period of time and labor to be
known as community service in
lieu of all or part of the fine
determination already Mister
president that the person is in
fact indigent we have community
service the requires actually
payment well I don't know
you're reducing obligation you
know it really looks like a lot
like you're getting paid and it
feels like you're getting paid
so what we have here is a
this is about actual punishment
if you know if you do something
wrong then you're supposed to
have some sort of punishment
attached to that but we as we've
is not willing to pay for courts
and two for justice to be
administered and I and I have a
disagreement with that I hear
that a lot here the the only
done wrong in Mr president my
point being is that when we do
things wrong in the society it's
supposed to be an inconvenience
and that's what I
back and go well I really don't
want to do that again and and
that seems to be something that
we stray further and further and
people out off a little bit too
easy and at the end the public
is the one who pays only they'll
pay in dollars the pay a
property and maybe the Pam
yeah they might be doing this
everywhere else Mr president but
is it right for us here does
that work here our crime rates
steadily go up or violent crime
school for property crimes are
that and the you know I'm
fearful for that leads us Mr
president I I certainly will be
supporting this today I do
appreciate the sponsor and his
Baca.
We do have a floor amendment the
reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number.
One to Senate bill one eighty
one as amended amendment
I move US Senate floor amendment
one to Senate bill one eighty
one is amended.
And this amendment would put
back in that indigents the
criminal charge whereas where
the spot where the indigenous
information is left in this bill
is specific only to the motor
vehicle code so the intent of
Senator Judiciary amendment
thank you thank you we are
debating the the center for
member number one we go to
Senator Ivey Soto.
So it's it's it's a value
neutral.
Present on top of that is being
a friendly amendment.
on the amendment.
Thank you due to.
I I I I move US Senate amendment
one or I'm sorry floor amendment
one to Senate bill one eighty
amended.
Senator Baca.
Mr president roll call.
The card Colorado.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos yes senator from
the body you know Senator
Candelaria no senator should run
this Senator Diamond.
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
yes yes yes yes yes yes yes.
Senator Hemphill you must be up
in your office would you repeat
your vote.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto passes Senator
how to meal.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Munoz passes senator
Neville.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sanchez known Senator
twenties.
Senator Schmidt is no Senator
Lopez at Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Diamond I'm sorry.
Senator Diamond known.
affirmative fifteen the negative
senator member number one has
been adopted to send ability one
now is twice amended we are back
on the bill Senator Burt.
me the process now if if we set
this up and do we have an
estimate on how many people this
will affect that go through the
system say on an annual basis.
I don't I don't know the exact
number of people that this
would.
Impact but because we're not
actually waving in in the fines
or fees the impact that'll have
and people cannot pay the full
amount at that time they make
arrangements you have got like a
Mr president and the Senator
Burt we did not my comment is
that part dates a couple
judicial districts might
contract with Senator share and
ideally for some of these people
they'll be able to.
Vied a a credit card that would
just be debited every now and
then on that but but that is
about view of this thing that is
one of my concern about the
application of this after a year
or two you know you've got a
hundred a thousand two thousand
don't pay their bills basically
to the district of the state
room ever now are going to have
to be around it up so that now
collection agency and and so I I
guess.
Mr president Senator that's my
concern is the practical
applications I I appreciate
where you're coming from however
it's hard for me to support bill
which I think is going to create
won't pay because that's the
nature of people all over the
world and the people who are
behind on their credit cards
people who are behind on their
installment payments were behind
on their their house payments in
agency to follow up on these
folks and and make this happen
and so the dentist when you're
forty two dollars a day and a
hundred twelve dollars a day
becomes pretty small and you
this infrastructure in the cost
of trying to maintain and manage
this credit bureau that you're
setting up for the entire state
Gallegos on the list Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank you Mr
president
This bill would go it will be
Senator yield.
Thomas present.
effect ninety days following the
adjournment of this legislative
session assume that it's passed
and signed into law by the
governor.
the conviction that it goes into
effect the time of the charges
or the time of the sentencing Mr
president.
This president and senator
Sedillo Lopez
not at the time of the
conviction it's at the time of
the sentencing.
And the last possible moment.
When they said apply this
approach.
Certainly it's you know actually
Senator says do X. amendment
because that was the confusion
to be I think that this is a
really good bill because so many
people are suffering now with
the with the situation the
interim committee the courts of
course corrections and Justice
Committee and the state center
sentencing commission made the
proposal along these lines I
debate Senator goes.
hear this in committee and has
just wondering
To try to understand the bill I
understand that you're
decriminalizing offenses by
pending on the amount of time
you're in.
Mr president and Senator
the guy across this would be
for example.
and just Bernalillo county.
In order for them to collect
four point one million dollars
in assessed fines they lost two
converted into jail and
community service which was
actually a fair amount of that
amount of money that they really
that in get in in addition to
community service.
Credits this is this I will tell
you.
That this is our this is a bill
that actually will likely reduce
fine to pay and I don't Hey
it's.
They immediately sure weren't
for my rust instead of trying to
work with the first and so and
so then the cost them in terms
Is is actually a greater cost
right now than than than
actually what's anticipate in
terms of being able to work with
people to be able to get them to
make the payments and if they
in jail or through community
service.
Mr president and senator I guess
so he would be my consideration
would look at elongating that
time of collection not
affect a the AOC will they not
lose money on their budget.
Agency president and Senator
getting credit for it in other
ways unless unless they spend an
extended amount of time and and
and jail this gives other
options that actually will will
Thank you Mr Senators Mr
president center and I agree
with my colleague Sedillo Lopez
com center city Lopez on where
because it seems like we're
letting prisoners out of jail
chickens out of cages full we
still keep the legislature on
Mr president and with the center
yield center so the yield spread
of a happy to yield Senator
Ingle and also in terms of
Senator Gallegos last comment I
do believe the legislature will
are paroled B. I I I think it's
a four year parole term.
Thank you present center idea.
Hi I tend to see what we want to
the other day on a on a bill at
the Billboard business was going
to get better I think we're
gonna have a lot more
construction around our
courthouses four people are
back a few years when we had a
full Senator that would have
been the mayor of Albuquerque.
And he put a a put cameras on
But it was very successful and
so successful it took him off.
Because people were so angry
about getting so many tickets
for running red lights in
Albuquerque.
making this to where it's almost
going to be.
I can't pay.
And we're gonna put on time
program to pay these fines and
the amount of people that are
going to pay them I think is
system in our court system that
is over used.
And abused and the.
I just really.
I don't say that we've got a
of and used by people that don't
need to do it and our and our
court system is not going to get
the funds the fall through like
it was and is and in many cases
very well at all thank you.
Thanks Santo Domingo any further
debate on the bill Senators.
bill was on the floor and I
chose to do enough solid by
presenting inform.
But with that mistrusted out.
Common punishment is a is is a
doesn't force people into for
the crime or to become criminals
for a second reason in terms of
the punishment this tries to
strike that balance in a better
way than what we've done
a roll call vote thank you
senators to your seats please
more voting on Senate bill one
eighty one is twice amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator chevron this.
Senator Diamond.
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator manos.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle Senator Pirtle no Senator
pope yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Schmidt is no Senator
severe Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator share now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn ask Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Baca no.
Senator Candelaria.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes.
By a vote.
Of twenty five in the
affirmative fifteen the negative
Senate bill one anyone is twice
and for consideration about
thank you thank you going on
item number five that Senate
bill forty three Senator cels
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
see no objections Center souls
to explain the bill thank you Mr
president this particular bill
is for allows the demolition of
construction in over the years
we've added other systems that
could be used for the state and
local match one of the areas
it's always difficult for school
districts is when there's a
they still have to do some of
the security maintenance and
upkeep and other types of things
the only thing that this bill
does is it allows the public
school facilities and it comes
without a state local match one
of the concerns districts often
have is it's difficult to go out
for the local match alright with
approved for districts to get
full funding there.
Is not any state local match
when there is demolition that's
all it does.
Absolutely.
Thank you Mr president does this
legislation require any
salvaging of materials that
might be able to be repurposed
would be up to local codes local
school district and other things
this only is enabling of the
public school facilities
authority to have demolition
costs fully covered.
high the contractors don't take
any time to to ensure that you
know beautiful oak wood floors
are salvaged and repurposed and
reused instead it's just all
dumped in our landfills so
things are not just thrown away
the yucca building is a perfect
sample within Rossell fourteen
thousand square feet of wood
floor beautiful wood for never
been sanded before luckily the
architectural aspects of these
buildings and knows that that
the old stuff is better than the
new stuff so maybe someday Mr
president senator we find a way
on public buildings to re
that thank you Mr president.
Thanks Senator Pirtle further
debate Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr president what
Senator socio Senator so Z.
yield Mister president of course
we talking about here does any
if there any figures talked
about about what it cost to
demolish a school.
Mr president and center Ingle
facilities authority is dealing
with and so it's not typically a
large cost but because it
requires a local match it
sometimes is difficult for the
local communities to deal with
and there isn't a list a
particular schools this is just
enabling for the future.
President I don't necessarily
have a problem with this but I
have to be really careful when
we go here because.
The amount of money that is
generated here for this is going
to be something that contractors
very specialized area for
certain contractors to do and
certain contractors to know how
to bid this.
And I just think our costs are
going to go through the roof on
certain bonding obligations that
basically really help the rural
areas a lot more but as time
goes on and legislation and how
fund is going for less and less
than what it used to and I just
feel like we have to be careful
when we add things on.
handled in New Mexico very often
once the government's
involvement in the costs go
absolutely through the roof
thank you.
Thanks entering a Senate
committee.
thank you Mr Senator I just have
one one point or one question
In trying to really save cost
here and be efficient in the
discussion and development of
demolition training programs and
things like that to to bring
those people in to help out with
this sort of thing.
Mr president and senators
something forward okay thank you
Mr president maybe just a
suggestion of this is kind of
not.
Really within what this bill
does but I think it could also
I maybe I don't know but maybe
because for an academic exercise
Sandia there's a lot of
explosives work I'm just
wondering if somebody would be
able to come in at a very very
help reduce the cost here so
just a just a suggestion but I I
just I appreciate the debate and
and will continue to listen so
thank you Mr president thank you
legislature what I found that
happens.
When bills like this are past
all of a sudden there's only one
or maybe two contractors that
are the official a officially
really hope doesn't happen here
but it I'm sure it will because
it always does thank you.
Thanks entering any further
debate.
recused from this will do for my
profession and conflict of
interest.
I see no objections.
Senator cels to close thank you
Mr president this is you
it also then allows the district
to not be paying insurance costs
and other things which puts
money right straight back in the
classrooms and so Mister
president I move that Senate
bill forty three.
We're voting on Senate bill
forty three.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Candelaria nope Senator
Candelaria Now Senator chevron
this.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes Senator Duhigg Senator
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be now.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
The
sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
of a Senate education I now have
to justify why I'm trying to
tear down buildings instead of
build them up as an education a
legislator but I'll deal with
Thank you centerman yes we do go
to item number six on the
calendar.
Senator Stewart.
passage passage has been taken
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitutions the
no objections Senator Stewart to
explain with the builders.
with our students and that is
learning loss R. two LFC
evaluations found that lower
student engagement with remote
Produced by doubles.
The dynamic indicator of early
learning skills it's a testing
company that looks at Hey one
they're seeing a huge drop in
the ability of our early
students to learn to read and do
math.
students that are black and
Hispanic for even lower.
So this bill.
Thanks to good programs that
we are back in person then it it
requires all schools to either
do two more weeks for K. five
plus.
started this I was contacted by
superintendents and teachers at
cetera with some concerns about
this we met multiple times
that's why you're looking at a
application process we limiting
eliminated some of the specific
tests for K. five plus we also
we re wrote these statues to
accommodate that.
So we put more flexibility in it
and now we have their support
essentially what it does is if
paid for it if you haven't you
have to extend up to ten days
from where you start so for some
districts that could be I some
districts could be eight for
learning get a six percent
average pay increase course the
requires more work.
And for K. five plus it's a
fourteen percent increase.
school so Mister chairman I'm
happy to answer questions thank
you Senators Regis reminder we
are in third reading and that's
been a long day but if we can
please keep the volume down so
Senator Kernan Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president.
I hate the sponsor would yield
for a question or two Mr deal
I know the theory behind this
that we need to extend the
school year we need to take the
kids to have more time in school
And also know from of the
committee hearing before that
this will take into effect
unless we can be in a face to
Madam protiv.
Mr president Senator.
Now I'm usually not a gambling
person.
I think more and more of the
education population is getting
vaccinated.
Thank you for that answer Mr
president and senator I I
That's my concern.
That's my concern about the
And.
And I know this is nothing to do
with your bill but you have some
direct contact with with
What what percent of our
students are.
Are behind grade levels right
now have have you got any idea
have the exact New Mexico data
in part because.
We've we've not been assessing
students normally.
For at least a year.
actually asked for flexibility
to not have to test everyone to
do sampling I'm not sure what
the upshot is of that request I
was on a conference call with
regular testing which is third
through eighth and once in high
school with standards based
assessments I said no but I was
in the minority most states
Two different
studies and they're saying from
four months to a year this
doubles what.
track in K. one two three
decreased from fifty five
percent to thirty seven percent.
For kindergartners fifty eight
nine percent we're in the lowest
category compared to thirty four
percent last year.
This is a simple assessment the
all over the country so this is
really shocking to me to have
that low percentages no it's
it's really hard to teach young
our students so I just think
we're kind of all in trouble for
a while and this is the effort
behind this bill both from the
this because those programs.
That the judge said we're so
good we're not taken up this
year because of the pandemic.
I have a son that's teacher and
he's teaching.
Mass.
Across that.
That medium.
And it's so hard.
To.
To determine.
What is a lot like this soon
deal we're doing here.
You know if.
mouth inner facial expressions.
You know I don't know whether
I'm getting across my porn or
not.
And I've got a son that's doing
it and it is yes.
A situation that were falling
know we've we was talking about
students that we we couldn't
even find there for awhile and
then we found Senator
in my part of the world.
And there's lots of crossed.
People there.
And it's a tough situation.
What is it it is we still
haven't lost the year.
If we could get these kids back
Anything's an improvement over
what we're doing today anything.
And I know there's there's
And I know what you're trying to
do here and I tell you my school
districts are not in favor of
this because they're having
Find someone to teach more days.
I understand what you're trying
to do.
But also I understand we need to
do it today.
president that the two schools
extended school year.
So I've got.
thank you very much for the time
being center was further debate
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr president
and Madam protium just to
four day that those have all
been resolved in the substitute
is that correct.
Mr president I will yield and
the answer is yes I've I've been
we had we had several zooms on
this and I just once I heard the
concerns I just decided to re
write the statutes so the first
week schools they don't do
twenty five days for K. five
plus they do planning and
instead of ten for extended
that they don't have to do even
more or if they're not up to the
ten they do a few that's written
into the bill.
Those for the main concerns that
year we all do a little bit more
school.
Thank you very much Mr and then
approached Mr president madam
pro tem and and I support this
The calls to them is just going
to continue they have lost so
much learning over this past
year and I think all the kids to
be back and I made that
Five days a week and we are
still struggling just to get a
couple days a week in and we
have got to do something I'm
but I will tell you it's time
for everyone to get back to the
job of educating our students I
support this bill I'm glad it's
and days that schools are
children are supposed to be in
school that has always been in
statute.
And I do think that many of the
districts are ready or very
the other key to this is it only
is possible if they are in
person this is not many that's
going to go to additional
virtual school so that's very
important these kiddos need to
task of educating our children
and so that's all I have and
thank you on that pro tempore
caring this bill.
Senator Kernan we do have
Thank you Mr president with the.
I am pro tempore yield Senator
yield yes I will.
Mr.
I had but I had heard early on
of that
it's Representative Ross had an
issue with the timeline is it
day week so we re wrote the
statutes for the four day week
that was his timeline issue.
President.
we can come back next year in
extended or house at work Mr
president of center this is a
temporary provision for next
year it's six section six of the
year we might extend that we'll
see how the districts like it
we'll see how the kids like it
we'll see where they're really
at we'll look at their academic
Mr president pro tem I
understand then we'll reevaluate
after one year so it could go
and be on the line your if it's
to the benefit of students so
what I'm understanding.
Mr president madam pro tem and I
appreciate it I've done quite a
few things this year to try to
get those listen Senator Woods
table in education the would to
help us get our kids in school
now talk to the governor staff
just a little while ago about.
so the football games or sports
small district in Eunice and.
Senator to my superintendent
asked name what are total hours
are currently in I'll have to
Thank you Mr president in the
words of Cory Booker I think the
goose is cooked on the this
legislation and so I only the
said that just before the to go
vote he he knew how the vote was
going to go and so I'm just
saying I know how this votes
going to go but I do want to say
something positive I I very much
And you know there was a a
beautiful painting.
I believe the orders was ever
Gonzales that we had presented
Mrs learn auger with
A grandma was was cooking with
the with the wood stove.
send kind words though that some
of my family has and and it's
risk kids
and I think.
Just the fact that in studies
have shown this the kids that
have more books just the when
school whatever it it it doesn't
the it's an independent factor
just the number of books in the
house
increases a kid's likelihood of
of developing appropriate
especially if we tied this to at
risk kids
of course to be discussion of
which books would go there
that's another that that's
concerns about what the teachers
think I have a lot of concerns
about well why can't the
districts and kind of decide for
themselves and you know have a
little more local control
we have large universities in
states that that are open no
one's no one's having problems
we have Florida.
their death rate it right now is
lower than California not
picking on certain states I'm
just showing that no matter what
we do no matter what governments
have done in different states
that COVID is is a pediatric
disease will poliomyelitis
poliomyelitis is a pediatric
disease COVID is not thank god
it is not but the the the death
not at risk of COVID we we know
this we have the data and we can
look at and and thankfully in
our in our Republic we can look
at other states what they're
these students are at risk no
one can show that data nobody
and so I just the just want to
point that out that I really
really really hope we can get
the kids back I very much
the biggest concern of when I
called at risk folks are the the
the folks the the the kids that
the Sanchez talking about in the
studies that are hurt the most
and so I I'm I'm thankful for
Thank you Mr present with the
sponsor yield Mister deals yes.
Thank you Mr president
Senator can you remind the.
the question I can't hear you Mr
president center can you remind
me by whose order was for the
schools closed ten person
learning.
Mr president Center and I thank
you for for that but your
reasoning for bringing the bill
was to address the loss of
and I I guess my concern is and
and I I don't think I have any
other questions I just want to
clarify that.
and
frustrating for everyone
involved.
kids get kids back in for
virtual learning and then we
come into this year and it's all
virtual.
And then now the governor is
saying well it's okay to go
back.
It's all right it's not fair.
The governor who made the order
herself to close the schools
doesn't make the order herself
to open back up.
prerogative she closed down that
way she can open up that way and
so now you've got pressure on
your school board and other
school boards around the state
The governor obviously believes
it's safe for them to re open so
let's reopen.
We've seen in other states.
And yet we're still closed and
now we want to extend the school
year.
Now you and I have had many many
discussions around K. five plus.
And I appreciate that and I
always appreciate the wonderful
discussions that.
Mr president center you and I
have had and we have always kept
That is my concern.
I can't support mandating to our
districts.
That they do this I support
support completely opening it up
although it doesn't really
matter.
Because right now they can't do
it.
Because right now.
We are going to run a bill to
increase the number of days when
we honestly won't even let the
kids get get back in the class
now.
safely do it it's All I Want to
do is stand up here today and
say let's open our schools let's
let our kids get back and just
let them get the education they
deserve and then if we need to
Mr president thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Woods yes
Senator Lopez.
I thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate
back we did have a lawsuit that
was decided by judge singleton.
which is the Ozzy versus the
state and of course Martinez
Mr president for many of us have
been involved in setting here
with education in our
communities you know my
come to fruition December I know
agreement which was some issues
that centered around Rio Grande
High School.
And graduation rates and the
quality of teachers as I mean of
But I think what the lawsuit
brought to the attention for all
of us here in the greater
community is that we are still
missing on how we work with.
Offering an opportunity.
For our students.
Not so much to catch up Mr
president but the way I always
floor is when you're new in the
chamber your educated but you
still got to come up to speed so
you have to spend extra time to
go through and read bills to
even just within this business
that we are Mr president members
of the Senate.
And for our students.
Offering this extra time I think
as the comments that have been
made Mister president
senators is of I like it still.
That the students have been
online not everybody can learn
these these contraptions these
computers laptops and everything
else and I think that is
another.
Positive look out to say that
all of us have had to come to
actually being much more
included in what's happening
with the students that what of
what they're learning.
There are several of us on this
floor that actually have school
age children.
teach me how to use a laptop.
She knows how to use this thing
left and right upside down with
your eyes closed of how to do
slides and everything.
Talking about what they've
learned in surviving a pandemic.
So Mister president there's I
hope not not the the sunny side
Forces an issue to add value for
what the students already have
in their bring.
to me this is something we
should have done many years
back.
students Mr president members of
this that I sent to support
thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez any
further debate Senators.
Si no further debate.
I did not in two thousand eight
the legislature did a big study
with the American institutes of
research of their major
ten continue to focus on in the
lawsuit are those two programs
up there on the board.
These are evidence based
programs it extends the school
offering this to our students
next year.
Mr president I move that Senate
finance committee substitute for
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Candelaria yes Senators around
this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator part of the year.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez no Senators
committees.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator so yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Representative Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
By a vote of thirty one of the
affirmative line and they get in
the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
bill I did not like the mandate
and I know we have other
opportunities to get our kids in
school and we pick and choose
those opportunities as we go
were not willing to extend so
with that I'll yield thank you
Mr president thank you senator
gave us Senator Stewart thank
you Mr president members of the
legislation the reader to read.
act creating a capital
improvement program for public
school ventilation systems
creating a fund.
Providing for applications from
and grants to school districts
and charter schools to improve
declaring an emergency.
How's Education Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty two.
House Education Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty two having been read
by representative Kelly Fajardo
and senator Gregory A. Baca.
And act relating to health
clarifying the definition of
contracting hospital in the
transportation committee house
bill two forty house bill two
hundred introduced by
Representative McQueen.
And act relating to water
Directing the water trust board
to evaluate and recommend
projects to the Interstate
Stream Commission disallowing
the use of funds for the New
bill two hundred and resident Mr
president Senator Woods on that
bill two hundred shouldn't that
be sent and to finance its
Is that center was unable to
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth Mr chair it's
federal money.
It's how the federal money gets
Take the projects.
The center was.
Then Senator Wirth this is
know we're at a point where.
I mean this third third referral
on this bill it did not you know
wasn't looked at and House
Appropriations and again when we
I move that we referred this to
the third referral to finance.
Etcetera etcetera was made a
motion.
point which I know is not where
you're going you're trying to
just have a finance referral but
let's let's take a look at it
hold it back and we can.
No we'll take a look at.
Senator Baca we just read in
house bill two forty so in the
in the light of our new
information here a I'd like to
the house already it simply
changes the definition if we
would like a variety of
committees with it's it's then
going to tax from the side so I
pull that one back as well
because again before we start
single referring bills I think
there's been good communication
on that so let us take a look at
it and happy to look at that.
And act relating to crime
creating the crime of illegally
dismantling a motor vehicle
vehicle stolen motor vehicle for
stolen vehicle providing a
Committee and Senate finance
committee.
That's almost.
Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr president
the Senate that the duly
enrolled in a gross copy of
Senate bill one as amended with
emergency clause has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the house in open
directed to inform the Senate
that the duly enrolled in gross
copy of Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill three
with emergency clause has been
read in full and signed by the
That's all.
Senator Wirth.
This president is that we go
about our business committee
reports.
Has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that it do passed
as amended.
Respectfully submitted Senator
Joseph Cervantes chairman.
Move adoption of the committee
report.
Senator is a motion to adopt the
committee report.
four hundred nineteen has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that a
do not pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Benny Shendo junior chairman
Senator Shendo.
Option of the three four.
Mr president your Education
Committee to whom has been
referred house bill fifty two as
amended has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
to be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the gentle we fight they were
acted upon individually.
See no objections the reader to
read and Mister president house
move adoption the committee
report that is we have a motion
to that the committee report.
Seeing no objection the Canadian
forces been adopted in the
journal show that they were
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president just for the chairs
that's it for today will be in
at eleven o'clock tomorrow for
chairs to make their
announcements.
affairs committee will start at
five fifty well it's a five
thirty and that we have to bills
of that we carried over from the
agenda but we'll we'll go as
long as as we can until members
start toppling over in their
seats thank you Mr chairman
Senator anticipate Senator nail
thank you Mr president members
fifty five you know not very
noticeable Bill on alcohol do
deliveries please have your
proposed amendments prepared and
submitted to the Senate
tomorrow at noon thank you
thanks Antonio center many of
us.
Thank you Mr president according
to the Senate finance finance
Where those two bills and and
try to get out of here by six
o'clock.
Mr president thank you centerman
yes Senator CENIC's.
we plan to meet Tuesday Thursday
and Saturday morning Saturday we
will handle to Senate emergency
bills thank you.
Any further announcements
legislation to prohibit the gay
and trans panic defense my
office is attempting to get
commitments from Senate
Judiciary for over two weeks
referral for Senate bill to
thirteen be dropped and that
this bill which is made it
through the process before come
to the floor before the logic on
the Senate floor thank you a
CENIC on the Senator Wirth I
here
but again with respect to the
process so I just.
Again would point that out and
think typically that's how it's
done with consultation with the
deference to this process
withdraw the amendment but for
me this isn't just a matter of
complacency this bill deals with
whether or not people who killed
you senator Wirth and Mister
chair I just could I just
Senator Candelaria you got my
word this that was but the three
of us visit with Senator on face
tomorrow and then we can have
indeed role cultural affairs
committee will meet at nine AM
tomorrow we have a presentation
from McKinley thank you Senator
Pinto any further announcements
Senators.
objections the Sentinel Center
Reese's until eleven AM
tomorrow.
