Senator Baca said Senator
Padilla.
Rebecca are we ready to to roll
with that
as far as having their expert
witnesses and.
Yes Senator Pinto we have our
list of
At folks who gave public comment
as well as the.
People who called in and we have
it looks like we have all of our
expert witnesses are ready to
go.
Okay I'll be listening in you'll
see me online will pop in and
op but I share our meal your
take over from here.
Thank you madam chairwoman
morning everybody it looks like
we're recording and everybody is
in place to regulate listen into
Senator Baca who's going to talk
about Senate bill three three to
the soil and water conservation
district Senator Baca good
morning.
you're on mute.
Good morning Mr chair good
morning members of the committee
I hope everybody's warm this
morning.
What I have for you today is
Senate bill three thirty to
Senate bill three thirty two of
basically addresses mill levies
property taxes essentially for
for soil and water conservation
district in two thousand
eighteen the bill was passed
under a under a title of of I
believe it was voter tune up or
something to that effect was
about three hundred pages I
guess was that bill or something
here that and a lot in that bill
what happened and what was
stricken was the sunset period
for these property taxes Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and that the sunset
period was ten years so
effectively what was done was
eighty eight levy would be
passed for of a referendum would
be passed for having to do with
the resolution that would go
through the level of soil and
water conservation district for
whatever purpose they needed it
and the voters would take a vote
on that but with that new
stricken language that property
tax will now would now never and
it would go on in perpetuity and
never fall off without visiting
the voters again and so that
that particular we had a actual
referendum come up after that
was a passed in twenty nineteen
and that that vote was taken
here and it was aptly named but
by some of the opponents the
forever tax because essentially
that's what it would do Mr chair
members of the committee is it
would tax the the public on
their property for a specific
project referendum which is
totally reasonable there you
know there are some important
projects they do but it would go
on and on and on and on and
Everett so that's one provision
of the bill at.
And that language can be found
on
The forty the age here.
And that language can be found
on page two.
And it's lying I.
And it's a simple addition for
stated period of up to ten years
now that was standing law up
until twenty eighteen when this
was stricken in that in that
other bill additionally all your
attention to the bottom the very
bottom of that paragraph another
provision was is that if there's
a loan obligation
that the soil water conservation
district takes on so if in their
render referendum they would say
for instance we we have this
we're going to borrow money to
do a specific project and we
need the mill levy in fact to
pay back that that capital loan
obligation the mill levy would
stay in effect until throughout
the obligation only it didn't
specify what obligations so I'll
give you another example of that
and I see madam chair is back
and and the members of the
committee an example of that
might be so you go you you have
you take out a commercial loan
obligation you've gotten your
referendum basically you've got
your your tax for your lad tax
approved by the voters they said
okay we we approve of the land
tax we have a loan obligations
that we've taken out for the
project and it goes and and and
so it just continues over the
years now the loan obligation is
paid off what we're finding is
that some of the soil water
conservation districts are going
out and getting additional loan
and additional funding and and
it simply continues that
property tax obligations through
through the loan period so you
can see by this structure and
mechanism what happens is is you
could go out and get one loan
and then another loan and then
another loan and go on on on and
on and on and continue
throughout this process
Continue the tax that we as well
and so what this bill seeks to
do is it seeks to basically seal
seal a couple of loopholes
because a of that right now
what's happening with the voters
is is it do go out in the vote
for this and I'll tell you that
some of these taxes of the at
the increments they were being
presented to the public there
was a very small voter turn out
so for instance a one of these
taxes was approved with about
four hundred votes and you know
that's a pretty low low margin
to pass to pass across an entire
a an entire county you know in
our county there's several tens
of thousands of people enough
four hundred votes to tax every
single piece of property is is a
pretty extensive and powerful
and so that's what that's what
the essentially this bill is all
about thank you for your
consideration I'll turn it over
to you Mr chair or Mr chair or
witnesses chair whoever is
whoever is a in running the show
right now we can go over to a
whoever you'd like next experts
public of and I'm not familiar
with what how your processes in
this committee thank you Senator
Baca if you're expert witnesses
are with you will call upon them
now and they can give their
testimony and before we go to a
public comment.
Very good I should have on the
phone again good men she is a US
of went to county soil and water
a board member and she could
tell you a little bit more about
it if the skilled good man is on
the line.
Maybe that are affected we have
Gail on the line with us.
Mr Chairman I do see a phone
number five oh five eight six
six oh four oh three if that is
you miss Goodman could you
please and you yourself and I'll
go ahead and identify yourself
please.
I'm not sure if there is.
Yes hello.
Up madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Gail
good men and I live in Valencia
County and I'm a member of the
Valencia soil and water
conservation district and I'd
like to say that I'm not
speaking for the board I'm
speaking for myself as a
resident and for the people who
voted for me first I'd like to
thank you very much for the
opportunity to participate in
this process it's awesome so
thanks
with regard to Senator and I'd
like to think Senator Baca for
bringing this bill forward it's
really really important I could
clarify for you the two hundred
and thirteen million eight
election Senator Baca.
Actually it was two hundred and
it was a standalone election and
two hundred and eighty four
people voted for that bill lady
so two hundred and eighty four
voters caused everyone to be
taxed in the district for ten
years
so it's it's critically
important that the funds are
being put back into the
legislation in two thousand and
nineteen the soil and water
conservation district had
another referendum this time it
was a bundled election thank you
legislators for changing of that
possibility it six hundred six
thousand one hundred forty three
of people voted and of that
number four thousand and eighty
five voted against a forever tax
and Senator Baca made the point
that people may support the
project the district to the
notion of the soil and water
conservation district but the
idea of a forever tax people
just simply will not approve and
rightly so a forever tax so it's
it's critically important that
the sunset B. put back into the
into the our legislation the
other problem is Senator Baca is
other other amendment is also
critically important because as
the soil and water conservation
act is written districts are
permitted yes they are and that
at the time there are mill levy
funds that to continue
collecting the milk lady until
they pay off the debt in this
case in the case of the Valencia
for water conservation district
they are not currently in debt
the mill is there Millie the
failed and so what they're doing
is trying to take out a capital
outlay loan to extend collection
of the current mill levy for
ever and that it's absolutely
legal it is in my.
You are just a call so senator
Baucus changes are really
important and I beg you to
consider them thank.
Thank you miss Goodman for your
comments Senator Baca do you
have any other expert witnesses
with you today.
Mr chair that I think ill ms
Goodman is is my only expert
witness today so from there were
we yield to you and and your
wishes very good Rebecca Nathan
do we have anyone from the
public who would like to speak
either in opposition or in
support of the bill and if we do
we'll start with those in
opposition first.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
At in opposition to the bill.
We had Debbie to.
Executive director New Mexico
association of conservation
district.
Yes you then at that rate may go
ahead.
Just thank you Mr chair members
of the committee first all
entailed about slow water
districts when Congress set up a
solar Rosen service which became
the sole conservation service of
the natural resource
conservation service they asked
it governments to enable the
slow Water districts so there'd
be a local delivery system for
USDA farm bill dollars.
There's three thirty three
thousand four water districts
covering every state the very
unique relationship shared
between federal and local
governments and all of the water
districts have agreement signed
the USDA so that the bar bill
dollars to come to their
districts provide voluntary
incentive based conservation and
technical and financial support
to farmers ranchers thirty to
forty million dollars per year
come to Mexico because of the
slow Water districts through
USDA water conservation district
also put other state and federal
funds on the ground to grants
degree Max.
Force and repair and restoration
the districts do not have other
taxing or bonding authority like
cities counties or schools this
one Miller last is all that they
have to operate the local
districts except a small amounts
from state government of around
ten thousand dollars all of the
mill levy is currently past have
one male or less limitation and
a ten year sunset in less their
debt the law was amended to the
local election law to put this
all water districts on equal
footing with Conservancy
districts and watershed
districts which do not have a
sense that and already have
school I mill mill levy is been
passed with language providing
for capital militants have not
been passed with language
providing for capital obligation
so this language does not secure
their melodies with the dentist.
The loan from New Mexico
finances Authority has enable
districts in rural areas of New
Mexico to to be able to build
offices and provide for federal
the federal partners and that
money stays there so this is
really important to not support
this bill section two takes away
the opportunity for solve our
districts to grow thank you your
your two minutes are up and
we're gonna have to move on to
the next.
In in opposition thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have Brandt
van die government affairs
director for the New Mexico
association of conservation
districts.
Right.
Thank you very much and Mr chair
members of the committee my
again my name correct and I can
I live in New Mexico I also
served as a supervisor on my
local solar water conservation
district and with due respect
for Senator Baca I asked you not
to support three thirty to
conservation district at bill
let me to have the ability to
address local conservation
issues that arise in the
district based on that after
resource needs at that specific
time in some districts might
need male let me funding to
assist the producer removing
debris falling make a hundred
year flood that's happened in
New Mexico the district might
decide to purchase minimum
teleport meant to help their
local communities with this is
thank Nico supplied locally
grown food during drought or
they might decide to partner
with our local high school at
FFA or four H. program to
address a newly surfaced natural
resource concern like outreach
to local communities to identify
abandoned water well that need
to be capped to protect the
local water supply so just this
morning not thinking about how
valuable it be at my local
conservation district I had some
maybe portable gas powered
generators available to help
local producers that have
installed solar powered
livestock fund it's been very
cloudy it's been overcast for
five days and with no sign does
cattle and the wildlife have no
water so we need to have the
opportunity to have funds
available to address the resort
concerns as they happen it would
be wonderful if we have that
crystal ball to look down the
future ten years but so far my
district haven't found that the
act also thank you very much and
I ask you not support
additional.
You for your comments Mr
mandate.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have bill via
and that the number Gara.
US oil health champion New
Mexico moderate delegate of the
New Mexico effect yet that the a
and the vehicle ahead.
We should be on going and not
terminated I will be honest you
know better got a opposed Senate
bill three three two the oldest
and most resilient industry in
New Mexico's agriculture The New
Mexico soil and water
conservation districts have
faithfully supported our farmers
and ranchers with vital programs
grants and education with too
little resources from the
government they have struggled
and persevered to serve our
farmers and ranchers under
difficult circumstances I recall
Jr is a precious and ever more
important New Mexico asset
without thoughtful agricultural
practices are beautiful valleys
would no longer be green our
award winning farmers markets
will no longer exist where
people can buy healthy food our
restaurants grocery stores and
specialty stores will no longer
be able to carry the array of
healthy and favorite foods love
to by New Mexicans tourists that
come to see and taste the great
foods of our state defining our
private precious New Mexico as
the land of enchantment are
secular waterways are to me the
eighth wonder of the world and
the national treasure in my
heart I think yes are the water
lifeline to our farms and
ranches we the prob
agriculturalist have reached out
to the New Mexico soil and water
districts in our there is across
the state over many years and
they have provided important
ongoing support and outreach to
us with their innovative
educational programs grants and
guidance to help us have ever
more choices the help to create
better wiser effective
agricultural practices bill that
is help to support soil and
water conservation districts
which in turn help to support
the vitality and resilience of
our new beloved New Mexico you
are your your two minutes are up
thank you for your comments.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we had Peter the
hell with the house oil and
water conservation district
Peter.
Good morning chairman being
built vice chairman had a meal
and members of the committee my
name is.
And I am the manager of the
total soil and water
conservation district I've had
the privilege of this public
service for twenty two years so
I'll water conservation
districts were created in
response to one of our nation's
most devastating natural
disasters the dust bowl of the
nineteen thirties currently
there are more than three
thousand local and tribal
conservation districts in the
United States local conservation
districts leverage millions of
dollars to New Mexico non
regulatory voluntary locally led
incentive based on the ground
conservation is the mission of
the program.
The two thousand eighteen New
Mexico legislature passed the
local election act and that was
signed into law by the governor
the act effectively remove the
antiquated requirement that soil
conservation district mill levy
is expire after ten years the
act was enacted as a result of
do pass recommendations from all
assigned legislative committees
and strong bipartisan support
the committee reports and
substantial majority votes are a
matter of record.
House soil water conservation
district opposes Senate bill
three twenty two three thirty
two because the current proposed
legislation as written seeks to
undo this past progress and
reestablish the sunset language
which would be devastating to
the soil and water conservation
program this would have a
negative impact for New Mexico.
In these uncertain times the
safe food supply and a clean
environment is most essential
the people of New Mexico need
conservation districts to
provide both the technical know
how and the financial incentives
necessary for a thriving rural
and urban market place thank
you.
Conservation program ensures our
future as a state and the nation
thank you thank you Mr hill.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Next we had very thank.
That week I had.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is so we
think and I'm a registered
lobbyist at the national young
farmers coalition I'm also a
farmer myself here in Bernalillo
and several counties
nationally and farmers coalition
and our members across the state
stand in a position of Senate
bill three three two for all of
the reasons that have been
stated already we do soil and
water conservation districts as
as really essential entities to
help support for farmers and
ranchers on the ground across
the state these groups are
already under funded and the
ability to use the LFC tax to
help fund projects on the ground
is is really essential for them
to be able to continue so thank
you all for your time today we
need to not support Senate bill
three three two thank you thank.
Mr chair members of the
committee we received at
expensive.
Right in opposition.
To dispel.
Okay the executive director of
the New Mexico thank you SO
three H. and rob hires co
founder of the New Mexico
healthy soil working group.
Stephen Trujillo to find their
the tiled floor on water
conservation district Henry
brown board member at the
northeast SWCD.
Charles Goodwin with the
Carlsbad boiling water
conservation district.
Marilyn Miller and with the Rio
communities.
Mentor dot about that with the
Valencia as W. the the.
I we both be out of luck Luna a
large budget when you all I'm.
At starlight Augustine and
marking out then attended your
ranch organic.
Melissa may district manager for
the San Juan oil and water
conservation district that
president and and Michael
Richard of Los Luna.
I went to get this free Los
Lunas million Vogel and J.
Shelburne with rocket punch farm
of the land.
Ramon state learn Valencia
County.
Linda waited.
I disagree Valencia for on water
conservation district.
Brenda I on behalf of the edge
with soil and water conservation
district.
Normandy hell advertisement oil
and water conservation district
chairman.
Carl trucks will help champion
with the task County oil
conservation district.
Your trip Alaska is.
Mocked the Valencia County Linda
Fraser Valencia County and your
house thank blanket well water
conservation district Alex
Envirothon Chandler Luna.
Terry road at Ph.D member at the
Whitfield wildlife conservation
area the main New Mexico.
Enbridge Inc John.
Two small about Luna rap great
the extremity is three hundred
of us well and water
conservation district.
And finally a Christina all day
bonding acting right chair
Democratic Party of New Mexico
rural caucus.
And now we'll move to those
members of the community of
public comment in support of
Senate bill three three two.
Mr chair members of the
committee we the the no request
you at the on the doom and
support of this bill.
We did receive a written
support.
J. M. they're all hay and forage
farmer Valencia County.
Matt Torres the Los Lunas.
And bill and the now that more
being.
And that is it in terms of
reading support but this bill
thank you Nathan I appreciate
everything you did in regards to
public comment will not going to
members of the committee
senators does anyone have any
questions or comments for
Senator Baca.
At chairwoman Pinto.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Baca.
If we take the middle the levy
out is I didn't see anything
that would say how to replace
that.
Thank you for the question madam
chair basically the the mill
levy would it would be replaced
by referendum so all all it
requires is is as they have
projects come up and they have
work to be done in there is no
argument from up from myself for
my expert I would guess that
some of these projects are very
important to do need funding
but the requirement really is a
you go to the public the
referendum and you ask for this
money of the ability so
basically you're asking the
public to pay for projects or
needs of the of the soil and
water conservation district
through property taxes and it
you know we heard a lot of a lot
of
I I guess communication from the
public there you know some US
seven support on many many
opposed the opposition is mostly
statewide where the support that
you heard was primarily from
Valencia County and and so the
reason for that is because
ultimately it it it hurts the
soil one water conservation
districts to have it structured
the way it is right now because
what you're doing is you're
going to the voter and and
you're saying Hey we want to put
a property tax on your property
and it's never going away and
and we saw the result of that in
the election that they just had
in twenty nineteen here where
the mill levy was actually
defeated by nearly two to one
margin and that's because the
mill levy doesn't go away if the
mill levy had a ten year sunset
I can promise you madam chair
and and and board members that
many more people would have
voted for it because there's an
end to it that they can see
rather than it being proposed in
the opposition proposing it as a
forever tax you know because
madam chair come a committee
members who wants to pay a
forever tax that's not a popular
idea that's why they were
successful actually prior to the
law in twenty eighteen when it
changed and now since the
they've been unsuccessful in
securing funds I think this
would actually be a a a
productive productive item for
soil and water they would have a
much more from Google product to
the community I don't think that
ever lost a the tax or mill levy
election like they did this last
one and I think it's precisely
because of that sunset does not
exist.
Did not answer your question
madam chair so Mr chairman
members of the committee Senator
Baca.
If we take that away.
What's going to how are they
going to get funding I guess
they would they would get
funding through in the
referendum so basically you you
go through and and the process
is you have a referendum so you
you you make a resolution within
the soil and water conservation
district and I know I'll yield
to my my experts or she can
clarify following this brief
summary so they make a
resolution and they say Hey okay
they agree within their borders
what we want we want to put on
the ballot a new property tax
for this reason and and that's
how they get their funding and
that's how they've always got
there funding until twenty
eighteen but now the problem is
is that is that that goes for
ever since they took out that
language in twenty eighteen so
the wait to answer your question
I guess more briefly how would
they get more funding they would
simply pass another resolution
up put it on the ballot again
and if the people of like it
they will vote for it which they
used to and if if they do not
been obviously it would get shut
down which is what happened last
time overwhelmingly.
Looks like my ex for a came
online here UNM is good then
you're welcome or drive good
then you're welcome to a to
chime in here if the if you'd
like.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity first
of all the the the the board of
supervisors of our soil and
water conservation district have
total discretion on how their
budgets are spent for example
the current mill levy invalid
for the legislative water
conservation district is three
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars a year all of that
allocation three hundred and
twelve thousand four hundred and
twenty one dollars are being
spent on salaries.
That's how they're being spent
soil and water conservation
district have have the potential
to be a marvelous that it
depends on their how their money
is allocated no one is
suggesting that mill levy
shouldn't you have a that's not
the point of this bill the only
point of this bill is to
guarantee the mill levy payers
the district voters that they
will have the opportunity to
vote yeah or nay on I'm no wait
the now they both yes it's ten
years and it's not just that the
board of supervisors has ten
years that community has the
opportunity to opportunity to
evaluate their performance their
service how they're allocating
funds after ten years they have
to go back to the community to
request another mail lady nobody
wanted to stop funding districts
with the mill levy that's not
the intent of this modification
which all it does is is turn the
turn the legislation back to the
way it was so
passively that helps I am not
saying districts are not
valuable no one believes that
they can find a super benefit to
their people not all districts
are equal not all districts are
doing that and the voters should
have the protection of our
legislators in case that's not
happening.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you for that
Senator Vincent Senator Mr
chairman members of the
committee and not Senator Baca.
So that it's more of a
transparency and went to once
this mill levy is voted upon by
voters that they're locked in
forever yes and we're just
trying to stop the abuse is it
and in the eyes of certain
people what they deem as abuse
by these
What soil water conservation
districts.
you madam chair and committee
I'm really you know it it's to
pull to me it's it's one that
you know we have that we're you
know it of the resolution is
passed a referendum is set to
the voter and and they will test
on it and it lasts for ever and
so that that's the way it is now
that the that's that's the first
issue so so we have a tax that
cannot be seen ever stopped read
regardless of that that will
always be taxed once it's passed
right now that's the first issue
and so this is so yes so so they
so the money is is levied and it
is spent forever those projects
could change you know and and it
just goes on and on and on but
the the really and I I really
want to convey to you madam
chair of this committee that
this is actually a really good
thing for the soil and water
conservation district because
the way they changed the law in
twenty eighteen.
Telling people that they're
going to be taxed forever.
I'll tell you that that that
referendum that they tried in
twenty nineteen following
removal of this language I mean
it went down to the one yeah and
that's and I mean like so it was
like six thousand to three
thousand votes in my experts
probably knows the exact numbers
there but it was it was
overwhelming we a negative
response to the forever taxes
its so called and so you know I
wish that some of the opponents
from soil water conservation
district it might be a different
way in their district but we are
a sampling of what they're going
to be facing when they go out to
the public to ask for money so
I.
Next time it should should this
bill go through here become law
and they say okay we need a mill
levy for this project the public
now will no this can only last
ten years so we have landowners
to have very much last year and
and they're going to be much
more apt to support soil and
water conservation districts
knowing that there's some and at
some point to the property tax
for the will be at least asked
again you know we can it will be
on the ballot and they'll be
able to vote on it whether it
continues or not rather than
just asking them Hey we want you
to pay this forever I think
you'd agree that most people
would and it's been proven how
negative the reaction to that
madam chair.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and Senator Baca.
So.
Having all these opponents
against the bill doesn't make it
sound like everybody was brought
to the table to find a solution
to this knowing that this was
the first occurrence that did
happen with this election
That it I think it's something
that probably does need to be
explored but that all of.
People should be brought to the
table to move forward thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Thank you so much we're not
gonna move on to Senator Shendo
followed by Senator Griggs
Senator.
Senator harm you I think Griggs
is hand was up before I was
still okay at holidays Senator
Griggs we gonna yield the floor
to you.
Thank thank you Mr vice chair
and and thank you senator boxer
for the bill I mean there's this
sounds to me like you know like
a liquor bill really you get
whole lots of a of opposition
with that without the real
liquor.
Maybe shovel well but its water
so I mean I'm sure that to
that's a big deal to our one of
the things I think about the
that election bill.
Its whole goal was to provide
more tradition patients and I
believe it was your ex virgin
said in one of the one of the
elections they had only two
hundred eighty four voters
turnout or two hundred eighty
four voters voted for I I don't
know what.
And then the next one turned out
where they had a whole lot more
because of the way the timing of
the the election went and
possibly the question on the
ballot you know you don't really
you don't really know but.
Mr vice chair and and senator
You made the comments about this
should be in our forever taxed
and it's my understanding and
and stuff with taxes taxes while
they often are open ended
they're actually never for ever
because there are ways to repeal
a tax under the.
Under the operating or the laws
for our for these districts does
that exist are there ways to
repeal an existing tax.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and and senator all only lonely
you Senator could like in a cut
conserve soil and water
conservation district to to a
liquor bills that.
Your renowned in that area so
but it tax your question
There are ways usually the
typical way of passing a mill
levy is is basically you go to
the public and you say we have
this property tax and it's for
this purpose and that purpose is
fulfilled and it ends and if
they want to continue this money
I think we've all madam chair
and senator of her This slide if
you will for this your taxes
will not go up that's an example
of continuing as sometimes a
mill levy that's that's how that
would work this never got this
never gets to that the way it is
right now the way it is right
now is it's voted upon and it is
never really revisit it at that
point it's a it's on the books
it stays there forever and so
you know part of that is you
know and as I said part of this
is a protection I think even for
soil water because it makes
their their requests money's
much more palatable because
there's there's some and and and
to to address your question as
to of the voting changes the the
voters the rest of the bill and
in two thousand eighteen as it
pertains to soil and water for
the elections was very effective
it would in the brought well as
you can I I'll almost nine
thousand voters to the election
rather than about four hundred
total and so a lot more people
aside just because what they did
was they took all the elections
and put it together and then
they put the the referendum in
there as well so more people
were coming out for the election
so they saw the referendum as
well and so they were able to
vote for that so those it was
really good for voter
participation however that
increased voter participation
there's a lot of moving parts of
the bill so that size I think at
the same time they removed the
sunset and they didn't really
recognize at that point.
That we have all these voters
going to the polls now and now
we remove the sunset they're
looking at that so became very
unpalatable to vote for that
referendum and it may be today
in it maybe ten years from now
but I think that soil or water
at the end of the day is going
to be the one actually
supporting this bill when they
have a few more saplings of of
voters coming out and shooting
down the forever taxes is the
call of and and and so I think
this is a healthy thing we hate
to get to that point because at
that point well we're gonna have
a lot of projects that really on
their knees and they're really
going to need a lot of money at
that point so I think this is a
real positive being for the
voter and for soil water up
thank you madam chair and hope
that your question Senator
Griggs
rich by sure center that I mean
that that does to the main.
The fact that are you know in
the municipality of Alamogordo
when when I was on that
commission you do have voters
always have an opportunity to
repeal a tax.
So I just don't know how that
would work in in addition but
one of the things I think you
were you clearly saw their
Valencia County is the the short
on water district needs to do a
lot more work before they they
propose a a taxed.
And there's nothing I guess
right now Mr vice chairman and
senator that keeps a short on
water district from placing a
sunset provision on in the mill
levy that they.
And and
madam chair and senator was
question at the end of that I'm
sorry I missed that the audio
when out for just a moment here.
and Mr vice chair senator their
there was in the and the
question was.
Is there anything that restricts
a soil and water district from
placing a.
Sunset provision on any mill
levy day ask for.
Thank you madam chair and
senator no and I think it's a
great idea I I think to be
honest with you madam chair and
senator and had they done
something like that and
introduced it as a referendum
stating we we would like to this
many mills for us so many years
I am actually sunset it
themselves that that would have
been very effective yeah and and
they have that option right now
they can make that work right
now with what they have the
question is does board have the
wheel in the where with all I'm
to to go to the community and
asked that question of that way
we see you know we see how
budgets and operations co in the
government and I'll ask you very
plainly or pose the questions to
yourselves
if you're going to ask for money
from the public would you ask it
for one or two years or forever
and I think that question was
answered a it'll be asked
forever and unfortunately that
that at the end of the day hurts
the districts.
And the vice chair and senator
I'm I mean I I can concur with
with some of that I also you
know I have the other the other
side of this we're.
Certain things are project
relating their operating related
and that operating not
necessarily going to go away but
that you know a project for
rural you know in Alamogordo
those initiatives for road work
for building that you know ocean
water line to show those things
can go away show the the
reasonable approach could
readily be to petition set on
that on a tax years or so
but I think in some regards
that's better left up to the
individual districts in it
instead of taking away their
opportunity to do what they feel
like is best for their district
and in.
In many ways Senator that's what
this does that tells the they're
showing water district that they
yes they can't operate in way
they she is best for their
district what they what they
then find is that they can't do
the job they need to do.
So this is this is a tough bill
for me Senator because I I've
got people really yeah when I
mention liquor bill just because
I got a bunch of calls Budgie
emails
In opposition frankly very few
supporting the bill and they're
coming from you know from my
part of the world because
they're very concerned with this
bill will do to to them and I I
think honestly.
It might be as.
As the chair recommended is to
maybe sit down and go through
this with the.
With the short on water folks
over the enrollment determine
whether or not the approach
needs to be more side just or or
something because there's
there's just a bunch of of
opposition and I'm so Mr vice
chair senator I this is a hard
one thank you for bringing it
and that's all really that I
have.
You Senator Griggs would not
gonna go that Senator Shendo.
Thank you vice chair in a good
morning Senator Baca.
One of the questions that that
that I had of was.
Asked by a Griggs and that was
you know is there anything that
prevents you know accounting
from included this as part of
their referendum of a sunset and
so forth of.
And I think your answer was of
there's nothing that prevents
them right is that correct.
That's correct there there there
really isn't anything that that
prevents them I would.
I would ask I would ask this
question in return and and not
to you specifically madam chair
or or Senator but to to the
committee as a whole no not
nothing prevents them from doing
that but.
The other the other part of this
equation we spent a lot of time
and so the water is the voter in
the property owner and and to
have eighty eight tax let me
know we have you're right there
was a lot of opposition that
that called and I won't deny
that but there's also seventy
six thousand residents in our
county over here and you know we
can have seventy six thousand of
people on the phone obviously
write in letters but you know so
many of those own lots and
houses in New farms and in
businesses and they all pay
property tax every single one of
them and so is it fair is the
other side of this equation to
the voter fort to levy a
property tax on them that cannot
be removed and cannot be taken
away if it is in fact a approved
at some point and so I I just
wanted to point out that that
other side of the equation in
that regard thank you madam
chair senator for question thank
you and the you know I'm I'm of
you know we hear about the the
soil what a water conservation
district but it is a and and I.
Senator standard there's two
pieces of it there's the
operation there's a projects but
what what what are those duties
of maybe one of the experts the
duties that are imposed upon the
soil Water contradictory from
the act what are those duties
and.
Maybe you know I I'm.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and all you'll turn my
expert Dr good men she knows
more about the operations of
soil and water and she can tell
you a little bit more about
where the three hundred twelve
thousand of the three hundred
fifty thousand is going and what
they're doing with that there
if you would Dr Goodman.
Hello thank you very much of
Madam chairman and members of
the committee and Senator Baca
I feel very ill equipped to be
the single voices in support of
this bill because every fiber in
my body and all of the voters
who voted for me and the
majority of people who voted in
the last election propose the
mill levy it's critical it's
just critical I'm a new
supervisor I only have I've
attended meetings for years it's
why I ran for the board because
I opposed the way this
particular district is spending
R. Millie the money let me
stress that three hundred we
have a three hundred fifty
thousand dollar mill levy
payment to the district three
hundred twelve thousand four
hundred twenty one dollars are
going to salaries that
properties that the district
controls they control
approximately three hundred
acres of of wonderful property
that is supposed to be restored
for wildlife restored for native
vegetation
migrating birds at.
An attempt to to give to the
Valencia soil water conservation
district and many well educated
Apache sort of environment and
other uses that the board of
supervisors and the and the
residents would like it also has
a financial assistance program
in our district
it we spend approximately forty
thousand dollars of the
remaining that's all the money
the salaries and the financial
assistance program are
practically the entire Millie
the payment the financial
assistance program goes to small
farmers to to agriculturalist to
local people who have have
projects of that
M. and enhance their
conservation and agriculture
of water conservation we are
supposed to create pollinator
wildlife habitat and you listen
to your expert witnesses to
oppose it soil and water
conservation district can do
wonderful things it depends on
the board of supervisors the
board of supervisors is a
volunteer board.
Here is agriculturalist people
who make their living from
ranching and farming often don't
have the time to be on the
board.
Bob this bill would have to to
protect its bricks from boards
that are mismanaging their money
we need our legislature to do
that I I just can't stress that
enough this water conservation
districts are great million
these are terrific pool there is
an enormous amount of grant
money and federal dollars
available to districts they need
to compete for that money they
can do that we're not strangling
for water conservation district
and finally the water
conservation act actually
encourages districts not to it
enables them to go into debt to
prolong the collection of the
Millie the it does not stress
fiscal responsibility of
districts I think that's a
disservice to the taxpayers so
the second part of of of the
Senator boxes Bill here have to
encourage fiscal responsibility
that that's important you
shouldn't be opposing that.
So maybe that'll give some
clarity thank you.
Thank you thank you to Dr good
and and I I I hope that answers
your question Senator Shendo
this Dr Goodman could you
briefly I think his question was
more based on where the
operations are what they do is
appropriations can you briefly
describe what the operations
are.
What what do you mean
appropriations what do you do as
the year you said there was
about three hundred and some
thousand dollars being spent on.
And can you can you tell me
what's done with that what are
those people do with that.
What what what is it what it
what are their Rick water their
gin what is the job they do what
I and I am open on clarifying
madam chair and senator Shendo
if not please help me here what
not.
I think what I wanted to me I'm
trying to you say that the
military was defeated so what
does that mean then to the soil
and conservation district of
that county.
It so so what does that mean
that they don't get any money
the following year for the next
ten years old to the holder come
back to it what does all that
mean when he gets defeated in.
So what what's the option then
for Valencia counties soil
conservation district.
Madam madam chairman Senator
Shendo.
What it means is
well first let me say that that
this district has had since two
thousand and thirteen they have
collected.
The N. four hundred fifty
thousand dollars of taxpayer
money so they could have that
the mail they want to take out a
loan currently to build another
building to put themselves into
that the continued ability what
does it mean not getting the
mail lady it it means that the
three hundred and fifty thousand
dollars of taxpayer revenue
ceases on unless they can extend
the collection which is what
they're trying to do I hate
getting a loan to build a second
building
what it means the district the
district existed well before two
thousand and thirteen in the
mail lady they managed to run of
the bill and use water
conservation district and and
make project that would build
they got a capital outlay to
build the building are there is
a small building there right now
all.
They they as I have told you the
lion's share of the money is
going to pay very high salaries
so that we'll see if the mill
levy and in twenty twenty three
The bulk of the revenue for the
legislative water conservation
district will dry out they get
US department of agriculture
allotment they get a an
allotment from the soil and
water in New Mexico so in water
conservation district board or
something there are small
amounts of funding that they get
by
this is our is our they will not
be able to maintain the staff is
the main is the main thing there
are thousands and thousands of
dollars available for
agriculture water conservation
district wildlife habitat of
land restoration there is a lot
of money available then there
are I'd like to say that House
soil and water conservation
districts don't have no ladies
and they still function they get
requests they manage to serve
their communities not all
conservation district have
Millie these so there is a way
to operate and serve your
community well without a mill
levy this districts simply
relies on the mill levy for
everything that they do they
have a few small grants that
they get from the USDA and one
competitive grant that they get
but they will have to rethink
and if there is an election and
the some of the board members
are replaced then there will be
a new vision for the district
and the door will open to to a
different way of operating it
I need to drive I'm just going
to jump in here real quick I I
think you cover what he what he
wanted to there that the short
answer Senator Shendo is they
can continue the ability you
just have to ask the voters
would be would be the answer
okay I appreciate that and I'm
just trying to get a better feel
for it because it seems to me
that we're talking about not
just projects but also
appropriations and
you know it sounds to me that
there's various ways that the of
their.
Areas the county districts are
operating around the state of
you know this is really hard
because you know a nice to say
no this is a I'm in Santa Fe
County
of you know there's projects are
on going there and I understand
but it's very hard for me to
vote for something that there's
a probably one districts you
know I don't think the answer is
to you know all of solve a
problem by doing away with you
know something that other
districts are supportive of I
think this is seems to me very
of Lancia's specific
maybe there's ways to me is the
voter and if the sunset champion
posed by the district themselves
without changing you know.
Everybody I I think that might
be a better solution so thank
you of of Mr chairman and
senator.
Senator McKenna at did you have
some comments or questions.
No thank you for asking vice
chair.
Thank you any other comments or
questions if not I have one
centre back if you don't mind so
why should soil and water
conservation districts not have
operating mill levies like at
Conservancy districts.
The simple the simple answer I
guess for at least an hour and
in my district a
miss miss madam chair and and
senator is they say they simply
don't have the the of the
breadth of of of responsibility
and on appropriations that that
the Conservancy does here
you know we're talking about a
much smaller operation and so
and that that might be something
to pursue in the future but I I
would remind Mr chair and and
senator that that they were
operating this way for many many
years up until twenty eighteen
and and again of putting this
language in there and and and
you know and and we're open to
amendments here you know so if
if you have some suggestions of
its the the the sunset that
gives us heartache we could talk
about that but the other part of
this is Mr madam chair and
senator is that there's a
provision where they can just
continue the capital loans is
that how we really want them
running madam chair and senator
do we want these conservation
districts going out to borrow
money to
to then operate is that really a
promising way going forward and
the answer I think we could
agree to that is probably not
and so that that's another item
of within this bill but and the
one thing I do want to address
to is this has to be addressed
this weight unfortunately
statewide our county commission
did pass a resolution in
opposition to to to these
provisions and that that went
over on a four to five vote I'm
I mean four to one vote in
heavily in for in favor of of
supporting a of provisions
similar to this bill but this
is.
Statewide a statewide issue
again it's on the back of the
legislature to to cure problems
local or not when it comes to
this and and that goes to
Senator Shendo question at all
as well so thank you for that
and I hope that answers your
question Senator yes thank you
senator so just one comment
there seven hundred I think as
the in New Mexico seven hundred
affected communities two hundred
and twenty of them are in one of
my I counties right here in Rio
Arriba and a lot of them had
some concerns in regards to SB
three thirty two but I can see
where you're coming from Senator
so thank you for bringing this
bill to us today.
Members of the committee what's
your pleasure.
I look to table.
Motion to table by Senator Pinto
do I have here a second.
Second by Senator how to meal
Rebecca if we could have a roll
call please.
Senator Griggs.
Past.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
That to Senator Griggs.
No.
Senator Sanchez needs to either
clarify info or has an amendment
to his Senator subjects.
The motion was it's
excuse me Madam chair of Senator
the motion was to table and with
a test would be table and the
would be against right correct.
Can I change my oil.
What this.
I thank you thank you.
If you.
Just to be clear that was a no
for senator Sanchez correct.
But yes ma'am okay so we have
yess.
And.
For a table.
A motion that passes from the
bill has been tabled thank you
Senator Baca for joining us this
morning.
You madam chair and thank you
senators for your kind comments
in your wife's comments will put
those in a considering eight
consideration next time we see.
Thank you now at chairwoman so
do you want to take the reins
again for the next bill with
Senator Padilla.
okay we have Senator but do is
build Senate bill three sixty
one the telecommunications.
Rebecca do we have all of
Senator Padilla as witnesses.
Yes madam chair there here.
Okay great so the real Tel
telecommunication communications
fund for broadband Senator
Padilla thank you madam chair
and I feel like I should be a
member this committee madam
chair so I'm here so often
lately thank you very much for
having us again today
I just you know and and driving
quite a few pieces legislation
on broadband here is another one
that I think it's going to
add some real value to more of
our rural components and
portions of the state.
I do have to expert witnesses
Mister Steve Metz who is the
president of the New Mexico
exchange carrier groups and I've
known him for many years he's a
very valuable member of the team
there and then also William Bill
templum and he is going to help
with the field some of the more
legal components related to our
discussion this morning Mr Metz
will have helped me with some of
the technical components so
thank you madam chair and Mr
vice chairman members of the
committee
You know this bill is thirteen
pages long but it's double
spaced madam chair and as all of
ours are so really it's only
about seven or so pages and
really it it just once we we we
seek to drop in each one of the
rural telecommunications Act
components a couple of pieces to
make sure that we clarify for
the public regulation commission
you know what what they're able
to do with some of the universal
rural your universal service
fund dollars that are generated
and so really it's a pretty it
even though it looks lengthy and
there's a lot you know Burbage
you're.
It's pretty simple what we're
trying to do here we want a man
to the RTA.
Which we know has served us very
well we've had to make a couple
changes to it along the way I
did some items some things to it
in two thousand nineteen with
really universal support it was
really exciting that you're that
was the one bill I was getting
punched in the face on
repeatedly we're comes to
broadband telecommunications
because we had everybody in the
boat rowing the boat with us at
your and that the madam chair
was a prior to to you joining us
but I know that you were aware
of it but essentially what we're
trying to do with three sixty
one is to allow the PRC the use
of the PRC in our state rural
universal service fund
yeah and use it for consumer
broadband only loops this makes
a change in the usage of the
argue SS and I want to make that
super clear but we've never
quite used to all of those funds
anyway whenever we've generated
them I think there might be a
couple years along the way were
they utilize all of them.
This brings
Broadband only loops into that
definition of how those funds
can be used
I think we know that that the R.
USF in the USFL ands or what
have you are to be used for
telecommunication purposes like
think we all know that
telecommunication purposes now
dramatically extend all the way
into broadband and that's why
we're we're here today so that
we can provide that
clarification for the PRC who is
had some indigestion over how to
do that over the years I know
that I presented them with
several pieces of legislation
madam chair and Mr vice chairman
and members of the committee as
you know all along that line
years that I've been here and it
it's been it's been an up hill
battle but we want to make sure
that we're as clear as possible
with how we want this done.
But like I said not not all of
those funds have been utilized
in so why don't we maximize that
especially in the year we can
make this kind of a change and I
think we have the public's
interest in getting this done so
that's essentially what the
legislation does we do make some
changes to the access reduction
support payments mechanism and
and also the needs based support
payments component which allows
for these broadband only loops
I'm gonna ask Mr Metz to speaker
president Mets to speak for just
about two minutes or so I know
that we you've had a full fund
our I listen to the whole thing
just now that was an interesting
conversation and I'm also going
to ask a bill to implement to
say about the two to two to
three minutes also on the more
technical aspects the
legislation we also have some
backup singers today who we all
know very very well and are very
good friends of mine and I want
them to be part of this
discussion as well madam chair
tickets on the honest and chase
on the on this they're going to
Pichet wherever we might drop a
few balls or something and pick
those up for us as well so madam
chair with your permission allow
statements to speak for a moment
and then also build implement.
Thanks proceed.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and the thank you
Senator Padilla for for bringing
this forward my name is Steve
Metz I'm the CEO valley
telephone cooperative
valley telephone cooperative
serves the very southwest corner
of New Mexico so basically from
your is all border over to
Deming and south of I find ten
I'm also the president New
Mexico exchange care group which
represents ten of the oil
companies that serve most of the
geographic area of the state
I just described to do general
issue with this is the.
The universal service fund has
been around for several years
and it's always been meant to
support voice service so in a
rural area we charge eighteen
dollars a month for basic phone
service and there's about ten
dollars of surcharges that go on
top of that so twenty eight
dollars a month but we we
couldn't survive on that of the
rulers are too expensive the
sort of so we get help from the
so universal service fund for my
company that's about thirty five
dollars a month did we get from
the fund per customer
does support payments for the
rest of the companies range from
about twelve dollars up to as
much as eighty dollars.
Again this was always meant to
support voice service in two
thousand seventeen seventy
carried legislation that started
shifting respond towards
broadband which is excellent
that's what the SEC is god knows
what the future of businesses
but the but the issue is is that
customers have wanted to stop
they have stock have been
required to have their voice
service along with your
broadband service so as we roll
out broadband over the years
they've always had to have a
voice service also the FCC made
some changes a few years ago
that says we don't have to do
that anymore so we're trying to
get this all the status really
followed with the FCC doesn't
support broadband only so what
ends up happening in this case
is if we if we offer that
service to a customer that wants
broadband only we we not only
lose we're charging them for the
phone service of the twenty
eight dollars we also lose that
thirty five dollars and support
the my company is getting from
the fund
The other two thousand
Seventy legislation was that any
money that we give a respond
sixty percent of it has to be
spent on broadband so ultimately
with what the commission rules
under the current statute if you
can't count broadband only has a
line the good support you lose.
You lose the additional repair
plus you lose the.
Support from the fund so it's
really making it difficult for
customers to find broadband
eight some companies but other
companies haven't.
You know this is this is a
service of the customers really
want so the ultimate end result
without fixing this is going to
be that customers reader going
to be forced to continue to pay
for services at all lost in the
voice service or companies like
me are basically just going to
have less money going forward to
broadband in rural areas so
that's the essential problem I
think this bill would help fix
it and look at all stop internal
to Mr complimented to describe
how we're fixing.
Thank you Mr president and madam
chair and so Mr Templeman if we
can keep our comments about two
to three minutes I'd appreciate
it thank you.
Thank you
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name's bill to
implement and I'm an attorney
and I represent the New Mexico
strange Care group for more than
twenty years been very active in
all of their efforts and
participation at the public
regulation commission and before
the legislature with regard to
the rural telecom Act and the
state rural universal service
fund.
The issues that Mr Metz
described this concern about
growing million for a consumer
only broadband loops
what is to come so important for
enemy C. G. member companies
that we brought the issue to the
PRC and the last year and asked
that they then there are
definition of access line in
order to accommodate Seabol as
it's known
And that took so companies could
preserve there is support from
the state universal service fund
the commission however declined
to accept our proposal and ruled
in part that the the reason for
that was because they felt they
lacked authority under the rural
telecom Act to include a
consumer broadband only line as
an access line for purposes of
determining the amount of
support payments the enemy CG
thought that was inconsistent
with what this legislative
intent is in the rural telecom
Max so I we brought this to
Senator Padilla and and he has
moved this forward through
Senate bill three sixty one the
to accommodate the demands of
the rural customers in the state
and still preserve the support
that the rural carriers
desperately depend on in order
to serve their customers the
Senate bill three sixty one will
it make a one.
direct language edition that
will say that for purposes of
the RTA I an access line
includes a consumer broadband
only little one a regulated
traditional voice services not
used.
And in order to clarify that
language there are several
definitions that are also
proposed to be added to the bill
but the bottom line is to get
direction to the PRC that when
their computing the amount of
the reduction support payments
access reductions for payments
each year that they will include
a custard consumer broadband
only lines within their
calculation for access lines and
that'll allow the rural carriers
to continue to provide reliable
affordable voice and broadband
internet services to all do it
within their rural areas.
the one other amendment that
Senate bill three sixty one a
request that it has to do with
the section of the rural telecom
Act that is.
By for additional support
payments to be made in the event
of carrier needs of support to
ensure widespread availability
and affordability of universal
service that standard is quoted
in section sixty three dash nine
H. dash six M. and and it's
essentially the provision is
essentially the safety net
within the rural telecom Act
it's the provision that ensures
that those the fund will be used
in the event there is a deficit
here in the ability to provide
affordable
voice and broadband service in
rural areas and in those same
recent rulemaking proceedings at
the PRC the enemy CG sought to
streamline the procedures for
obtaining need based support and
in its ruling denying the
proposals from the enemy's CG
the commission stated that it
would not accept petitions that
were based on a lack of overall
financial stability.
Because they felt like it was
beyond the scope of the limited
funding of the state USF.
At a also ruled in a in a
First in this segment of the
case based on reconsideration
that day that any sort of
petition in the future that was
based on a lack of financial
stability would not be accepted
by the commission.
I'm gonna be CG felt that was
contrary to the intent of the
legislature and and the rural
telecom Act so again we brought
this to to Senator Padilla to
make sure that there be
clarification at so that the
rural carriers are able to
receive support if they find
themselves in financial distress
and all Doug direct directed
toward assuring that they're
rural customers are providing
voice and rural I and broadband
service as not they're not
delayed interrupted or
discontinued the service to
those customers so what the the
amendment and Senate bill three
sixty one to this particular
section what add language and I
quote that states may be filed
yet that a petition for support
need based support maybe filed
either on the basis of a
petitioner's lack of financial
stability or for a proposed
specific network development
project.
And then upon finding of that
need that the commission shall
authorize payments from the fund
to ensure widespread affordable
service is available to
customers in rural areas of the
state
those two specific amendments
with the addition of some
definitions are the sum total of
Senate bill three sixty one and
they they will health in the
development of broadband as we
collectively seek to expand that
throughout the state.
I think that's all I have at
this point thank you Mr
Templeman and Mr mats and so
madam chair Mr vice chairman
members of the committee so
there you have it we are really
in the in the place where we
must modernize all of our
telecommunication laws here in
the state attempted to be that
in two thousand seventeen with
this legislation in the other
three that that I was able to
get through that you're.
And then also you know link our
our laws with that C. C.
standards USDA standards all the
things you've heard me talk
about many many times already
this session and the previous
ones so that we can that make
sure that we're driving funds
all the way to where they can be
the most impactful thank you
madam chair will will be open to
public comments and questions
from the committee.
Thank you thank you senator and
thank you for that presentation
of Rebecca.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla I can
make them.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We with the there and and
there's no one on the call with
packed in opposition to this
bill and we received no
indication of opposition to this
bill.
In support.
We think we have hand Baker.
With the New Mexico democratic
veteran caucus Ripon chapter of
the American veterans for equal
right.
And.
Thank you are you ready all my
name is Ted Baker obviously
United States on navy submarine
veteran.
And we stand in support of this
bill for.
Many reasons primarily to allow
veterans all we access to the
remote locations for things like
telemedicine being able to all
register for vaccine on the O.
H. R. vaccine line and they
would be able to attend this
meeting
so with that in mind we support
this bill.
And that's it thank you so much
for your time.
And work.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have captain Nicolau
with they could win
communication.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Catherine the
sacred wind as they could when
communications strongly supports
SB three sixty one as a rural
local exchange carrier stickered
wind feel that this legislation
would benefit all rural
providers of telecommunications
services in New Mexico so our
customers have been establishing
their own priorities by ordering
broadband only lines in two
years ago the FCC moved a lot of
it supports to broadband lines
so in essence this legislation
would be on par with the current
changes in the telecom industry
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have Lona Waller.
Right I hear you
telecommunication.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Lana
Waller on the regulatory manager
for plateau telecommunications
and the vice president of the
New Mexico exchange carrier
group we stand in support of
Senate bill three sixty one the
need and desire for broadband in
New Mexico has grown
dramatically especially due to
the extraordinary circumstances
over the past year Senate bill
three sixty one serves to
modernize the state
telecommunications rules to
recognize the importance of
broadband and provide additional
support for further expansion in
the state thank you in advance
for your support.
Madam chair members of the
committee next we have JT
bowling pan on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce Katie.
Thank you madam chair this is JD
Bullington representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber
members the committee this bill
seeks to answer a.
Question.
Our.
Sorry if.
Members of the committee are one
of the chamber's top
infrastructure priorities is
extending broadband access to
rural communities across the
state this is one of several
bills this session that would
help do just that and the
chamber supports the legislation
Senate bill three sixty one
allows for the funding of a
wider range of broadband
projects in rural New Mexico
which will bring improvements in
a number of areas including
economic education health
etcetera this is the time to
double down on broadband
development and make every
funding Avenue as open and
flexible as possible to ensure
we can meet the inter connective
itty needs throughout our state
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee at that is it
report we received no written to
point at it does look like with
you guys and say thank you on a
may also want to he can support
of the bell.
Your members of the committee my
name is chase on the honors
Richard this from the New Mexico
exchange carrier group.
I ask for your favorable vote
for Senate bill three sixty one
of the reasons Senator Padilla
president mats Mr Templeman as
well as others have stated well
thank you for your time.
Chairwoman Pinto members of the
committee may take us on be
honest executive director for
the New Mexico exchange Kerry
group I want to thank Senator
Padilla for sponsoring the
legislation The New Mexico
exchange Kerry group is an
association comprised of now and
that's and telephone companies
providing voice and internet
service to customers in rural
New Mexico.
Request form to improve
communications within the
industry as well as with
legislators and the Regulatory
Commission as this group all of
our members support Senate bill
three sixty one which rural
women several provisions in the
rural telecommunications act
Senate bill three sixty one
reduces the digital divide in
New Mexico by providing
broadband to some of the most
rural areas of the state by
amending the roll
telecommunications act which is
will allow for the use of the
state Raul universal service
fund for consumer broadband only
loops.
The amendments proposed in the
bill as you've heard will help
eligible carriers preserve the
crucial state role universal
service fund support they
currently receive and ensure
these carriers have an Avenue to
seek relief from the public
regulation commission under the
S. R. U. S. staff if they are in
financial distress that
threatens our ability to provide
affordable voice and broadband
service to their customers.
Madam chairwoman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
this morning and I ask for your
favorable vote on the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla for
bringing this forward and we
will move to them questions from
the committee.
Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Padilla for a.
Ring this bill forward
since several questions
The fund that you're talking
about the state rule a universal
service fund.
You know that generates in
around eighteen million a year.
That comes from.
Fees assessed to consumers
around the state.
Can you explain that again how
that is generated thank you
madam chair and senator Shendo
chairman center yes you had
absolutely right so there's we
gave flexibility in two thousand
seventeen to the PRC to collect
a flat rate or percentage to
meet the number that we wanted
them to meet the to to challenge
came in when the funds started
rolling in and becoming
something meaningful but we did
have in in the law or the PRC
didn't have so they need some
clarification here didn't have
in in the in rural that the
funds could be used for
broadband only loops we all know
that broadband only is also a
telephone line and and and a
number of ways to communicate
and outside your home so that's
generally that's what we're
trying to do here.
This so so.
It.
So it's from our phone bills is
that what was the letter right
now yes Sir not not necessary
from anything with broadband or
anything it's just strictly
phone phone lines is that what
it is.
At the moment yes I mean I'm I'm
assuming that we will get to the
point where for the PRC and and
we have other legislation that
comes online so that we can
continue to fund and and fill up
the Cup if you will with the the
funds that that needs to happen
so.
Thank you because on the FY are
in on you know it it states that
you know
A one able company that offers
broadband.
But not telephone service to be
able to access to R. U. S. funds
but not necessarily pay back
into the are you just as via
connection fees can you speak to
that and what that means or
doesn't mean is that because
that means that.
We're not gonna be able to
collect no funds through this
process so that the fund might
you know be less going forward
and how does that work down I
appreciate that Madam chairman
and senator shin the so so
essentially by clarifying with
the language that we have here
the places that in that same us
that same swim lane but I'm
gonna ask either Steve Metz or
or built employment to give us
assessing dancer here on this
one but it's my understanding
that now that becomes one of the
lines for you can collect into
the fund because that's what
it's going to be used for.
Thank you.
Madam chair and senator I'm the
issue with that is this the
current federal law preempts
the ability to put a surcharge
on a broadband customers so it's
basically taxing the internet
and and so there's a federal
preemption issue with this
that's the reason that that says
that but that being said that's
a national problem that's going
on all over the country it's
something that they're the
federal government's going to
have to address at some point
but the current fund is being
use will be forthcoming for
broadband projects for example
some of the electric companies
were just given so much for
broadband projects they will not
pay and then it's just a
national problem with that so.
So so so does that mean that you
know if if we all go towards
broadband for our communications
and less hard wire line uses of
phones.
In this fund may disappear
because we won't have anything
anymore telephone customers is
or is it I don't know I'm just
trying to figure this stuff out
ma'am thank you madam chair and
senator said that that that is
one way to look at it sure
another way to look at it is
that this is being you know New
Mexico isn't always known as as
the most proactive say in
certain areas but this is going
to be a very this is a proactive
measure to win that regulation
changes which it's going to in a
very big way and this puts us in
a very proactive the position to
to be ahead of the curve rather
than behind.
That would be nice.
I agree anyway so
I mean I I appreciate you
bringing the bill I know that
the you know I have large parts
of my rural areas and I was
telling the Senator
Padilla this sometimes I do
enjoyed not having telephone or
internet connection when I'm up
there in the middle Navajo so
that way I don't have to be
contacted by lobbyists and
everybody else or or Senator
Padilla.
I think this services needed you
know what to get past Tory
chapter I've like in no man's
land that's kind of refreshing
sometimes overly so at least for
two three hours I'm by myself
with the no connection and that
sometimes a nice little refuge
but I just see that ingest I I
think we need to do this.
Thank god Senator Padilla for
all the years that we've been
together in the Senate in on his
advocacy around broadband
telecommunications and so forth
so user he's our go to guy so
appreciate senator and of that
that's all I have thank you
thank you madam chairman and and
chairman shin dong I'm gonna hop
in the jeep with you and I'll
just go and I'll just talk year
off the whole time you're
running around thirty on.
As.
Astoria and excuse me.
Thank you Senator Shendo thank
you senator Sanchez.
Madam chair of Senator Padilla
thank you for bringing the the
bill and.
Senator Shendo answer my
question I was looking at the FY
are on page two the fourth line
down and just basically the
answer my question is it's
taking out of the fund but it's
not ever putting back in.
And but I think you answered it
it might go away if.
When I using the land lines.
Is that pretty much.
He said yes thank you miss Mr
chairman and senator Sanchez
absolutely but it places us
again in a very proactive
position as a state whereas most
states aren't thinking this this
innovatively because eventually
that's going to be where the
funds come from and that's going
to be a federal you know because
there's a federal preemption at
the moment doesn't mean that
it's always going to be that way
and there's.
A vast amount of discussion of
making that change any day now
so I think you're gonna find
this is going to move very
quickly but I'd rather just be
in a very proactive position
than a reactive position.
Thank you Mr dear madam chair
thank you thank you Senator.
Thank you senator Sanchez
Senator pretty any more
questions from the committee.
The motion for us.
I have a couple of questions all
right in addition to.
when we talk about the
You know technology and just
moving forward and this.
Adult for the bundle and the
money's in that sense.
So the future has been stated as
a legacy for you hybrid
architecture.
if we're really moving forward
and being in front of this that
the how do we know that the
budget will page this out as far
as funding.
I take great question madam
chair I I wish I had a crystal
ball but I I don't I feel as
though.
We have some very astute
members in Congress now on this
very topic and so I think we're
in pretty good shape to be
represented very well there and
I think that that the feds
typically do look across the
fifty states for what they're
doing in order to figure out
what the federal legislation is
gonna look like and federal
rules I feel pretty good about
that I know that any CTE is very
active at the federal level they
brought me several pieces as you
as thank you and may now along
the way to keep the feds focused
on New Mexico and to keep the
feds focused on issues related
to say right of way and
easements and things of that
nature so I think we're we're
positioned very well to to make
our our our needs very well
Representative there.
Thank you senator I'm have you
looked at both of the.
This being separate instead of
being it being inclusive the
we're combining
then with the funding.
Yeah I thought about that madam
chair and I just feel like it
with something like this and
because of the vast majority of
the state being the fifth
largest landmass I think the
keeping things in the in the
same.
arena pool whatever you want to
call it really gives us a
efficiency with our dollars
rather than two different
dispiriting as working at the
same time utilizing you know pop
possibly the same money's I
think we run into some
inefficiencies that way so for
the moment I think I'd like to
keep everything in a together.
Thank you Senator Padilla and I
understand you know with the
cost of that we're really trying
to look at costs especially for
these companies
but the effectiveness and as far
as you know we don't want to
hinder innovation as one of
those
because that's what we're gonna
need we're gonna need innovation
to come in and it to be
welcoming into into the other
place because other countries
are already having the.
Local loop unbundling process
going and high understanding in
the United States is vast and
there's a lot of them
underserved areas within our
nation so.
I don't know if you want to
speak to that come and I I just
would agree with you I think
you're absolutely right on there
I think it's it's going to be
super important that we be as
innovative as possible we have
some very innovative companies
the eleven that are part of any
CG you heard also from sacred
wind a few moments ago fully
supportive of what we're up to
here and I'm I I feel like I
frequently dance around there if
the chamber in the round house
because I I I do a Carolina
legislation for all of them but
the innovation I mean you know I
just choose could win as an
example I mean their use and you
know I different things in order
to meet the demands of the
topography of New Mexico for the
area which which with which they
serve a lot of these companies
that are part of an ECG have to
do the same thing so I just
think that I completely agree
with you I don't I don't really
have a comment that would
disagree.
And one more thing so we don't
tax the internet as a state.
Just a couple that is correct
well now we don't.
Okay but the feds do.
I don't don't believe we no not
not at all but that is coming
that is coming because that's
where all of these funds to
continue to build out these
networks and to revitalize them
and to use these new innovative
approaches is going to come from
also.
Thank you senator Betty and
thank you for bringing this
Ford thank Senator session
Senator Shendo want to continue
I believe we have a motion for
the past a motion for the past.
Thank you to have a second.
Second by Senator how to meal
and the second by Senator Hermio
Rebecca could you call the roll.
Yes in explain Margo.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo a yes.
Senator huh.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes and Senator
Griggs wants to explain this
vote.
Yes Senator Griggs.
You madam madam chair and
senator I'm I'm a little bit
troubled about the
the answer to Senator Shendo and
senator Sanchez and I hope that
you know the supporters of the
bill can they have a are you
know have a little more
specifics about that before this
bill gets to the four senators
so were so if you could do that
I'd appreciate it so thank you
madam chair thank shin thank you
madam chair we will absolutely
horrible following this this
committee meeting and and get a
more definitive response for you
so there's that there's a little
more clarity thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla and
your bill Senate bill two sixty
one has to be passed and look
we'll move on thank you thank
you madam chair members of the
committee will log off now thank
you.
Yes we do have Daniel so
Rebecca he is on.
Thank and Rebecca.
Yes madam chair Daniel so is on
the line he is the chairman of
the health education and Human
Services Committee for the
Navajo Nation council Mr cell.
Yes.
Delegate so I'm let me breaking
down with the committee this was
not on the agenda but it is a
run down of a little bit of what
The nomination was going to with
COVID will give you about ten to
fifteen minutes delegate so to
can you give us a little bit of
history of what the nation has
been going through and where we
are but the Navajo nation's
initiative is to move forward in
recovery for the Navajo Nation
thank you.
so to and pardon me for.
Breaking protocol to address.
My granddaughter but plan.
Madam chair.
New Mexico Colorado.
To.
To my brother.
Senator.
Shendo thank you for putting.
Story on chapter.
On the map in in the morning so
this legislative body.
I could not do the actual blue
that's how come I'm calling in
but it is so.
So
I appreciate this opportunity
basically.
We are in the throes.
The the.
No
nineteen pandemic.
In regards to that.
And and it.
Foremost is we have the the
Indian health service.
In New Mexico we have the the
northern Medical Center in
chip Law Gallup Indian Medical
Center you.
Gallup and the crown put
hospital in critical.
Basically service The New Mexico
portion.
The medical nation however
because it is a federally funded
hospital they do accept.
Patients from.
There was a sight and mind you
these.
Three hospitals that are
mentioned are operated by the
Indian health service.
They are.
The folks that are.
Doing the vaccination program
outreach.
The three chapters that I
represent.
For you'll see no in counselors.
Are funded by the Indian health
service to Presbyterian medical
services.
We are
As in most cases.
The server handed and by the
federally funded Indian health
services
through a.
Designated contract.
And so in in that aspect then.
What.
You.
It the Indian health service has
been.
Throughout the years when the
pandemic scored it.
It was one eight six right you
said that Gallup Indian Medical.
The other.
Hospitals have in.
Because or.
Work to intensify the need the
Gallup Indian Medical Center now
has.
Fifteen I see you with.
And.
So that that is so what we're.
And of course so the nation is
also not be in heavily to get.
New Gallup Indian Medical
Center.
The committee this committee
that I chair as well as the
committee of the whole of the
Navajo Nation council has
selected a site.
This was sorely needed fifteen
years ago.
But this committee put forward.
And so we go to the next level.
The site selection because the
all the parameters that go with.
Making sure the site is.
Adequate as for is.
The.
Compaction tests and whatnot.
So the other is.
Not a few miles from Torren
check to the west.
Is the.
New
shows that would be built.
With the help center in on that
the is going through the design.
And so with by twenty twenty
three will have the.
Eighty seven million dollar
wholesaler.
The public.
So in that aspect in the
meantime.
The aspects of.
In the adequate healthcare.
Delivery.
Is.
Major concern.
As you know quite a number of
our population.
Has.
By.
Recommendation.
The highest rate of diabetes
affects.
The aspects.
Hypersensitivity high blood
pressure.
Related.
In the current.
System.
Disparities within how to cope
so the immune systems are
compromised.
For us.
We read.
The CDC.
Population that have
compromised.
Immune systems or.
Well below.
And in that aspect we have to.
Go to.
As many.
Right the as many ideas to try
to.
The healthcare delivery system.
To a level.
That is cool.
or the issue and.
What.
Mexico.
I
realize we have a.
Three what we called three
satellite reservations.
They are so far from.
What they've chosen to to Indian
self determination.
Contracts with the.
Thank you very Office of the
Indian health service so they
do.
Then their own systems but
again.
We ask that.
Having to.
patient.
Then at least if they need
intensive care then.
This
off reservation.
So in that aspect the.
These.
Funding from the federal
government is in plain view.
And it's a constant the.
Thank.
The.
Communication.
This is.
Information.
Chapter.
Yes.
Oops.
within one day.
The chapters agency as well as
the New Mexico portion.
Similar.
It and then
we will.
The spiritual.
Our new trickle tool
constituents.
That we're thank.
My granddaughter.
But when.
On number of Senator.
An ugly.
The plan.
His granddaughters Granville.
So that we.
Our cultural values are aspect
of.
Relationships.
So that could be a really I'm
really thankful.
The.
Madam chair out from you to
address the committee.
And certainly.
The kids education student
services committee.
Selected one fifty.
To basically utilize federal.
Allowance and that's in managed
care entity.
Was basically work with.
The.
Health and Human Services.
Agency of the US.
Welcome to allow for the.
Look through Medicare.
So basically deliver.
A central Services.
Where there is a lack of
community health nursing through
the Indian health service.
We will see the entity that we
selected.
Development corporation hi
Malina healthcare.
To deliver.
Aspects of.
Home care services.
Thank you so the.
One of the main.
Problem is.
Adequate.
And so in a lot of time on the.
The.
But people can't make.
At the our health care
facilities on the New Mexico.
This aspect that.
We feel that no not on the
development
of a corporation okay okay.
The other is the aspect of.
Students.
That was our.
Developing.
We.
Health care system.
This is our way of.
Being proactive.
To express so the termination.
The.
Hello Education
Committee.
One of
the.
The card use the equity in the
sea and the health care.
Committee of the whole committee
can get to.
Committee also.
Shows that we and.
We've we've gone forward.
Thank you.
The.
Five hundred ninety or so.
Tribal nations of the nation.
With the existence of the United
States.
The Navajo Nation.
One of the few.
So
that has a we work with.
Modeled after.
Coordination.
We all know that.
For for others.
The United States on.
Coordination council.
Well founding document the three
percent government is.
nation so is governed by.
So in that aspect.
We are choosing.
Utilize.
That is about by the
Four of book Care Act.
In managed care entity.
So this the seven will the.
Nation to utilize the items
of what development corporation.
Shows.
And so.
That is so.
We.
Sure.
But.
Of
The legislative leaders to.
Basically.
Hello this concept to move
forward.
Those hopes.
The health care system.
Delivery with.
For more.
To cook.
Oklahoma.
Mexico.
So that.
What I would present to the
committee.
Thank you thank you for allowing
me to address.
The committee.
Every aspect.
Adequate water delivery system.
Adequate power lines
Adequate road system and of
course.
God been.
Adequate.
Segment on population.
Through the delivery of.
Geriatric services to our
elderly population.
We look to the New Mexico.
Senate.
The legislative body to.
Hopeless.
Would be innovative.
Available by the federal.
Government to go forward.
Thank you.
Thank you delegate.
So here.
J. and thank you for addressing
the committee and I know there's
some legislation that's been put
forward I don't know if in the
committee committee members
We have questions right now
because there's no legislation
tied to this right now but there
are a couple of bills that are
there if you want to comment
real quickly Senator Hermio Mr
so I just wanted to thank you
for taking the time to address
the concerns of what's happening
on the Navajo Nation and I
understand exactly what's
happening as a former county
commissioner we ensured that we
sent budget from the county to
the Navajo Nation just because
the needs of what was happening
with the lack of hospitals in
the area and medical care or was
a concern and we re by county as
well and so as an ally to the
Navajo Nation and to the native
American population thank you so
much for bringing this to me and
talking to the committee I
appreciate your time and you can
guarantee that I will support in
any way that I can to ensure
that we address your issues
thank you Mr so.
Thank you senator our meal
Senator McKenna.
I thank you madam chair thank
you committee members for being
with us and listening to this
search so
Begin the.
Thank you madam so I'm so glad
to hear your voice I'm really
proud of you you're a wonderful
leader for your chapter for the
Disney people and I want to
thank you for talking to us and.
your words of resonate with me
and the committee members so
when I will ha.
Thank you Senator McKenna
Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam chair in the.
Thank you because they'll get so
how were you doing out there.
Now that I hear your voice thank
you Senator my.
Okay good not thank you I am
aware of of the in C. in all.
The NGO of project gets underway
in a we've had that discussion
with the committee.
The for number of years so I
know it's moving forward so
So I know there's a bill
introduced on the house side and
I do have a similar bill that
will be introduced in the Senate
of so we can keep this project
moving full work up.
The whole situation I know that
the you talked about the
hospitals but you also have a
you know in my district is we
have I have the two hundred in
my district and I know that the
ACL was closed
That will what is the status of
that are you aware of because I
know exactly what to do now and
can you see pool of health unit
so what what's the status with
that.
Yet they will.
thank you
madam chair and committee
members Senator Shendo.
Question and.
We are all.
Question.
The.
Health care facility to remain
open.
And in that regard the.
that the health care facility of
it within the.
Albuquerque area.
Indian Health Service.
Supervision.
We we continue to push.
That would be.
Open back up and remain open.
I guess that then that coincides
with the ability to.
With the aspect that.
The Indian health service.
Verily underfunded.
One of the aspects
in regards to that particular
closing and we certainly and the
other is real aspect in the.
With the for the recruitment and
retention of.
What healthcare providers.
That is also something that we
we maintain.
To.
Correct.
Senator Shendo a.
The committee and the council is
in full support of and in the
stands with.
wondered why you.
Getting the.
Would be fully funded adequately
funded and to remain open.
Yes the.
The cordially chapter is.
Hope your facility is seriously
underfunded and there was times
that they they themselves had to
reduce the of service to the
community members.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Shendo in the.
And do you have anything further
Senator Shendo.
No done thank you.
Thank you thank you delegate so
and I'm any other questions from
the committee and I think the
committee for entertaining the
presentation here may Mr so
about the aspects of what the
Navajo Nation is going through
and what we're seeing still up
to this date at this moment and
that we're all here together to
bring and help our state recover
and help our people throughout
the state recover.
They are I think anything with
health care poses a lot of
questions and some you know in
depth understanding of which I
don't expect to be an expert in
or you were close to it when we
start talking about health care
and all the issues with it and
how it is funded and everything
entailed and how it's
intertwined
Senator
delegate so's information
contact information will be
available to the committee if
you don't have it or you can
contact my secretary and we'll
get it to you if you have any
questions or any further
discussions you would like to
have
based on what that means
reporter how he can help the
nation and the thank you
delegate so cat.
and if you have any closing
remarks
And then we'll have closing at
the committee meeting.
Thank you so to the to the other
Madam.
Here in.
Members of the committee
senators thank you for taking
the time to listen and.
We sure do need a unified.
stand to make the changes that.
Well we still local level.
Wish to.
Have.
Change.
Certainly we appreciate.
Yes but.
The New Mexico legislature.
Taking care of.
This is the state of New Mexico.
We appreciate each and everyone
of you thank you.
Thank you thank you go net
elegant so and for the committee
suppose.
Government.
And for the committee members we
have all the bills that we refer
to our committee here we have
heard the mall and.
So Thursday we're we go to the
floor but I don't know full well
since introductions I we're not
starting till I think eleven
thirty we won't meet that time
frame for the next agenda so we
will not be meeting Thursday
unless there's something in.
You get.
Well you can go to the US Senate
conservation if you had some
built in there have them bring
it that let him know you're up
available for that time to push
your built Ford so we will not
be meeting Thursday and pending
what is introduced that time
we'll see what the agenda comes
up for Tuesday thank you all in
right.
What they want yes are any
Anything from the committee.
No Rebecca thank.
Nothing from from the secretary.
And okay.
Thank you.
Okay thank you thank you with
the floor.
Yes a great one.
