Members of the committee we are
online.
Thank you very much everybody
welcome to the Senate rules
committee.
we are
going to get to Senator
confirmations today I do need to
make a couple of announcements
and advance just for catering
purposes the first is that we
are going to begin today with H.
J. R. fourteen that is a matter
that should not take very long
to do R. however it is it is
sponsored not only by
by Representative Baldonado and
for heart of each of whom I'm co
sponsoring a bill with it's also
sponsored by of the minority
floor leader Rep Baca and also
by Senator Sanchez who gave his
first presentation last night on
the for the Senate does such a
good job without we go ahead and
pass another bill through so
that he can do it again
and the and so in addition to
that Senate bill four fifty four
will not be heard today.
And I just want to let everybody
know the plan on Senate bill
four fifty four.
It's an emergency bill or
generic bill up that we refer to
them in various ways and that is
in order to balance out internal
transparency with external
transparency well we're gonna
have a meeting tomorrow at ten
o'clock the rules committee will
of where we will be considering
Senate bill four fifty four as
well as a couple of House Bills
and I'll be discussing that just
a moment R. and so that way
we'll be able to have internal
transparency about the bill
because Gerry Committee Subi for
House you probably committee
tomorrow but that will also that
allow us by doing it tomorrow to
reported out so that the sub
gets up posted on the website
and therefore there will be a
strong transparency before gets
hard on the floor
the other thing is like I said
we are going to be hearing a
couple of house bills of one
that we were in the middle of
hearing we needed to take a vote
on and and then there's one or
two other health bills that
we'll be hearing and I do just
want to clarify and I very much
appreciate she hasn't had a
chance to log in yet this
morning but I do want to very
much appreciate the some some.
Medication with the Senate
president pro tem in terms of
consideration of House Bills and
and based on those on those
our conversations we're going to
be able to to get through you
are the hospitals and so I very
much appreciate the US Senate
president pro tem um and the the
the communications that we've
had in terms of making sure that
those can get considered it's
important for each of the
chambers to be able to consider
each other's legislation on
timely fashion that's the only
way that the system will work so
so with that.
Let us proceed to Senate a house
joint resolution fourteen and
Senator Baca your house sponsor
here as well but I will let you
take the lead and I do see that
secretary Ortiz as well just as
well as Mister Gibson from the
department of transportation
secretary eight Ortiz from GST
so with that Senator Baca
previous state.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
members of the committee today I
have hello house joint
resolution fourteen with me I
have of the house co sponsors
Alonzo Baldonado and
representative Kelly Fajardo
also online as stated by the
chair I have a secretary can
Ortiz I saw secretary Michael
Santa earlier US secretary gets
and I have a also go to are
representing the of the page Los
Lunas here and up to give you a
brief overview of what this bill
It resolution does and some
background in the in the
planning for many years now has
been at east west interchange
off of interstate twenty five
Morris road in Los Lunas sits
approximately two miles south of
the current interchangeable and
the purpose of this interchange
would be alleviate traffic with
the development of the Facebook
site as well as many other
industrial sites Niagara Water
and and others of the congestion
in that area of the village of
las Loomis has become untenable
and so this interchange seeks to
alleviate that and what this
joint resolution doesn't
particularly is it grants
easements General Services
Department over seven parcels of
land allowing for dad's
construction to be to be made
and of these easements are long
Morris road and not and there
are a lot of the south side and
that's the purpose of this of
this of this bill primarily if
you'll read through it
is it is really just property
descriptions so so all that you
see the down there is is really
just property descriptions of
each you need to spend it
Representative that would be.
Given to the village for a
construction of this interchange
with that Mr chair I will yield
the yield the rest of my time.
to my co sponsors and to the
secretaries.
individually thank you Mr chair
thank you very much Senator Baca
of Representative Baldonado
Representative Fajardo is there
anything you wish to at Mr
chairman I think Senator Baca
again a very accurate
description I can't add anything
to that Mr Chairman.
What are most of the
presentations we've had all
year.
Representative Fajardo.
I'm so in the second.
I think Mr chairman I totally
agree I can't add anything else
thank you so much so we do have
a secretary Ortiz we do have
a Mr give some from the
secretary he's from
just do we have this reaction
from the opioid as well as a
corporal of representing the
village are there questions from
committee and I senator Morris
you have a series of questions
you normally ask.
I don't know if you want to go
into those real quick.
You Mr on drives so only by
bicameral off we always ask all
these of these plants transfers
thanks is there any conflicts of
interest we need to know about
any broker fees any
Representative or realtors
involved that our legislators
are elected officials this is
the time to disclose everything
worked out.
Thank you Mr.
Moores this is Representative
Baldonado I do so realistic for
a living and but this this is
not a transaction that I'm
involved in any way with other
than drafting the resolution and
and trying to make this easement
a reality so there's a there's
no conflict in that regard.
Mr chair disclose as well that I
an attorney we're real real
properties a primary focus of of
of my practice but I have no
conflicts to disclose in this
regard.
Also just to follow up with
Secretary port fees are the the
Landed the we're talking about
is that a home or.
Controlled by any elected
officials.
Mr chairman members of the
committee know how the land is
owned by GSD and for the past
several months we've been
working with the bill it would
department of corrections with
department of transportation
specifically addressing any
concern security concerns
related to that correctional
facility that Morse road to J.
a joint so I there's no.
Other ownership under the GST
and this bill provides the
easement so that the O. T. and
the bill is can work on the I.
twenty five Morris road
interchange.
Fantastic thank you very much
are there any other questions
from committee if not what is
part of the committee.
Senator Baca.
Most important pass with the
you on but I could read his lips
Senator o'neill's.
Yes I I want to second that
despite Representative Baldonado
is beard which I I really you
know I should be kinder in my
judgment but I'm not sure or
thank you.
With.
very good seeing nobody else
seeking a probe this time Mr
hill if you would please call
the roll.
Senator Baca.
Yes Senator Moores.
Yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Wirth yes.
I think I saw Senator Ingle.
Okay now he's got the Senate do
it yes and senator Ivey Soto yes
ma'am congratulations on an ad
unanimous do pass recommendation
from the Senate rules committee
of on house right resolution
forty thank you madam chair
thank you commit you to quickly
thank you.
Well so we are now going to go
to confirmations and let me just
make a couple quick notes were
admitting a number of people
into the room.
To into the Duma room for them
to make comments on the
conferees and sold let me if I
may we love days confirmations
as a great opportunity to get to
know the people who are going to
be
leading our various it's it's
detention of higher education
what the state we do have this
morning.
Six people that we would like to
be able to up vote on and have
them go to the floor for their
confirmation.
In order to know that in order
to be able to do that
With with respect we need
everybody to be brief R. if you
don't mind that will give the
committee a little bit of time
to be able to ask questions of
the of the conferees and make
sure that we're able to vote on
a we have a hard stop
of ten forty five.
So that is going to give us
not all whole lot of time to get
through these conferees so
if you'd like to let them know
that you're here and support
that's great if you'd like to
tell their life story.
These let's find some time
offline and we can enjoy the end
of the this the stories about
all that I'm also going to ask I
need to.
Thank you have a couple of
administrative matter so I'm
gonna ask of the vice chair
Senator Duhigg to preside over
this part of the meeting center
doing.
Thank you Mr chair.
Good morning everyone we have a
western and eastern today
and first up is on Senator Karia
Hemphill I believe I and and how
we're gonna do it is so we're
gonna do all the Western folks
first I Sanchez will introduce
the conferees will talk and then
we'll go we'll do public comment
for every what all the western
folks and all these are folks I
each together separately but the
groups together and then we will
vote on them.
I individually so **** Center
create Hemphill take away thank
you madam chair it's an honor to
have this opportunity to
introduce Dr Howland for regions
at western New Mexico university
in the beautiful town of
Silvercity I know she's an
excellent cook she's volunteered
for refugee camps around the
world she's a public health
executive an advocate with
thirty years of experience in
domestic and international
public health.
Passionate advocate for women
and children she's attended many
prestigious universities
including Harvard Business
School Columbia University and
Georgetown University she's
received several awards and just
had several publications and is
an avid writer for various
publications she's kind smart
and passionate about behavior
health and champions the rights
of sex abuse victims and she's
also served on numerous boards
and I'm thrilled to have this
opportunity to have doctor have
a lan in my community and I look
forward to meeting her in person
and I want to thank the governor
for making this truly
outstanding appointment and
thank Dr have a land for her
willingness to serve and with
that it's a great privilege to
stand in strong support of Dr
Haviland for region at western
New Mexico university and I'd
like to turn it over to her
madam chair to introduce
herself.
Dr happened thank you very much
Senator and thank you to the
committee for this honor to be
nominated to serve as a region
of western New Mexico it's an
honor to be able to give back to
the state that I love so much I
have seen both here and in the
United States and all across the
world the transformative power
of education there's no better
investment that we can make in
the future there's no better
investment that New Mexico can
make in its residents I know
especially for young people that
education as a pathway to the
middle class and to a better
future to me what I think is
most exciting about western New
Mexico is its combination of
liberal arts and science as well
as its commitment to
professional development it is
through its programs has the
opportunity to transform the
state and so I'm thrilled to be
able to Sir and I understand
the unique challenges the COVID
has placed on higher education
it's a moment when we really
need to think through what is
education future how do we serve
our communities how do we do
student centered and understand
the unique challenges that COVID
has placed on our institutions
and so in an effort to be brief
I will say thank you I would be
honored to serve and I'm
thrilled at this opportunity to
get back to the state thank you.
Thank you doctor and US senator
fees like to introduce our
Brenda Hernandez Gonzalez.
Thank you madam chair it's also
in a huge honor to introduce
Brenda Hernandez for the
appointment for student region
at western New Mexico university
she is currently working on her
master's degree and entered
disciplinary studies at western
she graduated with her bachelors
of science in kinesiology with a
minor in marketing and was on
the dean's list and a member of
the associated students she was
the sports marketing intern New
Mexico City and former customer
support representative for
ninety she has an impressive
bilingual written and
communication skills and I want
to thank the governor for making
this appointment and thank
Mister Hernandez for her
willingness to sort serve as
student regents on our board of
regents at western New Mexico
university and it's a privilege
to stand in strong support of
Brenda Hernandez for student
regent and I turn it over to her
to introduce herself.
Thank you senator could I have
very very grateful to be here
and good morning madam chair
committee and distinguished
guests that is my pleasure to
express my gratitude gratitude
for this wonderful opportunity I
intend to apple my duties as a
student advocate to respectfully
and gratefully represent the
university at large as well as
my community I am grateful and
honored to be a Mustang and
received positive instruct and
strong future for western New
Mexico university thank you so
much for your contributions time
and consideration.
Thank you so much Mr not just
and Senator Kernan
I'm not Senator Kernan on.
Madam chair she was having some
technical difficulties so if you
want to go to the next conferee.
Chair and and the next person
actually is going to be for a if
for eastern so maybe we will
hold off on on that madam chair
if I can I I have Dr David Lopez
for western and I'm wondering
Hamm I apologize Senator o'neill
I was looking in the wrong spot
on the agenda you're absolutely
right I should have gone to you
next so.
Okay okay so it to echo sent the
senator from summer cities
comments it's my honor to
sponsor as we affectionately
called Dr Dan.
Dr Dan Lopez as regent for
western
and then New Mexico university
Mustangs anyway okay other than
the fact that he was born on
Valentine's day which might
account for why we love him so
much I must say my grandmother
was born on Valentine's day as
well Dr Dan is an amazing
amazing person so New Mexico
such as so when I look at is his
wife's story it's I'm just so
proud of the New Mexico and you
know to to be able to speak on
his behalf he.
Possible for me not to think of
of that wonderful college the
university down its a coro
without thinking about Dr Dan it
and how he basically from
nineteen ninety three to two
thousand six maybe that the
institution that it is right now
I I can say that I have never
actually been to this campus
until some one of our interim
committees during me there and I
was stunned at its beauty and I
just didn't even know existed I
mean I'd heard about it we
talked about it but wow what a
what a jewel that is down there
to coro and so he's so much
responsible for that being a
thriving institution it is.
Accomplished person he just I
love the fact that he sold tires
briefly you know that kind of
makes it even more
To me just more appealing and
just you know of worthy of
respect anybody sells tires
that's going to be a hard one.
So I just can't say enough about
him he carries himself up here
and within our halls of such
class I honestly didn't even
know he was my constituents and
so I'm not going to store up to
get signatures recently many
never ever said to me I'm your
constituent by you know he's
just just been there and so many
levels so I cannot committee my
enthusiasm and up in two
thousand for this appointment
thank you.
Thank you doctor Dan yes please
go ahead.
I believe you are muted.
Mister Roberts could you could
you help a new drive them.
Madam chair I've done all I can.
Mr chair Dr do you see a prompt
on your screen pass it on mute.
Can you accept the prompt.
Well what.
A doctor then there should also
be a.
No picture of a microphone on
the bottom left of your screen
if you see that if you can click
on it the.
Should I meet you.
Well while.
Dr David is is dealing with the
the technical difficulties why
don't we go ahead and get
started on public comment for
the the western university
conferee is.
Hello go head let you
manage that.
Okay madam chair we have Joe
shepherd I believe he's going to
speak on all three countries.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Joseph Representative president
of western New Mexico university
and I need to figure out how
we're able to keep Dr Dan muted
because that might come in handy
should this sting Committee
compartment.
Order on it at my board.
That being said I I have to tell
you there's a I want to thank
the governor very much for the
stellar slate of candidates the
state the saying goes I would
strongly believe that if if you
surround yourself with people
who are smarter than you you'll
do far better and indeed these
three are forced more than that
I am I know each of them
Representative Hernandez or
student government president
it's just an amazing job leading
the students and advocating for
for them in their behalf in the
university is much better for
her leadership keeping it
revolved moves to drive have a
little I've gotten to know quick
shout out to her husband Tom who
keeps hiding behind the corner
there but between the two of
them they're they're just not
only Stiller couple but doctor
having been in her own right as
you heard from your resume is
exemplary in our public service.
Rings to not only in New Mexico
but to to to our global society
and that skills that will bode
extremely well for students with
many of them being first
generation students
nontraditional students and
doctor have and has a passion in
terms of helping out the
downtrodden and and bring better
lives to those who care to for
would not have that opportunity
so excited to have our good to
see you doctor Havel and of
course there's there's Dr drive
Lopez.
And everybody knows me
throughout the state.
Excuse me.
Everybody knows and throughout
the state as Dr Dan and he is he
is a mentor he is a leader he is
a giant among higher education
his wealth of knowledge is
international accu men will bode
extremely well for university
keeping it short madam chair I
strongly encourage this this
committee to move forward in the
Senate to confirm the slate of
candidates thank you very much.
And madam chair I believe Dr Dan
is unmuted.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Senator for the introduction
kind words we did have me a
little bit short of my tenure I
was actually there Mexico Jack
ninety the two thousand sixteen
perfect very at that.
Yeah we're in the all the honor
to serve on this high honor our
I did not seek the nomination
but I am honored that that that
that you get what you at the
border region of western New
Mexico.
My background is a tool that
would take a while let me just
make one.
First one would be I think all
of us that had.
Working the opportunity to
develop long experience both in
I bugs that responsibility to
try to get back to the community
and this for me one way.
Once we you know we have
educational.
Mexico this the problem it's
time to write expanding the.
That is.
We need to find a way to.
Make sure that we expand the
higher education are you I think
it's one of the correctly
there's about two hundred fifty
thousand students in New Mexico
never completed their education
they started with the dentist
most of the number a lot of our
financial we find ways for our.
I would say
workforce we're never going to
be able to develop on the
economic diversity and
sustainability in the state are
one of the previous nominees.
As you travel the world and
have been working in this
countries are all but gone.
In Botswana for example just to
give one last we have to pass
learners and they've been able
to advance that way that that
really made we have an
opportunity.
On the landing one of the
interesting things that are
there are countries based.
The private sector basically
brown I would.
One of president the whole gamut
R. but
yes.
Finally I would the state that
we I am.
Byrd  our legislative thank
wonderful on university I came
from a small university on note
from challenges of being small.
But still it's great
opportunities that that madam
chair.
I think the state thank you.
Thank you doctor damn.
And Miss Vigil that's got a
return to the public comment
madam chair we have next marks a
major to speak on all three
countries.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for let me
speak sporting and just to
clarify I wish the best luck to
all the conferees but this is
might might Madam is this
regarding drive down
and I just want to stand in
support of Dr Dan
you know he's from Brooklyn New
Mexico grew up and we'll
beginnings and you know people
don't realize he's also DFA
secretary under Tony and I am I
correct.
He also worked in Senate finance
committee Senator alternate
Donald and and then he up also
the Czech president of New
Mexico for twenty three years
and also the chair of the cop
counselors present for nineteen
years so and then uses in terms
of just has incredible
experience and welcome dollars
in terms of Mexico legislature I
think with all that he brings
incredible.
Incredible experience to western
New Mexico university and just
to a university that's this
flourishing and suggest doing
tremendous things down and in
the southwest part of the state
and throughout the state leaders
present shepherd and and so on
so I just wanted to say Dr Dan's
been a mentor I learned a lot
from him all these years and I
just appreciate everything he's
done for me and I think he's
gonna be a great asset to
regents you watching Mexico
university thank you Mr chair
members of the committee.
Madam chair next are we have
Kate given.
Morning madam chair and
committee members thank you for
this opportunity support Dr
Linden Haviland
I have been a collaborator and a
colleague of hers and what I've
noticed issue brings just rare
combination of collaborator
motivator visionary and
implementor she brings people
together around a shared goal
you can see a pathway to
achievement and also as an
adjunct faculty at western New
Mexico university of
particularly thrilled to see her
leadership and where she will
take the university in the
future thank you.
Madam chair next I have Leander
dolphin.
Good morning madam chair
Senators I appreciate your time
today for allowing me the
opportunity to share my support
for Dr Caplan's nomination I
know that you have lived for
more than a decade and I'm
thrilled to offer my unqualified
support for our she is a step us
again for the world's most
vulnerable women and children
and work unceasingly to promote
public health education and the
ratification of poverty both her
scholarship and her life's work
demonstrated commitment to
improve the lives of the world's
in a meaningful way and she is
the true value of a servant
leader I'm a managing partner at
a law firm Shipman and Goodwin
and a member of that firm's
school practice in my practice I
represent public and private
education institutions including
colleges university legal
counsel to a number of colleges
and universities I'm certain
that doctor Allen Staffel
impassioned advocacy and
leadership are tells that any
higher education institution
fortunate to have with that I
appreciate the time to speak.
Madam chair I believe that's
everyone for doctor happened
next I have.
Tony Trujillo for doctor denture
of.
But good morning madam chair
members of the committee my
name's Tony Trujillo I'm a
lifelong resident of so we're
city is a registered lobbyist
for western Mexico you.
That's a tough task winner
chairman says to be briefed
today when you're talking about
the doctor then
western New Mexico university
otherwise known to us now there
is our our word on the lap
is is going to benefit greatly
from doctor dad's the best
knowledge is experience is
contacts all in the group the
higher rate arena this
appointment along with the other
two appointments the one
undergraduate the governor
induced these appointments the
heart of the Cuba is going to
be doing great with this
appointments.
We.
Madam chair I believe that's all
if there's any other folks here
to speak on the western
countries can you raise your
hand.
Okay madam chair I believe
that's it.
Thank you Mr.
I so we'll go to the committee.
Any questions from the
committee.
Gentleman.
Senator Ingle thank you I A. R.
I noticed your own mind on the
issue where I'm looking here
that all of people endorsed Dr
Danner all ball dislike years.
You know I must have been
something more because the glare
almost have to have a welding
helmet there's too much glare
off those hedge but I'm not
always gentleman for many many
many years and Dr Dan is a.
Is a while the folks that I was
first appointed with when I was
elected a few years back and now
he's been a great friend to me
and a great person for the state
of New Mexico he has been a and
the budget part of our our
system has been in the higher
education department for many
years at New Mexico tech and
done a great job and
One of those folks that show.
Been an absolute asset for all
of New Mexico and not it is one
of those people up to is very
valued up here because when he
told you something you could go
to the bank AUMENT and his word
was always use bond there's
nothing any better than that up
here thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle central
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I apologize for
not being able to activate my
camera this morning
you know I was that earlier
about the of COVID at the
struggle that that created or
university at the way that that
they're gonna educate our our
Students that get all that they
get there's been a trend.
Of the many years moving toward
online and I comment that
xcelerated that it did a lot of
the
people the that that the doctor
online and mobile banking at
bank by that well also of
motivated a lot of people to
move online on on education so I
think as as we move forward of
that one a lot quicker that the
train was going but that's
that's where we were headed and
so we're gonna have to adapt
specially here in New Mexico
at at really go after those
people who are wanting to go
back to school and use online at
at the weight to get him in the
classroom and then is there to
create the hopefully.
All of you the Capri here today
can work toward that goal and
then I do have madam chairs you
all heard of the.
Part of the standardized
questions but I think it's very
important for the public that
that the apps the average out
the vote but did any of
of of this brawl the Capri do
you or any close family members
donate to the governor the
governor's campaign act.
I I donated.
And and doctor of.
How much did you donate not no
the exact number but it was well
within the limit that I state.
I also don't think I donated
five hundred dollars.
Mr Mendes.
Donate.
And thank you madam chair of
concrete that did you or any
family members have you donated
to any of the legislators or
their campaigns or pacs
I have donated to any number of
legislators.
State.
Work out right hand that are.
I think this year are.
Martinez this marks are I think
that the chair.
Appropriations.
And the number of others I also
delineated federal law.
Donated to Meredith Dixon and to
Doreen Gallegos.
I do not donate but I was part
of many of that updated
specially with the student body
as well.
Thank you for that madam chair
concrete of very excited about
the the governor's appointment
today again applaud the governor
for fighting
or that qualified to serve on
the border region thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Senator Pirtle any
other questions from the
committee on these conferees.
And I think
We might not have quorum right
now if if that Mr chair has
stepped away so we will go ahead
and and move on to Madam chair.
We do have six.
We do I'll.
With Senator Pirtle we have six
excellent okay great well before
we go to to a motion I just want
to thank you all for your your
willingness to serve we are
really lucky to have folks of
your caliber who are willing to
serve and I know that you are
going to be real assets to
western and it to New Mexico so
what is the the pleasure of the
committee.
For more the appointment for
western New Mexico university.
Thank thank you Senator Ingle
and.
Also I'll go ahead and second
that Miss Vigil would you call
the roll starting with
doctor Havilland's confirmation.
I'm sorry Miss Vigil our agency
Senator o'neill was there no
it's okay.
Senator Baca here Senator
o'neill yes Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Ingle yes.
And senator do it.
Yes I believe senator Wirth is
on as well okay Senator Wirth
I'm sorry yes.
Thank you doctor have Linda you
have a do pass in your
confirmation will be heard on
the floor I believe this
afternoon.
Thank you you Miss Vigil let's
go ahead and call the roll on
this Hernandez Senator Baca.
Yes Senator o'neill.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Ingle yes and
senator Dick.
Yes.
Congratulations Mister Mendes
you have the committee is
recommended your confirmation
vote of six to zero and Miss
Vigil let's call the roll on Dr
Dan.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Neil yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Thank yes.
Graduations sided and you you
all have the the recommendation
of the committee for the vote of
of six to zero are you I believe
all of your confirmations will
be up on the floor this
afternoon we really appreciate
you being here this morning
create your willingness to Sir
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
All right and now we will go
from western to eastern I and
we'll start with us Senator
Kernan introducing Chris Ruiz.
So thank you very much madam
chair and members of the
committee and I will tell you it
is a real privilege this morning
to be able to sponsor the
confirmation of Trish res I have
known her for many many years
and
Both on a personal level and as
educators working together for
the benefit of the students some
across school district I'm just
I'm received her resume you're
always to do that Trish was very
active all across New our
community is state and even on a
national level but I had no idea
of the many many thanks that she
has accomplished over the years
let me just briefly go over her
professional credentials she has
a master's in counseling from
the university of the southwest
she has a B. S. and do all and
do a licensure in elementary and
secondary education I'm.
Also has forensic debate and
credentials from Baylor
University and speech language
pathology and community
disorders from eastern.
That that covers all of her for
professional credentials on a
local level at Trish is been
recognized both that is citizen
of the year in my community and
hops and and all of the things
listed below that just confirm
that that was a very
The report did she certainly
deserves at so she's been
extremely busy in our community
and at the state level as well
she served on the Public
Education Commission for number
of years served as vice
president of the PVC she also
has served on the con alma
health foundation board of
trustees
and also she's been very active
on a national level with the
Democratic Party so Trish is
just that she brings a wealth of
experience the thing about Trish
worries that that always that I
can remember you can't walk into
a room where she is and not see
a smile on her face and she's
one of the most courageous women
that I think I've ever known so
with that done madam chair I
will yield and and now.
Be available for any other
questions.
Thank you senator mysteries up
if you'd like to say a few words
please feel free thank you good
morning madam chair in senators
and thank you all for your
service thank you so much
Senator Kernan for your kind
words or leadership and for you
know keeping southeast New
Mexico in the state of New
Mexico at the forefront of
everything that you do I'm I am
so humbled to.
Or you it is the consideration
to be on the board of regents of
ENMU which I consider to be one
of the crown jewels and leaders
in universities in the state of
New Mexico and I'm hoping that I
am able to join this exemplary
institution a little bit about
myself I'm a lifelong Hobbs
municipal school district
employee go eagles.
And the lifelong rule committing
rural community members.
Educator it's always been a
pleasure to advocate
for all educational endeavors
one.
The last two years have chosen
to work at all at the
alternative learning campus and
those kids have
Needs they have they need more
support than our traditional
students and so it has been my
pleasure to work with them and
you know make the challenges and
in the struggles that they face
daily and so I am proud to to
serve in that role
It is imperative my thought is
it it is imperative that any
institution of learning
insurers that they serve all
students from all backgrounds
that they insure cultural and
diversity and they provide
educational programs that meet
the changing needs of the world
one of the things that I and
that is interesting is you know
COVID nineteen is dressed is
into an entirely different
learning environment to which
I'm glad to say our students and
our staff and our community
members have risen to the
challenge for that so we need to
be sure that we're meeting those
those changes every day
in the other thing is is it's my
goal to impress upon our
students that regardless of the
challenges they six they can
succeed and I'm here to help
them as our educators across our
state and I'm a walking example
and really what I say walking I
mean rolling because I've lived
the last twenty three years in a
wheelchair as an above the
bilateral if you need but I that
is served as a really great
impetus in my advocacy for
differently abled populations
this at Madam chair in senators
we must continually seek avenues
to improve our education systems
and ENMU is always the forefront
of this go we must also ensure
that we are inclusive of
differently abled populations
and that we embrace all cultural
differences and one of the
things that I think is
interesting is the current board
of trustees is an all male board
our board of regents and sore is
an all male board and I would
love to see a female on their
and with that I simply ask for
your consideration.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr is I we're gonna do
the same thing with eastern as
we did with western will
introduce all the conferees and
then you public comment for them
all at once before going to the
committee so Senator Ingle us
take away thank you madam
chairman of it's really a
pleasure for me to introduce
this morning at one of Houston's
student regents is shot or head
she is a young lady from the the
hail from Levelland Texas and
she is a voice major working on
a bachelor of music and vocal
performance variation New Mexico
university she is the work of
financial aid with other
students at south plains college
she
Help with the music and the and
the First Baptist Church their
import talus and she is a vocal
Department student worker and
Order student government their
eastern New Mexico university
and I think she's going to be a
real addition to our border
regions there and I'm very
thrilled this morning I have not
had the pleasure of meeting
Chandler but rather resume and
up to talk to folks and there
she's very well qualified to be
our state and region and I'm
very very glad that she was
nominated by the governor and
I'll now turn it over to
Chandler and she can make a few
remarks for herself thank you.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
and committee for granting me
the opportunity to speak today
it really is an honor to have
this opportunity to zoom in in
front of you all
as Senator Ingle said I am from
Texas and I am proud to say that
I.
Absolutely love New Mexico.
And I'm so grateful for the
opportunities that eastern has
granted me and I truly cannot
imagine myself at a better
university and I'm so proud to
be a greyhound that for the sake
of being brief I just want to
emphasize my intentions for this
appointment I want to ensure
that the universities held
accountable for fostering a fair
and equitable learning
environment for all being a
student myself I'm aware of the
fact that many students feel as
if they have difficulty feeling
heard in an academic environment
and my goal is to help amplify
some of these quiet voices and
ensure that everyone has the
opportunity to succeed and feel
heard.
When our students are successful
the university is successful and
with that I will yield and stand
for any questions from the
committee thank you.
Thank you Mr.
And Senator Padilla.
Thank you madam chairwoman of
the I. eight could not I'm gonna
ask of my country to be brief he
is probably as.
Published as any other New
Mexico and I'm so proud to
introduce you to so what was
those a long time friend of mine
and someone who I worked with
previously in just a pillar of
the community madam chair
you Mr bush those had a long and
and and if the and distinguished
career with central New Mexico
community college formally
Albuquerque technical vocational
institute here retired as the
vice president for student
services where he was
responsible for rather large
budgets across the students
services operation there you
know if you have multiple teams
has received multiple awards as
a presenter all over the planet
his skill set and also to bring
others together so that they can
you know get things done that
way I get the sense that he is
the maciver of higher education
you know he's parachuted in to
to build fix repair reconstruct
break apart put back together
again so many different things
and and you know I am not
surprised I had talked to him
about five years madam chair
until I was approached on
ensuring this this confirmation
let me just tell you what real
quick what he's been up to since
he retired and the this will
tell you a little bit more about
this being here you know he's
taking the time to volunteer
with the St Felix food pantry
working drives a car sorts food
with all of his background
experience he's more than happy
to roll up his sleeves that way
who does project where he's
helps others to learn job and
entrepreneurial skills share net
New Mexico where he's on the
board of occurring at the
nonprofit organizations
dedicated to helping pregnant
women and their families the
Johnny and friends Albuquerque
institute working picks up
wheelchairs madam chair and to
make sure that they're repaired
medical supplies he puts them
together make sure that they're
delivered we need some he did
receive the two thousand
nineteen educator of the year
award from the Hispano chamber
of commerce chair I can go on
and on and on I'm so impressed
by him I I ran into at the
grocery store.
Many years ago I don't even know
if you remember this but he was
picking up food for people who
didn't have food and and I just
and just so impressed with them
really touches my heart that
he's willing to come.
Someone asked madam chair for Mr
bush this to say just a few
words on his behalf thank you
Madam.
And if you won you so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center by the end committee I I
truly appreciate it is quite an
honor and privilege to be
considered as a region for
eastern New Mexico university I
never would have thought that I
would end up at my alma mater is
a region rather than as a
student and I truly appreciated
the education I received there
it prepared me well to go on to
the Harvard graduate school of
education and then to my career
in in higher at I think that
that kind of gives me a great.
Experiences and what I have done
in higher I've worked at a
Carnegie one institution the
university of North Texas I
worked there for for for about
five years I worked at the area
higher education center in
Colorado which is three three
institutions on one campus and
if that won't drive you crazy
nothing will drive you crazy we
at Denver community college
metropolitan state university of
Colorado at Denver all occupying
the same campus.
And that really enables students
to go from developmental studies
all the way up to a doctor if
you wanted without leaving that
campus and made a quite
affordable as well and then I
was incredibly blessed to work
at central New Mexico community
college under some great
presidents and work with some
great people I think that the
the future is exciting I think
they're going to be a lot of
incredible challenges for higher
education
the last year is service and
accelerate for distance learning
and I am just would be very
happy to serve the students and
and the university thank you.
Thank you Mr process I and Miss
Vigil let's go to public comment
for all of the eastern
conferees.
Okay madam chair for Trish we
have Carol Ann Arbor street.
I'm sorry your muted Mrs Mrs
miss Armbruster.
Okay.
And madam chair and senators I
am Carolyn Armbruster I was on
the Public Education Commission
for six years and that is how I
match fisheries for years ago.
I wanted to say so much that
hardly left anything you but I
I'm from Los Alamos and Tricia's
from Hobbes so we so the only
met in Santa Fe and places with
PC Matt.
But what I wanted to say about.
The very briefly even.
The P. C.'s as a really unique
organization because there are
both Democrats and Republicans
on that commission and never in
my six years have I ever seen a
vote.
Along party lines ever and then
we have a lot of us.
So increased when Trish was
elected vice chair and I was
elected secretary works not only
in the general PC but also in
the
in the executive committee.
I'm one want to say about Trish
is that she's this amazing
ability to.
Change.
She didn't necessarily bode the
way I put it on I thought she
was wrong she thought I was
wrong and it was over it never
went on anything else because
she thinks with their heart
thanks about in our case K.
twelve students what's best for
them doesn't matter what
everyone else thinks she's
credible ability to evaluate and
to measure what are the pros and
what are the cons for something
so that this way.
When she speaks people listen
you know member date for all of
us older people we remember
these advertisements.
When it speaks everyone listens
and I think that's where Chris
thank Trish is I think the fact
that she is a woman and a woman
of color and women in district
the able to will add diversity
to this board and it's been
mentioned so I won't go into it
anymore and I don't think that
you can find a better person for
this position and I'm listening
to everyone else and thinking.
To go back to school you all
these the nominal things so I do
urge you to.
I heard and taken that vote to
the floor thank you very much.
Thank you madam chair next we
have Israel Chavis.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee it's good to see and
hear from so many of you I'm
here to speak in support of.
Our public education
commissioner Trish wheeze she's
been a long time friend of mine
but more than that she's an
invaluable asset to New Mexico
she's an advocate for rural and
low income New Mexicans she's
thoughtful and passionate about
her commitment to advocacy
you've heard that she's a
disability advocate she's an
education advocate but she
brings a unique perspective to
map to every board and every
organization she's part of I
think a lot of people talk about
how Trish is that her
personality and I always liked
to to describe as bright she is
both bright in personality and
intellect she works harder than
anyone else I've ever known and
there's no one like Trish Reese
if you've matter you you you
know that you're lucky and if
you haven't yet you probably
heard of her and want to meet
her
she is I think the world of
trash and this is a fantastic
opportunity for not only agency
released but the university to
have her on the board of regents
and so I urge you to do pass
again my name is Israel Chavez
assistant district attorney in
southern New Mexico and I think
this would benefits of the New
Mexico in value so I I urge
every member of the committee to
support her nomination thank
you.
Next we have Mister costs.
Hello everyone I would like to
thank the committee and the
chair for having me today
I'm currently I am the director
of campus I think he's Mexican
recipe alumni also from you you
and a voting member of the
alumni association of being here
I have known mysteries for over
fifteen years I have the
privilege of being a student at
Hobbs time when I first met
miseries someone fifteen years
ago I was a I'm a Hispanic
student I was a first generation
and when I mean.
Miss Ruiz takes a passion for
what she does she help me are
become the person I am today she
led me from
We advise to counseling to also
advise me how to get my
scholarships to get get me that
goal of higher education.
I haven't over the time I've
seen Mr ruby's.
Take a lot of challenges as vice
chair of the New Mexico Public
Education Commission
she is an agent of change she's
a champion of students in
education
her willingness to share skills
knowledge and expertise her
value of on going learning and
growth in the field of education
she values the opinions
initiative others she is
respected by colleagues in
levels of education in the state
of New Mexico and I asked the
committee and the chair to
please accept the nomination of
Mr agency address Ruiz to our
border regions as a proud alumni
as also the proud Hobbs high
school graduate go eagles
And I I stand for any questions
that the committee might have on
the qualification that mysteries
has thank you.
Madam chair next we have
Danielle press.
Your muted.
Now I'm I am muted.
We can hear you miss Presley
thank you thank you madam chair
it's interesting that you see my
name is Presley that that is for
our high school graduating class
in nineteen sixty five I wish I
were only sixty five but.
And sixty five I met with I
first met Steve gamble drive
state gamble so my history with
eastern goes way back I was a
fine arts major at UNM and as a
fine arts major in a drama
teacher I saw early on the
diversity of the campus.
Eastern New the the desire to
create excellent in the fine art
and excellence in the technical
arts at the same time I have
been.
Closely involving closely
followed in my career as an
educator.
To go to eastern I lived in
these mountains I've been a
principal at in the Moriarty
district and in the estancia
district when I retired from
education at the end of my
career when I was serving as the
education secretary for juvenile
justice system which is part of
CYFD I was still working with
eastern because the Roswell
campus with providing classes
for a strong institution and I
love it after I retired I was
privileged to serve on the
Education Commission with
Missouri I found an agency
released the same
characteristics I admire in
eastern there is NO collusion
with no lack of excellence there
is diversity with no lack of
excellence there is there is a
fierceness to do the correct
thing for students this release
is here that's the word I see
her as she drives the vehicle
called the beat if you could see
it has a list you can get up and
you can get down thank you whips
around in that car it's like I
think
she's a scrapper but she is
dignified and her scrapping she
works to build consensus he is a
strong woman the last few that
we talked to the whole lot.
I it is my privilege to
recommend pressure relief for
this position to speak in
support of her she's a dynamic
female was fierce thank you.
Madam chair next we have been
regained cardio and I believe
he's going to speak on all three
companies.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak today I'm
here in support of Mr Sandler
had my name's in Ricky create on
the current student body
president at eastern New Mexico
university now there's plenty
that I could say about agency
had but there's simply just
isn't the time
At eastern Chandler and I both
came and at the same time the
same here and then we both
joined student government at the
same time and we're both music
majors so it has been an honor
and a privilege to see agency
had grow not only as a person
but as a student a musician and
a leader she has served in
student government as a senator
representing the college of fine
arts and she's always been
persistent punctual organized
and overall just dedicated to
serving the students of the
interview so it is without
reservation what I say that
agency had will serve with honor
and distinction if confirmed as
a regent for it you know you
again thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for
your time and for the
opportunity to speak to you
today.
Madam chair lastly I believe we
have Dustin C. for.
Madam chair Senator Ingle and
members of the Senate rules
committee my name is Dustin
Seifert I'm chair of the
department of music at eastern
New Mexico university I've known
Chandler had for three years as
a vocal performance major in the
department miss sandy is an
exemplary student who is
dedicated to academic success
and eight their peers by example
it is no surprise that are
academic transcript supports
this assertion she is passionate
about our chosen field of study
and highly involved in the music
life of the department of music
and university Chandler
possesses strong verbal and
written communication skills she
listens intent for intently
awfully processes information
and is unafraid to share her
well informed opinions agency
had understands confidentiality
and as consent and consistently
demonstrates a high level of
professionalism Chandler will
bring boundless energy and
enthusiasm and our love of the
NMED to the position she has
been a major player in the
department of music and student
Senate I have no doubt that she
will be an incredible asset to
the ENMU board of regents thank
you all.
Madam chair I believe that
public.
Thank thank you all.
And we will go to questions from
the committee.
Senator Lopez.
I thank you madam chair and I
just want to say congratulations
to each of you who have been
nominated to serve and I I know
that it takes time of course to
serve in these positions and
give of of your your your
private life which we all I know
is very precious but I know that
each one of you will do your due
diligence for the positions that
you are will be confirmed on
today and I just a I know that
New Mexico's higher ed
institutions will be in very
good hands so congratulations to
each of you and I do plan to
vote in favor thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Senator Lopez I is I
don't have Senator Pirtle is
there he usually has his
standard questions he asks.
Thank you madam chair in the if
the committee would indulge my
standard questions I appreciate
that again I apologize for not
being able to be on video
but the this question is for for
all countries did you madam
chair did you or any of your
close family donate to the
governor governor's campaign or
PAC.
I did not.
I did not.
Senator Pirtle idea mate.
And madam chair would you mind
disclosing the amount.
I don't remember I don't recall
that I did donate to the
governor's campaign.
And madam chair in concrete did
you or any of your close family
donate to any members of the
legislature he did not.
I did not know.
Chair and Senator Pirtle idea.
And and Madam would you mind
disclosing which members if if
you can remember in the amount.
I don't remember I'm sorry but I
you know.
Active on the local state level
and and support a lot of
community events and individuals
I I did support some of our
legislators.
And madam chair I appreciate
that you know it's very
important we we stay involved in
state engaged in New from the
testimony today I know you are
well aware of of what it takes
to to do what's best for our
children so I do appreciate you
staying involved just full
disclosure madam chair members
of the committee I am one of
those nontraditional student I
recently rules that you unmuted
you are online
so I'm I am going for for my
degree so you know I I'm
learning what the struggles are
that
nontraditional students have an
and so I would be happy to
discuss with the any of the
regions if you ever want my
opinion for what it's worth on
online learning and and where we
could improve and and what we
could do for people like like
myself that the or or living our
professional life or family life
and then of course trying to go
back to school and and better
ourselves in that aspect I would
be more than happy to do so the
that offers out there thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Senator Pirtle any
other members of the committee.
Well I and I it I'm I'm
interested to hear that Senator
Pirtle is doing the NM use
online program has gonna say I.
My nephew David is doing the
exact same thing
he's gone back to school and
he's are finishing up and and
and and like Senator Pirtle he's
he's doing it while he's he's
working and and living his life
and so I'm sure he would.
Have some some things to add to
that conversation as well he's
finishing up a a criminal
justice degree on with an M. and
M. E. N. E. and and use online
program this year as well and I
echo Senator Lopez's comments
thank you all for for the time
that you're giving to this and
for your dedication to to New
Mexico and to higher education
and Miss Vigil let's go ahead
and call the roll starting with
is Ruiz madam chair do we have a
motion and a second oh I'm sorry
thank you madam chair I move.
We have a motion from Senator
Lopez and and I'll go ahead and
second that.
And
Miss Vigil thank you madam chair
will start Trish route.
Senator Baca.
Yes Senator Lopez yes.
Senator o'neill thank you Sarah
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle yes and senator do
it yes.
Congratulations menstruate has
backtracked on.
For in their head Senator Baca.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Pirtle.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Ingle yes and senator do it yes.
And for Phyllocnistis Senator
Baca.
Yes Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Ingle yes and senator do it yes.
Congratulations to you all you
all have the the recommendation
from the committee on a vote of
of six to zero and your
confirmations will be heard on
the floor this afternoon.
You all thank you thank you
thank you very much.
Madam chair thank I'm you know
as is our usual tradition in the
committee when we're in person
so we miss it but please accept
our our our you know why and
claps David J. and everything
that we were doing committee by
check in our usual tradition so
it's like a just that just
wanted to come mention that
madam chair thank you.
Thank you senator and members of
the committee it looks like when
the chair is not here we
actually we finish early.
That is everything on the agenda
for the rules committee today so
as the chair mentioned when we
began will be having we will be
meeting tomorrow I believe he
said at ten o'clock but
otherwise the rules committee
will stand in recess until then
thank you all so much.
