Senate bill seventy introduced
by Senator Padilla and act
making appropriations from the
cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure fund Senate bill
seventy Senate bill seventy
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senate Indian rural cultural
protection and acting the
patients debt collection
protection act preventing
collection from indigent
patients requiring health care
facilities to screen patients
for assistance eligibility
spent limiting enforceability of
certain judgments making
violations of the patients debt
collection protection act and
the collection agency regulatory
attorney fees and costs for
certain suits by collection
agencies amending and enacting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight Senate bill
seventy one.
bill seventy one Senate bill
seventy two introduced by
senator Neville an act relating
to industrial revenue bonds
changing the method for
determining an annual in lieu
to the state for electric
transmission project shall be
made by the person proposing the
electric transmission project
declaring an emergency Senate
seventy two Senate bill seventy
three introduced by Senator how
to meal an act relating to
transportation.
Avoiding that fees imposed by
the federal unified Kerry a
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill seventy
three Senate bill seventy four
emergency response act enacting
a new section of the public
health act providing for
automatic termination of a
public health emergency order or
a public health order that
closes public places or limits
in certain circumstances
declaring an emergency Senate
bill seventy four Senate bill
seventy four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health of Affairs
governmental conduct prohibiting
disclosure of sensitive personal
information by state agency
employees providing exceptions
Senate bill seventy five Senate
bill seventy five having been
Senator diamond an act relating
to special hospital districts
creating the Sierra County
special hospital district Senate
bill seventy six Senate bill
Senator Kernan an act relating
to higher education creating the
regional two plus to pay.
I look project to establish a
seamless transition from
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill seventy seven Senate bill
seventy eight introduced by
Senator Padilla and act relating
printed referred to the Senate
tax business and transportation
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill seventy
eight Senate bill seventy nine
introduced by Senator Pirtle an
providing powers and duties
creating the small business
pandemic reparations tax credit
and providing for certificates
of eligibility providing a
process for protests creating a
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate finance Senate bill
seventy nine Senate bill eighty
introduced by Senator pope an
act relating to race prohibiting
Human Rights Act Senate bill
eighty Senate bill eighty having
been read twice by title is
printed referred the Senate
Education Committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
requiring The New Mexico's
sentencing commission to
evaluate the racial impact of
certain proposed legislation
Senate bill eighty one Senate
bill eighty one having been read
and act relating to radioactive
materials amending the duties
and composition of the
radioactive waste consultation
task force.
Describing responsibilities
regarding private disposal
printed referred to the Senate
conservation committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill eighty two Senate
bill eighty three introduced by
Senator Steinborn and act
relating to utilities enacting
Senate bill eighty three having
been read twice by title is
printed as order printed and
referred to the Senate
conservation committee and
Senate tax business and
prescribing requirements for
community solar facilities
subscriber organizations and
subscriptions prescribing
requirements for administration
of a community solar program
ordered printed referred to the
Senate conservation committee
then Senate tax business and
transportation committee Senate
bill eighty four Senate bill
eighty five introduced by
distributions making
appropriation Senate bill eighty
five.
Senate bill eighty five having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate conservation
certain uses of fresh water in
oil and gas operations providing
penalties for the spill or
release of oil gas are produced
water creating the oil
and non domestic wastes that are
protective of public health
worker safety and natural
resources requiring the tracking
of produced water alphabetize
zing definitions and adding
oil and gas act clarifying
requirements for water quality
control commission rulemaking
related to the use of produced
water outside of the Oil Field.
Senate bill eighty six.
Senate bill eighty seven
introduced by senator Candelaria
and act relating to public
records prohibiting retaliation
under the inspection of public
records act providing civil
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill eighty
seven Senate bill eighty eight
introduced by senator Candelaria
in act relating to finance
authorizing the New Mexico
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate conservation
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill eighty
eight Senate bill eighty nine
introduced by Senator toman an
Senate bill eighty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printer referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill eighty nine.
Senator manuals thank you Mr
president Senate finance will go
into your house bill one in
about six thirty five give us
enough money from time to try up
finance and we will be webcast
thank you and for the members of
the public are watching that
will be webcasted.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
So basically the Senate finance
committees going to hear house
bill one in committee and well
we stayed on the floor we're
going to continue to introduce
bills we're just waiting for a
we go back to that order
business introduction
legislation.
On that order business
introduction legislation the
reader will read.
in the public employees
retirement act Senate bill
ninety Senate bill ninety having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
Development Act including retail
businesses located in
unincorporated areas of the
county in the definition of
retail business clarifying that
funding may be used for
Senate bill ninety one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill ninety one Senate bill
certain circumstances Senate
bill ninety two.
Senate bill ninety two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee then Senate Judiciary
and expansion act establishing
the office of broadband access
and expansion providing powers
and duties making appropriation
Senate bill ninety three.
Senate bill ninety three having
ninety four introduced by
senator Mark Moores and senator
bill B. o'neill and
representative Antonio Maestas
an act relating to athletics and
likeness allowing for the
professional representation of a
student athlete by an agent for
matters arising from the use of
of the student athletes name
Senate bill ninety four Senate
bill ninety five introduced by
Senator Lopez and act relating
to tobacco products clarifying
that municipalities and counties
may enact ordinances charter
the tobacco products act Senate
bill ninety five.
Senate bill ninety five having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
types of cases reviewed by the
maternal mortality review
committee expanding committee
leadership membership powers and
privileges requiring approval by
the secretary of health for
six.
Senate bill ninety six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred.
The Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
act amending the kinship
guardianship act providing for
voluntary placement of children
providing for financial
subsidies amending repealing and
enacting sections of the NMSA
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill ninety
seven Senate bill ninety eight
introduced by Senator Tolman and
act relating to economic
development incentives requiring
revenue department to compile
and present a tax expenditure
budget and New LLC's of certain
tax expenditures to the governor
and legislative committees
making appropriation Senate bill
bill ninety eight Senate bill
ninety nine introduced by
Senator o'neal and actually need
to tax exempt organizations
revising requirements for audits
business and transportation
committee Senate bill ninety
nine Senate bill one hundred
introduced by Senator Gerald
Ortiz Y. Pino and act relating
name to appear more than once on
a ballot if the candidate is the
nominee for a major political
party and one or more minor
political parties amending
repealing and enacting sections
Senate bill one hundred if there
was ever a year to be the Senate
bill one hundred sponsor this is
the year Senate bill one
hundred.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
president of the.
The virtual quality of our
session this year means it will
be a virtual hundred bill party
We may deliver little boxes of
food to your door as we had this
morning they're a lot of ways we
can deal with this again at some
thought I'm open to suggestions
responsible for planning putting
together a celebration for all
of our staff here at the capitol
who work so hard obviously this
year is different but we still
introduced by Senator woods and
act making appropriation for the
New Mexico department of
agriculture to carry out the New
Mexico agricultural workforce
development program Senate bill
Senate bill one or one Senate
bill one hundred to introduced
by Senator Pirtle and act
relating to time exempting the
state of New Mexico from the
reversion to standard time from
daylight saving time.
Senator into having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
health and public affairs
committee then Senate Judiciary
order of business.
Thank you senator Senator Pirtle
and thank you Mr president and I
will note that if we were on
permanent daylight saving we
we've actually started ten
introduction legislation the
readable read Senate bill one
hundred three introduced by
Senator Stewart and act relating
to the environment restricting
the use of neonicotinoid class
Senate bill one oh three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printer referred to the
Senate conservation committee
then Senate tax business and
transportation committee Senate
rural again I think I know
conservation traditionally has
seen these and and I understand
that but if we're gonna have a
committee committed to rural
issues I think this is one again
Mr president banks are pirtle
Senator Sapanta how could you
repeat the title that bill
please.
You need to DO naked to know
it's neonicotinoids process
decides providing exemptions
require in education and
training program amending and
sounds like conservation to me.
Thank thank you senator
Stefanics and senator fertile
farm that for you into making a
motion you were just making a
practice but just moving forward
you know rural issues usually
involve Ag and and that's about
as Ag related as it gets thank
you Mr president thanks in part
State University for the support
and expansion of a network of
weather stations throughout the
state Senate bill one oh four
Senate bill one all for having
five introduced by Senator
Rodriguez and act making
appropriation for law
enforcement assisted diversion
Senate bill one oh five.
Senate bill one of five having
souls an act relating to driver
education school sure the bonds
increasing the required charity
Bond for driver education
schools Senate bill one oh six.
Senate bill one hundred seven
introduced by Senator Gonzales
and act making appropriation to
the public education department
for college and career readiness
the Senate Education Committee
then the Senate finance
committee Senate bill one of
seven.
Senate bill one oh wait
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act making
appropriation to the Department
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill one away
Senate bill one oh nine
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act making
Senate bill one online having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health public affairs
committee that's the Senate
finance committee Senate bill
appropriation Senate bill one
ten.
Senate bill one ten having been
read twice by title is ordered
Senator for the Senate Education
appropriation to the department
of finance and administration
for the land grant council to
hire a New Mexico licensed
professional surveyor and an
attorney who specializes in
affairs committee that Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one eleven Senate bill one
hundred twelve introduced by
Senator Stewart and act relating
to economic development creating
away from reliance and natural
resource extraction.
Avoiding duties requiring that
department secretaries of state
agencies comply with the
strategic plan making
committee that's the Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one twelve Senate bill one
thirteen introduced by Senator
souls and actuating to
construction requiring new
Senate bill one thirteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Senate conservation committee
that's a Senate tax business
transportation committee Senate
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight Senate bill one fourteen.
Senate bill one fourteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health of public
parents or guardians if a child
does not arrive at a day care
center public school or charter
school Senate bill one fifteen.
fifteen Senate bill one sixteen
introduced by Senator souls an
act relating to airports
allowing the sale of unleaded
fuel at airports Senate bill one
sixteen Senate bill one sixteen
bill one sixteen Senate bill one
seventeen introduced by Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino and act making
appropriation to the department
of health to contract for
services to assessed and
Representative SS and report on
one seventeen Senate bill one
seventeen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
licensure regulation and
inspection requirements allowing
the acquisition of meat pursuant
to ownership of an animal share.
Directing the establishment of a
state meat inspection program
an emergency Senate bill one
eighteen Senate bill one
nineteen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate
conservation committee that's
the Senate taxed business
licensure enacting the
psychology inter jurisdictional
compact.
Senate bill one nineteen.
Senate bill one nineteen having
been read twice by title is
and act relating to procurement
exempting youth conservation
corps contracts and service
agreements from the procurement
code Senate bill one twenty
Senate bill one twenty having
bill one twenty one introduced
by Senator Gonzales and act
relating to public finance
providing for the issuance and
use a state transportation
project bonds for certain
Senate tax business the
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one twenty one
Senate bill one twenty two
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Senate bill one twenty two
Senate bill one twenty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
assistants and pharmacists in
the definition of health care
practitioner for the purpose of
making certain provisions in a
health care practitioner
agreements void unenforceable
committee and Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one twenty
three one twenty four introduce.
By Senator Tolman and senator
Neville an act relating to
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
tax business transportation
committee Senate bill one twenty
four Senate bill one twenty five
Senate bill one twenty five
Senate bill one twenty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
weather modification program
Senate bill one twenty six
Senate bill one twenty six
having been read twice by title
is ordered Senate and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee then Senate finance
representation and advocacy act
creating the office of Family
representation and advocacy
establishing duties of the
director creating the family
representation and advocacy
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one twenty
seven Senate bill one twenty
eight introduced by Senator
o'neal and act relating to
mental health care connecting
providing guidelines for
treatment of at risk patients in
emergency care requiring suicide
stabilization training for
police officers prescribing
Senate bill one twenty eight
Senate bill one twenty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee that Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
flexibility for the New Mexico
Wirth say board to implement the
provisions of the New Mexico
work and save act.
Verifying definitions clarifying
certain provisions of the work
programs creating the work and
save fund providing conditions
for implementation of the New
Mexico work and save act and the
New Mexico work and save I R. a
program making an appropriation
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one twenty nine Senate bill
one thirty introduced by Senator
souls an act relating to state
vehicles requiring the
transportation services division
of the General Services
requiring rulemaking Senate bill
one thirty.
Senate bill one thirty having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate tax business and
An act relating to public school
capital improvement creating
discretionary program units
defining discretionary program
units excluding certain program
units in calculating
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one thirty
one Senate bill one thirty two
introduced by Senator souls an
Senate bill one thirty two
Senate bill one thirty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee then Senate tax
business transportation
We have.
No no no that's a more at one I
only have as J. R. three four
five six and seven.
Okay so I'm a three yes.
Yes.
Senate joint resolution number
three.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend the constitution of New
Mexico by adding a new section
of article two that provides the
people of the state with
environmental rights including
the right to a clean and healthy
repealing the current pollution
control provisions of article
twenty section twenty one Senate
joint resolution three.
Senate joint resolution three
having been read twice by title
introduce in.
Do you rate this committee
assignments again Sir Senator
Kernan would you like me to read
the title as well.
Mr president I have the time.
I'm Mr president.
What I have read and I have read
through that that's going to
have a significant impact on the
this earlier and I didn't
realize this is going to get
ready and here's what I suggest
let's hold off and get the
Senate finance committee members
back because I think we need to
have a vote on this on the floor
I would I would ask that we just
again wait until they're back
and then we'll we'll have this
discussion if that's okay
Senator Kernan yes thank you
very much thank you Senator
provide to the state ethics
commission the sole authority to
review establish salaries every
two years for all elected state
officers and remove existing
legislative authority to set
the Senate rules committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate joint resolution for
Senate joint resolution I
introduced by senator committees
by school districts or charter
schools from having the force of
law unless funding for those
mandates is provided Senate
joint resolution I.
resolution six introduced by
Senator Pirtle a joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to article four
section one of the constitution
of New Mexico to provide that a
law enacted by the legislature
joint resolution six Senate
joint resolution six having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
rules committee events Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate joint
resolution six Senate joint
provide for nominating
committees for appointed and
reappointed members of boards of
regents of state educational
institutions except student
members Senate joint resolution
That.
Senate joint resolution seven
and Senate memorial number one
introduced by Senator Korea
Hemphill a memorial requesting
the establishment of a task
force to promote the use of
Senator Mario on having been
read twice by title is ordered
print and referred to the Senate
rules committee that's the
Senate Education Committee
senator moral one.
thank you Mr president unanimous
that we go about our business
announcements miscellaneous on
that order business analysis is
the latest Senator Wirth so we
are waiting for a rules
committee committee report and
until seven thirty.
so get a chance to get out of
the chamber a little bit and I
also want to thank the.
The reader and the staff up
front for that was a lot of
recess until seven thirty.
The Senate will come to order.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
