Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Wirth your Senator
Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
That's the remain standing after
the indication for the pledge of
allegiance to be led by Senator
could it Hemphill.
The pledge allegiance and
Spanish.
Me in a spirit of stillness.
President.
Prince.
And move and breathe and live.
This land that nourishes us and
About how to live in harmony
with this
May we all honor that was done
with our lives and actions.
For your commitment to serve the
people of New Mexico.
Full of new possibilities.
A day where you find meaning and
beauty in your work.
A day of the magic nation.
Creativity.
And wisdom.
transformation for yourself and
your community.
May you always lead with courage
and integrity.
Choosing the right.
Truth.
Beauty.
Transformation and community.
Be with you in each moments.
For the common good.
I pray all these things.
For you for us.
Maybe a spirit guide you protect
you walk with you.
Keep you safe and healthy.
This day and always.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
From the left that eleven that
other lawsuits Stallis and nails
the America he I literally got
Thank you senators as we begin
today I would ask unanimous
today's session in a different
way.
As you know this past week we
lost a loved one the servant of
the state of New Mexico.
about thirty five minutes away
for from where I live and to
visit with the family and the
community and the impact that
it's had on every single one of
They wanted me to thank all
those members who have
personally reached out and of
call the family and the showing
of support.
Minus and compassion and love.
In honor of officer Marion Jr.
Thank you Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements miscellaneous.
We very much appreciate her
words and the chance to just.
Take a moment and you know take
a breath and realize the
importance of why we're here.
deadline tomorrow on capital
outlay.
There are requests Bonser ship
and re authorization forms that
need to be signed and delivered
to request a new bill file.
If you've got an existing file
you're working on that that's
fine but if you want to
renewable file.
Deadlines for you all to be
aware of.
Before I yield to members just a
little bit of a road map for
today we do.
I do want to share a process.
For expert witnesses because
this will be the first time
we're doing that.
And certainly given not comment
They will all log in on the zoom
they will stay muted.
And if the body accepts them as
expert witnesses they will be on
Our so that is.
The process for today we will do
Messages from the governor
announcements miscellaneous
thank you senator Wirth we're on
that order business announces
miscellaneous and the senators
wishing to.
Sure any announcements.
Thank you Mr president over the
weekend that was great to be
back with my family are session
baby George Hamish had his fifth
birthday and it was a great time
in the entire world but I think
his mother is now figured out
that he's no longer a baby now
he's a he's a young man and this
is great to see him grow and and
every session I get reminded of
some running down the the aisles
right here but look forward to
seeing him soon.
Further announcements Senator by
the.
Thank you very much Mr president
denouncing Center recognize a
government there students and it
has done a phenomenal job of
organizing themselves much like
we do Mister president and so
they've done such a great job
that they are a gold standard
there is totally turning the
screen upside down in a very
positive way and here's an
example one of the things they
did in about a year is is to get
that student government student
Senate off the ground and have
done a remarkable job so just
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to make an announcement
of my constituents the entirety
of Hidalgo County across the
district thirty five and
throughout New Mexico we mourn
the loss of a true hero New
Mexico state police officer
the community those who knew him
best described officer Jared as
respectful a hard worker and a
leader who had high moral
children awice and another
expecting this year today we
honor him as an outstanding
officer a friend a fiance father
including his state police
brothers and sisters I
acknowledge the grief and the
sense of loss within my district
for those joining us virtually
collectively the Senate body
God bless our broken hearts
thank god bless our law
enforcement officers.
Thank you so much Senator
Diamond.
Senator Woods.
I've got a email here from Amy's
secular.
And it states that the four H.
programs make such an impact on
the development of use for eight
communities this was a study
done by the Tufts University the
positive development of use I
just want to stand here today
Any further announcement
Senators.
Si no further announcements
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
one.
Your president pro temper
Stewart and members of the
Senate in accordance with
article four section forty two
The New Mexico constitution I
October one two thousand twenty
to serve at the pleasure of the
governor.
This appointee shall serve and
have all duties responsibilities
and authority of this office
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business committee
reports run that order business
referred Senate bill one has had
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
passed as amended.
Respectfully submitted George my
nose chairman Senator many of us
Mr president your finance
committee to home has been
referred Senate bill two has
headed under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended
Mr president yes then grab that.
pass respectfully submitted
George when Yost chairman
sentiment us.
Thank you Senator Vogel and do
the motion the reader has read
all the reports now.
Move adoption the committee
report centers we have a motion
referred Senate bill thirty two
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it to pass as amended and
thence referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually.
Si no objection the reader to
read Senate bill sixty seven do
pass and then to refer to the
amended and answer for to the
tax business and transportation
committee Senate bill eighty I
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee.
Senate bill eighty six do pass
Senate bill one oh three do pass
as amended and it's referred to
the tax business and
transportation committee Senate
bill one twelve do pass and it's
referred to the finance
committee.
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Stefanics chairman
thank you senator CENIC's Mr
president I move the adoption of
The committee point seven
adopted in the journal so that
they were acted upon
individually.
Mister Mister president you're
Education Committee to home has
been referred Senate bill sixty
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually.
committee Senate bill one forty
four do pass and that's referred
to the finance committee.
Senate bill one forty eight do
pass and that's referred to the
bill one sixty three do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate bill one sixty
nine to pass and it's referred
to the finance committee Senate
William P. sold chairman.
I move adoption of the committee
report.
Senator has been a motion to
adopt the committee reports.
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee to who has
been referred Senate bill fifty
five has headed under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass and that's referred to the
we vote on them with one motion
and that the general fact that
they were acted upon individual.
See no objections the reader to
read Senate bill seventy two
referred to the finance
committee Senate bill one sixty
six do passed and then referred
to the finance committee Senate
bill one seventy two do pass and
that's referred to the finance
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two oh nine do pass and it's
referred to the finance
committee Senate bill two fifty
seven do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
referred to the health of public
affairs committee.
Senate bill two seventy eight do
passed as amended.
And then to referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Pinto chairman Senator Pinto I
move the adoption of the
committee report that is is been
a motion to adopt the trade
reports.
That.
Si no objection the committee
one hundred eight has had under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
and if the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually.
Say no objection the reader to
read Senate bill one oh nine do
pass and it's referred to the
Senate bill one sixteen do pass
and then for for to the tax
business and transportation
committee Senate bill one
seventeen to do pass and that's
referred to the finance
Senate bill one twenty four do
pass as amended and then for for
to the tax business and
transportation committee.
Ninety seven do passing that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill ninety nine two
passed as amended immense
referred to the tax business and
business and transportation
committee these are audible.
Senate bill sixty I do pass
sentence referred to the finance
committee.
to the Judiciary Committee
Senate bill ninety do passed as
amended and that's referred to
the finance committee and Senate
bill ninety six to pass and
of the committee reports that is
is been a motion to adopt the
committee reports.
A
no objection the committee point
have been adopted the general
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to me
all the committee reports and
that we will tend them with one
motion that the term reflected
they were acted upon
individually.
Committee Senate bill twenty
four do pass and this referred
to the Judiciary Committee
Senate bill thirty four do pass
and it's referred to the
Committee Senate bill fifty do
pass and it's referred to the
finance committee Senate bill
fifty two to pass sentence
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill fifty three do not
Senate bill fifty nine do pass
in this referred to the finance
committee and Senate bill sixty
six do pass and it's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Ivy Soto seen no objection the
committee point have been
adopted in the journal so.
That the the teacher acted upon
individually.
do pass and that's referred to
the tax business and
transportation committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Daniel A. Ivey Soto chairman
Senator Ivey Soto of this
pass as amended and it's
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill one ninety six do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
the Judiciary Committee.
Senate Joint Memorial one do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the Education
Committee.
committee substitute for Senate
joint resolution three do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate joint resolution thirteen
submitted Senator Daniel A. Ivey
Soto chairman Senator Ivey Soto
moved off to the committee
report that is there's been a
motion to adopt the committee
report.
I
Committee too home has been
referred Senate bill ten has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Senator Joseph
you Mr president so once again I
think this bill is not been well
thought out and and and I think
I believe it it completely
removes all of the protections
for women.
Of one of the protections in
here is that a woman has to
consent to all of a sudden now
that's gone.
I I would respectfully ask that
it that we reject this committee
report.
Thanks Senator.
voted yes to accept the
committee report.
A vote of no is to reject the
committee report.
The clerk to Colorado.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
law the.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
serve on this Senator Cervantes
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs no Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator huh near yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan Now Senator Lopez
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
Yes senator Paul PS Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator suite is now Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
yes Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods notes Senator
Baca.
Senator Baca notes Senator
By a vote of twenty seven the
affirmative fifteen the negative
the committee report has been
adopted.
same with recommendation that a
do pass as amended and that's
referred to the.
Finance committee respectfully
Committee reports that we act on
vote on them with one motion and
the journal reflect that they
were active on individually see
no objection the reader to read.
Senate bill ninety to do pass as
chairman Senator about this
reduction Senator is a motion to
doubt the committee report.
I see no objection.
The committee for has been
allow cameras in the gallery
si no objection it is so ordered
thank you senator.
Thank you Mr president.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
The Senate will come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in the
suspended and that the record
show that their journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee.
The Senate will come in order.
See no objections Senators the
Santo con artists Center Lopez
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Senate bill one two and three I
do understand some amendments
for Senate bill two that are up
in proofing and we're checking
on those so just stay tuned of
business third reading of
legislation.
Run that order business third
meeting legislation just a
reminder senators for on third
reading we are all more and I'm
advocating we appreciate that
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous in the
Senate the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
one as amended with the
emergency clause on final
president members here's my plan
for presentation Senate bill one
first unanimous consent to have
three experts on the phone.
Council of course miss Stokes
is.
Bill drafter and is here for
technical advice and takes no
position for or against the
bill.
Si no objection.
yield to the to Senate co
sponsors Senator Candelaria in
Korea Hemphill to discuss the
specific provisions in Senate
Mr president Senate bill one is
a continuation of the work.
That we have done in this
legislature to address the COVID
nineteen pandemic.
provided relief to New Mexicans
in New Mexico businesses
impacted by COVID.
And I think it's fair to say our
efforts along with the efforts
recovery curve in New Mexico and
what I mean by that well.
There was real concern back in
June that we could have a flat
Because of the work we've done.
We've been able to mitigate the
harm and as a result.
I've heard the curve described
But certainly let's be really
clear there's more work to be
done and Senate bill does this
work and continues it is
designed to help to.
Of the most impacted groups
We had a very spirited debates
in November about essential
workers and wanting to help them
of those that make less than
fifteen dollars an hour.
during this pandemic.
To provide the services we all
need.
Well we did not agree in
November to the mechanism.
explain in more detail it uses
the working families tax credit.
To allow those that make less
than individuals making less
than thirty one thousand five
When they file their their tax
return this year.
And claim the working families
tax credit they will get an
additional.
Six hundred dollar tax rebate.
The second thing this bill does.
It provides food and beverage
establishments with a four
month.
Gross receipts deduction.
From March through June.
Which is particularly important
for municipalities to rely so
heavily on gross receipts.
And essentially though this is
giving.
announcing today.
Kind of an update on the overall
red to yellow transition.
And to the extent that we're
And what I like to do is you'll
Senator Candelaria to discuss
the specifics.
The working families tax credit
which he has been working on is
really become a champion for and
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate hopefully
my English will be slower today
than my Spanish was earlier
I thank you Mr president members
basis come together in such a
significant.
Way to lend a helping hand to
administration as a anti poverty
measure the idea being that the
federal government would
incentivize work but would
federal level has been one of
our nation's most the fact of
pieces of policy to address
income inequality in our country
achievements New Mexico like
many states has followed suit
and has implemented many years
ago and earned income tax credit
that earned income tax credit
So this is and I mentioned that
background Mr president because
as the Majority Leader said the
question all along on this issue
was getting the right mechanism
recovery dot org which is a data
clearing house that is being
updated in real time by both
Harvard University and others.
which tells us the story of
affected all communities in New
Mexico equally
as senator Wirth said Mister
president over the last year
helpless New Mexicans who make
sure that shelves were stocked
and making sure that our economy
and our state continued to
function even though we are
Wages and employment in New
Mexico and across the country
has largely rebounded in many
sectors and for higher income
grew up in the folks who worked
one or two jobs and invested in
their families and everything
Society asked them to.
one hundred and ten million
dollar direct finance financial
stimulus that is targeted New
Mexico's working families.
is also the sort of economic
policy that will not only get
New Mexico out of this recession
but will help us stand up
stronger when we are done.
They have the pent up demands of
rant the of the pandemic demands
of clothing for their children
food basic medical needs.
Unprecedented actions to protect
the public health which yes has
meant the closure or shuttering
of many service sector injury
industry in the state and so
not going to invest that money
it's not going to be stored away
largely for a rainy day
unfortunately because too many
of our families don't have the
luxury of thinking about asset
the end will also be a direct
financial stimulus to our
state's economy that money will
get spent it will get spent in
local businesses.
We help New Mexico rise by
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate restaurants and
bars have suffered great
financial difficulties over the
last several months due to the
Senate bill one will find
restaurants and bars some
financial assistance to help get
them through the next few months
so this bill is modeled after
ability to deduct gross receipts
from the purchase of prepared
food or non package beverages
from March first to June
occasions and create lasting
memories as we recover from the
pandemic thank you Mr president
thank you we do have a floor
amendment.
Senator Wirth to move and
explain the amendment thank you
Mr president I move Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill one as amended with
emergency costs.
A little bit complicated I'm
gonna walk everyone through its
a technical amendment we wanted
to make absolutely sure that is
Center Correa Hemphill
mentioned.
Are basically technical
amendments to make it clear that
the gross receipts tax deduction
for food or beverage
establishments includes those
will expire after June thirtieth
twenty twenty two so as I
mentioned for months.
Item number eleven.
Specifies the food and beverage
Reinstates item five of the
Senate finance amendment and
clarifies again that for those
restaurants and bars.
They will not have to pay G. R.
we're debating Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill one as amended with
emergency clause.
Any debate.
amended with emergency clause
and ask for unanimous consent
Senator is been request for
unanimous consent on Senate
floor amendment number one.
As amended with emergency clause
has been approved.
Senator Wirth.
We do have another floor
amendment the reader to read
Senate floor amendment number
Thank you Mr president and I'm a
little rusty on this do I need
to move that we.
On Senate bill number one twice
amended.
With emergency clause.
Senator Candelaria made a very
good point.
And my.
Amendment has absolutely nothing
to do I'm saying there's an
easier way to do this.
There's an easier way.
By working with employees
And it is put into an account
rate in to the state what I'm
suggesting is the employer takes
a credit.
For that.
made whole because the state
picks up.
His mouth to be.
Are going in to his account I
hope that that somewhat of the
senator would senator Wirth to
CENIC on the other who would
like to yield to that senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
and.
First let me just say I
technical and so it did give me
a chance to.
Review it and review it with the
experts and it is a different
approach.
And the reason for the
opposition.
Is is is a couple of things I
mean this is an interesting
And for restaurants and bars
being able to keep the G. R. T.
during those four months is
immediate relief.
So one of the challenges I have
with this.
credit and the tax department
have to put together a whole
program to figure out what that
credit is against.
Our and I just think that's
going to delay the relief that
know in the.
Restaurant industry in
particular.
Many employers.
Are paying less than minimum
And so that would result in a
lot less money.
Actually getting to the
restaurants and bars so again
will I appreciate.
get restaurants and bars more
money immediately so I
respectfully what opposing them
thank you senator Wirth centers
we're debating senator Memon
number two.
So the way this is been
presented is a business gets to
collect gross receipts tax which
the purchaser believes they owe
to the state of New Mexico and
then they get to the the
business and.
what should I call it the no of
the game isn't played of so the
the people get to keep the money
or the actual of.
People that earn the money the
without this amendment it's
almost almost of a con game
where people are paying tax
thinking they're paying tax
with the with the people and I
believe Senator Woods.
Of amendment really addresses
that in in helps us to be just a
president.
Thank you senator further debate
Senators.
Si no further debate on the
Discussion about immediate
relief.
Because when you pay an employee
if you don't have to put that
improvements mask anything else
immediately.
You can budget that money not
gross receipts on the other hand
But what happens.
If we decide are we don't decide
what happens if another health
order comes along.
My bill my amendment is talking
directly to employees.
That's who were trying to keep
in.
Now I know that we can look at
Help taxed revenue department
for one.
With that is your solution to
the same problem.
I believe this is a simpler use
your.
More efficient way of doing
something.
I believe it would be triple
Amanda.
With the emergency clause.
emergency clause Mr president
object we do have an objection
as unanimous consent so we will
go through we will have a roll
call vote on this amendment.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
sure about this Senator to run
there's no Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg no Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen no Senator
Hemphill no Senator Hemphill no
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hermio no Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
no Senator Lopez no Senator
McKenna no Senator McKenna no
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neill no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator pro bono Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no Senator
songes.
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
So Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart no Senator Stewart now
senator Coleman.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator gray
goes back no.
Senator Pirtle.
By a vote of fourteen in the
Thank you Mr president and I'm
actually my my questions and
concerns have a little bit to do
with the amendment that passed
and so I guess since the
sponsor Senator Wirth please you
Center were detailed.
Mr president I do.
Thank you Mr president senator
and I'm I was looking at the
number ten we're we're insuring
the word dispenser.
Before mobile food service
establishment.
is the definition I don't I
don't know Mister president
senator actually what a
dispenser mobile food service
it a try
so we wanted to be clear in the
purpose of the amendment as I
mentioned was to include in the
general definition of food or
And then we define dispenser
But I think the section you're
looking at is a mobile food
service establishment so I don't
trolley cars you can ride around
and.
At their basic a trolley bar but
I don't think we have those I I
don't know the answer to that
but I believe that the section
and.
Mr president centered as I as I
look back at it the the
dispenser word is followed by a
food establishment Sherman and I
now correct and and I didn't
find the comma.
Mr president my understanding
it's a dispenser semi colon.
Differentiating those to that.
Thank you Mr president Senator
and and etcetera I need to I
need to talk to the body a
what we're doing a fine edge as
fast food restaurant.
And while I knowing what I've
believed I guess would have been
potentially less than than
others and I think that's the
reason you're you're doing a
language however.
One of the the prominent fast
And they are closing two of
those locations.
Directly because of the results
from the from the the shut down.
people in that situation more
than we believe.
So Mister president senator I'm
you know I'm not prepared to
make an amendment I wanted to
as as we move on.
Or it to look at that again
because I know
Mister president senator trying
Alamogordo that that they have
suffered too although we might
believe that.
That kind of goes against some
certainly letting me know that
that he's had issues.
Change the change to shut down
bill moves to the house that we
strike that provision.
and allow these individuals to
have that opportunity as well so
thank you Mr president and
Si no further debate senator
Wirth to close on the bill.
Thank you Mr president members I
appreciate the discussion and
certainly Senator Griggs I think
gonna ask for a roll call vote.
Senators we're voting on Senate
bill one as two times a minute
with the emergency clause.
To your seats please.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores
subpoena.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Padilla yes Senator
Penn Bill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Rodriguez Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Sanchez.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees.
yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
with emergency clause has passed
the Senate senator Wirth.
Thank you ladies and gentlemen
the Senate.
Thank you senator Wirth thank
you Mr president unanimous
amendments yet so what we'll do
is jump over
Unanimous consent we go back to
that order business third
reading of legislation ideal to
that the rules be suspended and
the record show that the that
we're here this bill is ready
and ready to debate it thank
you.
Thank you so all action has been
you for your consideration
Senate Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill three
this legislation re authorizes
was sort of one of the first
will recall the small business
recovery act creates two things
number one it creates a loan
program managed by the New
capital who don't have the sort
of banking relationships that
they can pick up the phone and
get a line of credit for a
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
The creates the program whereby
finance authority all address
Mister president the
restructuring that we have put
forward in the bill before you
relative to the initial bill
desire was truly to provide an
economic lifeline to those firms
who were shut down their
businesses were closed for the
loan you had to demonstrate the
thirty percent decline in your
revenue for both months that's
thirty percent in April and
thirty percent in may.
were denied because of that one
provision and so the legislation
before you opens up the doors to
more New Mexico farms to come in
states that a firm would qualify
for a loan under this act if
they can demonstrate that since
the onset of the COVID nineteen
pandemic their love their firm
follows.
The maximum period of the loans
contemplated under this re
authorization are ten years as I
stated the maximum interest rate
community's needs about
addressing the qualifications to
get in the door we also listened
to the business community and to
entrepreneurs across the state
expenditures under the re
authorize bill before you this
legislation will also make
available to Mexico firms across
the state a ready and cheap
firm that has incurred or will
incur costs in terms of capital
improvements for asset
acquisition that are necessary
because of the COVID nineteen
last year is those sort of asset
acquisitions and construction
that was not planned but was
absolutely necessary to the
pandemic and the second
important point it'll make on
to invest in and build out their
own e-commerce capacity and
their own supply chain we
learned in the pandemic that
commerce across the world is
becoming more and more
of many businesses and
entrepreneurs who are in a very
difficult position but are able
to now to access a cheap source
of financing for some firms
we have taken a bipartisan multi
faceted approach to this problem
the second part of this bill Mr
president as in the first
legislation is that we have you
program those funds are only
transferred an as needed basis
there's not a a giant fund
transfer that happens it's on an
as needed basis Mr president
two.
and so now I ask for your
consideration and your support
thank you Mr president thank you
Sierra the idea senators are
debating Center for committee
five seven point six I be
excused from this will in all
matters and debate pertaining to
this vote.
Si no objection.
So order.
some of these loans are some of
my business interest may apply
for.
So I don't think you would be
right for me to vote on such a
major so please excuse me from
this though.
We do have Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor of the bill please yield
has there been some liquidity
issue in New Mexico where a
person or business could not go
and get their own loan from a
from conventional financing
president sorry a business loan
not a home loan.
So in short answer Mister
president yes there is a
liquidity problem in New Mexico
for many entrepreneurs and
business owners and it's a
structural equity problem you
I'm gonna be alone unless you
have significant assets so there
is a structural liquidity
problem where we have a sector
of our economy that is banked
have pent up demand for
liquidity and other firms in
other sectors of the economy Mr
president so both things I think
are true at the same time for
concern me here is that when you
talk about of not having the
required assets or not having
any in insurance banks have the
FDIC took to back loans like
that here it would appear that
we have the full faith and
credit of of New Mexico taxpayer
The answer to your question Mr
president is both yes and no the
same time yes in the sense.
got distracted it is that we can
please keep the discussions down
to anymore so the presenters.
Maybe even here Senator Baca can
you please restate the question
president Senator was that some
people structurally cannot get
the loan because they don't have
the required asset level maybe
that's correct then are we in
fact back you risk your riskier
loans then and are we putting to
back those loans Mister
some other insurance to back
their loans Mr president thank
you Mr president I appreciate
greatly the Senator restating
the question so again back to my
very lawyerly answer is the
thought which says leave all
that money in the severance tax
permanent fund leave it on Wall
Street what it gains you know
four five six percent interest
and spin off may be an
I submit to this body that that
money is for that that this is
not a risky investment in the
sense that the essence of this
bill says that we are going to
Mexico workers that work in
those firms.
Now I say yes that is has a
higher risk yes.
doubling the default rate of SB
I see loans the worst case
scenario I believe that is
forecast is a thirty percent
return on that cash that yes
this is a riskier investment
investing in equities on Wall
Street that are in tests law or
the oil industry or Walmart or
to invest in ourselves.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Mr president thank you
for your answer I do appreciate
that and I'll probably have some
comment on in a moment but I
constitution or we're pledging
credit to a to a private
associations Mr president this
bill is not pledge credit so
now.
isn't repaid and it's not
insured then we are using the
credit of of the of the
taxpayers in New Mexico I I
would think.
good faith disagreement of fact
and law here which is the
determination of whether or not
the loan instruments which are
faith and credit is levied a
situation where the state was
pledging its full faith and
credit would be let's say if a
company came to us and said we
want to issue a billion dollars
going to step in and guarantee
that third party transaction
that is a situation Mr president
or the state would be pledging
its full faith and credit in
this legislation the state is
investment into that program I
think the second point Mister
president is that from a
constitutional perspective and
just really from a common law
perspective whether or not an
back yes we reasonably expect to
get paid back do we go into this
with eyes open knowing that this
is a difficult time in New
Mexico's history there may be
that point we do agree and and
the reason Mister president that
I go into some of these points
is because there's a lot of
questions in there that should
be answered if we're making a
argue Mr president as as to the
remainder of a of the argument
presented by the sponsor and I
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing this forward I
understand where his heart is
and I'm gonna support this
become a public bank or get into
the banking business as a
regular process I understand
Mister president the times are
building and so I would point to
that Mr president that we cannot
then come back and Pat ourselves
on the back for curing ailment
sponsor has and I said I will as
I said I will be sponsor I will
be supporting this this so
legislation today but we really
need to look at these types of
and then pointing ourselves out
as a solution thank you Mr
president Senator Baca further
debate sentiment us.
You Mr president ask Miss
Thank you I think this is a
fantastic bill Mr president I
think it's really a offers a lot
of a lot of assistance to two
can a nonprofit qualify if part
if it's operations suffered loss
but then they got it another
grants because that's been
happening with non profits and
part of the nonprofit group but
then its regular operations had
to shrink so that may be on
balance it might look close or
nuts and bolts question that is
you know best left to the loan
originator right well in this
case which is NMFA so there's
you know there's not a specific
may arise and craft a policy for
that but what I will say Senator
is what this bill does for
explicitly for the firm that
you've referenced is instead of
done by the New Mexico finance
authority and so in this example
the the controlling legal
inquiry would be has that firm
basically right and so it would
it would really be up to you
whether or not that firm can
demonstrate to NMFA satisfaction
you know I think Mr president
one of the things we need to do
in this chambers really applaud
And you know they will be the
ones making that decision a fact
case by case basis Mister
president.
Thank you Mr president I'm
really glad that nonprofits are
L. eligible and I think that
some of our non profits are
getting grants to actually
provide food to their clients so
they're actually increasing
their budgets however their
vote for it thank you Mr
president thank you Sir Senator
Sedillo Lopez any further debate
Senators.
Sierra a lot of the clothes.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate you know
we didn't ask for the sars COVID
basic lifesaving measures be
taken and businesses across the
state but instead of looking
back at the past and cursing at
let's look forward to the future
president voting present voting
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative I. roll
call vote thank you senator
Senators tier seats please we're
not for government work.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Cervantes
recuse himself Senator Diamond.
Senator I then yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez VS Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator need to be no yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Pinto.
PS Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez passes Senator
communities.
Senator sure no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods recused himself
senator Sanchez.
the small business recovery act
has passed the Senate.
Thank you Mr president members
of the Senate.
Thank you Sierra Lotta.
Senator Wirth.
On that order business serving
legislation center semantics
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show that all action
for placing Senate bill two as
Senator Stefanics explained the
bill thank you Mr president this
is a small bill compared to the
other two this the fit financial
issues Mister president that has
come up from our restaurants are
bars are wineries are
distilleries for the loss of
waves their next annual license
renewal and that is why the
price tag is very small it's a
one time
Fix thank you very much and I
If we can just give justice I
just a moment as and then it
gets handed out to the members
the reader will go ahead and
read the will just give a moment
for each member to get the
amendment.
Senator moving explained
eminent.
Mr president I move Senate floor
member number one to Senate bill
two is already Amanda wants with
the emergency clause.
here and we were struggling for
a while to figure out how to
make sure this helped the
businesses that were actually
affected by this some of those
what this amendment does is it
tries to focus our efforts here
on the New Mexico businesses
that have really suffered and.
It doesn't hurt to the big box
shut down then you need a break
and that's all this really does
Mister president.
Senator panics
thank you sponsor for accepting
it as a friendly amendment.
Thank you for the debate on the
amendment.
Of my unanimous consent.
That is better request.
I object.
Withdrawn.
has been adopted to Senate bill
two as amended with emergency
clause.
We're back on the bill.
first legislative action we
should recognize it is.
this got a COVID.
As to why we picked out the
liquor establishment.
the thought says just doing it
for the alcohol beverage much Mr
president and Senator Stefanics.
most of those areas are rural.
So when there is a restaurant a
bar a distillery or winery they
small businesses in my district
and throughout the state.
Then Mister president hi.
My districts can rule to.
up in Senate finance I was told
to run your own damn bill.
And not bother with this one so
way to pay unemployed to pop
popcorn not not anything and
we're doing nothing for them
with this bill.
Si no further debate centers to
fax to close on the bill.
Thank you Mister president I am
who I now move that Senate bill
two twice amended with the
called thank you senators please
tier seats we're voting.
On Senate bill two twice a
minute with emergency clause.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator problems yes Senator
Candelaria.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivy
Soto.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator only ODS Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
And.
Yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees.
Senator smitteez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator severe
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods known Senator
Moores bass.
Yes Senator.
RCS.
By a vote of forty one of the
affirmative one of the negative.
Senate bill two is twice a
minute emergency because we've
twenty twenty one liquor license
Moving on to go to senator Wirth
thank you Mr president unanimous
is that we go about our business
introduction of legislation run
that order business section
legislation.
The reader to read.
legislative redistricting
committee declaring an emergency
Senate bill fifteen.
Senate bill fifteen having been
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to health coverage
prohibiting imposition of cost
sharing for behavioral health
services under certain insurance
coverage policies are plans
seventeen Senate bill three
seventeen having been read twice
by title is ordered front
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three seventeen Senate bill
act and the abuse and neglect
act revising procedures for
placing children in protective
custody Senate bill three twenty
four Senate bill three twenty
four having been read twice by
act relating to transportation
providing for the process for
the collection of damages by the
department of transportation for
destruction of property Senate
bill three twenty five Senate
Senate bill three twenty five
Senate bill three twenty six
introduced by Senator McKenna
and act relating to the
environment limiting the use of
pesticides on public grounds and
section of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight Senate bill three
twenty six Senate Bill to.
The twenty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
Lopez and actually need to
privacy.
Prohibiting the disclosure of
sensitive personal information
restricting the disclosure of
certain information by certain
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
three twenty seven Senate bill
three twenty eight introduced by
Senator Gonzalez an act relating
to taxation removing the six
business transportation
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
twenty eight Senate bill three
twenty nine introduced by
Senator Campos an act relating
to ambulance services
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
three twenty nine Senate bill
three thirty introduced by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
thirty.
Senate bill three thirty one
manner prohibited the secretary
of state and county clerks from
running for a different office
during their term or for two
years thereafter were
participating in official
for elective office Senate bill
three thirty one.
Senate bill three thirty one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
and Senate Judiciary Committee
levy shall not exceed a period
of ten years and that the
supervisor shall not authorize
the continuation of a levy for
capital obligations that we're
within ten years of the date of
approval providing exceptions
Senate bill three thirty two
at about three thirty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred.
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act making
appropriation to the
administrative office of the
courts to contract with the
nonprofit community development
affairs committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
three thirty three Senate bill
three thirty four introduced by
Senator Senator Stefanics and
a permit for a new mining
operation Senate bill three
thirty four Senate bill three
thirty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate conservation committee
the board of regents of eastern
New Mexico university to manage
and conduct a program to train
teachers and to teach school
children about robotics Senate
Senate bill three thirty six
introduced by Senator Hamblen an
act relating to elections
providing for the registration
of qualified residents who are
sixteen or seventeen years of
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill three thirty six
Senate bill three thirty seven
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
three thirty seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three thirty seven Senate
bill three thirty eight
agreements Senate bill three
thirty eight Senate bill three
thirty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee that Senate Judiciary
the lowincome comprehensive tax
rebate increasing the amount of
the working families tax credit
and expanding eligibility
requirements for the credit
requiring with holders of the
Senate bill three thirty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered print referred to the
Senate tax business
transportation committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
to clarify the definition of
reciprocal participant Senate
bill three forty Senate bill
three forty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
thank you senator that Senator
T. subpoena.
For the conversation thank you
Mr president.
Senate bill three forty one
introduced by senator Neville
Senate bill three thirty Senate
bill three forty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill three forty one Senate bill
Requiring provider agencies that
provide services through certain
Medicaid waiver programs to
increase compensation for
certain staff when reimbursement
rates increase.
paid to provider agencies under
certain circumstances requiring
provider agencies to collect and
report data regarding the direct
support professional workforce
Senate bill three forty two at
three forty three introduced by
Senator for the and actually
need to motor vehicles amending
the crime of racing on highways
to include racing on streets
crime of racing on highways or
streets providing definitions
Senate bill three forty three
Senate bill three forty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to crime creating the crime of
vehicular manslaughter Senate
bill three forty four Senate
bill three forty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Gonzalez and act relating to
public officers clarifying
attendance pursuant to the per
diem and mileage act changing
the rates of per diem
reimbursement for in state and
affairs committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
three forty five Senate bill
three forty six introduced by
Senator Lopez and act relating
resolution of concerns providing
access to student educational
records providing for the
confidentiality of records
providing potential actions for
Committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate the then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
three forty six Senate bill
three forty seven introduced by
prohibiting the sale of eggs
from confined hands prescribing
penalties Senate bill three
forty seven Senate bill three
forty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
that is I'll go to Senator
million US and then Santo
Domingo you wanted the title
right as well.
President I think that's a
wonderful idea.
Thank you we'll do that and
forty seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate conservation committee
and Senate Judiciary Committee
the title is an act relating to
age from confined hands
prescribing penalties.
Senator Ingle.
President I just.
where the court came from and of
course going.
Because this will I know it is
this is in no justice will lead
the crew to the cost of eggs in
unbelievable fashion thank you
Senator many of us.
Mr president elected
Mr president Senator Candelaria
result thank you Mr president
are good Senator why do the
French only one egg for
breakfast oh my goodness I'm not
much one S. deposit don't Missy
RC exiting you Senator and any
further questions on this piece
of legislation.
C. then we're gonna go on back
to the reader will read the.
for central New Mexico community
college to develop and operate
intensive short term boot camp
training for unemployed and
underemployed workers to improve
long term economic and workforce
committee Senate bill three
forty eight Senate bill three
forty nine introduced by Senator
Duhigg and Senator pope and
Senator McKenna and Senator
Hickey.
virus disease two thousand
nineteen public health emergency
requiring certain disclosures be
made to borrowers requiring
certain loss mitigation options
having been read twice by title
is ordered for it referred to
the Senate.
Tax business transportation
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill three
forty nine Senate bill three
pump to receive the geothermal
ground Google Google he pumped
tax credit pursuant to the
income tax act and the corporate
income and franchise tax act
Senate bill three fifty Senate
senator Ortiz Pino and act
relating to health establishing
the global hospital budgets task
force to study global hospital
budgets created demonstration
for Medicare and Medicaid
services authorizing the
secretary of Human Services and
secretary of health to apply for
funding from the federal centers
for Medicare and Medicaid
recommendation Senate bill three
fifty one Senate bill three
fifty one having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
orders or other documents from a
location in the county that is
not the county seat.
Repealing section thirty four
dash seven dash five NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
three fifty two having been read
twice by title is ordered
president referred to the Senate
health and public affairs
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill three
eight being laws two thousand
seven chapter three fifty three
section two and lost two
thousand seven chapter three
fifty seven section two
requiring all students in grade
levels lower than fourth grade
practitioner on or before
January one of the school year
in which they enroll providing
for the promulgation of training
requirements for school vision
screeners Senate bill three
fifty three Senate bill three
by Senator Lopez and act
relating to executive
reorganization and acting the
vocational rehabilitation act
creating the vocational
rehabilitation commission
the transfer of functions person
money probation records and
other property Senate bill three
fifty four Senate bill three
fifty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
domestic affairs providing for
the appointment of a parenting
coordinator you.
A proceeding in which a child
custody order is issued Senate
bill three fifty five Senate
minnows and act making
appropriation for assistance in
the burial of deceased indigent
persons Senate bill three fifty
six.
Senate bill three fifty six
fifty seven introduced by
senator my nose and Senator
Candelaria and actually need to
executive departments requiring
confirm Department secretaries
New Mexico residency Senate bill
three fifty seven.
Senate bill three fifty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
trespass Senate bill three fifty
eight.
Senate bill three fifty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health of public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
money for legislators or the
governor's election or
reelection to any public office
during a legislative session
declaring an emergency Senate
bill three fifty nine Senate
Senate bill three sixty
introduced by Senator Padilla
and act relating to public
utilities and acting the utility
easements for broadband act
authorizing the use and sharing
Providing for optional recording
of such notice establishing
claims pursuant to the use of
utility easements allowing cost
recovery for communications
infrastructure projects
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill three sixty Senate
bill three sixty one introduced
by Senator Padilla an act
relating to telecommunications
amending the rural
definitions Senate bill three
sixty one Senate bill three
sixty one having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate Senate
engine in rural and cultural
Campos and stand Senator Diamond
and act relating to our racing
amending the horse racing Act
providing for advance deposit
wagering Senate bill three sixty
two Senate bill three sixty two
Senate bill three sixty three
introduced by Senator Candelaria
and actually new to cannabis and
acting the cannabis regulation
Act enacting the cannabis tax
public health and safety
advisory committee revising law
enforcement reporting
requirements revising sections
of law related to cannabis
creating a public education
campaign.
from cannabis excise tax revenue
amending the Lynn and Erin
compassionate use act providing
an revising penalties amending
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill three sixty three Mr
president okay.
Senator.
You you call Senator sure you
didn't even look over here how
believe that the other cannabis
bills that were creating a fund
in in taxation and all that also
went to Senate finance so read
does not in any way either mark
or appropriate revenue the only
reason the language making
appropriation is in the title is
appropriation but one of the
sticking points I've had in this
entire debate is that we do not
earmarked revenue we do not
appropriate through the cannabis
appropriation and mark would not
be a property to the Senate
finance thank you.
Senator.
The so Mr a.
It does belong in Senate finance
just because of those two
reasons Senator many of us do
yield Mr president I think all
those get bills are being
gathered in in the Senate
this one to Judiciary and and
see what they're going to
compile and send out to us
before we bring it to finance.
Thank you Mr president are you
Senator.
Just waiting for them to just a
little more.
Okay.
code in the public health act
amending the public health
emergency response act providing
that public health and executive
orders of general applicability
throughout the state or a
portion of the state shall
other local permitting organ
ordinances Senate bill three
sixty four Senate bill three
sixty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
changing the prohibitions and
requirements relating to certain
adjustable rate home loans
Senate bill three sixty five
Senate bill three sixty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
nineteen introduced by senator
Craig Brandt a joint resolution
proposing to amend article
twelve section three of the
constitution of New Mexico to
eliminate the prohibition on
state educational funds being
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate judiciary Center
joint resolution nineteen Senate
joint resolution twenty
introduced by senator say about
within two days when two thirds
of the members elected to the
house of representatives and the
Senate certified in emergency
exists in the affairs of the
state of New Mexico Senate joint
resolution twenty.
Senate Joint Memorial three
introduced by Senator Baca and
Representative Townsend.
A Joint Memorial requesting the
administration of the president
Senate Joint Memorial three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senate tax business
transportation committee Senate
Joint Memorial three Senate
of the United States Congress to
restore the nature economy and
security of the net United
States New Mexico border.
Senate memorial tenth federal
moral ten having been read twice
A memorial honoring James G. M.
P. White and recognizing his
outstanding service to New
Mexico Senate memorial eleven
Center memorial Levin having
memorial twelve introduced by
Senator Hamblen a memorial
requesting the department of
environment to report on the
effectiveness of the dairy rule
in protecting New Mexico's
committee then Senate
conservation committee seven
memorial twelve.
Senate memorial thirteen
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino a memorial recognizing the
early childhood task force in
two thousand twenty one Senate
memorial thirteen federal moral
thirteen having been read twice
by title is ordered print
referred to the rules committee
And.
Good.
And Senate bill three sixty six
introduced by senator my nose
technology providing for leases
and contracts for broadband
platforms and the provision of
services making an appropriation
Senate bill three sixty six.
Senate bill three sixty six
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president I just want to make
sure that was it for the USS
starship one else.
That we're talking about the
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that or
business announcements
miscellaneous around that order
business Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr president so I
will give everyone a sense of
the road map for tomorrow once
we get the committee chairs to
announce their meetings.
When that order business we have
sentenced to fenics in senators
thirty to about eleven fifteen
before we come on the floor and
on Saturday morning we are
meeting from nine AM to noon
thank you very much Mr
president.
plan to meet on Friday and
that'll depend a little bit down
on how we do with the floor what
time we get out here about what
time we do that so stand by but
we'll put together to general
publisher for Friday and we will
This thank thank you Senator
about this Senator.
Souls.
Thank you Mr president Senate
little behind and that we might
need that to catch up but that
is still tentative at this time
thank you Mr chair Mister
president.
Friday will be looking at having
a meeting it will be strictly
confirmations that we'll be
doing at that at that meeting as
soon as we're able to work
going on we have center do
subpoena.
Thank you Mr president of the
Senate health and public affairs
committee will meet one half
complex or controversial bills
so hopefully we can complete the
work by five or shortly
thereafter so it'll be a virtual
meeting three o'clock.
Thursday and I believe the only
thing on our agenda is an update
from New Mexico highlands
university on the native
American social work institute
thank you thank you Santo
Thank you Senator Shendo.
Ingle.
favor and and when you're mask
as you speaker microphone Center
the subpoena Mister president
Senator Ingle it would be nice
to have you at the meeting today
yes I I do the yield Mr
Senator by the I thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent unanimous consent to
drop the committee referral for
Senate bill two oh four to
related to broadband in that
some of our native let native
lands this is a bill that died
in the last fifteen seconds of
the two thousand nineteen
session this is the path what
I'm asking now is the path that
the bill took in two thousand
referral can just please we say
that again thank you Mr
president to drop the committee
referral to Senate Judiciary and
move it's it's next stop and
move that to Senate tax business
you read the title of the bill
do you have the title of the
bill Mr president Mr president I
can pull it up right now if
you'd like.
Thank you Mr president no
objection here thank you Senator
Baca.
Si no objection.
It is so ordered thank you
center for the thank you Mr
amount that that we receive so
we may look at that one again
Senate finance for the Senate
finance will not be going in
today or tomorrow will be a busy
revenues are headed in the
state.
I want to form of the body that
that it we all have been talking
about for making a junior bill
And will gather those up Senate
finance staff is available to
help you place that money within
confines of the budget.
need help Senator Senate finance
can help you LFC can help you
with those placing those numbers
within the budget and so that
will build pry move pretty
me know that way we can make
sure on top of it.
And so Mr president we Senate
finance will meet on Friday so
thank you.
bring attention to the work that
we did today although I think
you know we've made some.
you know some headway on on some
issues that's been created in
our state I just want to draw
have restaurants to don't know
if they'll ever be able to vote
again and so although these
these measures that we voted on
today I voted for two of them
because I think they're okay.
these but the reality is you
know we're still shut down
Chavis county is still shut down
and our our businesses are
our districts and you know Pat
ourselves on the back and say
look what we've done you know
government created these
problems that the government
orders
when you really stop and think
about it.
And that was coming from
government his government
running to their aid saying Hey
we're here to help you.
And I'm happy that we are able
to help them I'm happy that the
hoping that this is a sign that
this body and the and the house.
We'll do the work that we need
to to to rein in.
The executive branch of
no fault of your own but that's
what we have to do we have to go
home and look them in the eye
and and where the contact that
they have.
And so we have to get the spine
we have to have the courage
and really improve and ensure
that these mom and pop shops do
not go out of business thank you
Mr president thank you Senator
Pirtle any further announcements
Senators.
going to hear to built tomorrow
Senate bill ten Senator Lopez
and Senate bill twenty seven
Senator Rodriguez here those on
the floor third reading
Thursday if we get it over and
read in.
We may not need to be on the
floor on Friday so we'll stay
tuned on that but that's the
road map for tomorrow and with
