For the committee a good morning
madam chair members of the
committee and no I don't have
any opening remarks I do that
work with scheduling late
yesterday afternoon to call
their attention to the wrong
agenda in what's happening and
that and I thought it was
remedy but as of this morning we
still had the wrong schedule in
there but.
But I did contact those senators
to inform
them of the error and that
hopefully we'll have everything
back on track
after today's meeting thank you
thank you.
Thank you all right do we have
any mail from the members
anything but before we begin
with Senator call folks.
More questions.
No okay thank you and I we have
Richard with all as our
Analysts design and make the
margin authority Rebecca
committee secretary and looks
like we.
I think we're ready to go
Senator Senator Campos do you
have everybody that that you
need online.
I believe so
there is a problem of course
we'll do is we'll bypass we're
able to go ahead and make sure
that that there but I understand
they're available for up to the
markets.
Okay thank you Senator Campos
sentiment we are ready to begin
thank you you may begin thank
you very much of Madam chair of
course to the members of of this
distinguished committee it's
definitely an honor to be here
before you go back to the late
senator John Pinto are what an
honor to go ahead and see his
granddaughter sharing of this
distinguished committee and over
the years we have the
opportunity to work very closely
with each other and I can tell
by the dedication with
professionalism that you
continue to bring forth on
behalf of the inTaos family of
that is something very guards in
the state of New Mexico will
really appreciate that.
Members of the distinguished
Committee what you have before
you is Senate bill one sixty
seven and one of the reasons why
this bill is back before the
committee is to further
elaborate and explain.
Not only the purpose of the CSD
P. Senator but also the use of
the resources from start talking
about are a indigenous
population about our seconds in
about our land grants these are
very important issues to the
people of New Mexico and often
times whenever I travel the
country and make presentations
are people aren't too familiar
with any of these aspects so the
presenters today Mr Adrian
Sungoliath who is the director
of the CST the center are there
in New Mexico highlands
university and he is also of
course a very much involved with
the band on leadership institute
they are.
Along with that we have public
or see who is executive director
of directors The New Mexico
seconds Association of their
role today is to help us better
understand the purpose of the
resources that we're seeking and
in the long run but that those
resources would be used for
Senator has been funded in the
past and there are other
resources available last year
for this particular project but
again as we move forward
this is going to be more of how
we continue to put forth so some
of those resources to ensure
that we
Continue with what the purpose
of the center is in particular
this project in China and the
curriculum development for our
students all the way across the
board here in New Mexico and of
course this is going to
What I call the of the global
sphere as we are president if
you will information
particularly those people who
are there curious which to learn
or looking at downside not more
about all of the great state of
New Mexico and a lot of our more
races and our cultures so madam
chair members of the
distinguished Committee inside
but if they're on board I would
like to call upon Adrian's on
the line to talk a little bit
about emphasized the need in the
involvement of our indigenous
populations and then also Mr
Burciaga who will also talk
about the second portion of our
state the resources and how we
over time to involve
these particular Alsop's ideas
and cultures into our
educational curricula thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Mr Senator lost madam
chair members of the committee
it's a pleasure for me to share
with you this morning specific
to the what I call the L. G.
curriculum second land grant
education curriculum and project
when I think of our indigenous
communities specifically I it's
really the starting place of the
conversation around land and
water justice and food
sovereignty
it it's it's a starting point as
far as what we need to be
thinking about as far as the
cultural ties to land and water.
food here in the state of New
Mexico in the southwest
the realities as far as history
specific to these these topics
and ultimately that just really
clarifying that there's much
more when we think of the
history when we think about the
funds of knowledge that exist if
we're making recommendations
around a curriculum specific to
a sec is a land grants that we
really need to take into account
not only the the past
perspectives but the current
perspectives of our indigenous
communities and it's such a such
a critical piece such a
important focal point I'm so
that way when our students are
proceeding through engaging and
reflecting upon this type of
curriculum that there's a much
bigger and broader picture a
picture that is waited in the
appropriate areas and a picture
that is balanced when we think
of history in many instances
these type of histories of these
type of reality that really run
across disciplines are are never
really shared within our social
studies curriculum or really any
parts of our curriculum that
exist excuse me in our K. twelve
system let alone our higher
education system so when I think
of the implications I think of
not only pre K. twelve but I
also think of higher ed and how
the indigenous narrative around
land food and water really is a
critical piece that needs to be
shared and I look at this as a
tremendous vehicle for
supporting that conversation to
to take place.
Thank you Mr Santa.
You may continue your
presentation our troops.
Thank you.
Your I think you are muted the
Apollo.
Thank you of good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee it's a tremendous
honor to have the opportunity to
present some of our thoughts
with you today about this about
this bill and I think senator
Sanchez Senator couples for
being the sponsor of the spell
I'm with the New Mexico acequia
Association we're a community
based organization that
advocates for our rural land
based way of life through
community education and policy
advocacy I'm not an educator but
I come from a community that
highly values education and that
increasingly sees the importance
of integrating
in the knowledge about our
communities into the curriculum
are you there spending much of
their lives as part of our
public school system and and
they're surrounded in with these
in these beautiful communities
and these plans sacred
indigenous lands but now also
lands that are there for their
ancestors are deeply rooted and
yeah and and a lot of ways the
education
in the schools doesn't always
reflect the the the profound
beauty around them or what their
role is in
and and working towards the
betterment of their own
communities but also it's also
for for all used to learn about
the agent in Star communities in
New Mexico to build common
understanding
this is a land grants are vital
part of New Mexico's culture
history and social fabric and
and we continue to be relevant
and community development in
rural communities around the
state we also know that
culturally relevant education
should include the study of
historical development of our
our our our historic land based
and indigenous communities on on
contemporary issues and
challenges they face
we know that research shows that
multi cultural among
multilingual up.
Which is to education allows
students to maintain their
language and cultural identity
which can contribute to their
well being and performance and
school
we we saw the landmark decision
and Yazzie Martinez that stated
that the state should take
immediate steps to support
students and that decision also
highlighted the need for
multicultural learning
opportunities the response to
the cultures languages and
heritages of diverse student
populations so this this project
was conceived with that in mind
that out we are looking for how
the of the history the
traditional and indigenous
knowledge and our communities
can be honored through our
educational system and
integrated into our curriculum
well we're our children are
learning in the public school
system and of the the funding
that has been requested and this
would be the second year of
funding would be to continue to
develop policy recommendations
that was lead to curriculum
development in collaboration
with the with the public
education department and so
that the work is very
participatory in nature it's
involving educators and
stakeholders one of the key
principles that we have
incorporated as is to have
community involvement and
specifically also to have
indigenous representation from
from our published and other
tribal nations to make sure that
what we're telling the history
of New Mexico that we're
honoring the indigenous history
and placing the a second one
grant history with them that
broader context and that's
something that's really needed
in New Mexico within our own
communities in the second online
grants but also for the broader
community to just really
understand what New Mexico that
the complexity
that that that.
The implications for social
justice and the importance of
our land based way of life and I
are both indigenous land grant
in the second communities so
with that madam chair we're
we're here to answer questions
we appreciate your consideration
thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee of the
CST the project was started that
several decades back and with
that what we have done is to
beginning to go ahead and share
Boller forward of that all of
our cultures are not only
Representative but as we move
forward better ways of life here
in New Mexico definitely are
brought forward so that more
people understand our diversity
you're in our great state just
one final comment madam chair
members of the committee I want
to express my condolences to our
Adrian at the loss of this
beloved mother it's just recent
and he's here with us this
morning in order to continue
that with the district project
but again I want to send my
condolences to this family thank
you very much madam chair back
reserved presentation and
weren't able on the screen to
respond to questions.
Thank you Senator Campos and
thank you Mr Santa and Mrs
Garcia we will go to Rebecca
Martinez to see if there's any
public comment.
I will turn it over to David who
will announce who's
available for public comment.
Madam chair members members of
the committee.
On you have the bad echo.
Madam.
It is still it's still that no
still act.
Pretty good echo madam chair now
that Rebecca Martinez has muted
the echo should be a.
Okay.
Madam chair of the committee my
apologies and on the vehicle
with us we have doctor how
global Baca and the story and
with the New Mexico land grant
council I just percent that
professor at UNM and air to an
approved economic and kind of
from a land grant.
That drive about that you can go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and and thank you
Senator Campos for sponsoring
this very important legislation
I get a over to a couple of land
grants the Santa Cruz the
Kannada and attempt to make
grant a group is but see on to
on then a second opinion of the
San Juan New Mexico very nasco
so this is definitely part of my
my heritage and I had the
distinct opportunity to become a
instructor at the university
level I've talked classes New
Mexico history at the university
of New Mexico as well at central
New Mexico community college
and that is absolutely a lack of
recognition of the importance of
land grants and a sick as in the
history of New Mexico in its
development and the development
of the important traditional
economies of New Mexico that
sustained us before maternity
and is a lack of recognition
that these communities still
exist and so when I found myself
teaching these courses there was
a lack of materials and a lack
of recognition so this.
Is incredibly important in
developing curriculum
recommendations both to the
public education department and
the higher education department
typical it is essential
knowledge into the the
curriculum it at the and the
kids will and at the higher end
level I come from a community
educators and two siblings that
are now administrators that were
once middle school social
studies teachers and that was
something these are the
conversations that we have the
absolute lack of resources that
were out there good resources
and you know my siblings that
they can rely to rely on their
experiences and their knowledge
but they recognized that other
teachers don't have that same
personal experience and so the
linguistics program at the falls
he absolutely supports as we
look forward to continuing to
collaborate with New Mexico
highlands university on this
program thank you.
I think that is there another.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee on the call with us we
ought to have done a
consolidated with the New Mexico
secretary commission as I thank
you Association my apologies
Donna go ahead thank you good
morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is
Donna Gonzalez and from Tommy
song New Mexico so also very
rural community I work for the
New Mexico Astec Association and
I am also a member of the New
Mexico a second commission I am
in support of SB one five seven
so part of my job at the New
Mexico Astec Association is to
do I thank you.
Youth education work and so I
get to give presentations too
many to loss of take lots of you
head start through college and
I've had no greater joy than
seeing their spark in their eyes
and their hands raised when
they're competent and answers
about their true heritage yes
that is the land our food our
animals and even the bugs are
all part of our tradition and
our culture is so rich and it's
important that the you know
that they felt confident and
that they make the connection in
their belonging to the roots and
their place I am honored to
speak with you and thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee we had also received a
request to comment at Ralph the
hell.
Chair of the New Mexico
commission unfortunately does
not seem to be on the call with
us.
And that was all in terms of the
request for public comment in
support of this bill.
Thank you thank you Nate and we
have Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair.
with decisions sponsor.
Senator Campos hello normally
you know if we're trying to
create changes to curriculum at
at universities is this the
normal way we go about it orgy
usually that a group of faculty
members get together and discuss
with the university change that
they want to make and curriculum
and work on that together and
then bring that to the
university in the university
roll that into their into their
budget out it just this looks
like it it's a different way to
do it and so if it is I just
create your explanation of how
that works.
Thank you very much Senator
Griggs of course curriculum is
brought together in the in a
myriad of ways I'm gonna take a
quick response so this and then
from there first possibly turned
over to a director Santa but in
essence when it comes to the
development of the curriculum at
the secondary post secondary
level of those thoughts and
ideas are brought forth they're
usually reserved out of the
read a review I'm sorry by this
committees and then from there
the information is
authenticated.
And then from there agree to if
you will by people in the
department and then that is the
all the the short process in
terms of how ridiculous is
developed also the bed in the
head level as we move forward
with the development of
curriculum there are several
steps and analysis as a they do
move forward regarding any
former curriculum but through
this CS the P. as an example of
this is just one portion of it
we when I say we as a state
sponsor CST P. had been
contracted in past years I had
to help to develop specific
lines of curriculum presented to
our educators administrators and
other styles for analysis and
and adoption so it's a lengthy
process and this is just part of
that process and particularly
when it comes to the sectors in
the land grants.
This is a process that is
partially used in so I could
madam chair Senator Griggs
justice for to our director
Santa for a real quick
explanation of how they do this
at the university level
sciences.
Thank you Senator Campos some
and madam chair Senator Griggs
members of the committee thanks
for giving me a bit of space to
respond to to the question and
so Senator Griggs specifically
we are in a very timely at a
moment when it comes to a
curriculum development and
perhaps the implications.
That curriculum development
would have not only on on New
Mexico public education
department but also higher ed
and what that says momentous
opportunity is is the state of
New Mexico currently is at the
point as a of adopting and
creating brand new social
studies standards for the whole
state
with that in mind whenever the
state's identifies new standards
that has implications on the
school of education for all of
our higher ed institutions fire
at in the state of New Mexico
they need to update they need to
make sure that they're offering
specific resources as specific
supports for those teachers will
ultimately will be moving in to
the classroom and teaching in
accordance to these the
standards and so if you can
imagine being able to weigh in
at this time with
recommendations from are
indigenous and Latinos bottle
communities about what we feel
is a value that need to appear
within our state standards
specific to social studies and
other potentially potential
content areas it is it is a
wonderful time that will
ultimately impact the the dean
of the school of education
specifically at the New Mexico
highlands university and the
curriculum that needs to be
applied to developing future
teachers whether it be in the
bilingual arena or the general
education and even the special
education arenas so that way
these topics are are taken into
account and capacity is built in
in the appropriate fashion.
Madam chair Senator Griggs in
essence their adoption cycles
and within those cycles the
program if you will review
analytics is involved in the
disappearance of widespread in
the adoption of curriculum
changes thank you.
Thank you are thank you both
Senator and.
And is Dr Santa
thank you thank you both in the
and madam chair I have you know
the.
The thing to me was with
education in our this this
sounds like a is is reasonable
approaches as any
We're.
Yeah we can run a.
Representative file of getting
kids educated and things it
really really makes sense to and
do some good over overall.
we've we've expanded to a
program she and at the secretary
hello at the higher end level
we're we're students go in a
major and graduate with a with a
degree in something that really
doesn't help will wind up making
a live they they may be enjoyed
your college experience but then
they have a hard time finding a
job that that that that helps.
But I think one of the things
which that troubles me about New
Mexico versus Texas for action
Texas has a proud history New
Mexico has a proud history New
Mexico has gotten away from in
many ways recognizing that proud
history they have been studying
our history to we're we should
care and and.
Recognize that you New Mexico is
a pretty need to pledge and
we've we've somehow forgotten
that and we we need to get back
to some of those things but we
also need to get back to some
other basics.
And and those things just you
know there's this particular
thing that you're talking about.
Not only really needs to be
mentioned or talked somewhat in
the at higher it it needs to be
we need to develop good New
Mexico history courses are
taught in high school probably
and maybe even back in the
middle and junior high.
We we need to work on some of
that and hopefully hopefully
with some Senator Campos a
position in the Senate and
here's a your position in life
some of those things can can
ultimately get get done
you know this way yeah I'm gonna
I'm gonna support the the bill
senator I I hold city does which
you you were counting on it to
doing that I I think it needs to
be part of something much much
bigger that we we do in New
Mexico.
Because you guys are looking at
a at a portion of New Mexico
history New Mexico division
important that.
What you say it's very important
to white people down in in to
roshi.
What people in Alamogordo Sheena
to Roche actually has a shake
you loose has a shaky so those
are those are things that will
work how did that occur what
happened.
And I just believe that we've
got that we got some work at
average and it's not just with
with this deal here it's with
our entire a focus on on
education in New Mexico and how
we choose to focus our.
Our classes and or put our
emphasis in our state so it's
kind of a rambling deal but
Senator I've I think really
this probably ought to be worked
on hard for universities and
other things and and maybe this
is this is an approach that.
I wouldn't have taken but yet
I'm gonna support you bill and
support you approach and see
where we get thank you senator
thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair thank you senator
next points well taken and
you're always thinking of the
global approach I really
appreciate that I did make notes
and that will continue to see if
we can take care of this on a
much broader scale again thank
you very much.
You thank you senator Greg thank
you Senator Campos and we have
Senator McKenna.
Good morning madam chair and
good morning Senator Campos
I would like to echo what
Senator Griggs just said I think
this is really
really important
New Mexico history that needs
much
broader.
Platform if you will lack of a
better word you know it's it's
so important because the end of
this take yes that's how we work
many of us are here here today
because of a farming and the way
we farmed in this desert climate
so thank you Senator Griggs I'm
someone mentioned that he was
miss Garcia.
Senator Campos and chairwoman of
that this is the second year of
funding so to that and I'm
curious is this the same amount
as last year and then my
secondary question is what
occurred last year and for
instance was a report done is
this year's proposed work tasks
does it align are they intended
with what occurred last year
thank you senator I'm and thank
you chairman.
Thank you very much madam chair
of course and McKenna to respond
I'm gonna asco director Santa to
start if you will with the work
that has taken place and then
from there some of the work that
we're still planning in the
future thank you.
Absolutely madam chair Senators
excuse me
Members of the committee forgive
me
my response to that the
specifically is that we're
currently in a three phase
process on where we are pulling
together a number of different
stakeholder representatives the
state corporate representatives
include the following
specifically in our indigenous
community our indigenous youth
communities.
Our Latino Hispano youth
communities are looking
responding communities that are
attached to this sector as a
land grants also we are inviting
a higher ed community as well as
policy makers
and so the through and yeah
through all of these groups
including educators as well K.
twelve educators we want to pull
together the recommendations
that will be made specifically
to the New Mexico public
education department as they
begin to develop out the
standards that I'd mention a
little bit earlier and to the
higher education department so
that way these entities begin to
recognize that there is a value
of for what has been mentioned I
believe within this community
committee of for a quarter of
who we are as New Mexicans
and whether it be we come from
an indigenous community along
the Rio Grande Valley or
even and and the Shiprock area
or other areas as such is that
what was mentioned specific to
Tularosa Exeter Exeter and we
have these realities even in Los
crucis New Mexico where New
Mexico state is curious about
what we're doing and are
interested in connecting in
various professional ways so
pulling together these entities
to provide very clear
recommendations and secondly
what we have as an under current
besides the recommendations as a
the development of a white paper
within the white paper what we
want to do is we want to
identify clearly to specific
things one what sort of
curricula already has existed or
exists within the region of the
southwest that looks
specifically at land and water
and secondly what sort of
resources are available so that
we as we begin to make these
recommendations within this
three faced.
Process we have a resource
within the white paper to
identify what is been done what
is been successful what hasn't
been successful in one of the
resources that are available out
there so that way when we
proceed on into your to we can
begin to really develop out
curriculum that is place based
that begins to recognize those
different nuances that northwest
New Mexico might have that are
different from central and
northern New Mexico that are
different from southern New
Mexico and we begin to develop
out a process and a framework
that really looks to supporting
the development of of curriculum
that is place based and
community based.
I'm thank you chair woman
Senator Campos and mist doctor
Santa and pardon me if I didn't
catch this but the amount for
last year's is the same of for
the this year's request.
So madam chair members of the
committee my response to that is
last year we received forty
seven thousand
and that that was a good seed
money to initiate this process
the three phase process that I
mentioned in the development of
curriculum it willing require a
lot of different moving parts
and so if there is an increase
this year two seventy five
thousand as is indicated within
house bill one fifty or as an
excuse me Senate bill one fifty
seven and so that's that's the
difference in those would be the
total amounts.
Okay doctors and also I see a
total one seven hundred seventy
five thousand did you say
seventy five thousand.
Correct I have few forty seven
thousand last year and seventy
five thousand this year fund
correct.
Okay and I'm seeing a hundred
seventy five thousand on my bill
analysis.
And so a chair madam chair and
members of the committee I may
have read that incorrectly and I
apologize but it definitely was
forty seven thousand last year.
And seventy five thousand this
year.
I will revert back to Senator
Campos as far as the total
amount okay thank you senator
thank you chair of madam chair
and thank you doctor Santa thank
you.
It I'm sorry Madam the did you
have a comment Senator Campos
madam chair just a sentiment.
Quickly last year the amount was
forty seven thousand that was
what was appropriated this year
the request is for the seventy
five thousand we're not sure
once the missile budget is up
but again there's there's going
to be that amounts or less that
would be appropriated and would
be for of the continuance or if
you will face to of the phase
three project of that is before
you thank you.
Thank you Senator Campos that
Richard would you like to
comment.
Mr
Intelisys
The table it is seventy five
thousand requests not one
seventy five.
I'm sorry just a typo but also
the FIR she indicates that the.
The LFC recommendations includes
more than five hundred thousand.
These programs that's.
It's an LFC recommendation
percent still being worked on.
House Bill to thank you.
Thank you senator.
Richard Senator McKenna you
concluded with your comments.
Okay thank you madam chair yes
thank you Senator Campos thank
you Richard and thank you doctor
Santa madam chair madam chair
just very quickly instead of
McKenna and of what I'll do is
I'll meet with you so we can
talk about how some of these are
yes the some of the programs and
other resources are are used in
some kind of try to work through
this issue because sometimes it
can become a little by the I
want to make sure that there's
the the full understanding of
the appropriation what we did
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator Campos Senator
Hermio.
Good morning madam chair thank
you so much members of the
committee thank you Senator
Campos always nice to see you my
friend my question is is it to
my understanding that then that
the curriculum is funneled
through the department of
education at New Mexico
highlands.
Madam chair and of course Center
had a meal when and and I'm
gonna go ahead and do for of
course the doctors on the line
but whenever curriculum is
developed it's usually developed
months the schools amongst
committees and then from there
it's General and as an example
in this case at and so that is
the procedural aspect of it what
happens with the public in the
Public Education Department
oftentimes is they will ask for
the input of organizations like
CST he will work on the
curriculum frameworks that meant
that then that'll be passed
around to the educators in that
area for analytics and we you so
that in essence is the process
but if I may just quickly defer
for a few comments from our
director some of our.
Madam chair Senator have a meal
members of the committee
Senator couples is absolutely
correct ultimately it's up to
the local educational agency as
to of the curriculum selection
and ultimately development
that's was the beauty is of this
particular effort it will
provide a framework the
recommendations and to support
really of place based community
based.
Regional development and
implementation throughout New
Mexico as our different
communities view of land and
water realities within their
communities.
Thank you madam chair in about a
comment is I really like this
curriculum because I think it
also touches on what we found in
Yazzie Martinez in the
importance of teaching to our
culture and ensuring that we are
inclusive when we do teach
students throughout the state of
New Mexico so I want to echo
what senator Gregg said and that
New Mexico history is important
and it's valued and it's
something that everybody needs
to learn and as a senator who
represents a district that has
lots of land grants and a
thriving a second community I
stand behind this bill I know
the importance of it and
understand the importance
because I do notice in my
district how the a second
culture has a huge generation
gap because of a generation that
doesn't understand the
importance that water SB that
know that water is life and that
we need to ensure that we
sustain our second community
that water continues to flow and
that we protect that and we do
that by educating and we do that
by ensuring that we can trust
our history of our staff as to
the next generation and
generations to come so thank you
Senator Campos for bringing this
bill up and that's all of my
questions and comments madam
chair.
Thank you would you like to
respond composed of those thank
you very much of Madam chair and
I want to go to center how to me
not only for his advocacy but is
lifetime commitment we start
talking about the second
amendment land grants in the
area that he is from I have
already noticed the amendment
and the work that he has done
particularly with our use and
they're going to be some other
pieces of legislation that both
the entire working closely on so
again what we're going to bring
source if you will not only are
diversity in our culture but
we're also ensuring that the
resources that we use are going
to be session for this sort of
development if you will and the
bridging of the gaps that have
occurred amongst generations
thank you very much Madam.
Thank you Senator Campos Senator
Shendo then we'll have Senators
Senator.
Morning madam chair in the.
Senator Campos.
Oria good of the guards I don't
see much of you after eight
years what happened former sweet
right how are you well you moved
out.
If you moved up that's good.
thank you a couple of the
questions that I had would have
been answer but the.
So so.
So this funding to support I
guess face to is what you guys
are calling of is part of the
convenient also is it also
I guess it's it's it's directed
to highlands.
Is it also buying faculty time
to do this work or is that the
faculty are engaged or they
do that on their own time or so
I know you don't you just give
me some clarity as to the the
budget you increase in that and
it sounded like you're part of
the effort is to convene
educators
No CKO folks of.
Stakeholders using all of that
and and so and my question is is
is is some of this funding going
to buy time for faculty at the
highlands.
So madam chair Senators sendo um
and members of the committee in
my effort to respond to to that
question which is a terrific
question at this the during this
moment with our virtual
realities it's kind of of what
a.
Wrench into how we we typically
manage things at this point.
In the preparation stage and the
initial convening
there is not that type of
in fiscal support that we're
requesting but as we begin to
now in the future.
With the hopefully the the
passage of this particular
Senate bill I can definitely
envision as providing or at some
sort of compensation for
specific supports that R. I. H.
E. individuals and other
potential subcontractors might
be able to provide in the
engaging in and and supporting
through their knowledge and
their wisdom
at around the development of
this type of curriculum I think
that you know that type of
support and that type of
compensation in many instances
no matter how minimal as is much
much valued and contributes to
the value that we applied to the
knowledge in the quarter
content that we're that we're
talking about that we've
described here with
Within the hour that we've we've
been sharing so hopefully that
response to Senator Shendo and
madam chair and thank you.
yes a so so major the funny
right now is just going towards
convening and and bring people
together what I'm here.
Madam chair Senator Shendo you
you're correct right now that is
providing the support not only
for creating the convening this
but also of for the development
of the white paper the research
that's involved with that and
also for individuals who will be
supporting and facilitating the
the various stakeholder meetings
whether it be obviously right
now on a virtual reality.
And the notes that will come out
and be developed into a specific
report
that will be created probably by
may and will ultimately feed
into the white paper and the
recommendations that will be
existing within the white paper
in late may early June from this
this part of the phase of the
effort.
Madam chair in addition of that
that thank you thank you for
that
you know I I think you know
as as we mentioned by previous
Senator single register we have
here in New Mexico and then of
course just a diversity we have
you know even within the state
and the I don't think Senators
souls will money me telling the
story of course we both came in
at twenty thirteen I was vice
chair of conservation at that
time in the Senator souls
it was also a committee member
and of course he was a high
school teacher got its PC NM
issue and so and and I the the
topic was around a sick yes and
so we've been debating this
thing for about an hour and he's
sitting to my left.
And he is just going back in for
the ice is just like.
And and about an hour into the
debate he raises his hand and so
the.
Peter Wirth was chair at that
time and called on him Senator
souls in the.
Is sort of very she said what is
in the state yet.
We all looked at each other the
budget
you know it is so just you know
that whole thing in the I mean
here's a gentleman that was
educated with a PhD delta New
Mexico state teaching high
school and had no idea you know
what that was about you know and
so forth I think it just speaks
to what you're trying to
accomplish but I also appreciate
a Apollo's comments I think we
have a rich history of our own
indigenous communities here and
the evolution of that and to be
corporate it and put all that in
perspective I think is
important.
because I think you know the.
You know we're we know water is
a certainly a huge issue in fact
the we're still in our water
settlement in and I remember a
couple years ago you know one of
federal judges in all.
in one of our other lawsuits
stated that the when the Spanish
crown came in the pueblos lost
Water Rights.
I mean if things like that
happen you know and course we
appeal to the tenth circuit and
reverse that course decision of
it is so these are the kinds of
things are still very real for
us as pueblo people you know no
water is important for us but I
think it's a you know the
education of these things are
are also important to put things
in perspective
so just wanna make those
comments as senator so create
your your continue working
education and and this
curriculum I guess I I think
does listen to Senator Griggs us
comments isn't so much about
creating anything the higher
education arena at the moment
but more so creating Turk
curriculum for K. to twelfth
system wherever it is
appropriate is that correct.
So madam chair members of the
committee and Senator Shendo in
response to your your question
ultimately the yes and yes to
both your questions I believe so
the the notion of creating a
framework to support the
development and rollout of
curriculum this specific to a
land and water sick as a land
grants depending on the lens
that we use is is definitely a
goal however at the same time
getting back to the store you
just shared it's imperative for
us to be thinking about R. I. H.
she's as well our institutions
of higher education because it's
there were future teachers are
developed and we want our future
teachers to have access to that
type of curriculum as they're
developing out their skill set
to become our future teachers
whether it be at the secondary
level elementary levels so that
way when they're placed in there
they will see the opportunity of
this curriculum and be able to
fold it in very seamlessly so we
do have we are swinging for the
fences in in in in both in both
instances whether it be with the
Judy institutions of higher ed
or our local P. pre K. to twelve
school systems.
We should thank you no more
questions.
In addition yes.
Thank you madam chair just a
very quickly into Senator Shendo
mais former suite maybe he's
always stimulating this you will
sites within my mind and the new
site is global surgeons of
identity thank you very much of
Madam chair Senators.
Thank you Senator Campos and we
have senator Sanchez.
Good morning madam chair needs a
Camaro Senator Campos thank you
for bringing this bill
grill short I'll be all the
senators are comment on this
great comments our history here
in New Mexico is great and I
think it should be mandatory
Kate through all the way through
high school I want to touch on
one little thing with this money
I think and also think to touch
on what center how to me said
the gap to close this gap that
we've lost on a sectors in you
know maybe some of when you guys
get this going some field trips
and get him out there to live
beyond the sick yes and and
clean and see why the process of
cleaning the ditches this is the
time of year now in February and
March to get the seculars ready
and everything RN's sensors did
to provide water to all of our
farms and with that I appreciate
you bringing this.
A bill Senator Campos and great
presentation.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair thank you very much
Senator Sanchez and in your area
I know that you were going to
diligently and closely with the
R. Sanchez and others as you
continue to I don't clean dishes
but as you move forward and work
with land grants thank you for
everything that you do as well
thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you senator Sanchez does
that conclude your.
Question yes yes madam chair
thank you.
Okay thank you senator Sanchez I
will I have a couple of them.
Questions well not questions or
comments in the sense of as far
as when I was teaching.
It is not required for New
Mexico licensure that we have
New Mexico history unlike other
states like Arizona you to get
your license you must take and
Arizona history online.
Something and pass it in order
to get your license even though
you're fully license that's
teacher in New Mexico.
So I I pose that question to the
Education Committee
during the year and it's also up
to the teacher to me that the
local you incorporate those
things around you in which you
bring those life experiences in
so that's where the home grown
in trying to have teachers
within your area
is essential.
But also on that in is the
resources that must be available
I believe that you can
incorporate into a curriculum
but when I go into the high
schools in toward my high
schools and I look at the New
Mexico history but it's from
nineteen ninety two there's no
resources for the teachers to
call call part even if we put a
curriculum in place so I hope
that is what are the
considerations as far as
outcomes from this as we move
forward I don't know if you want
to respond to that I know we've
been on the bill for most of our
so
Madam chair members of the
committee I love to respond to
that really quickly as part of
the white paper there will be an
inclusion of a bibliography that
will identify and the variety of
different resources that are
whether they be indigenous
centric or eastern Latino
centric or a combination of both
recognizing the ties that we
have to land and water and and
and the importance of of growing
our own food in in this region
for thousands of years and I
just for thirty six forgive me
madam chair members of the
committee I do not have my my
doctoral.
Degree yet that should be
happening within another year
and a half so I just want to let
you all know that.
Okay thank you thank you Senator
Campos in the Mr standalone
miss Garcia and do we have.
But what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Sierra Romeo.
Madam chair I would like to
present a motion of two passed.
We have a motion to pass by
Senator our meal and seconded by
Senator McKenna.
Rebecca would you please call
the roll.
Thanks yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes to pass.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six for the past.
Thank you Senator Campos and we
you do have a due pass you're on
to your next committee
appreciate thank you very much
madam chair members of the
committee hope you have a great
day thank you.
You yes thank you.
Okay we got Senate Bill.
One sixty six the statewide
watershed study Senator our meal
you will take over the
chairman's I present and Rebecca
do we have everybody.
whoever's on think that
From the waiting room.
Madam chair of the list of
expert witnesses that you sent
me yesterday anymore have signed
the and we do have Rebecca Roose
who is representing the
environment department in case
you have any questions
the environment department.
I did get a text that there was
someone in the waiting room.
some of these the.
Some of them are on for both
bills.
One moment Senator.
Senator good to go ahead and put
your bill on and they can come
on when we get to the public
debate yes chair okay this is
Senate bill one sixty six
statewide watershed study and it
is a bill that appropriate fifty
thousand to from the general
fund to the environment
department does purpose of
contracting an organization to
conduct a statewide watershed
study to review water
infrastructure projects in
agricultural areas and under
developed areas that lack wanted
to version four major rivers in
the state.
This is more like seed money in
the census to.
Shed light on
some of the empire mental
impacts that we've had these
last couple years there was a
watershed study that was done
for a little part of the state
But it didn't cover the whole
state so we're hoping that this
bill will kind of put a put
forward as far as kind of
giving.
Local communities the.
The way to make sure that when
they do put in roads are do have
big buildings put in that that
is taken into consideration the
wire metal impact and that the
that is available to them I've
had some buildings in.
On the reservation in which they
were built and some would like
the woods of floating.
Land area with the foundation
eventually the building moved
into accommodation was cracked
and therefore the building could
let's in inhabitable after.
So we also have some.
Capital projects that they're
starting to put forward in plan
for what we do in the Shiprock
area have an issue with the
watershed.
Tearing up some of these roads
also some of the access to some
of the properties are also in
jeopardy when we do have
Maybe some rains that come
through and after the over the
years with some of the drought
some of these water ways in
which the water was directed
filled up with their so we do
have some changes in that sense
and I'm.
See if we have any other
Questions are that that really
the gist of the bill thank you
thank you senator do you by any
chance have any expert witnesses
with you that you'd like to
speak at this time.
Okay yes I have Rebecca Roose
from the environment department
and the Environment Department
kind to contract out with the
New Mexico water institute so
that it can be handled different
ways.
And the amount of money that's
in there of what's kind of what
the.
Well let's see came up with in
the draft of the bill thank you.
Thank you Mr rose.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Pinto
members of the committee it's a
pleasure to be here with you
this morning I'm the director of
the water protection division at
the Environment Department I'm
we cover a full range of water
quality issues for the state we
have a lot of expertise and
watershed health in our within
our division working on various
surface water quality programs
both at the federal I programs
through the federal clean water
act and state programs to our
water quality act in other other
provisions.
I'm when we reviewed the the
bill and did our analysis on
this which we did submit to LFC
yesterday and I see it's
incorporated into the actual LFC
analysis that's posted
I'm we just based on the
language of the bill we had some
questions about the the real
goal and intent disco Senator
Pinto your description just now
is very helpful and and better
understanding of the objectives
what you're what what the driver
for the study and and how you
would hope that it would be
years to our I think that as
you'll see in our analysis both
the environment department in
the office the state engineer
were wondering what type of
water infrastructure projects
would be the focus of the study
and our and so we would have a
better I think a better handle
on the best way to execute the
study with additional
description and information
along the lines of that
introduction from Senator Pinto
I'll make one more quick point
and then and then I'll I'll I'll
be interested in and what
questions are that I might be
able to help answer from the
environment department's
perspective the other key saying
that we at chimed in on is the
amount of the appropriation
depending on the scope a
statewide study I'm may not be
realistic in this amount of
fifty thousand dollars I ate it
again it really does depend on
the scope and how much you how
do you want to go how many
parameters how many
considerations I'm and if it's a
watershed scale study that
statewide I'm if the funding is
the limiting factor ultimately
the bill passes the
appropriation as fifteen then
the scope of the study will
ultimately be scaled to what can
be done with that amount and
it's possible that it could be
scaled up.
Appropriately on the scope to I
ensure that it is a statewide
study I alternatives we I
if that funding is not adequate
to do a full statewide study it
could be targeted watersheds
that type of thing so a lot of
room based on the way that it's
crafted a lot of room for and
take with tailoring I think
during the contracting or
procurement process to make sure
that that the funds are used as
effectively as possible for the
ultimate objectives the other
point that we made about the
appropriation is that.
In order for the environment
department to manage the
contract as envisioned by the
belt we we need to allocate some
staff time to that and we've
estimated at about point one two
FTE for a year would be
approximately fifteen thousand
dollars so unfortunately without
a separate appropriation to the
environment department for
managing the contract we would
have to use part of the
appropriation in the bill to
manage the contract to make sure
that we're meeting all state
procurement requirements
providing the necessary
oversight so that's another
consideration in terms of both
the size of the appropriation
the scope of the ultimate study.
I'll leave it there and again
happy to be here have an answer
other questions as I'm able and
also follow up after the
committee meeting this morning
if necessary thank you.
Thank you thank you Senator
Pinto thank you mistress before
we go to comments or questions
from the committee we're gonna
take at comments from the public
are there any comments in
opposition or in support of this
Senate Bill.
Hi.
Excuse me vice chairman we have
a less Manuel Lito who was
designated as one of the
senators witnesses on the line
Mr mon Leto.
Are you there.
Yes good morning I am here.
Thank you.
Hi good morning members of that
committee and people work on
mine and public and the phone
and online it's good to
Be involved in this that part of
the process thank you senator
can tell for the it could be
that I the opportunity to do
that well I just wanted to stay
on large manually tell I am a
lifelong resident to hide you to
Mexico and I am fully support of
this bill I'm in everyday that
it is health because of for we
are from and that means that are
necessary for it is the very
important I'm Senator scale
from growing up in that area to
economic development to
community development and.
The need for that to move
forward is permanent and I fully
support it.
In every way possible.
If you miss one hundred to now
are there any other public
comments either in opposition or
support Mr Martinez that we can
hear now.
Hello.
There are no other
Participants in the waiting room
to give public comment.
Very good since there's no other
members of the of the community
waiting to give public comment
we'll go first to Senator Shendo
and then just understand just
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you a Senator Pinto for
this bill
I guess my question also you
know it you know the bill states
a statewide but in your
presentation you are citing
certain examples within certain
communities and I believe
Rebecca of from the garment
Department also noted that you
know it's not a money to hold
statewide but if they're certain
regions in particular if you're
looking at northwest area within
the Navajo of maybe several
counties maybe it our
recommendation is to maybe do a
of change the the language so as
instead of being a statewide
maybe more of a geographic
region
of would be my recommendation I
A. B. I know that the.
Of our waterways are waters you
know some of it also you know
certainly impacts our tribal
communities but these waters
also are off the reservation and
coordination with local
governments and others are going
to be very important we're
speaking of watersheds so that
that's just my recommendation I
think it's a good thing water is
important no restoration of our
watersheds and and protection of
those waterways and and and all
this important but maybe
regional allies in
if there are certain areas that
you felt you know with you in a
representative Allison
important Amy I think the
resources target that way will
probably go a much longer way as
opposed to looking at statewide
that's just my recommendation
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee that
was the reason why when I had it
drafted are asked to be drafted
to use the word statewide and
when that amount came up I was
okay I'm assuming that they're
installing that whoever's that
the department the state
department that would handle
this would incur or have the
ability to carry this out but
when I looked at it they said
they still contract to someone
else which makes it very
interesting because of the state
that we're in as far as the the
limits on water and the you know
we should it should be a
priority the study should be
carried out recurring we every
so many years to ensure that we
are maximizing our this resource
especially when we have so many
limits on it so that is I'm that
was a little bit out of my hands
of actually knowing how much it
would cost to do something in
that manner thank you
submission.
Thank you senator of maybe maybe
this goes back to miss Reese
with the environment you also
mentioned that you have a lot of
expertise in watershed how often
or periodically is there a
watershed study done for the
either from the state engineers
office or any of those agencies
that have that purview over
water can you respond to that a
settlement.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
Senator Shendo I'm it's a good
question as I've been thinking
about this during the discussion
this morning I think that there
are some existing watershed
studies that could potentially
be expanded upon it with with
the project envision in this
bill I'm.
The environment department we I
do developed with oftentimes
community groups watershed
groups other outside parties.
Develop what we call watershed
based plans and those watershed
based plans are at the heart of
focused on restoring water
quality so we have programs
where we go out and monitor and
assess actual water quality
parameters in our surface waters
across the state determine which
streams and rivers and lakes and
reservoirs are not meeting our
current water quality standards.
Those waters than are listed as
impaired waters and we then
develop watershed based plans
for how we're going to restore
water quality in those waters we
currently have
Let's see I'm looking at the
last at least.
Here are some complete watershed
based plans in the state there
are a number more that are in
the drafting phase and I'm it
would be possible to can
actually look at those existing
plans which are in watersheds
that have some of the
characteristics that Senator
Pinto spoke to and our and then
build off of those to look more
and targeted at where there are
impacts on roads and other
infrastructure associated with
the health about water because
we have a watershed that's not
healthy you can have huge runoff
events during storm events that
washed out roads and make you
Madam deposits like Senator
Pinto was describing so some of
that could be built up line from
our existing watershed based
plans and draft watershed based
plans.
Separately of the state of the
meeting at the office of the
state engineer I'm they are just
now kicking off the process to
develop a fifty year state water
plant and they have a whole unit
in the of the state engineer
that's focused on water planning
they are looking more
holistically at water quantity
water supply and water quality
and so that's something that's
going to be conducted led by
thousand state engineer
Interstate Stream Commission now
through this time next year I'm
which also could provide some
our.
Results some study and ways to I
maximize the investment of the
project envisioned with this
bill.
Thank you thank you a three so.
Okay good so that's all I have a
Mr chairman.
Thank you senator this senator
Sanchez for his question Senator
Sanchez.
Mr chair Senator Pinto thank you
for being in the bill my
question is for also agency
Rebecca how many watersheds or
they're in New Mexico and and
you use those fifteen plans on
how many water sits.
I thank you Mr chair senator
Sanchez at I don't know off the
top of my head how many
watersheds and there are
different ways to come out that
in watershed science there are
different sizes of watersheds
you can have watersheds within
watersheds it's quite complex
from a watershed science
standpoint I don't I don't know
off the top of my head the
number of watershed so what I
when I say we have fifteen or so
complete I have what that
represents but I will check with
I'll check with my staff well
that meeting continues and if I
get the answer I can share with
all of you.
Mr vice chair thank you Mr
record.
Yes understand just will not go
to Senator McKenna Senator
McKenna but we'll go to Senator
Griggs.
I think you're vice chair I
think Senator Griggs had his
hand up first so I would like
to.
I apologize because go ahead
this will let me go first to
Senator Griggs my apologist
under Greg submit to Senator
McKenna.
Thank you Senator McKenna but it
really is I I appreciate your
that doesn't that matter Mr
chair
madam chair.
It it appears honestly that the
that the bill the funding is is
probably an adequate for the for
the scope of the bill.
I think you know we had a
watershed study done along the
the front range's Sacramento's
years ago it was combined with
that with federal dollars in it
which hundreds of thousands of
dollars to to get that entire
study done and they work through
the.
the the camera which federal
group but they also work with
the state engineer the
environment department I I don't
know that they were involved in
that particular particular study
but at the state engineer is
charged with lots of things
water why and maybe the maybe
the more appropriate group but I
don't know all in the in the
back of my head could respond to
that shown but it looks like.
Honestly if you want to if you
want to continue to pursue this
one I would just I would think
that if if you do you need to
really reduce disco.
In order to try to get it funded
because you've you've provided a
certain amount of money to do
something and the environment
the environment department
doesn't sound like they're
exactly sure of what it is they
will do with you know with the
funding
and we're we're we're going to
in continuation could be used
and
yeah there's lots of anger
cultural areas in underdeveloped
areas that lack water diversion
from major rivers I mean if you
come you know Alamogordo there's
not revert they were closed
Alamogordo
go over to
Loving to and then you nation
and then go to damning manages
to just not show it could wind
up being utilized in or in a
place even the you really aren't
intending for to be your your
whole page for to be more in the
in an area that that.
That you represent and that's
perfectly fine our issues that I
think what we've got is we we've
got a we we need to work on a
and I don't I don't know what
you're your thoughts will
ultimately be your to work you
know try to to deal with it
before it goes up I'm guessing
of finance next but I you know
I'd hate for you to get there
and it just be very because they
decide that it's it's not
You know it's it's drafting
needs to be tighter to to deal
with the needs that you're
looking for show that's I mean
that's kind of what I I would
recommend it to move forward in
that
go from there because I I think
you're gonna you're gonna need
to.
Or the bill made.
You may have issues in the
inspection maybe show up so
thank you Mr vice chair thank
you madam chair.
And away we go.
Thank you thank you Senator
Griggs thank you.
The chairman members of the
committee.
I had a bill last session and it
was about the whiskey lake dam
rehab and this is where this
bill County came out of it after
having some discussions well as
okay we should take this a step
further in the sense of
addressing that particular area.
So that's why incorporate the
state by because I did not just
want my area I believe it's an
agricultural stepped a
discussion that needs to be had
because when we talk about
ending hunger and taking these
first steps to.
Support our farmers and
agriculture and even finding
funding to continue with and
start this infrastructure
for areas as far as safety also
we had a flood in the area to in
which we lost a father and a
daughter and we have some
development that has occurred
also within the area that homes
are.
Could be jeopardized if we have
a big rainfall and we have not
really approached the.
In some rural areas to have
flood control which is a safety
measure in the sense especially
if we have those around the
schools so this is really
something to start the
discussion and really look into
it
you know that amount to I was
very
Mindful of that in the sense of
the gallons a very small amount
but I would say well maybe it's
the initial beginning when we
talk about plant planning and
design of the of what the
contract would come out to our
who who would really assume that
work to do to carry this out but
also to see also look for other
funding it it became a larger
scale issue so thank you senator
degree.
Thank you Mr.
Any other comments or questions.
vice chair no not really no I I
appreciate to sponsor her for
her efforts you know there's
there's certain things that
happen through the subdivision
ordinance or the the
subdivisions statutes that
require things to reduce and
limit flooding up possibilities
downstream there's there's a lot
of things that go on that are
that are in place all already to
to protect.
Communities and people I think I
think this this one you know I'm
I'm afraid to the number is age
two low for the scope of of what
this function really is trying
to do and I think that it you
know I mean I I hope we move
forward I hope that there's an
opportunity for it to be
utilized but I'm not even
personally I'm not even sure
that to the environment
department is the right place in
the and.
State engineer would be the
better social but those are
those are my thoughts and
I just appreciate to sponsor her
concern trying to trying to move
the show the legislation forward
so thank you misfortune.
Senator great.
If you have any comments yes
thank you Senator Griggs Mr
chair and members of the
committee.
In the room.
I don't want to see the real
world are the normal world
subdivisions and those
regulations might exist they do
not exist
in my district in a majority of
my district so this is one of
the reasons to start that
discussion.
And also die rechte you know in
the state how can we help with
that not just in my area but I
think there's other rural areas
in which they don't have the
money to be she ate some of
these
Initiatives safety initiatives
for their little towns when we
talk about having that
in kind money to approach some
of the projects that they
probably would need to have
incorporated in their
communities as far safety thank
you.
Do you senator will now go to
Senator McKenna for her
questions or comments.
Thank you vice chair Hotmail and
thank you Senator Pinto for this
so well thought out concept I I
really applaud it and
I want to keep it keep in mind
folks that my comments I'm gonna
sound very much like from a lay
person perspective because I
don't have a background in
watershed technology and on the
intricacies of it so keep that
in mind when I when I make my
comments on my questions so be
go easy on me.
But I'm just like Senator Griggs
Just pointed out
the idea of a of a state wide
watershed study.
I think the timing is is right
on I think about the drought we
are going through I think about
climate change and I think about
the number of industries in our
state.
That would benefit from a study
like this and I think about our
foreman ag community our hemp
farmers are tourism and arias
seeking us thank you
associations I think they would
really benefit among many others
I I'm sure I have it listed from
a study like this and so.
As Senator Shendo was saying.
with this amount of money you
could probably scale down the
scope and my idea is if if the
general fund can can accommodate
it let's scale it up and do the
the statewide because I think
time time is of the essence and
I also think from an operational
standpoint.
Stopping and going is expensive
to so if you if you got your
team of scientists
Engineers to do this to be great
just to you know assemble them
once get the study done verses
taking care portion and then
they'll they're like oh from
their contract and and then you
have to scale up again when we
continue
so that's my comment in question
and then
Senator Pinto and of ms russe it
and my pronouncing that
correctly.
I am so bad I've been trying to
get better my pronunciations
I'm if watersheds.
To do it right you'll have to
work on getting access with all
the tribal lands in the state
and so I'm gonna go off Mike and
thank you for her.
This is exciting thank you for
dealing with my lamen type
questions and comments.
Senator pointed would you like
to take up those questions or
would you like to defer to
agency roast.
Mistress you would like to
respond thank.
Sure thank you Mr chair Senator
Pinto thank you Senator McKenna
for your insights and questions
I'm on the the last points
about I just lost my train of
thought Mexico and.
It.
Your second question was about.
Senator McKenna.
You might surmise my follow up
to getting this the study done
will it necessitate.
The team to have access work
through access to the tribal
lands for because I'm not sure
where all the tribes watersheds
are and so I just think about
okay access to sovereign nations
we ought to think about that.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
senator McCain I think you for
repeating that
your you're right that watershed
boundaries don't track with the
StateTribal jurisdictional
boundaries so if we're doing a
statewide study at a water shale
watershed scale and there will
be crossover an intersection
with our tribes nations or
pueblos I the environment
department has at the
significant amount of experience
working directly with our tribes
nations Cup was when we were
studying things that relate to
or directly intersect with their
jurisdiction we have our tribal
liaison at the department to
support that outreach and
engagement to make those
connections and work directly
with the affected respected
tribes nations pueblos we also
coordinate very closely with the
Indian Affairs Department we
need to make those intersections
and ensure that we're
approaching are at shared
interests shared watersheds are
appropriately and thoughtfully
and respecting tribal
jurisdiction every step of the
way so I'm you're right to say
that that might be a factor here
I I certainly don't think it's a
limiting factor in any way I'm.
To your original point about
just completing a study scale
scope that sort of thing I'm.
I do think that I you know
standing on something that I
said earlier about this state
engineer verses the environment
department there elements of
this that touch on what both
agencies do I'm and the more
that I hear Senator Pinto talk
about I have flood mitigation
and risks associated with
flooding that's something that
very much touches both the water
quantity brown which is off
state engineer territory and the
water quality round which is
Environment Department
jurisdiction and for example we
work in our watershed programs
we work a lot on storm water
management the storm water
control is a huge water quality
concern because stormwater can
pick up pollutants even
settlement but other pollutants
as well and deposit them in
other places of the watershed so
I'm practices to put in on the
ground to manage stormwater is a
really key area of our work on
on watershed approaches so
that's a key element of this the
study that's envisions I think
that we would have a lot of
expertise to offer in managing
the contract and and scope and
overseeing and but certainly the
same is true for the Austin
state engineer and and we do
work closely together on and
water issues and water projects
that are crosscutting between
our two agencies.
I hope that's helpful I am happy
it if you want to follow up
question that thank you Mr chair
and senator McCain.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you our vice chair I I yeah once
again I am I'm just curious
about the dollar amount I'm if
our general fund could afford to
scale it up.
I'm especially because of what
we're experiencing right now
that would be my recommendation.
So I'll leave it with that thank
you vice chair thank you miss
Ruth.
Senator McKenna do I have any
other comments or questions from
members of the committee.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Senator Pinto did you have a
comment.
Yes I'm we're back with was
talking about you know which
department I think that was a
big question too because we want
to.
We don't have so many the
What would you say storm drains
in our areas but we would like
to develop some areas where
there is some holding of the
water for those agricultural
areas that don't have the rivers
Act that close of river access
so that was another things I did
have some support letters or
emails from farmers within the
Shiprock area other farm
entities on in the to actually
area that they do have some
development there but there
needs to be a little another
step taken as far as we talk
about science and developing the
the plan for it is that we take
the approach of science and the
watershed to.
To make that plan thank you Mr.
Senator and it looks like that
Miss Martinez do you have a
comment.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee we just had a call in
user one I believe this might be
a Geneva Begay Senator Pinto
that we've been trying to get
into the meeting as one of your
witnesses.
Calling user one could you
identify yourself.
Geneva Begay is that you.
Good morning this is not too
naive about my name is pearly
element from the Navajo Nation
thank you.
We did miss a comment from at
pro did you have a comment in
support or in opposition of the
Senate bill.
No Sir not in opposition thank
you thank you are do you have
something you want to send
support since you you didn't
make the the comment at the
beginning we had some issues of
people logging on but if you had
a comment and support you can
take that time now if you'd like
to make that comment.
Mr chair I think you probably
need to notifier what bill are
on I'm sorry they were on Senate
bill one sixty six and the title
please oh I'm sorry and we love
that title the title of the
Senate bill that we're currently
looking at is that a statewide
watershed study and it's that
sponsored by Senator Pinto and
Representative Allison.
Thank you and thank you for the
opportunity to be care and hello
good morning ation on our eight
leaders on the call
the division of community
development we are in support
but I also would lean on our
water resource management and
the would be one of the
department to administer and
move forward with the project we
work closely with the water
resource Department and the
division of natural resources
thank you.
You for joining us this morning
and thank you for your comment
Senators any other comments or
questions.
What's the pleasure of the
committee a motion for the past
Senator Shendo.
Motion for do passed by Senator
Shendo do I hear a second.
Second by Senator McKenna miss
Martinez so if we can have a
roll call please.
Thanks.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is for the past.
Give us Martinez thank you
Senator Pinto your bill now goes
on to the next committee and so
thank you so much for for
allowing me to take the reins
today while you introduced her
bill and I have over everything
back to you madam chair at thank
you Mr chairman and the members
of the committee and hopefully
we get the discussion.
Taking a little further as we
take another step.
Mr vice chair you're going to
check that I have the next bill
to send a perfect when seventy
two the tribal natural resource
specialist thank thank you
senator we've that now go on to
our next Senate bill and so
Senator if you'd like to do your
introduction and do you have
your expert witnesses with you
on hand.
Thank pretty much the same
because we follow to build cut
pretty new but related to it but
it's going to creating AM
department
that is a very good under one
that slows out here on Senate
bill one seventy two which is
the tribal national natural
resources specialist bill and I
defer the for to use other.
Okay Senate bill one seventy two
appropriates fifty thousand from
the general fund to the Indian
Affairs Department.
To hiring that tribal natural
resource specialist will work
with Indian nations tribes and
pueblos of the state to
cultivate and develop their
natural resources and it kind of
follows along to that it reaches
into debt is very several
different realms of the of
helping within the area that we
can develop and start see money
and also discussion in what
states like California or do
have a but pretty much develop
programs where they're even able
to be initiate some economic
development with the farmers
that the the provide grants and
you know find other ways to.
Encourage investment and
development as far as
infrastructure and even working
with the tribes with existing
natural resources within their
area and maybe bring them to
market but also consider those
natural resources and working
together Collett give the
so it is a.
Nothing new I believe we don't
have anything existing like this
within the Indian Affairs
Department.
So it is a fairly new concept
but I hope to take it forward
and it's also I think a very
minor investment
the amount to is very low as far
as when we're talking about
reaching into different areas
that could that this position
would help us.
Bring in and I'm hoping it will
also impede you know the.
Existence of those federal
monies that are out there so
fifty thousand to needs a very
small amount to start with
It can develop into a program
and where they do pull in a lot
of these federal bunnies and all
these different areas and might
be overwhelming for over takes
this everybody I think it will
start a discussion on it and
take those steps to move forward
to help us develop them thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee.
Yes under with your expert
witness like to comment.
Yes the.
Do you have.
Yes we have S. manually total
still on the line on behalf of
this bill and we have a whole
McDonald long treat who has just
joined us so miss madam Lee tell
would you like to comment on
behalf of Senate bill one
seventy two.
Hi good morning again our
committee madam chair and chair
thank you very much again for
hearing this morning
yes I really with I would like
to put forth by support in my
comments for this bill because
I'm working with the Navajo
Nation before and
being involved in several
district wide eyed in New Mexico
side in Avalon ation trying to
gather the information and
research necessary for and then
related over to say that I hate
I found that with my position
was very difficult
because of that how would you
say that
Government to government aspect
of it so to have a LA is on if
you well in this in this
position would make things
easier because when it comes to
watershed when it comes to
anything natural resources holy
people that we really deal with
and the lan Department and also
community development and
they're already you know
overwhelmed and what other
projects in on the Navajo Nation
Arizona side and then New Mexico
at the you know as we start
working and improving and at
introducing newer projects
it would be greatly appreciated
to have somebody there dedicated
to this kind of communication so
we're next and Boston
translation and everything keeps
moving forward and you know we
don't start get stopped again
and then started again you know
and because there's a lot of
things that are moving movie
entities moving parts that are
happening that would require it
to keep moving and this position
where it really helps you know
people like for me that was
working for and and lower level
at echelon of the Navajo Nation
be able to get that translation
over to say so that we can
continue with planning and we
continue improving our community
and our economic development on
the nomination in New Mexico
thank thank you very much for
hearing me I appreciate it.
Give us not only to.
This McDonald long tree would
you like to comment on behalf of
Senate bill one seventy two.
Coke McDonald's Lonetree.
You may be having some technical
difficulties I think we should
move on.
Thank you respected as any other
comments from the from the
public.
For the comment being none of
them take questions or comments
from the committee are there any
questions or comments from the
from the members of the
committee.
Senator Shendo.
they can chair thank you a.
Sponsor of I think this is a
great bill homie I think the a
model money is probably a lesson
what the.
The includes salary fringe
benefits you probably look a
little bit more so I recommend
that we probably up the amount
of I I know that the you know I
of the tribal minister for
tribal hello natural resources
department but there's also a
lot of I think
Our nation that that does happen
between state and federal
agencies and there's other
resources that I think are also
available out there and I know
that subtribes don't have the
capacity so I think having
somebody with in in in in in
Affairs Department that's got
the you know over overall view
of what's going on at the
federal level state level where
releases are real resources
available to really maybe help
facilitate some of that as well
so I just want to comment I
think it's great
and those of former secretary of
Indian affairs of you know that
would have been very important
back when we first started but
we're evolving as a department
and I think this position would
greatly serve the state as well
as the respective tribes in and
communities.
Senator Pinto July to address
any of those comments or would
you like me to go to the next
question.
And Senator Shendo and I do
believe we're we're still
developing our the Indian
Affairs Department and you are
right about the capacity of some
of our tribes with their they
don't have it and I'm hoping
that this will help us continue
to move a lot of things forward
on for our people and keep them
in the area to develop the farms
and continue thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla now go
to Senator McKenna Senator
McKenna.
Thank you vice chair Hotmail and
thank you Senator Pinto I I I
say Bravo for this legislation
however just like Senator Shendo
and others have commented I I
think if anything the amount
needs to be increased and I'm I
did look at the financial
financial impact report and
that's what the analysis
analysis this are included as
well.
So that's my comment
Thank you thank you senator
McCain and Mr chairman members
of the committee and like I said
it's it's kind of us like seed
money it does not exist right
now so one hoping that we can
even if we do start start in
the.
Smaller capacity if need be to
increase that capacity that
would
you don't give us more reason
and I think that's one of the
things we try to do is to say
is.
Well in some sense start out
small and then we see the need
and start the discussion about
it and then we'll see that that
that that need is a little
probably needs more
appropriations to it thank you.
Senator will now go on at center
but cannot do you have any other
questions or comments.
Thank you vice chair and Senator
Pinto no I don't think you thank
you well then moved out to
Senator grades Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr vice chair and and
Senator Pinto I'm I'm sure age
as Senator Shendo mentioned you
should probably be a a positive.
For the for the tribes and and
for the department
thank you again the number maybe
maybe to all and one time and
one thing I wanted to point out
is this is a one time
appropriation show as you do
this you know you're going to
have to work again with the
department probably for that for
the next years to PlayStation in
their budget or you're going to
be coming back trying to put
chairs.
In your each and every year to
fund them which you know who
knows how that would work but
but I just want to encourage you
to to do that with the
department of because that
that's going to be important it
sounds like to.
To have this individual helpful
and and working hard all the
time so I would to I certainly
do that as you move as you move
forward.
Thank you senator.
You Senator Griggs at we now
move on to Senator Shendo.
Yes thank you chair just just
reminded me what senator breaks
that we don't know what's going
to happen with H. B. two of I
don't know if the it the Indian
Affairs requested any increases
and perhaps I don't know what's
going to happen whether there's
going to be a the it junior
House Bill if there is I think
that would be an opportunity
Senator a Pinto to maybe make
that appropriation to the
Department you know so that is
recurring and not just a one
time so just a recommendation.
Yes thank you Senator Shendo a
vice chair members of the
committee at yes I think there's
different ways we approach
things and I'll try to do try to
I'll say we try to cover all of
them but try to make sure we can
have those steps put in place
and consider all those different
ways to
Be successful in this thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you and so the questions I
have actually asked by my
colleagues and so I appreciate
this bill coming forward and
also the only concern was
thinking that it might not be
enough as a one time
appropriation and so being that
I see no other questions or
comments from the Senators
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
What you for the past.
Motion for two passed by Senator
Shendo do I hear a second.
Second by Senator McKenna if I
can have a roll call please.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo a yes.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is for a new
path congratulations Senator
year your bill will designed to
the next committee and so thank
you for bringing up these very
two important bills and in
regards to water in our
communities and I think you for
championing.
Thank you thank you very much
vice chair and thank you members
of the committee and thank you
for our participants online and
Rebecca and thank them for
helping us with that.
And we have Senate bill one
ninety three role coming equity
what's meant.
Senator.
Can kill and diamond.
Did she have.
I think they're both here it is
ten forty eight and.
You're ready to make sure that
you have your people online and
you may begin.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's an honor to
be here today and have this
opportunity to sponsor an
introduced Senate bill one
ninety three with Senator
diamonds Senate bill one ninety
three will provide a rural
equity on but whose job it will
be to work on issues that impact
rural and frontier communities
Senator Diamond and I have our
expert witnesses with us this
morning Priscilla loose Federal
executive director of the
southwest New Mexico council of
governments Stacey **** she is a
director of the national center
for frontier communities and
Cheryl Miller a board member for
it from the national center for
frontier communities.
and the reason this bill is so
important right now is because
in rural New Mexico and frontier
communities were Senator Diamond
and I are from our communities
are often under served or un
served in many areas and of
course with the pandemic the
these disparities have been
highlighted when school went
virtual children in rural and
frontier communities suffered
most because of the lack of
broadband infrastructure in so
many of our areas and even lack
of cell phone service and I'm a
school psychologist and many of
the children and families who I
work directly with have
difficulty accessing services
under the most under the best of
circumstances but during these
last eleven months these
families have been hit the
hardest they Stoppard from food
insecurity have challenges
accessing health care behavioral
health services affordable
housing just to me name a few
and even though we suffer from a
lack of resources so we have so
many people in our rural
communities who are full of
ideas and have creative
solutions to the challenges that
we face and then on bed would be
able to service an advocate for
our communities to ensure our
frontier and rural communities
have a voice at the federal
state and local levels of
government this will lower
barriers and create genuine
sustained equity and opportunity
across New Mexico and with that
I'd like to turn it over to
Senator crystal diamond thank
you madam chair.
You guys I am just pleased to
join as Senator Hemphill Terry
here today I represent district
thirty five so that's the boot
hill of New Mexico and you know
we're here to bring a voice to
roll in front here New Mexico
and that's not just our
districts but for many of you
it's communities that you
represent as well right and I
was please first of all to be in
this particular committee that
they had to rename this
committee to recognize that
urban rural divide and it
sometimes we as legislators are
policy makers take into
consideration the impacts that
rules or regulations or policies
or programs will have on the
urban areas and unfortunately
our rural communities the
impacts of those areas are often
ignored and and not
intentionally but but this
balance please join these
efforts will bring a voice to
rural New Mexico to to address
those rules knows regulations in
the policy impacts so that we
all recognize you know one size
fits all doesn't fit throughout
New Mexico so well I under I
understand that's not the intent
a lot of times that happens
regardless and so we keep a very
narrow focus on how different
funding different programs and
projects will impact on where
they are most populated areas
and so this bill aims to really
bring a voice to roll to Mexico
that's important to me I know
that you guys are serving on
this committee it's important to
you as well and so our unique
cultures are customs and our
traditions and the values of
really New Mexico are seated in
rural New Mexico and so I am
happy to champion any effort
that will bring a voice to those
people so I'm gonna turn it over
to our expert witnesses who
wouldn't really address the the
meat of this balance of thank
you person if you're on the line
if you please join us.
I'm sorry Priscilla Lucintel has
not joined in the meeting as of
yet she is.
Sorry she just tax me that she's
having trouble getting in.
We moved over we have to
additional expert witnesses a
Senator Hemphill mentioned Stacy
**** if you're ready to kind of
provide some background and why
you think this maybe effective
in New Mexico you can go ahead
while we wait for Priscilla okay
thank you so much for having us
and a mostly I'm going to turn
my time over to Carol Miller who
is the founding director of
national center for frontier
communities I'm the current
executive director and have been
working on the C. here and they
just really second what senator
documents that and Senator
handheld that you know we've
known the disparities for awhile
but during COVID and has become
incredibly clear that
are ruling frontier communities
don't have often
the data we need to make good
decisions them you know we we
have you know what I'm just
start because Carol's gonna go
over so much of what I'm about
to say that I would like to turn
my time over to Carol's that's
okay.
Thank you very much madam chair
honorable members of the
committee staff and members of
the public first of all I want
to thank you all for your
dedication to fulfilling your
responsibilities to the people
of New Mexico during these
trying times as we continue to
learn together how to conduct
virtual government I really
respect all the effort that
everyone is putting into that
madam chair your father's
Senator Pinto was full to friend
and a hero and I treasure I was
lucky to be on the floor of the
Senate one day where I was able
to make a video of him singing
serenading the Senate with the
potatoes on and I certainly
treasure the memories that I
have working with him for many
years my home base is a small
village of three hundred and our
three hundred people in reality
by county.
I've been living here since
nineteen seventy six with a
couple of moves to the big town
of Chatham audio New Mexico to
work and three different times
to Washington DC to work for the
federal government on behalf of
the people of New Mexico
I am also represented in the P.
three spring Yasuko community
coalition our regional health
council founded twenty four
years ago by P. grease Pueblo so
our coalition we usually start
our presentations with the land
technology statement
recognizing that we live on the
current in traditional lands of
keep grease pueblo we're
grateful to the governor's
councilman pueblos staff and
community members who have
shared and and help guide the
work of our coalition for more
than two decades.
Senate bill ninety three builds
on work begun in twenty
seventeen when the national
center for frontier communities
presented an action plan with
three key goals to the Economic
in rural development insurance
committee
to transform the way the small
communities could be heard and
how the business with the state
the legislature supported for
and in twenty eighteen pass to
Senate Joint Memorial to to
establish a workgroup to
continue the work looking at the
issues and it was that work
group that studied a number of
things that other states and
other countries to to try and
increase the way they provide
support to their smallest and
most isolated communities so
this is really a result of
almost five years of work with
representatives from across New
Mexico are Joint Memorial in
twenty eighteen was also
bipartisan memorial we're really
thrilled are of course to have
this bipartisan effort because
the it's really not about
politics for how we move forward
in helping all of the
communities that are so isolated
and remote
The important thing that in but
it does I'm one of the things
that has been asked for for
years is to develop a bottoms up
planning process that includes
the needs ideas and talents of
the people living in the
smallest communities too often
policies are developed in a
centralized way and small
communities are not included we
we need to think about what will
work in the entire state and we
really haven't had anywhere to
president of problems that have
been identified and it's not
just about cash it's also about
the way regulations are some
time written and I'll give one
example of something my
community center in my village
has tried to help and senior
lunch once a week so that our
seniors are not isolated and we
learned that the only way to
have the funds to do that you
must have a five day week
program well that might work in
some places that's just one
example of the barriers that are
intentional and unintentional
they don't really get the
resources to where they're
needed and this is not just
about more funding because there
are many things that can be
fixed in our smaller communities
through changing regulations and
the way that programs are
operated a lot of our problems
are about where do we go when
something becomes identified
which is where the concept of
having that single point of
contact in state government to
receive information about that.
I watched quite a bit of the
November special section session
both on the house and Senate.
And time and again we heard
representatives and senators say
how do we know where the money
went that we appropriated in
June did the communities most in
need receive those funds and it
we did not have a place that
could look at all of the
different programs and collate
that information and share it
with either the executive or the
legislature so we really think
that this is a small program in
terms of numbers of people but
it is huge for how our community
has been excited about we're
finally going to have a place to
represent us with the state
government so.
That's why in fact in some of
the benefits I hope.
Thank you Mr Miller do we have
anybody else.
Thank you madam chair we have
Priscilla this that our expert
witness on the line thank you
madam.
Good morning it's Priscilla can
you hear me.
Yes we can thank you good
morning everyone it's a pleasure
to visit with you this morning
I'm sorry I'm not sure I could
see the the the link and it was
up but for some reason it was
and I see my apologies so just
as a brief back background
around on what I've been doing
I've been the director for the
southwest New Mexico council
governments now for almost
eighteen years I've been working
in rural communities now through
the council of governments for
almost thirty four years so I
I'm familiar with the funding
mechanisms of familiar with
special districts and everything
in between that comes around
we're working with rural
communities and there are so
many challenges we face but most
importantly and how important it
is to be an advocate for those
rural communities because many
times there things around
funding mechanisms whether it is
the the eligibility criteria
maybe it's something as simple
as what we've done in my region
around creating sent to the
designated places for those
unincorporated area so that we
have the actual economics of the
population count to be able to
apply for you at the funding is
a number of things that we can
really articulate not only at
the state level that a federal
level to really be able to
enhance the opportunities for
rural communities and there are
many a good example would be is
that many of these water
districts and even sometimes
affect kids that don't have the
ability to be able to provide
matching dollars because there
is no way to tear the match
because very they don't have a
supplement or an adequate
revenue source to be able to do
the much needed improvements to
their facilities and that's just
one example but there are many
things are on economic
development housing and
everything in between so I just
wanted to really come.
May the importance of how
important it is to really help
everybody in the state in New
Mexico or rural stated that is
and so these challenges are many
within the state in New Mexico
and if we have learned anything
through COVID and the challenges
of the programs and services
that are probing provided
terminal to rural areas and with
that I'll leave it at that and
if there's any further questions
that I can answer I'd be happy
to share.
Thank you do we have any other
witnesses.
Madam chair I believe that.
That's all the expert witnesses
with somebody going to say
something.
Thank you thank you senator
Rebecca are naked would you.
Please call on public comment Mr
passionate to do.
We're gonna go to public comment
person then we'll come to the
members.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Joining us on the damn call we
had Cindy Padilla executive
director United Way of northern
New Mexico.
You go ahead.
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Cindy Padilla and I'm the
executive director of the United
Way of northern New Mexico and
we work with over forty five
nonprofit organizations and the
rural and frontier areas of New
Mexico counties Rio Arriba and
Los Alamos so I want to thank
you all for the opportunity to
speak today.
Are nonprofit organizations
provide a way for people to work
together for the common good
transforming shared beliefs and
hopes into action we all know
are nonprofit organizations feed
he all shelter educate inspire
and nurture people of every age
gender race and socioeconomic
status and our work begins work
government programs and services
unfortunately I their farms
short or cannot be reached.
Public private partnerships are
critical to improving community
outcomes and health care
economic development and social
and environmental justice
creating a front to your role
equity but gives are nonprofit
organizations and small local
governments a much needed ways
to support public private
partnerships it is our hope that
this advocacy will fundamentally
strengthen these partnerships
and ultimately improve community
health economic and social
justice outcomes United Way of
northern New Mexico stands in
favor of Senate bill one ninety
three we want to thank the
bill's sponsors and our northern
New Mexico front tier and real
advocate Carol Miller we're
hoping to bring this bill
forward thank you.
Thank you we have any other.
Madam chair at we don't have any
money out on the as zoom call
with that we did however with
the numeric indications of
written support.
All the great the executive
director of the New Mexico
Sekyere Association Donna
Gonzales New Mexico is that
I think yes so ciation.
At any Rivera from the New
Mexico farm and livestock
bureau.
J. R. me home executive director
for the south central council of
government.
And a Joanne to miss out you
know all those.
And a.
Peggy J. Nelson.
And former increased double
digits Association commissioner
and former president of the San
Cristobal mutual domestic water
consumers association.
A gene that Nichols and then
community that and Karen Witt
lock with the at the national
association of social workers
and that was the on all the at
indication the public with
support we received.
Thank you.
Thank you me and senator our
meal.
You madam chair and thank you
senator is going to have to fill
and Senator Diamond for bringing
this Carol Miller nice to see
you as a member of Rio Arriba
County nice to see you
championing this bill so I'm
just it's a couple of comments
that I'm excited to see this
bill come through as a senator
who represents rural northern
New Mexico I understand the
importance of ensuring we have a
but then it can be the voice for
us at local and state government
now to make a comment I've seen
even in just one of my districts
and district I that two hundred
students have gone unaccounted
for during the pandemic and I
largely attribute that to the
fact that they don't have access
to the internet or maybe even
access to have some sort of
tablet or cellphone signal work
that they can make communication
with the school and so they're
falling behind in this virtual
classroom.
My concern is if we continued
not to address the issues of
rural New Mexico will continue
to fall far behind more than
just in the virtual classroom
not one thing I didn't see if it
is one question that I saw in
the FIR is it talks that there's
no it doesn't your Senate bill
doesn't contain appropriation
will you be working a
modification for appropriation
or or what's in the works with
this.
Thank you madam chair vice chair
how to me I'll we are working on
an amendment we we spoke about
that yesterday so we will
request an amendment be drafted
to include an appropriation and
with that I'd like to turn it
over to Senator Diamond if she
has any additional information
to share with about that thank
you madam chair and and
as senators both of you we've
been so we're freshman senators
bringing this forward we work I
work actually advise you to
included in an amendment with
this bill or that we may
included in DFA is budget
separately so so either way
there will be some funding that
accompanies this position.
Thank you so madam chair of
those are my questions I just
wanna make sure that something
is important to this for the
three of us Senators definitely
in rural New Mexico that we make
sure that there's an
appropriation so the best
definitely can move forward so
thank you for bringing this bill
up and thank you on behalf of
district five including those
rural communities that sometimes
bill we don't have a voice when
it comes to government of
legislation that that definitely
impacts us thank you.
Thank you senator Hart meals
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo are you there
there you are just a muted
myself so
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Hemphill and
Senator Diamond for bringing
this bill up
I to give you an army not just
one person.
I'm looking at I just listed all
the agency that this person is
going to be interacting with
governments office County
municipalities federal agencies
USDA nonprofits technical
assistance.
That's a lot of work for an
individual so
Maybe one of you is is capable
member Carol Carol to do all
this I don't care for a long
time and so forth so Carroll
good to good to hear you see you
as well I know I think this is
great you know I mean when I
when I listen to the
presentation and when we think
about you know frontier rural
communities in all of it you
know our our tribal reservation
are in different me I think it's
just a designation that we are
on the reservations were role
the impacts that that I think
the rural communities felt.
Whether it's health whether it's
technology broadband school
these are all the issues that
were keenly you know I think
brought to light you know
because of the pandemic and and
so I think of I certainly I
don't have a question I I I
think with the question that was
that I had about any
appropriation was a connected
but but I understand what's the
what's going on as well so
hopefully those bodies will be
appropriated but it's a start me
it's a lot of work that that I
think the needs to get get done
I I think having this type of
individual
Really serve our our a rural
communities in a way that it
hasn't and and so I appreciate
the senators for bring this
bill.
Thank you senator Shendo senator
Sanchez.
Madam chair.
Senator Hemphill Senator Diamond
and thank you guys for bringing
this bill I have
It's a question a recommendation
on.
It's on page two.
Section B..
Line scan through twelfth.
And I don't know if
Center and builder Senator
Diamond wants to answer but for
you have there were it's
appointed.
I would like to see it B. R. a
higher position by the DFA.
A recommendation if we could
have that sort of appointed a
kind of pointed as broad who's
gonna point or.
Recommendation are question
thank you.
Okay.
So you want clarification on
who's doing the pointing in that
sense yes it or send you are
you know who's doing the
appointing their
And if we could have a change to
hired by the.
DFA Madam.
Chair.
We do Senators would you like to
respond.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator for bringing that up yes
Senator Diamond and I have that
conversation just yesterday so I
will let Senator Diamond answer
that thank you madam chair.
We we had this discussion madam
chair senator Sanchez thank you
for bringing that up to to
clarify on page two line ten is
is maybe a little bit of
confusion if you guys want to
bring amendment forward to
clarify that we would consider
that a friendly amendment I
believe Mr Sanchez if I'm
correct you were that it would
then read the role equity on but
should be hired solely on the
basis of education and expertise
and be nonpartisan
based on what your comments were
if you wanted to stick it a step
further and actually clarify
that this is a position with and
DFA we would consider that
friendly as well if there is any
confusion that this is a
governor's appointment if you
wanted to provide language to
clarify that we we agree.
Madam chair of this Senator
Diamond yes that would be
exactly what
Exactly what you said would be
great.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Still there Senator Griggs are
excuse me senator Sanchez does
that conclude your.
Yes madam chair.
Thank you senator Sanchez
Senator Griggs thank you madam
chair and I'm I would thank you
that was something this small we
can probably go ahead and and
move it amendment.
for that
Where does this show workers
issues bill senators go next.
To go to provide answers go to
Judiciary next.
Madam chair and senator grades
our next committee assignment is
finance.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Senator Diamond domain
the.
There would probably be if this
were and going through Judiciary
there would be some discussion
on some of the language in the
bill.
For for sure I mean even just
where we work when we talk about
to shell be nonpartisan
nonpartisan means something to
somebody or something to
somebody else and may not have
any real effect on on the bill
I I think I understand what what
you're getting at but it same
time.
Those are the sorts of things as
you go through through the
process centers and as you.
Thank you want search especially
especially one of my favorite
committees and I know which
Senator Shendo was favored
Committee is to go through the
Senate Judiciary it's it's a
lovely time and I think that
that everyone should have that
experience now again but but
those are those are things I
wanted to ask you know real
quick I didn't see or hear thank
you had any comments from the
association counties or The New
Mexico municipal league have you
guys talk to them or did I just
mess their support.
Thank you madam chair Senator
for that question yes the
present level is that is still
on the phone and wants to
address that question.
Yes Senator helpful and and
senator thank you for that for
the question and members of the
committee so
one of my talk around that is
that number one council the
government's Representative
seven regions in the state of
New Mexico and so we are
partners with the New Mexico
association of counties along
with the New Mexico
along with the New Mexico
municipal league so that's kind
of where the collaboration and
my opinion could occur so if you
look at your the fiscal impact
report they did not respond to
the fiscal impact report but I
do not see that as being an
issue as we collaborate on all
these types of initiatives
because primarily our entire
state and in rural and so we're
we're we're always advocating
for those tribal governments and
other most rural areas within
the state of New Mexico.
That's what we do on a daily
basis and we try to build
capacity at the local level.
Madam chair Senators and the
mission of Cheryl and I
appreciate those comments
however I just want to reiterate
that when when you're dealing
with bills of this nature at and
you're talking about things
would impact cities and
counties.
It's always wise to bring them
into the mix conditionally
active their comments and I I
certainly appreciate the role
of.
Councils sent to achieve
pourtant we we have a great
working relationship with.
The southeast Council government
should do that quite often I
just I just want to the your to
tell you that when you're doing
this these these guys are it's
just important to have them on
board with you it's not there
when they're not there.
The question rises do they
support you in our show is best
to have them there we we can I
would I would recommend it to
the next time you gauge with a
process like that that you you
certainly try to get them on
board.
With your billing have we are.
Chair Senators you picked DFA is
there a particular reason that
we we DFA over over another
another state department
official.
Could you guys just expand on on
what it is you thank you and
right.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for that question in
their statement and I appreciate
your insight and not and Senator
Diamond and I are learning as we
go so I really appreciate do you
mentioning that and I see if I'm
not mistaken that Carol has of
been wanting to
speak to it your question as
well so I'll turn it over to our
expert witness Carol Miller
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair Senators
some other participants Senator
Griggs
this move really quickly we were
kind of surprised to be assigned
to and we're very grateful to be
assigned to a committee the New
Mexico association of counties
the municipal league had worked
on some of the developmental
work over the past years since
twenty seventeen and it just is
something that are outreach was
pretty limited from the time we
know that the committee
assignment had been made
and getting people signed up
those supporters some and people
to our right the Nelson support
it was purely due to the timing
and so I you know those of us
working on that are expected we
will be hearing and will also be
doing personal outreach one
reason those DFA was
the end to to was Legislative
Council Service felt that that's
an agency that receives a lot of
why does why that that they
already us funding moves forward
in ways but sometimes miss
certain communities are certain
programs that DFA was the over
arching entity in which to
places we did look at earlier
efforts looking at economic
development but many of these
things are greater than economic
development certainly things
like the broadband on some of
the school issues we're dealing
with and you know maybe you have
a recommendation but when we
worked with Legislative Council
we were guided to DFA is the
place that already receives a
lot of these kinds of concerns
from communities and that that
would be the most effective
place.
Thank you madam chair Senators
and witnesses are I've you know
I appreciate that are I would I
would have thought those would
have been to the consider
departments as well show so
madam chair Senators thank you
for bringing this bill forward
it's certainly an ambitious bill
and we'll a we'll see where we
go thank you very much.
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senators Hemphill and
diamond
this this is good legislation
It's so important that we hear
from all of our constituents
right and that's what makes our
state so unique we have such
unique communities
I I was glad to see when I first
heard about this being
introduced.
I was concerned about the the
levels of hierarchy for this
person or persons because I know
she can it says you can hire at
least one
so that's good because like
Senator Shendo said I think
pretty soon you'll find out that
you prying in office to
accommodate and serve
everybody's concerns but
So so that said I was glad to
see that right up front that
person's going to have a voice
with the governor's office
legislature and all state
agencies I think it's really
important
for this position like this that
the hierarchy is limited
so with that I would think
I I really support this and if
anything maybe next year you're
going to be coming back and
asking for an office and not
just to positions of thank you.
Any comments from the sponsors
are.
Anyone.
Okay we get back to Senator
Shendo.
Thank you madam chair for the
second time I don't know how we
want to do amendments
You know I I don't claim to be
an attorney I did get accepted
to law school went four year but
the decided that I would best be
served not being an attorney but
the on page one online twenty.
You know I know we discussed
this in you used the word employ
and then on page two
Line ten we use the word
appointed so of course those are
are you know you can appoint an
employee at the same time and
so.
I don't know miss madam chair or
even the Sanchez we can continue
this with the idea that it'll be
amended for the next committee
which is finance I know Jake up
who's in attorneys on that
committee so.
Things will get changed but it
here's my thought that perhaps
online ten
we could rewrite that.
In to say the rule equity but
shall be hired.
That possesses the relevant.
Education and experience.
So it's just clean it's not
about of nonpartisan so you get
the nonpartisan word out you get
the appointed word out and so I
think what you're trying to do
is you really want to try and
identify a person that has the
education relevant experience
that will serve in this capacity
so that's kind of my
recommendation
Madam chair and and Senator
Shendo I I think I speak for
both Senator Hemphill and I
again and and creating that
would be a friendly amendment if
we wanted that amendment to come
out of that committee.
I know I know in in past the
madam chair we made amendments
here if that's a friendly
amendment do you want to
entertain that amendment here
today so that when it moves to
the Senate finance that language
is already being changed.
So that it's a much clearer bill
senator grace you away in on
this one.
What I could do a you know the
fact that you usually employ on
page one instead of using higher
on on page two it might be
better to use the word employ.
To to maintain care some
consistency that I would I think
Senator Shendo that would be a
you know just just this is a
simple amendment we're not
trying to rewrite a whole lot of
things show if we came in and
said that we're going to strike
the word appointed online and
and
changes to employed.
And then strike the and shall be
nonpartisan inflation period
after experience I think I think
that should be doable by the by
the Canadian and we're just
right that that will that
amendment that way I would I
would expect.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes and I think that's one of we
can get that prepared I'm not
sure what they did in the past
was have it posted in one of the
windows there for the whole
committee to see and
In that but that'll Rebecca I
don't know if anybody's
available right there to have
that drawn up.
Do we have any more comments by
committee members well with the
working on them insert that
change.
I think that would.
Your.
How
can you mean.
Okay good we can do our next
committee meeting is Tuesday and
so we can just roll this over
get the amendment prepare and
rolled over and put this one the
first on the agenda for next
Tuesday so we can get it through
and so that which read in on
Wednesday when we come back on
the floor and it'll get to
second assignment we still have
some of these one committee to
get this thing done.
Yes and on that to Senator
Shendo I did have some questions
too about the language in the
bill so maybe will work let me
report with that are you okay
Senator Shendo to
I'm fine okay okay so.
We talk about frontier can you
explain to me what why we're
using that word in our bill here
in the bill here.
Thank you madam chair
I will let our expert witness
Carol Miller answer that
question guilt.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee that
language follows other
legislation both state and
federal
in.
Getting back to at least
nineteen eighty six for example
in New Mexico and the Economic
Development Department we have
the front to your main street
program and the language is
are used for other times the
languages used as remote but our
frontier has been defined in
federal law since nineteen
eighty six including a
provisions in the affordable
Care Act so it's following along
with other existing legislation
both at the New Mexico level and
the federal in some communities
that term and some of the others
are also not favored but on some
level understand Sir option tied
by trying to
we are programs together with
federal and other state
programs.
Yes and I think that's one of
the reasons when we use both
words we're not seeing any
conflict between the two as far
as addressing are I mean it's
not.
The superintendent are you
should we just be using one word
R. I Y. E. R. is to any conflict
with using to well it's possible
to serve rural New Mexico
without reaching out to the
smallest communities which under
federal and other state
definitions are defined as front
tear the most remote and the
most isolated and rural and and
there's I don't want to get into
the weeds of how many
definitions of rural there are
including all state it's just to
say this means the last mile you
know not the last small town
were you know there are many
places in the state that are
just so remote and isolated and
really struggling just to do
anything have any kind of
services available that is just
referring to the entire continue
of the types of world that
exists the census bureau and the
state frequently uses
metropolitan and and non
metropolitan which our
communities of fifty thousand
and fewer which then leads the
whole.
Basically almost all of New
Mexico and not non metropolitan
but it was just to say all the
way to the end of the line to
that last tree work or home
on the on tribal land that does
not have water does not have
internet does not have power
that you know we wanted we're
trying to get the benefits of
government and resources all the
way out to the last mile.
So you can see that too because
is this in statute our where
would we really define it with
in New Mexico and I'm I'm going
through this too because we do
have our new members here on the
committee so.
It is basically been
programmatic which is why there
are so many different
definitions even within USDA now
uses rural and remote but they
have a sub category that is
equivalent to front tier
they just within USDA there
about six different definitions
that are used the first time it
went into federal legislation
through senator hatch of Utah in
nineteen eighty six was his
understanding that the smallest
communities were being left out
of health services delivery and
he wanted to come up with a turn
that then all the way to the
last mile everybody and so that
kind of created its own historic
movement forward the state of
New Mexico uses different
definitions depending on the
program automatic the needs of
the program therefore the front
your main street program was a
way that the smallest
communities with downtown Sir
business districts were able to
receive the resources of that
program and funding within the
department of health there are
numerous uses of front tier in
different programs as
appropriate so that
things like requirements of how
many patients to a provider will
see can be waived in a community
that doesn't even have a
population large enough to meet
the bar it's been a way to stay
all the way out to that last
house the last mile the last
person to try and and gives some
differentiation the you will see
as this moves forward or the on
board will hear that they
couldn't qualify in one program
because.
Because of the way population
was defined and yet they could
qualify for another program with
the exact same populations so
and it is confusing I've been
working since the mid eighties
and you know we've ended up with
more definitions and more
programmatic things and not
fewer.
So it's not officially adopted
by the state in which we have.
definitions for it but we're
just going but I think what the
federal programs defined the
mass now the front your main
street program has its own
definition within the department
of health depending on which
program it is it helps its own
definition there are numerous
uses of the term and
programmatic eligibility and the
number of state programs it's
not just a federal no when the
federal government first had the
legislation in eighty six the
number of states in which New
Mexico is a leader which is why
that frontier center is here
the New Mexico department of
health realized immediately that
that would.
Categorizing and defining on the
front your parts of the state
for the first time we're going
to enable the state to help ward
for example community health
centers that are able to be in
the smallest communities switch
I know that Senator is that
probably every senator on the
committee house a community
health center or indoors
satellite in the smallest of
communities and that would not
have been allowed to happen with
a way to.
The eight waivers and
programmatic Lee focused
programming to assure that
outreach.
Yes in the reason I bring that
point up is because some
communities might think they're
included with it within this and
yet they're not because of all
these different definitions and
these programs and whether the
way they are funded so when we
talk about full support of the
state are in.
Within that you know when we did
throw these definitions and we
could be excluding some areas
that you may not have.
Really willingly wanted to
verses saying highly rural
sports when we do things within
our our judges station are
what's written that even those
simple one word terms can really
change the legislation very
differently to what who were
trying to include are not
exclude thank you this.
You just make one comment
because San Juan County has long
been our outlaw your county in
New Mexico because since
described as metropolitan under
the census bureau and has missed
out on many opportunities for
funding that would be available
if you different definition is
utilized and one of the beauties
about having an on but since the
state for the first time will
have a single point of contact
to collect the information about
how their programmatic
description St college ability
or affecting different
communities so you know I just
wanted to say that San Juan has
long been are a liar County
harmed by sort of for the census
bureau definition.
Yes beaming based on the brink
brink in that the census yes and
that's where those
also when we talk about tribal
communities I don't know if that
was what was referring to when
we talk about the border in the
country the country versus down
south do you have one more
Senator Griggs I'd I that's all
I have thank you.
Senator bricks thank you madam
chair if I if I might and
insurance are certainly up to
the discretion of the chair I
would like to propose an
amendment to go ahead and
address that we have to mend it
ready okay and and
let me let me read the
amendment.
Your.
Yeah.
K. sharing your screen I don't
know if you can share it or just
hold it up there so what you're
looking.
That's what it looks like.
okay good Senator on that on
page two line ten.
Strike the word appointed and
replaced with the word employed.
And on page two lines eleven and
twelve.
A place here in after the word
experience.
And strike the rest of the line
and strike all of line twelve.
Did you get that.
Yes I got it.
Basically all it does change of
court are appointed to employed
instructional language dealing
with our parks.
Thank you senator senator
Sanchez did you want to comment
about the amendment since that
was your concern.
Are you get.
Real quick no I'm good with the
amendment if Senator Hemphill
and Senator Diamond are madam
chair and
If we if the amended for what is
good with that I'd like to you
know see if instead of hanging
this up if we could move it out
if they agreed with the
amendment.
I believe that was a friendly
amendment yes was it.
I don't and also the I think
someone brought up the point of
but appropriation I don't know
if that would be something you
want to do here to lost about
four we we are on our it's that
simple or
do we just want to move the bill
on the anyone on the committee.
Madam chair I think we did go
ahead Liz bill on left in
discussion about their
appropriation issue doctors that
may be more complex and there
certainly is show you with that
I move the moves the admin.
Okay so action on the amendment
Senator Griggs wishes to move
Rebecca did you get that.
Okay and is our second Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo seconds that.
Coffin about Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator Hotmail yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six boats where do
passed as amended.
Thank you Rebecca and you have a
do pass this an Indian
restaurant rural and cultural
affairs committee as Amanda
then you move onto your next
Committee congradulations
senators and.
Good luck and and we have any
closing comments from our madam
chair Madam chair representative
right.
We we voted on the bill as
amended but we never really
followed after the ship vote and
okay we have yes so we we have
to go back if we have the
amendment we we we vote on the
amended on the amendment and
then once we have been amended
bill that we all vote for the
amended bill.
The bill yes do we have a
mission a motion by the
committee on the amended on the
Senate bill one ninety three one
amendment
chair of the we we need to go
back and vote on the amendment.
The daunting amendment and then
we're loading on the amendment
right once we adopt the
amendment then we have an
amended bill then you call for
the question again on the bill
itself as Amanda.
Thanks Amanda the questions but
the committee
do you have the vote recorded.
And will move to the.
Senate Bill.
One ninety three amendment
Do we have a.
Motion by the committee there
are any questions on the amended
bill.
So madam chair I think the
objections to leader we need to
make a motion and I'll make you
I think up front are you get to
our to approve the amendment.
Sure we need to do that first.
Yes so that Senator Rebecca you
have Senator Griggs AS a motion
to adopt the amendment.
We are a second that motion okay
so so that was the original
motion that I seconded.
And and that was the motion
etcetera etcetera right so so
that earlier vote was to amend
the bill.
Right yes No.
Yes yes where it all came to
support the bill as amended so
we still didn't do the actual
vote on the amendment right yeah
that's that's and so so.
So we the amendment restate this
to start all over again.
Runs of the.
I am I move the amendment.
Okay and I second.
No call for the question on the
amendment.
On the matter.
So the amendment the question is
whether to believe the amendment
yes you have a motion to move
the amendment so the secretary
needs to call a vote.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six.
So now we have an amazing deal.
We have been amended bill the
option of the meant that Dobson
of the amendment was successful
to the bill right so now I like
to move that we.
Make a motion for the amended
bill is there any objection or
any debate on the amended bill.
from committee now okay so we
have a motion by Senator Shendo
to take a vote on the amended
bill I guess Senator Shendo
motion is to do pass on the
Amanda yes correct object I
would second that so we have a.
Motion to pass by Senator Shendo
and a second by Senator Griggs
and Rebecca could you call the
roll.
Thanks yes.
Senator McKenna yes to pass
senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
had a meal yes Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes.
On a deep pass.
Right.
Okay great thank you and I think
you Senator Hemphill and Senator
Diamond thank you for excitement
Senators and do we have any
closing comments from the
senators or I just like to thank
say thank you madam chair and
thank you members of the
committee for your support and
your your health working this
out so that we can move our bill
on committee so thanks so much
we're all learning together and
I appreciate your guidance thank
you madam chair members of the
committee thank you for your
service on this important
committee and for your vote
today thank you all.
Thank you and that concludes our
a agenda for two day and we will
meet next Tuesday the agenda
will be posted.
I think we have a Senator
Padilla up on two oh four and
then two fifty seven.
And.
Senate bill two seventy three
invention though you're on for
next Tuesday.
Is that okay with the agenda
Senator Griggs you guys are
available for.
Representative.
One senator Sanders bill longer
I don't know.
I think there might have been in
issue with getting some of the
witnesses on because of access
cause of the mishap on the
legislature legislate you know
by you can click on the bill and
then kind of just go through the
process that was passed.
Yes.
so make sure you get your list
to Rebecca on who should be
contacted on the agenda with
this link and you guys all have
a great weekend thank you so
much Senators and have a good
one thank you thank you
all right bye bye bye.
