Do we have any thing we but
before we start.
Rebecca do you have anything.
Madam chair members of the
committee the only a
housekeeping item I wanted to
bring to your attention is that
we have a lot of bills today and
we got quite a few
expert witnesses as well as
people who signed up for
within the time frame to also
submit public comment we did
however receive several after
the deadline and and because of
the amount we have giving public
comment we're sticking to the
the role of our three PM
submittal deadline if if that's
acceptable to you madam chair.
Thank you and we did talk about
the student leadership meeting.
I'm if they were unable to get
on before the deadline that if
they could just email their
comments to to this Senator our
sponsor or to the committee and
we will see if we can get those
tallied up and I'm ready but.
Sometimes time does not permit.
Thank you Rebecca.
Okay Senator Padilla are you do
you have to look like you have
all your witnesses make them are
we set with letting people in.
Thank you madam chair get
beyond.
Okay Senator Griggs has joined
us to.
Okay Senator B. and W. could be
a good morning how are you.
Thank you so much Madam
chairwoman into and thank you
Rebecca Martinez
For helping to coordinate get us
all organized to get in here and
thank you to the vice chair Mr
chair by chairman and and the
members of the committee I come
before you today with a bill
that literally died in the last
twelve to eighteen seconds maybe
fifteen seconds of the two
thousand nineteen session we
weaved our way through the
legislature and boy was that an
up in a down in the roller
coaster ride in a trampoline
falling off the trampoline
getting back on again and it's
just been quite the effort to
try to get this done and we feel
very good that we made all of
the edits along the way which
the bill was ready for passage
on the Senate floor in two
thousand nineteen it was a house
bill so we did we've its way all
the way through the entire
legislature but we simply ran
out of time there in the last
couple of seconds there I do
have an expert witness that we
are all pretty familiar with the
John but all who I've known for
over twenty years now he is the
founder and chief executive
officer of the sacred wind
communications company he's
going to have a few items to say
for us as well I'm asking to
make his comments assisting
disposable so that we can as a
Rebecca mentioned madam chair
that you mentioned you have a a
link the agenda today so I come
before you with the Senate bill
two oh four I mentioned to the
journey that this bill was taken
it's a super important that we
get behind anything that is
going to bring broadband
in a greater capacity to all New
Mexicans the area with which you
know these rural
telecommunications companies
service are in some areas the
topography requires innovation
it requires investment and
sacred wind has just has done
just that I chair or vice chair
the science technology
telecommunications Committee is
is a couple of you are also
members of that committee and
and I think you know that I've
taken this committee out to ya
to Hey and to a couple different
areas so that we can learn more
about how to get all of this
work done the topography has
required a company like sacred
when to bring and and all of the
above solution to bring
broadband to their their their
constituency to to the folks
that they serve.
but the state rural universal
service fund which was created
in two thousand five it enables
rural telecommunications
companies to bring these
telecommunication services at
affordable rates and broadband
etcetera to these very hard to
reach areas the fact that sacred
wind was created literally the
very next year has created quite
the conundrum for this company
if you take a look at the
reporting requirements because a
lot of these rural that
telecommunications companies do
receive some state support
another supports to provide
their services so I had a
complete study done Madam
chairwoman and and Mr vice
chairman members of the
committee what was the average
cost to provide services to
their constituency verses all
the other real
telecommunications companies and
they were literally right in the
middle of the pack.
But what's going to shock you
are at least it shocked me and I
think it'll probably do the same
to you is the requirement that
this company has between two
thousand ten and two thousand
fifteen it's been a little over
a million dollars in on
recoverable costs to provide
their regulatory responses and
when we in fact could have seen
that million dollars provide
additional innovation additional
things and I know that several
members of this committee
including you Madam chairwoman
have been able to participate in
some of the innovative things
that this company has done as
they roll amount from satellite
to Microsoft options to what
utilization of white space to
a point to point to they're
looking at companies like sky
down in Roswell
Cash obstacles here in
Albuquerque that are point to
point and then also aerial
delivery of broadband so they're
doing everything that they can
do but we're just you know
kicking them in the but every
opportunity we get to the PRC in
order to require them to to find
this reporting and analysis so
this really three critical
things that that this bill that
is one is it brings fairness to
this company as any other real
telecommunications company get a
Maez of the real telecom Act to
allow sacred when to be a
recipient you know of the the
dollars they're the same way any
other company does but doesn't
require this you know.
Yep triple salchow double let's
stick the landing and pay for it
ten times over you know
reporting requirement it's going
to cut waste the bill's going to
Luminate really all of the
unnecessary regulatory things
that this company has to do that
know whether rural
telecommunications company has
to do and it's going to improve
connectivity which we know is so
vital so important right now to
serve folks of the to serve the
Navajo people in communities
within the high speed internet
the capability of their their
their area this proposal did
receive as I mentioned unanimous
bipartisan support in two
thousand nineteen and I wanted
to bring it before you again
early as early as possible in
the sessions we get this worked
out I would like Mister but doll
to say just a few words on why
we're here and and what we're
hoping to accomplish thank you
madam chair.
Thank you senator.
Mr.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee I'm honored to be here
this morning Senator Padilla is
as stated I am the founder and
CEO of sacred wind
communications and with this
this morning to have our manager
external affairs Catherine
Nicolau.
There are twelve truly rural
telephone companies in in the
state of New Mexico
and eleven of those companies
get ongoing support as a state
senator stated from the public
regulation USF on the universal
service fund so when does not.
The rural telephone companies
because of the nature of their
business the areas they serve
receive three sources of funding
that they operate on a financial
three legged stool.
One leg is the revenues they
receive from their customers
second leg is revenues are of
funding support they get from
the federal universal service
fund which is essential for all
conflicts and the third is a
financial support from the state
US up five Senator when is the
only rural telephone company
here in the state has to live on
or exist on two of those legs
and we have to do that with a we
conducted a rather risky
a balancing act but to keep our
the company moving and even at
that we have been
internationally and nationally
recognized for our innovation.
The discrimination the
regulatory discrimination.
The.
The war against the sacred wind
also is a bit insidious in that
every dollar that we spend on
regulatory and legal is a dollar
less than we get that we get
from the federal government for
operational support since they
do not support the you know such
administrative costs.
We're also the only are like the
only rural telephone company in
the state that has participated
in both the FCC calf option for
the to serve new areas unserved
areas of the state all on Navajo
land and in the most recent SEC
aren't off auction to expand our
network in outside of our
territory in underserved areas
of the of Navajo land and
because of the financial
constraints that we are under we
even though we are the only
rural telephone company to in
New Mexico that participate in
balls and the only rural
telephone company to receive the
FCC's support expand our in both
we had to restrict the amount of
of areas that we wanted to pick
up this is been underserved in
New Mexico because of our
financial inability to get a
line of credit from a bank to
ensure the federal government
that we have the funding enough
to expand our broadband network
outward so not only does this
current state of affairs in law
discriminate against us but in
the scrimmage against our
customers.
And the state of New Mexico in
our inability to go after more
federal money to to to build our
network thank you madam chair
members the committee glad to
answer any questions that you
may have and thank you madam
chairwoman thank you John and
Catherine Nicolau I believe is
also on with us and has done a
wonderful job of helping to
prepare me and others to get
this thing this a presentation
put together so madam chair we
will we'll stand for any
questions or what direction you
like to go in at this point.
Thank you thank you Senator
Padilla thank you Mr but all and
you will be we will go to
Rebecca and they stand for
public comment.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Joining and.
Joining at and the them call
right now should be Jason
Espinoza right New Mexico
technology council.
Madam chair and members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
restaurant lobbyist with New
Mexico technology council we
stand in full support of this
legislation and we do believe
that insurers are regulatory
fairness cut some of the
regulatory costs
in a way that can improve
connectivity.
So that the companies I can
build more infrastructure better
serve Navajo communities with
high speed internet so we stand
and support thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee that we also had
several people reach out and
they're not all of them made the
deadline.
The J. M. then from Windstream
services LLC.
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy and communications for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce.
As well as matiq NJ Fund The on
it right and J. at consulting.
All of the individuals banded
support of this bill.
It does that conclude public
comment.
Madam chair members of the
committee after that.
Thank you.
We will go to members of the
committee.
The questions from members of
the committee.
And what is the will of the
committee.
Hi a motion for the past senator
Shendo.
I have a motion for do passed by
Senator Shendo.
The second.
Senator Griggs Senator Griggs
seconded the motion Rebecca well
you call the roll.
Thanks yes.
Senator McKenna yes two passed
senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo.
Yes Senator have a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is support to
pass.
Thank you thank you everyone
thank thank you madam chair and
Mr vice chairman thank you
senator that Shendo for making
that motion.
Thank you Senator Padilla and I
hope we get that all the way
through thank you so much.
Thank you and next we have
Senate bill two fifty seven
delinquency payments Senator
Maria thank you madam chair and
I sincerely appreciate your
allowing this bill to be heard
as quickly as possible so
considering.
The number two fifty seven as
you know madam chair I am a
former foster child I lived in
seven different foster homes all
over New Mexico and the all face
home in Albuquerque my sisters
and I and we just got to work
our way out of there is many of
us have as many of us have and
it's been a real passion point
for me we don't necessarily have
a bunch of but well dressed
appointed lobbyists are running
around so I feel in a in a large
way with your permission madam
chair I feel like I'm the
lobbyist for for fun of my
fosters brothers and sisters all
over the state that's why
continue to bring some of this
legislation we've got some
really good stuff done in the
nine years I've been in the
Senate sorry my ninety year
excuse me
I do have the world renowned
super international sensation
cabinet secretary Brian Blaylock
with us this morning from the
children youth and families
department is doing yeoman's
work there and and just a I
don't even know when he sleeps
because he's just on it all the
time I talk to him you know it
two in the morning two in the
afternoon madam chair the very
proud of the work that he's
doing so I've asked him to join
this discussion today as we
weave our way through the
legislature with this particular
piece I I want immediately call
out that Senate bill two fifty
seven received a title that I I
think it's interesting I think
in the past we use the word
delinquency and we use the word
you know to to to really
admonish children along the way
by using this word delinquency
we talked about maybe going
through the process is Senator
Shendo who and he and I came to
the legislature the same your
Senator Griggs and I'm trying to
think who else was with us every
now and then we we try to change
the title of the bill and it if
this is so we're going through
an act of Congress snap legal
blood sample at the door and and
this that but I thought you know
what I'm not wanted I don't want
to change the title of this bill
because.
You know these children are not
delinquent I think the we need
to lift them up and we need to
help them move forward and I
know many of the members of this
committee feel the same way but
essentially what we have here is
Senate bill two fifty seven we
did not get the which I'm sure a
lot of you are dealing with I
want to show you we did not
receive what you can't really
see it unless it's on me here we
did not receive the FIR until
this morning so I hope that you
will understand that some of the
stuff that we're dealing with
with this piece legislation
because it's going to be a tough
one I'm gonna just tell you that
right now
We did get to see the analysis
until today but we have been
working for the better part of
the set secretary but a lot can
talk about this we've been
working for the better part of
six nine ten months on this
piece of legislation and have
received a lot so a lot of very
good input feedback we always
talk about cash you know did you
involve industry did you involve
consumers that you involved so
and so well Secretary Blalock
work very hard to involve the
judiciary the consumer of this
the various organizations that
we all know that Representative
by people like Mr Espinoza
miss Sanchez that I think is
also on this call or at least
observing and a lot of different
groups in the state but
essentially what two fifty seven
does is it demands the
delinquency Act to expand the
appropriate placements for child
alleged or educated to be a
delinquent child to include an
approved home of a relative or
fictive kin fictive kin is
design defined in the
legislation it's defined to
include a non relative who has a
significant and familial
relationship.
With the child that existed
prior to the child entering
foster care and non and non
relative and a non relative who
developed a significant and
familiar relationship with the
child after the child entered
foster care and who has been
identified by CYFD is the
child's.
A permanent connection because a
lot of ways families do that
madam chair the they do take in
a child because they know
there's a problem in the home or
they might be a a family friend
that they want to help out or
this or that so I think that we
should try to keep the
connections as close as possible
to the familial familial
standpoint rather than just
picking a child that putting
them in the condition and and
and and environment that they
know nothing about and what
winds up happening there is they
just you know really jump off
the bridge and and and run and
all sorts of problems so I just
wanted to point that out I think
that's super important
we are going to I don't know if
it made its way to you or not
but I do have a really great
description pointing
counterpoint of the bill that
CYFD was able to put together to
put on myself here to see can
actually see it I'll just point
out a couple of things that the
the the impact of the bill is it
for families in homes without
parent support or receive a
monthly stipend of about six
hundred dollars with many youth
receiving more in specialized
increments depending on what's
going on with the child.
eligible for the be eligible for
free college in New Mexico as
you know eligible to be
guaranteed housing until twenty
one that was the bill that I
brought I guess it's been about
two years now you all may recall
that the that was a very
passionate bill that I was able
to to get passed and signed into
law that takes advantage of some
federal dollars some minimal
state dollars to provide
supports all the way up to the
age of twenty one you know we
think these kids you know they
think they know everything
eighteen as it turns out just
think of all of us I know that
when I aged out of the foster
care system I don't know
anything and boy that that for
fell out very quickly out from
under me but this is what one of
the things that's going to help
them these kids and their
eligible for extended Medicaid
regardless of income or assets
until twenty six we mandate and
identify theft attacks in
consumer law assistance we
mandate screening for disability
related benefits and assistance
with obtaining if appropriate
and they're probably about you
know I would say another ten or
twelve items here and and you
all can read so I'm not going to
go over them individually with
you but I will address them
throughout this presentation.
I think the bottom line is we
have about three hundred and
fifty children that are in this
condition on an annual basis
about the prior to our efforts
in two thousand nineteen and
what we're doing right now we
wind up with about seventy
percent of them without the
supports without these these
efforts behind them to lift them
up either in the legal jeopardy
system
they don't long term long range
health related issues
repeated behavior with their own
children when they have them but
when you have these types of
supports in place when you have
this type of of of effort behind
these kiddos you almost flipped
the script so there's we're
we're now one of about eighteen
or twenty stated that maybe
twenty one states now that have
done a lot of this work and
they're already seeing massive
declines in in in the repeat
behavior of this type so I I
just you know want to cover all
that ahead of time I I know I by
talked much too long Madam chair
but I do know you know how
important subject is to me
and I want to ask the secretary
to say a few words as we go into
this discussion as well if with
your permission madam chair.
Thank you senator yes that's
fine continue.
Mr secretary you madam chair
members of the committee some
broadly like in the cabinet
secretary at the children youth
and families department this is
an issue that's near and dear to
my heart because these are some
of our most vulnerable you.
In the state of New Mexico and
it's many of you know I've been
talking to the legislature and
anybody else that would listen
from about two years from today
about this important issue
because the way that the state
of New Mexico handled out of
home placement very unequal
right now.
And so we have a group of you
that are in out of home
placement under court
supervision.
To receive a host of support and
benefit and then we have a group
who does not of in the reason
why is because in the state of
New Mexico when the court has
the child living in a place with
non parent or on the
appropriations side of the court
doesn't certified as medical
placing even though it into the
child living at home a grandma
with no parent or could be with
a sixty can with no parent and
on the child welfare side
there's a host of legal
entitlements and obligations and
the ability for the court to
more closely supervised location
in the juvenile justice system
in New Mexico we just never done
that even though it the
recommendation of the
administration children and
families recommendation the
families of focus it's a
recommendation of the the policy
advocacy and reforms etcetera
in some you know many states
have already adopted this
practice and and then be able to
federal options available for
decades New Mexico just never
done it when I first came in
twenty nineteen I said this is a
priority for us we want to do it
and it turned out that the
technical thing that we would
need to do because of how the
juvenile justice system works in
New Mexico's maybe it's very
difficult and so we really
wanted to do it in twenty
nineteen legislative session but
we don't have enough information
we work records we talked about
it at the ECAC is shows where
prove the commission in the last
legislative session we probably
put some tweaks in the extended
foster care bill that allowed us
to do it and then we were told
subsequently by judges that's
not enough you need to do
another thing to do to guidance
from them been working on all of
their input and recommendations
we brought in some outside
support including any case you
foundation we work with the
national expert consultants
provided by them and we modeled
that closely on how other states
have done it but also looking
specifically at the unique
juvenile justice situation New
Mexico and we think we have a
viable path forward
it we are continuing to take
input and and we will work
collaboratively are.
Working collaboratively with
judges to be sure that we do it
completely the right way up for
New Mexico but we think the
free market right and
importantly and I heard a madam
chair members the committee
heard Senator Padilla mentioned
that one pager that talked about
with the state.
And so with this bill would do
is this bill would allow the
court to certify want to use it
on a formal probation that but
living with non parent that
they're in and out of home
placements to be courts
discretion they would be able to
make that finding that's not a
finding that the way if you can
do and so we have we need to
court help with this they can
make that finding it makes clear
though that once that
certifications may it does
caregivers many many many of
whom are relative caregivers who
are struggling to make it there
today it opens them up
traditional family supports for
additional money and traditional
reunification of permanency is
whatever is appropriate in that
case we can be sure that is a
good placement for that family I
don't think it's an accident and
the two gun that's the scene
market decreases in recidivism
marketed decrease in it than a
more stricter placements market
decreases in kids they're
leading appropriations go to
homelessness it's just simply
really good for kids and
families because it allows us to
provide additional support
family support conditional core
to provision a reunification
internet connection housing and
it opens up more least
restrictive placements for these
kids.
And so it as you can see madam
chair and members of the
committee it's something that
I'm passionate about because
right now the way that we work
with the New Mexico the
inequitable we don't give them
the same services same access to
housing benefit and as a result
our outcomes after they leave
that you're not good and so if
you look for example R. LOC
report card and you see where
the kids frequently end up after
the leave our probation system
if they frequently end up and
adult and the adult criminal
justice system and we know from
other states that providing more
therapeutic support and more
family related services and
connecting the more to families
with this bill would allow us to
do it will allow us to have
those better outcomes overall.
so it also allows us to leverage
federal dollars for the for
these programs which is what
will allow us to fund it going
forward and so we have adequate
budget in the late the budget to
provide these additional
services if we can get this bill
passed New Mexico with it makes
for a makes it additional
services that are available what
we leverage federal dollars to
do it and but above all just the
right thing to do for these kids
thank you madam chair and also
joined here by in the Martin
whose lead up are older youth
programs and so we're here ready
to provide any answers any
questions or any technical
assistance that we are thank
you.
Thank you for joining us today
Senator Padilla anything further
our before we commit yes thank
you madam chair and I think the
secretary did a phenomenal job
of of of laying exactly laying
this out for you I've also just
forwarded you the support for
out of home placement Senate
bill two fifty seven one pager I
think are very important it's
it's I just sent that to all
committee members right now if
you want to take a look at that
it gives you the impact of this
bill it also gives you the
impact if we don't do this and
so I think it's very interesting
it cuts quite a bit of federal
dollars flow into the state if
we don't do this so we're happy
to answer any questions madam
chair.
Thank you Rebecca make them do
we have any public comment.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We received a couple of
requests.
And for public comment after the
deadline.
Again the bill why the Eric with
pants and director of public
policy and advocacy for and and
the a and.
And for the bill.
With current weight loss.
With the national association of
social workers for New Mexico.
And that prayer request for
public comment on that well.
And madam chair if I could maybe
just add some.
Yes thank you and and I just
want to say that Erica Sanchez
from and can we have worked
incredibly closely over the last
several years on multiple pieces
of legislation they held in a
great deal with the faster the
age of twenty one the the
funding for the higher education
component for foster children
aging out of foster care and she
did reach out to me about this
bill and I did encourage her and
I did encourage the department I
know that they had multiple
conversations leading up to
about I don't know my to go
until two in the morning last
night as far as I can tell they
worked pretty extensively so I
think there are a lot of there a
couple of things that we are
going to need to do to this bill
and so we're working through
that right now with her and with
a couple of judges I I don't
want to speak for her but my
impression madam chair it's just
my impression is that she didn't
want the bill to necessarily
slow down but for the off off
the camera if you will work to
continue and I don't know if
that Mr Secretary you are the
one that was working with Erica
and the couple judges that step
forward did you want to dress
Federal.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee we are working
with a group of of judges and
lawyers and other folks to art
specially experts with on the
juvenile justice side including
you can as well and we feel
confident Senator meeting last
night they were quickly to in
the morning but it was close we
feel confident based on those
conversations that we see a path
forward and will be able to do
so a clear then that I think
there's some things in the bill
that we intended one thing and
some of folks are telling us
that it looks like we're
actually doing the opposite so
we want to clear those up with
amendment and we can have those
and then it's ready and we're
hoping that that madam chair
members of the committee if it's
possible that we would be able
to do those and prepare those
before the bill goes to
Judiciary.
And madam chair I think you know
that I that when I give you my
word is my bond and I will
continue to shepherd the state
this those discussions or stop
the bill for another year until
we get it done right.
Thank you thank you Senator DS
and I have Senator Shendo.
Thank you senator.
I believe Senator Griggs had his
hands up for so okay Senator
great Senator Griggs.
You thank you madam chair and
thank you Senator Shendo your
dandy
Senator Padilla has been a a
strong advocate for.
For kids and for kids in the
situation primarily and you
know.
The the only issue you ever had
with some of the some of the
legislation is sometimes it just
seems to to need a little help.
And I don't know and and senator
does just go to Judiciary next
is that their job word hedge yes
Mister madam chair and senator
it's going to get all the help
it needs if it gets there.
It may also medicine all the
medicine it needs the you know
the F. I. R. I think you
indicated that you hadn't yet
but it until just recently in
the other staff in the at which
it needs to be addressed sure
and
I think that.
You know maybe even before and I
don't know anymore here since I
got off to do sherry I don't
know who's on the committee
these days but but I would
suggest that you get with which
some of them early as you're
working on on some of this
because.
Senator it may it may be that it
can't can't move if if lawyers
and and the courts are are
uncomfortable show
I'm going to you know there's
two builders years today and
Senator Shendo both of whom who
are.
I think genuinely trying to do
good thank.
And I applaud both should be on
I wish I knew more about those
two to help you right the best
legislation you could ride
I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna
support this bill on the support
Senator Shendo bill but I I
certainly encourage you guys to
to work hard on me because I
don't I don't want to have to
come to the floor with a with a
lot of challenges so thank you
madam chair thank you center
the.
Thank you Mr secretary as
certainly hope we find a good
answer because you know.
Kids are a big asset to our
state we just need to help where
we can.
Thank you madam chair and
senator grace and and I think
you know what we're more than
likely going to do so it's a
clean bill is is a per if we if
we move past year madam chair
and senator we're we're going to
approach Judiciary with a
substitute that is clean and has
the impact of the FIR as well as
the feedback of the folks that
we're working with right now.
Thank you thank you Senator
Padilla Senator Griggs that
conclude your.
Okay Senator Shendo.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you Senator Padilla for
continue to work on this
important issue with our.
With our our young ones that are
in the welfare system and I know
you.
Speak about your experience and
it touches my heart all the time
because you know I look good you
know what you've done and
accomplished in your life and
and and many others hopefully
will.
You know
Do the same with the right kind
of the guidance and support so I
I appreciate what you do of the
in an analysis of
it speaks to I know that I also
have in my bill definition of
fictive king of me I I I think
under the analysis a talks about
maybe having some two different
definitions within the within
the the children's a code
definer the Beauce and and that
connect act has that been worked
on as up in the.
Can the maybe a secretary of the
lock.
Madam also did on that one Madam
chair representative I'm gonna
ask him to it as the secretary
to address not being an attorney
I think that you know his
background experience in his
team would be better suited
Senator.
Thank you madam chair as a
condition the members of the
committee so yes we're we're in
a situation now where I think
there's a couple of versions of
it can that are making their way
through the legislative process
through through the though
process our commitment is to be
sure that the definition of the
could can in this bill aligns
with the definition can that
then the vehicle bill there's
just so much more expertise on
that and I know that bill it's
been worked on for years at this
point and so we're gonna be
watching that and we will amend
it the intent would be to amend
the previous years so that it
appears that and then any
changes that happened that bill
as it goes forward will be
monitoring that as well but
that's that's what we hope to
do.
He said that thank you
Secretary.
That's it madam chair.
Thank you senator thank you
Senator Shendo any other
comments from committee members.
Yes I have a couple the thank
you Senator Padilla for bringing
this Ford and it is a.
I think there there's a lot that
needs to be done there are some
gaps that actually involved
during this time with the
pandemic and mistreating out are
making sure that all are all the
children in the situation are.
Give in are not given but that
we take care of them because it
in some sense that's where it
falls on in in the system making
sure that we can.
Give them an opportunity or
better life a better quality of
life.
So that we can is a looks like
it's a vault in all the bills
there according to the FIR and
for different bills well
including yours makes for.
So it is a joint effort I wonder
why we're on four different
Bills that that you know it all
comes down to one definition and
I think that's what we're going
to see now even with the one of
the bills that's coming up with
the definition of rural library
that some of these definitions
have to be worked out and when
we talk about the thank it can.
I have issue with how would it
define native American.
What do we have blood what
because we're starting to see
especially with a pandemic that
there are ties to the there's
monetary ties to it now in the
sense on the federal level even
from the tribes now that
children need to be not I think
we need to be but the definition
of native American and needs to
be addressed and put out there.
So that we do know.
Where we're going with that are
needs to be built upon so thank
you senator Bernie and thank
you.
CYFD for all the work you do and
this time what is the will of
the committee.
The motion for
sending a motion for the past
the second is a contender.
And Senator Shendo segments to
the motion Rebecca well you
calling the roll.
Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Pinto.
We have six yes is for it to
pass.
We have successes where do past
where Senate bill two fifty
seven and you go on to Judiciary
Senator Padilla thank you thank
thank you madam chair.
Thank you for both bills today
and the.
Thank you.
I appreciate my record here
thank thank you so much and
appreciate the committee's time
this morning thank you.
Thank you and we have Senate
bill two seventy three
definition of rural library our
TCP now and senator TDP now.
We'll see if from he has all
these witnesses on the fence.
To see a movie from the next.
Madam chair members of the
committee I at believe two of
the three expert witnesses are
here but unfortunately it does
not seem that that senator to
subpoena has logged on the act.
I think it was here earlier was
he and then he went on.
They'll I I don't believe I've
seen him this morning I try to
be attending the length.
C.
The committee.
Madam chair if it's okay you
know I could just put it on and
have to expert witnesses talk
about it.
Okay yeah we'll start and see if
we can get him on the line here
good Senator Shendo.
For her.
You madam chair a members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to do this on behalf of
senator Jerry Ortiz Y. Pino I
know Jared has been.
Working on this so rural
library.
Of project for for many years to
make sure that the the resources
that that our community
libraries
Areas that are sometimes the
only place where people get to
congregate that have access to.
Computers or broadband are
getting the kind of support and
so what this bill is due and is.
Of revising the definition of
rural libraries I think over the
years there's been some issues
with regards to funding the
talent depending on the status
of a library whether it's.
It's a library rather it's
developing rather it's
establish and population based
and and and so forth so I think
what this of real it is trying
to do is to create some of the
definitions so that hopefully of
funding can flow to some of
these
Rural libraries in in a way that
that that we can support them so
with that I think I believe we
have some expert or maybe Jerry
has joined in by now.
Okay Jerry I try to help your
brother.
Yes hung up there thank you very
much Mr chairman and committee
members of the madam chairman
committee members.
I have with me an extra witness
Mr Schell nine mark I don't know
is if the Committee substantive
reaches you in time did into are
you going to consider that or
should we hold that off for the
next committee.
We can put it in here that way
it's can you.
It.
Thank you very much madam
chairman and and and what the
committee so does it is
it tries to clarify some of the
issues that we see you
struggling with how exactly we
money to.
Defying which of the many rural
libraries or many small
libraries and in urban areas are
are eligible for participation
in the rural library endowment
fund and so the the latest
interpretation of this bill
spells out of.
How the three thousand
population would be dealt with
the maximum population for a
community where one of these
libraries is is located how that
would we deal with in the future
in case the population grows and
and and of course for many of
these communities in it doesn't
grow unfortunately it just a.
If anything starts going down a
little bit but the
three reality is if for some in
some instances these small
communities to experience growth
particularly if they're near an
urban area.
And and this is a way of dealing
with that issue that particular
issue.
So Mr Chairman what what what
what I would like is for Mr line
mark my expert witness to speak
about this and I see that we
have people here from the
department of cultural affairs
who can also speak to and if
any questions but I would I
would hope that we would deal
with the committee so rather
than the original bill.
Thank you senator.
Mr nine Mike would you.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
letting me be here
so the real library endowment
was established in twenty
nineteen and there was a slight
problem with the definition in
the original bill where it said
it should have said when the
library so three thousand
population when the library
square is when that bill was
established but instead it said
when the library system were
established so that means maybe
even Albuquerque might've had a
three thousand population back
when their libraries was
established so this is
clarifying that
this three thousand is kind of
an arbitrary number the goal of
the damages to have fifty
million dollars in the a million
dollars endowment per library in
that these small struggling
libraries would have a reliable
funding source that would
continue for them that they
could count on even if they grow
over three thousand I there's
about a hundred library public
libraries in the state this are
you down in bill covers about
half the libraries in the state
Are there any questions about it
or about the in down Mentat well
I just got an email from the by
seacoast library a tiny one in
northern New Mexico this morning
that that they have five
students that don't have
internet at home and they come
into the library and go to
school there this library has is
seventy five hundred dollars a
year budget so I do are doing
incredible work on almost no
money in there just vital to
their communities.
We have any of that.
I I don't know if the.
Mr eyes from the department of
cultural affairs wanted to weigh
in on this but I see that he is
trying to seize in general
counsel for the department of
cultural affairs.
We can't okay.
Sorry I thought I got it with
the video
at Good Morning madam chair good
morning members of the committee
and senator Ortiz Y. Pino that
it is a delight we have been
especially through the state
librarian the like any is also
on this call
trying to.
Assist in the process of
clarifying that the amendments
to the original bill Senator was
interested in.
I actually do not have a copy of
the substitute with me so we'll
just try and comment on that but
certainly I think from the state
library's perspective you know
we support the that city in the
building the capacity of the
state library to deliver library
services to rural parts of our
state which are very difficult
and libraries are often does.
Shell has pointed out to the hub
of the community activity so the
we're here to assist in that
process to get everyone we can.
And that would ask Mr you need
to yes he had anything as the
state librarian up to to weigh
in and of course happy to try
and answer any questions that
the committee might have.
Madam chair members of the
committee senator to the you
know going to be with you I
don't have anything that at this
point I'm I'm here to answer
questions thank you.
Thank you Rebecca do we have the
committee substitute no we are
talking about in this morning.
You know the members that email
to them yes madam chair members
of the committee I we did
receive the committee substitute
and I sent it to you probably
about eight thirty this morning
to the committee members as well
as our analyst.
Give us a minute here would be
When we and then my email right
now trying to.
Would.
When.
The committee members have you
received it.
Madam chair I'm I'm checking I
have not seen it.
Yes it does mean I don't have it
I used to have a.
All American you have the
ability to send that again now
yes.
I do have it I have it
Yes he said that eight oh nine.
Propose SIAC Committee sub it
should be under that email.
Senator then do you have a.
Yes thank you madam chairwoman.
So in looking at what happens in
Dixon with Mr hi mark if you
think about these rural
libraries become a lifeline of
the community in real.
Sure hold up yeah hold on
Senator let's make sure
everybody has the committee
seven if there's any discussion
on the committee stab and see if
we can move.
On that and.
We'll see what the will of the
committee is with substitute.
You madam chair I think so we
need to are
And Senator Ortiz Y. Pino can
certainly say we need to.
Get rid of the bill and replace
it with the shops or I believe
we need to do our our motion for
that Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes but the committee
substitute.
Yes you.
The impasse on Senate bill two
seventy three the Senate to pass
for purposes of discussion on
committee so for two seventy
three.
Okay and I'm looks like senator
McCain is going to make that
motion.
Yes I'm move that we do not
except the original two seventy
SB two seventy three but that we
We discussed for for purposes
this morning substitute for just
be two seventy three did I say
that right senator grace.
It's pretty that's pretty close
I think we we know what you're
your meeting is and will be
happy to accept that that
motion.
My intentions are good.
Yes.
That good intentions you never
know where that you're.
It.
You get that done from Senator
McKenna okay madam chair we need
a second on now we need to be
and I second that motion.
What a do not pass on the Senate
bill two seventy three and then
we'll move to.
We'll we'll go for the
discussion on so Rebecca can you
call the roll.
Yes Senator Griggs.
Yes hold on let me let me to fly
somewhere loading port do not
pass for Senate bill two seventy
three so we can bring in a
substitute go ahead Rebecca.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is for a do not
pass on Senate bill two seven
three.
Thank you Rebecca and now we
will move to the committee
substitute the will of the
committee but I do we want to
schedule first or I believe we
do that senator TDP male party
discussed the substitute so now
we will move on to substitute.
I would will of the committee.
You have on the substitute.
That have we had a chance to
actually discussions substitute
I mean any question from there
from the committee on that some
of the changes in language or
sell I don't I don't know that
we actually did that so.
Yes we do if I if I could
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I'd like
to ask you about the the three
thousand limitation.
That you can expand to.
There's no maximum numbers show
for instance.
The south valley I thank you for
your would be a pretty
reasonable.
Spot if you if parts of it and
three thousand I guess it could
readily increased to a number
three times at do we do we
really intend to or do we think
we will ever have.
Rural libraries in a situation
where.
Just outside of Albuquerque just
outside of Santa Fe just outside
of Los crucis some point to
population could grow to a you
know a
Much larger number and they
really shouldn't be classified
as a rural labor.
Could you could you give me your
thoughts on that please Senator.
Madam chairman and and Senator
Griggs led to an amendment to
the Mr nine Martin a one way in
on this as well.
I think the definition that
we've we've included on page
Three.
Who are these rural libraries
that we're talking about here.
And that is to.
Munis ality.
First of all is funding a
located in an unincorporated
area then you would qualify as
long as the population it serves
as less than three thousand
but it's in a municipality is
only small towns that would
qualify so if the south valley.
or legalization unity near
Albuquerque suddenly guns got
enveloped by a population the.
Senator the you know you got
incorporated into this is the
the agency in the city that it
would no longer qualify the this
way I read it because
it would it would
No longer we definition of what
we mean by rural library but in
that event of the municipality
would be expected to be the one
that provided the library
services as they do for for
their their citizens Mr mark
speak to that because it's it
does pose an interesting
question.
Well right now so the south
valley wouldn't qualify because
they are part of the Albuquerque
library system pretty much all
of the libraries it did qualify
right now fifty one we're a
libraries are in small towns and
there's only two of them that I
think that are close to
Large municipalities elder
rattle of the State tests in
both of those have larger
populations but the indictment
included them because they are
five oh one see three libraries
million municipality to support
them so All I Want C. three
libraries said there's about
fifteen of them throughout the
state and essentially all of
them have to raise all their
funds through local donations
and foundation grants so so we
thought it was important to
include all five oh one see
three libraries regardless of
the population we don't have any
other funding sources but those
are the only two that I can
think of right now that are even
close to larger municipalities
Yes okay we can get a is not too
far from Espanola but I don't
think they'll be enveloped by
Espanola.
At I I can't really think of any
other ones that are near large
towns and and madam chair and
and and Senator the the
community of chaparral down in
southern New Mexico is
unincorporated.
Hey John include right part of
Dona ana and Otero counties and
has a population that some
people estimated as high as
twenty five thousand people.
But it is and incorporate and it
you H. you know it's one of
those you might want to want to
think about to chaparral
They have very very limited very
limited business community down
there so they have very few
places where they generate gross
for she staff from.
But the the community is is
certainly unincorporated so I I
suppose.
That would that would fit you
your definition because it's
it's unincorporated AV even
though its size is much greater
than three thousand.
Madam chairman and senator exam
believe you're you're absolutely
right cause on incorporated and
has no means of of supporting
and sells the library and I'm
not sure there is one is our one
there Mr name are.
There is a bit let's say
somebody started a library at
the local
community center or church or
something in that in the
developed into one that would be
interested in being part of this
endowment fund
that might be a community where
we would where we would see in
the future library developed as
long as it's unincorporated
would be eligible.
To participate in this element.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you senator Representative
Madrid has been working on
different things with libration
chaparral.
She she was elected so I don't I
don't know if there actually is
one for sure or he's trying to
get one or expand one or or what
it is but I think it would be
something really good to to look
into more to see what might be
what might be going on because
at that's just a unique place in
our in our state in an old co
chair on Dona ana county's is a.
Is growing maybe faster than any
any part of our state.
Show will we say that it's it's
a tough tough thing when you've
got a community or grouping of
people that size but it was not
incorporate so thank you madam
chair and thank senator.
Thank you senator Greg Senator
harm you thank you madam
chairwoman so what I'm reading
of this new bill is if once
identified as a rural library
then if the population grows
over three thousand it will
remain a rural library correct.
Madam chairman and and senator
how to me absolutely you got it
right on the nose.
It's the the one thing I want to
talk about our rural libraries
in my district serve as a
lifeline to people in the
community and so we've seen
during the pandemic we've seen.
People of each community is the
rural library to apply for
unemployment like Mr name
artists that we've seen children
who don't have access to the
internet come to rural libraries
so that they can access the
internet so they don't fall
behind of the virtual classroom
and so there's eight libraries
of my district alone that would
qualify and this qualification
means a lot for these community
is because right now these
community libraries a rural
libraries try to work with
counties to get money and
counties don't have much revenue
flow coming to support rural
libraries and because of what
rural libraries Judy our
constituents and the support
that they provide I will stand
behind this bill and thankful
for it for your hard work on
that Senator and thank you Mr
network for your comments and I
understand how important rural
libraries are to rural New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you senator meal we have
any further discussion on the
substitute bill.
I do have some concerns senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
So I know there's several
definitions that flowed when we
talk about federal funding and
not any kind of funding that
comes through when we talk about
rural and the most recent one
that I've heard was frontier.
and how are we addressing that
area that sits where there is no
library if that something was
going to be established so we're
saying there's no bottom but the
ceiling is three thousand.
Madam chairman and and of.
Members of the committee that
question is an excellent one and
and and we tried to make
provisions for develop.
Developing in the future.
In communities where there is
nothing right now but there may
soon be and so there is a
provision in the endowment Act
itself.
For the state library and to be
able to use some of the funds in
the in the endowment fund.
For the the actual assistance to
communities in putting together
whatever it'll take to get a
library started and maybe defer
to either Mr nomarch or to the
state library and on that issue
but I think you're you're making
a good point and that is an
there are going to be in the
future frontier communities for
nothing existed of the they may
very well want to participate in
this program in the future.
Okay.
And.
Excuse me I think Mr.
Something to that.
Yes okay go ahead Mr line item I
am working with state library
and You Like It night madam
chair members include the thank
you
we are working and and
guidelines for communities like
chaparral or smaller communities
to access grant funds through
the endowment to is actually
establish libraries so that is
part of the this part of the
original bill.
Thank you Mr line might and I
mean we've seen a couple bills
where definitions our.
Our issue.
So would you say this definition
the rural libraries is more
state or is it federal.
Let me know what what are we
using to to define exactly it
this is this madam chair members
committee this is the state
this has nothing to do with the
federal government or any of
their death Committee wins
Fifty three thousand mark we our
goal was to get fifty million
dollars into the endowment two
million for each library there's
three and three million dollars
in it right now so we have a
long way to go and we were
thinking that that was a
reasonable goal in there were
about fifty libraries that we're
three thousand or less so the
number is somewhat arbitrary I
would be some say it be able to
increase as the endowment
increases as the Legislature
puts more money into it I'd love
to see the population
Well in maybe some David and
support all the libraries in the
state but that was kind of in
arbitrate number that we chose
at the beginning to start this
process.
We are creating a definition
based on the need we're making
the money fit or.
It seems that we're.
Creating something and you know
we're kind of setting a
precedent here as we move with
we put is this is passed and as
we move forward that's going to
have to it consistently as long
as it's in there so that's why
I'm just trying to make sure
that what we establishing here
is something that is concrete
but it seems like we're trying
to create a definition to meet
the needs of who we are trying
to find
which is you know I understand
we're trying to reach as much as
reach out as much as we can but
is it submit this doesn't sound
make it sound like at a good way
to go around it that is all I
have I don't know if you wish to
respond.
I think you're absolutely right
into we we we took the existing
situation in the state where
there were about fifty I think
there actually were forty six
when we started and and and and
and and others.
Actually there were more than
that in some back out because
they have plenty of money there
is some down and in the oil
patch some libraries and special
and and set up by the wealthy
donors the the chose not to
participate in this program but
but basically we took the
existing situation in the state
and trying to come up with a
definition that would that would
cover them and make sure that
that there was a way of of of in
the future adding to that number
yeah if it occurred but it's a
unique definition just for this
bill.
Thank you senator and senator
Shendo in New Mexico should on
the subject.
Thank you madam chair a Senator
charities of penal I know that
tribes are eligible as tribal
libraries and so forth what is
the number right now that are
participating in the in the
libraries program do you have
that number yes Mr line marked
as you just proved provided me
with a listing Mr nine more.
Madam chair members of the
committee there are nineteen
tribal library statewide in ten
of them under this definition
would qualify for the
entitlement it's all many of
those are like Pueblo libraries
or Navajo chapters or Apache do
we have those ready what Navajo
chapter library twenty own.
I don't believe any other Navajo
chapter library Senator that
most of the rest of pueblos okay
yeah I know I was familiar with
the the Tory on because they've
been working on that for for for
some time and so forth so the
tribes are all tribes are
eligible under in on this grant
program as well if they
established a library yes okay
thank you.
Thank you Senator Shendo
anything further said Sen Jerry
Ortiz Y. Pino on the substitute.
Madam chairman of
that that does some very good
discussions thank you for the
questions.
Thank you senator Ortiz Y. Pino
and
so we had discussion on the
substitute for Senate bill.
Two seventy three and.
What is the will of the
committee.
a motion for the past Senator
Shendo.
I'm sorry.
The motion Ford two passed by
Senator Shendo in the second by
Senator Hermio on the committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy eight Rebecca would you
please call the roll two seven
three these folks are two
seventy.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo.
Yes Senator had a meal yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is for do pass
on committee substitute two
seven three.
Okay thank you Senator Katie
Pino thank you madam chairman
and thank you committee members
very good discussion.
Thank you and we got Senate bill
two seventy eight state Indian
child welfare act Senator Shendo
and see if we they can do we
have everyone ready for Senate
bill two seventy eight that
witnesses.
Madam chair members of the
committee I believe all of the
expert witnesses are on the team
called it that.
Okay and Senator Shendo would
you explain the bill.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you members of the
committee of the Senate bill two
seventy eight.
Of just explain a little bit for
those members that are new to
the committee and of course
maybe new to this bill in
nineteen seventy eight Congress
passed the Indian child welfare
act in recognition.
Of a.
Of the political status of the
Indian tribes and in the state
as well as tribal members and
the two of the more prominent of
I guess the.
In in the act is the.
Of the created a minimum
standard.
For the protection of of of of
of Indian children in the
welfare system.
Establish really to protect the
best interest of Indian children
and to promote the stability and
security of Indian tribes and
families but establishment of
these minimum standard federal
standards from the removal of
Indian children from their
families and the placement of
such a foster or adoptive homes
which will reflect the unique
values of Indian children.
The reason why Congress passed
as law was that
it was in response to the
overwhelming a high number of
Indian children in that were
being forcibly removed from
their families and tribal
communities nationwide so in
response to that the tribe's
really pushed hard for Congress
to to pass this bill so what
Senate bill seventy eight is
what we're trying to do here is
to strengthen our own state of
the Indian child welfare act.
Is really to bring it up to up
to date I think in New Mexico we
have a rip very unique of.
In on state in Mexico is very
unique that you know we still
have a very strong.
Indian tribes of our language
and culture in and we certainly
want to reflect and continue to
protect our children that are
caught up in the system to
ensure that that that their
needs as Indian children are
being protected and their
interests are also taking care
of if they find themselves in in
in the welfare or foster system.
Of with that I have couple of
expert witnesses that that I
would like to yield to of
the Jacqueline of adults who is
with the pueblo this letter she
is the the chair or president of
the New Mexico Indian child
welfare a consortium made up of
of any people that working with
the tribe's I also have the
governor of to lock ship walkie
Pueblo that that would like to
make a statement and then we
also have other I believe
secretary Blaylock is also on on
as well as
Other members of the C. why the
staff Cindy are gone who's the
attorney said the achievers of
Donal answer Seneal and others
that are on if we have any
specific questions relating to
this bill but but what I wanted
to do a secretary I know what
talk a little bit about it there
was some proposed amendments to
the committee and I believe
those were able to come in with
the a twenty four hour
you know a time frame and I'm
not sure of all the committee
members
receive those so I'd like to
move those amendments of before
we actually get on to the bill
so that we would have a an
amended bill if there's no
objections.
Are there any objections from
committee.
No well I'm let me make sure
with Rebecca.
Yeah.
Madam chair we did receive that
amendment in time and we have it
here and we'll projected on the
screen at this time that is
what.
Yes and it's been sent to all
the members.
Yes madam chair I it was sent
out yesterday.
It basically is to a lot of the
tecnico
of the kind of a clean up and
and inserting a Senator of new
sections and then just reading
numbering and so forth so it
it's it's pretty straightforward
so I don't know if any of the if
maybe one of the Jacqueline.
if you're on with my expert
witness maybe you can speak to
those a little bit about why
those were
important inclusion into to this
bill.
I can't see on my screen.
She and.
Thank you
madam chair members of the
committee I I would like to turn
it over to my colleague said the
air gone with the children youth
and families department on that
general counsel to best answer
these questions as it relates to
the amendments.
Thank you.
Speaker on my screen it she
admitted.
Thank you very much Madam chair
Senator Shendo members of the
committee my name Cindy are gone
I'm with the office of general
counsel with an assistant
general counsel with the
children youth and families
department in regards the
amendment summary of the
amendments include a change to
the definition of an Indian
child it expanded federal
definition going down the page
the other things that it does do
that if up on active efforts in
regards to providing notice so
the other ones that are just
remembering I'm not going to go
through that if that's okay with
it with the committee of the
schools who was the the the
changes number and if that if
that's okay.
Expander any objections by the
committee
are there any objections by the
committee I can't see the whole
committee.
Thank.
Okay you may.
Thank you and someone continue
some sorry that I'm looking to
the side and not looking for but
I have my laptop here which has
it expanded and bigger font so I
could see it better thank you in
regards to the the investigation
during investigation period the
the the bill does allow for the
department to note
to get involved at an early
stage however the department
supporting services with Indian
child's tribe before taking it
the child into custody that's a
new amendment the bill doesn't
mention that the the to get the
child the tribe involved prior
to taking the child into custody
and this is done early on that
the investigations stages in
addition it provides that the
department shall have the burden
of proof of making sure if to
act efforts for more culturally
appropriate remedial services to
the parents before removal so
that is done at the
investigation stage before the
child was removed from the home
in addition the the the section
city
three C. active efforts in
coordinating services again to
prevent the taking of an Indian
child into custody and this one
basically
The goal is to prevent that
break up of the Indian family by
providing services I providing
services specifically stating to
prevent removal and
documentation of those services
that are provided that's not
stated in the current bill in
relating to
The state for number five.
Documentation in court as to
those active efforts that were
made by the department of
specifically documenting to the
court and specifically what was
done in regards to those active
efforts why those active efforts
were followed or not followed in
that documentation presented to
the court.
And then the others all
remembering in the striking
letters going to number eleven
number ten
so that if there is reason to
for the for those active efforts
to be unsuccessful in regards to
instead of just stating that
they're on successful that that
quality and that the the the
department of has to note in the
petition motion or document of
the court why those efforts were
successful and successful.
In addition the amendment to
allow for the department to
document the quality and
quantity of the of the.
Quality of the services so that
it's just not like we provided
this and so they have to do
become more specific in
providing what kind of quality
services were done and how that
was done specifically.
In addition it adds language to
the current bill to hold of the
department Morris responsible
for establishing services for
parents with may have barriers
of reunification so if you have
a parent who may have superiors
are unique to the situation the
department has to go above and
beyond to provide those services
and to to help eliminate those
services so that reunification
can
And then and and number fifteen
in regards to those active
efforts any other efforts that
are appropriate to the Indian
trial circumstances as to what
may be included specifically in
regards those active efforts in
ways those out.
In addition of the qualified
expert witness is required for
testimony for adjudication
hearing as well as the
termination of parental rights
hearing it identify specifically
that the department cannot serve
as a qualified expert witness.
And it also indicates on the
left and the number eighteen
that adds relevant sections if
they are violated the subject
sections can be used to
invalidate in action initial
bill only list a couple of days
but it lists all those areas of
we're at all those efforts have
to be made in order for the
termination of parental rights
or the action to take place and
if none of those are complied
with specifically according to
those different sections then it
would invalidate the the
preceding invalidate the action.
And expands on that initial
definite of the initial sections
that were stated in the current
bill.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr gone for
that.
Thank you thank you senator
should know thank you.
The witnesses.
So the amendment us during the
discussion on the amendment.
From committee and I can't see
everyone so.
Race.
With there's no further
discussion on the amendment
that's the will of the
committee.
I like to move the
Amendment.
Second.
So we have a motion by Senator
Shendo to move the amendment and
seconded by sector Senator
Griggs.
Rebecca.
We call the roll.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez yes Senator
Shendo.
Yes Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes.
We can the.
We have the amendment for Senate
bill two seventy eight.
And we will go to discussion
Senate bill two seventy eight
once amended.
With the.
Public comment
excuse me madam chair.
Yes I have expert witnesses they
want to speak to the bill before
we go to public comment.
Okay we'll go to the what car
was on the on the amendments and
so forth so okay thank you thank
you madam chair members of the
committee we do have an amended
bill at this point so I I'd like
to
the turn the time over to a.
Of the staff in the office with
the New Mexico in the child
welfare Association and then
after her remarks governor to
lots of what.
What
Speaking.
Hello.
If I could have Jacqueline
Elche.
Thank you senator madam chair
members of the committee.
We want having a good morning
from the Pueblo of this let us
thank you for the opportunity to
listen to us today I'm a little
bit of introduction on how this
group forms to create this piece
of legislation
first and foremost the the
safety and well being of our
Indian children is deeply
important to tribes our children
are sacred our children are the
future of our tribes and nations
and the best interests has led
this very unique and different
development of a state Indian
child welfare act this process
is primarily based on the.
On the lived experiences of
children and families very
similar to the experience you
will soon hear from a lot of
Pojoaque he's governor.
Joseph to Lachey historically
non natives have forced pre
written policies in Paul and
practices into tribal
communities that they feel is
best for us.
This process the system and
practice was not working for
tribal communities children
youth and families department
respected on government to
government relationship and
follow the lead the community
and field experts of the twenty
three tribal.
Of the twenty three sovereign
tribes and nations in New Mexico
the expansions beyond the
federal act come from tribal and
pueblo if we're workers tribal
leaders communities and families
and CYFD to create this bill
focusing on ending communities
who are most impacted by this
piece of law.
With this we are expanding
provisions and protections to
maintain and preserve our Indian
culture and identity which is
crucial to the survival to the
survival of our eating people
and our communities we think the
state of New Mexico for allowing
this historical process to move
forward by letting those who are
most impacted.
Be at the table and provide the
over all a recommendation and
solution that is best where are
you communities.
Senator Shendo madam madam chair
members of the committee thank
you.
Thank you Jacqueline I would
like to turn attention over to
the governor a lot you please.
Good morning madam chair and
members the committee has is
because we're in our our culture
just open up with a quick quick
prayer try to keep it to less
than forty five minutes as I
told Senator Shendo earlier
we are in the Senator total of
eight hundred ninety one of the
home will meet with the you know
I'm sorry.
Just in time we had called me
being be it on the LFC opiates
this on going to see part of
this watch very many Oahu Hachem
circadian.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning again I I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak of thank you thank you for
the opportunity to speak about
the Indian child welfare act the
state Indian child welfare act
from the perspective.
Of this Indian child was given
an opportunity because of the
federal act.
Although my story may seem
unique it is not not rural
Indian country.
My name is Joseph rental lodging
was originally born with the
name March yet we're still have.
And the biological son of Angie
the idea of the put local walkie
tribal member who was orphaned
at an early age due to her
mother dying for tuberculosis.
I am the biological brother I'm
gonna be used in murder trial
keep the brown.
And the biological brother of
Lorenzo Barker who lost his life
to diction a little over three
years ago.
I'm the biological brother for
older siblings were not as
fortunate as me having been
placed in homes outside of the
Pueblo walkie.
They were adopted out of prior
to the passage of the nineteen
seventy eight Indian child
welfare act.
To this day I still search for.
I'm grateful adopted son of John
demo to lodging my mother being
a former governor of the what
local walkie.
I'm a father I beautiful grown
daughters and husband to a wife
that I've been with since high
school.
I am currently the governor the
public walking and served in
leadership for over eleven years
Note now six years as governor.
Before that I served for many
years in law enforcement.
Today I'm here to share a little
bit about my story how the
Indian child welfare act
affected and benefit in my life.
As mentioned earlier I have four
other biological biological
siblings were born prior to
nineteen seventy eight.
They were not given the
opportunity that I was very
gratefully given thanks to the
act when I was born in Morris
Illinois nineteen eighty one.
We look at my perspective get it
will not mention the hospital
that I was born and because I
was born well my mother was
serving time in prison in
Illinois.
The biological son have an
orphan native American mother
and create more veteran of
German is Scandinavian Senator
hence the beer.
Okay.
In nineteen eighty four eighty
five my great uncle Jake
governor the public walk at the
time many of you will remember
in reach out to my parents Joan
dealt a lot to us they would be
willing to take in a child was
soon to be given up for adoption
outside of the problem this he
was able to find placement for.
Yet been reached because of the
nineteen seventy Indian child
welfare act which was passed
less than three years before I
was born.
I was lucky enough that they
said yes and I was flown back to
New Mexico I remember the flight
did you leave thank you still
remember running into the open
arms of my sister and my parents
and now my new family.
As we drove from Albuquerque
back home to walkie I remember
looking out of the windows and
see the mountains those which
I'd never seen before.
NET we knew I was home.
Only recently after reviewing by
adoption paperwork that is a
four year old not only have the
cognitive ability of the two
euro due to neglect.
To a certain extent my wife
still believes that I have the
cognitive ability of a two year
old but that's neither here nor
there.
So how does one go from a four
year old with severe cognitive
abilities to the governor of the
tried.
And how does this pertain to the
subject at hand.
Hey to Senate sound cliche but
it did take an entire tribe to
raise me.
After much research and studying
I found that some of the answers
as to why it was able to thrive.
Nancy very year the author of
the book primal wound a book on
the effects of adoption on
children rights.
Young children are exquisitely
attuned to their senses.
Before we begin to use intellect
to discern this from that we
depend upon our senses much like
other mammals do.
We know well the first five
senses sight sound touch taste
and smell.
When the senses are familiar we
feel safe.
If they are different distance
alarms to our body.
As you can see our biological
senses of familiarity with our
culture and our language has a
deep impact on a child's ability
to thrive.
So why does it matter so much
that you need children be placed
back in their own respective
pueblo.
What does this have to do with
the Indian child welfare act.
In European cultures are brought
in widely identifiable
throughout America.
You can find the English and
Spanish are spoken to coast to
so coast it's awesome and
Christianity are the most widely
practiced religions in the
United States currently.
Can find Hispanic and various
other you European cuisines at
restaurants in nearly every
American city what you will not
fund is table being spoke in any
other city or country.
Our culture is hundreds of
thousands of times more narrow
than that of other cultures.
What you'll find is that our
customs our prayers are not
practice in any other place
other than a few specific levels
and this holds true for each of
our problems and tried here in
the state of New Mexico.
We are in danger culture a
culture so close to it the
extension that if we do not
continue to protected by
protecting the children belong
to this culture.
It will be lost in just a few
generations.
We have substantially more cases
of children placement not
because we're a lesser human
beings or lesser species.
It is because to this day we
suffer from the consequences of
historical trauma.
We still suffer from the
religious oppression and the
physical sexual emotional and
spiritual abuse associated with
people whose entire world in
thousands of years and
generations of culture were
uprooted by European conquest.
Again we are an endangered
culture so why should you
support the state in in child
welfare Act.
Well so few things our state is
a large population of native
Americans and others.
And even though there's federal
law regarding Indian child
welfare you still lack of
clarity from the state's
standpoint and a lack of
training of from the state
resource standpoint for our
tribes.
The more biologically familiar
children are with your true
genetic roots the more likely
they are to thrive.
We are in danger culture that
will be depleted to nothing
within just a few generations if
we do not do something about it.
My questions to you as lawmakers
is what are not be diligent to
help break the cycle of
historical drama as it has been
broken for me.
And for my children.
We're not be diligent to Care
legacy as lawmakers of healing
to historical trauma by giving
our children a chance to stay
within their biologically
familiar tribal rather than
adopting a passive and cynical
view of it closed to extinct
culture.
We're not be diligent to develop
impasse legislative policy that
protects our native children
rather than allow historical
trauma to permeate into the
future.
I just want your legacy will be
what will your children member
of you we need to make a
difference in the lives native
children or we are here to the
best of knowledge mint of the
issue without taking action.
As with all laws and policies is
important that we.
establish a foundation from
which we can build off of.
The state of the law will be
that foundation that we can
build off of.
As we move into the future will
be refined and Amanda and
redeveloped and improved.
But today folks we have an
opportunity to develop that
foundation and so I plea to all
of the to consider this is bill
medical do you all understand
you know a little bit from our
standpoint for the standpoint of
a child who's had a was raised
in a beneficial home because of
the the Indian child welfare act
I do pray that the you know.
We continue to be proactive in
helping our children however we
do know that foster children
will continue to be had and so I
want to be there to make sure
that I'm doing my best to
protect these children as I was
protected when I was a child so
with that being said I will hop
a appreciate it Senator Shendo
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for that.
Thank you governor so with that
madam chair that concludes our
of introduction of the bill in
our in our expert witness so
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Rebecca do we have any
public comment.
Madam chair members of the
committee at there is a lot at.
Public comment on the bill and
we have a number of people on
the meeting with that.
Thank.
I believe in opposition to the
bill with more the all of our
star.
Go ahead Marci.
Please I'm not in opposition I
am I'm.
I am for this bill.
If you amendments my name is
Marcy Oliver Starr the proud
member of the nation of
Oklahoma.
Are currently.
Eight children through foster
care and adoption through foster
care.
We are.
We journey with no intention
we're really desire to you
wanted to foster L. G. B. T. Q.
plus teams which we have created
other plans I believe in the
Indian child welfare act and
I'll continue to fight for our
children I would like to ask a
few questions and respectfully
request that this bill.
With a few amendments.
I believe that these questions
will need to be addressed how
many children are brought into
care each year through the staff
throughout the state these
children how many are will stay
in state foster care when or if
the tribe chooses not to take
jurisdiction.
Three.
Children are placed referred
homes.
For how many of our relatives
homes and how many are non
religious problems.
I foster families are if we're
preferred in the state and all
these homes how many are
relatives homes and how many are
non religious problems the
reason I ask this is because the
faster conference a few years
ago I asked state officials how
many foster homes that were in
the state as well as in
Bernalillo county only answer
about Bernalillo county one.
That can be possible because our
home is home and they said yes
you're the only one.
A detailed and realistic plan to
recruit and retain native foster
family.
The definition of the different
channels discussed and Secretary
Blalock I believe said that the
definition predictive can't for
that built maxed the definition.
Here's.
Where.
Thank you Marci madam chair
members of the committee knack
we have Dr Evelyn land Blanchard
independent consultant.
At the land go ahead of before
we the flow at limits are are we
give them two minutes or how
many minutes are you given the
so that they know they can get
the remarks within that time
frame.
That.
Madam chair.
Yes Senator they've been
notified through the agenda that
they do have two minutes when
they do come out to public
comment and then we also
notified again when Nathan does
bring them into the room okay
are notify twice thank you for
that thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee at.
Thank report of the bill we have
doctor album land planted.
Evelyn.
Evelyn I believe you are muted.
Every.
More I think you're good okay
all right a good morning as
chairman Pinto and and the
Senator Shendo.
My name is one point three.
I.
Participated.
From nineteen seventy so and
today in the development of
action H. R..
I strongly support of the state
of I see W. R..
I am I going to use my time St
Louis to of section to section
two AA asked do that for sure.
I'm.
When.
How.
Well for act was passed in
In Congress and seventy eight.
We ended up with not eight
hundred and.
In appropriations.
And as.
We need to which are title to
the family programs.
The.
Active effort.
has been confined to over the
year to.
Procedural requirements.
and just.
At because that was not funding
for the family development
program which not
Tension to child welfare and
social work services development
really within the law.
I I.
Urged the
Urged that job.
There B. I did there be a
discussion and intention to act
efforts.
The.
I'm.
Services.
That are provided.
Thank you.
The madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have Donna can product
with the Pueblo of to do K.
Donna go ahead.
Good morning.
Thank you madam chair.
And members of the committee.
Thank you Senator Shendo for
sponsoring Senate bill two
seventy eight I am done I can
turn the and and and child
welfare case manager for the
public to sticky and they tribal
member of Cochiti pueblo I am
also the vice president of the
New Mexico tribal ending
children.
I wholeheartedly support Senate
bill two seventy eight we are
the voice of our native American
children our children are the
sustainability of our native
tribes.
I urge you to pass Senate bill
two seventy eight thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee and thank you Senator
Shendo.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have any way to Akron.
Social services director and
interim health director with the
public about the Anna.
And we're acting go ahead.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am here today on
behalf of the Pueblo of Santa
Ana to express our support for
SB two seventy eight.
we think it is important bill
and we would urge you to support
and pass this bill as well we
would also like to thank Senator
Shendo for sponsoring the bill
and thank.
Secretary Blaylock and his
wonderful staff for all the help
and support.
And work to get and
collaborative work that has gone
into producing this bill thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have Kandace Littlefoot
with gold futures of New Mexico.
Yeah.
On it on the litigation eight
Austin actually a Kandace
Littlefoot in chapter
good morning chairman members of
the committee and so my
relatives my name is Kandace
Littlefoot I'm a member of the
dhinac nation tribe and I'm a
mother I'm also a policy
associate with both teachers
formally known as young women
United a nonprofit organization
by and for women and people of
color here in New Mexico we we
policy change research place
please.
Organization and culture ship
and we fully support Senate bill
two seventy eight we know the
importance of keeping our
children safe and within their
homes and communities in order
to flourish and grow we also
recognize years in practice of
systemic racism and how it plays
within the child welfare system
and the generational impact has
made on our tribal communities
say if it will hold the state
accountable when it Indian child
is in their custody and
ultimately provides the tribal
nations the opportunity to
protect their children in
multiple ways we would like to
thank Senator Shendo for
bringing this important
legislation forward and we urge
the members of this committee to
support this vital piece of
legislation thank you for your
time.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have Stephanie thou of
our general counsel with the New
Mexico Indian Affairs
Department.
Good morning madam chair Pinto
committee members my name is
Stephanie Salazar a general
counsel of the Indian Affairs
Department we stand in support
of Senate bill two seventy eight
clarity on the process and
collaboration with tribal
nations is critical and we
believe it Senate bill two
seventy eight addresses these
concerns and we urge your
support thank you and thank you
to the sponsors and everyone who
worked diligently on getting
this legislation here today
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee next we have Jean Act
you would think with special ed
with the victory at packet
behavioral health department
social services equity program
Gina.
Thank good morning got to have
been my name is Judy that
Cheney's what and I'm a member
of the and then nation or Navajo
Nation and I am the if the
specialist for the hickory
Apache nation here and also in
New Mexico and I am in strong
support of.
Senate bill two seventy eight
this legislation protects our
children and families and.
Within our communities as well
and insurers are tribal
sovereignty I urge you senators
to support this bill thank you
very much for your time.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Next we have Rochelle Compton
echoing chair.
With okay okay going to.
Morning madam chair Senator
committee members my name is
Richelle Thompson I am the co
chair on behalf of all can we
can and I fully support of the
bill to seventy eight and I act
encourage you to pass this and
support this this is a crucial
piece of legislature that needs
to be going through on behalf of
the children and our tribal
communities and this with this
protection will provide
you know.
The overall greatest protection
for our families and our tribal
communities so I would just like
to say thank you
and all your support in this
matter thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee next we have three
better.
Speaking on behalf of okay being
gay Santa Clara pueblo Zuni
pueblo is let it slide below and
type of the Pueblo.
Good good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is drew setter registered
lobbyists for the public is that
okay when gay sent late base
Santa Clara and Juni I really
can't say any more specifically
than governor's lot you did in
his testimony
my all of my clients stated
support the bill we want to
thank the senator and the
secretary for all their hard
work on this we urged committee
to about the legislation thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee back we have.
Right abate them now what.
It provides visitation and faith
exchange program project
coordinator.
And Pueblo of it but I tribal
member.
Good morning he will be one hand
but my name is ray as the beta I
am the project coordinator for
the gate was supervised
visitation and safe exchange
program out just let us awful
services I'm a tribal member
from the public and I
wholeheartedly wholeheartedly
support Senate bill two seventy
eight thank you madam chair
members of the committee and
special thank you to Senator
Shendo for sponsoring this bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We also get the request to speak
Graham amber yeah brief current
tribal court your manager with
the pueblo of Sandia equip
Department.
Merioles back.
Nicole pan pan.
And what lock with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico.
But I think the honest with Ms
consulting.
Maria Elena phone protective
service worker and a quick
coordinator included member of
the New Mexico tribal Indian
welfare consortium works without
public postal services.
Caroline Daly.
The problem is let at social
services equity actor.
As well as Britain COVID.
Rep from clapping gyro.
Pueblo of Pojoaque tribal
treasurer.
All of intended strong support
of this legislation and that
concludes that public comment.
Thank you mate then and now we
will go to the committee Senator
Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator Shendo and in the you
know it certainly sounds like
there's a lot of.
Need for the bill I was reading
the the FIR Senator and there
are some some issues that pop up
that you know need to probably
be addressed in the in the bill
I don't know that the.
Amendment got it and it's kind
of hard to bounce around to be
sure.
But for instance the FIR talks
about thank you F. H..
And which says it act efforts
are a keystone of the ICWA.
And it's clear the bill is
intended to expand on our expand
on federal requirements but
there's there's a lack of
uniformity.
And so it it pretty much lays
out that you need to look at the
act efforts under the definition
section the need to looking
section thirteen paragraph she
that expanded but it's only for
that section.
Sure you need to be certain
about what it is that you you
want to clearly do.
then it it talks about and and
one of the things that is.
N. or is it is a.
Is a concept in the law as
opposed that reason did not all
you should know or you should
have reason to know but then it
says that that gets watered down
in the.
In the bill to reason to believe
not reason to know all and so it
defines where they shot were
that is section thirty six
section forty one section forty
two
it it just appears that there
are things that we need to.
You know we need to catch in
there and clean up and make sure
the bills doing all those things
that
That you intended it doesn't it
doesn't look like Senator and
and madam chair that those were
necessarily difficult things is
just you've got on a test short
little bill here.
Of that it's not hard to you
don't have things that don't
match up.
but I would I would suggestion
that you go go back through the
FIR and you're at your folks
look AT that catch those things
show your your you know if we're
gonna do this thing that we come
back with a with one it's
probably written to address the
things that you wanted to amend
and then the issues in mass and
your gets to where you are you
have an amendment H. over two
pages long you may want to take
to the next committee a
committee show up if you have
some of the changes because we
start making the the number then
much pretty pretty lengthy our
research center on again you
know these are these are things
that the need for more job
usually import.
You and.
Senator Padilla we've worked
hard to come up with some things
that that address important
issues and in the.
In these communities.
And I I believe I'm yeah I need
to support she in that but I
also want you to know that there
are things it I know you want to
get right so I just encourage
you to to go back through this
FIR looking sheet where to catch
in and and make sure that you
address the things either that
the other rider the wrong in the
F. I. R. but that's a that's the
suggestion that I would make you
Senator and I am thank you madam
chair and thank you senator for
bringing which obviously
important bill.
Thank you senator grace for
those recommendations and we
will certainly of look at those
and and your comments and of
well I was just thinking about
you know just created a a
substitute bill for the next
committee it'll be Judiciary and
so they'll do a lot of the clean
up as well so so what we're
trying to clean it up as much as
we can before we I believe the
next this Judiciary so for so
your comments US senator.
Thank you Senator Shendo thank
you Senator Griggs.
The elect members.
I'd like to make a few comments
during this pandemic I did
somebody dropped the ball
whether it be the tribal courts
whether be CYFD in which a child
interstate California had to be
removed and sent back over there
in a domestic violence
situation.
The tribal court did not answer
CYFD did not answer Health would
date the it is placed everyone
the mother was incarcerated
during the holidays it was a
very disappointing story to hear
and also after coming into the
session and learning the day
before that was not resolved and
still an issue I reached out and
From other lawyers that deal
with it where.
We were in the fall.
That the tribe did not follow
through that the state did not
follow through.
And it.
The time.
I think that some time limits
that didn't need to be
incorporated into the bill
especially when we don't have an
answer right away for the child
and the parent.
you're doing the best you can
and next thing you know you call
around you even they've been
contacted DNA and DNA receive
state funding.
Nobody held anybody accountable
they just kept passing the Buck
along.
And then I get called in.
And they try to reach out to and
it didn't get resolved and on
and on and on and I believe
they're still in the situation
now which is very discerning
especially when we talk about a
child and a native American
child and the domicile and the
child even being on the
reservation and even having a
mother to be extradited to
California.
I understand we are in a
pandemic.
But when those calls go
unanswered and that's just one
case.
I would be surprised if there
are more out there.
So when we talk about
Defining the native American
child I think that really is
something that we have to start
with with all tribes income and
and green met about exactly at
what point and where are we
going to say this childhood say
American because the child that
Was involved in the situation
had a half parent that was not
native.
And you know where it's and I
think we're going to go into
that it is science now there's
technology out there.
We have people that are missing
murdered.
that are not identified but yet
we're asking the FBI to identify
them and even that we're saying
well written determination.
written by who we we have these
databases we have the census
that is drawn in which in in our
instance with the Navajo Nation
seem like it did not really
capture what was needed and we
cannot be relied upon.
We are also seeing that monetary
compensation is coming out in
which if you are a member of the
certain tried you will be
compensated in some sense for
being native American but how
much.
To what degree do we say you
know yes that is enough because
there will be
Some challenges to it by others
that especially those that are
non native was saying well.
Do you look native
how are we going to determine
that.
And in that instance
for the native American tribes
it's going to be determine
whether you are you need of
enough to be considered native
American.
So it I think this is a great
bill but I think there's a
couple other bills to that are
really great I'm surprised that
we are not coming all to the
table with that.
Each bill does have some
implications
and will have some effect on
each other.
If we passed one bill before the
other end and we're going to
have to come back and correct it
we talk about all of us being on
the same page and the bottom
line is helping the child.
About this is kind of what
we're.
This legislation.
The child is like the back end.
The front end of it.
Needs to be addressed to.
I don't.
Reading and seeing the data that
we have the highest rate of
native American children
than any other.
Ethnic group in the foster care
system of New Mexico should be
alarming.
We need to do something to
decrease that.
Whether it be parenting classes
or education for the child to
build their rights making sure
that we had advocacy that we
have lawyers that are really
there for that child that are
really knowledgeable about what.
And that was the problem with
what happened with this
situation I heard about whoever
handled that did not was not
knowledgeable about it it fell
into the wrong hands but
legislative reached out.
To the state of New Mexico they
reached out to the Navajo Nation
try to get an answer try to get
input nobody answered the call
all the way down to the judge
could you can be reached.
That is very discerning so
that's why I'm sticking to it
there has to be a time
constraint if nobody's going to
answer that
that's how we lose children.
So are we being one hundred
percent.
Column in what we are trying to
accomplish here.
But I think it does become
tedious it is a process that is
going to have to go all the way
down to finding some of these
words and holding to it so that
we do set a precedent to move
forward and specially when we
tie funding to many of the state
thank you Senator Shendo I don't
know if you want to respond to
that
with the judiciary right here is
a very interesting committee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for your comments I know that
the you know we can pass laws
but at the end of the day it's
to people that are on the ground
that are are implementing the
stains and and certainly we hope
that that they'll do the right
thing on behalf of our children
and we could pass a law but you
know if they're not a hearing to
it or do not comply with that
order taking this seriously
Alliance only so much we can do
is legislature's so hopefully
they can hold themselves
accountable for the work that's
ahead of them and to protect our
children's appreciate comments.
Thank you Senator and thank you
for bringing this bill forward
they're not more for the
comments by the committee
members what is the will of the
committee.
I motion for do passed.
I thank you.
The motion for do passed by
Senator Pentel and we have a
second by you and Senator Hermio
but could you please call the
roll Senator thanks.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is for it to
pass.
Thank you Senator and you have a
due pass for Senate bill two
seven eight one cemented thank
you Senator and thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you Senator Shendo and
thank you for all your expert
witnesses and everybody that
join you today we will move on
to Senate bill two oh nine which
is my bill native American Phil
funding Senator higher meal you
will be the chair thank you
thank you senator so Senator if
you want to present Senate bill
two oh nine at this time and if
you have any expert witnesses I
want to make sure that they're
on maybe that I heard expert
witnesses on.
At.
Members of the committee I'm
fortunately.
That neither of the minute that
the to be on the call.
And integration with them for
them let letting them know that
that the bill was coming up.
Madam chairwoman your expert
witnesses are gone are you fine
presenting without them.
Yes.
Perfect thank you.
Thank you so Senate Bill.
Two American bill funding is
just an extension to continue
the maintenance from them fund
grant and to move it into a
reoccurring funding so the
appropriation that's attached to
it four hundred fifty thousand
to the from the general fund to
the film division of the
economic development department
and it supports native American
filmmakers and native mouth with
native American film projects
they do go through a process
that is
The which they apply for the for
the fun and the last cycle are
the first that was the first
time they did that it was a
hundred thousand dollars that
was appropriated and they
received five thousand dollars
after a discussion with the with
the success of the project and
with the New Mexico film the.
After COVID are during that time
we saw a rise in the cost to for
these projects because of the
criteria to meet the COVID
standards as far as PPE and
having
certain people on the set as for
safety precautions.
To conduct their
Filming so that's why the
Appropration went from a hundred
thousand two hundred fifty
thousand I think they're still
probably gonna keep that the
same amount of applicants and we
had all kinds of applicants in
which they are we're starting
the project are trying to finish
up their project and the
different array of
Criteria and that they were
covering all the way from
educational to behaviors
it was a very good.
Our.
Demographic area widespread and
I think most of you are familiar
with the the first grand it was
the John Pinto.
Memorial grant plant.
But in the west and the
question.
Thank you senator before we go
to questions or comments from
the committee Nathan is there
anybody from the public who
wishes to comment.
Yes chair and made to hire me
and members of the committee
and.
On the call with we have three
you better.
Representing I authority.
You like to go ahead.
I'm not sure if you're having
technical issues there.
We also received a request from
at after the deadline prime but
you can say Fontana at.
All provision to indicate their
support for this bill and that
that it for request for public
comment.
Thank you Nathan before we move
on both will check with my time
just center your muted if you're
available now is your time for
public comment.
You might not be there at the
moment members of the committee
any comments or questions at
this time.
I
see no comments or questions
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Move effects of bricks which got
it.
Senator Griggs both on a do
passed I hear a second second
Senator Shendo second by Senator
Shendo is Rebecca we can please
have a roll call.
Thanks yes.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yes is for it to
pass.
Legislation senator your your
Senate bill two oh nine goes on
to its next committee.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee and
Senator.
But at least you can take out
you can continue to chair the
next will be by.
Okay thank you we're not going
to move on to Senate bill two
eight four with Senator Ivy
Soto.
And so Senator if you are online
I see you and I are your expert
witnesses with you.
So from second states office is
present tense any technical
questions that may come up and
otherwise are generally I New
Mexico some very good Senator
you have the floor what what
German German madam chair
members of the committee.
So this panel is is simply doing
in alignment at this point in
terms of the our pick up
probably occasion Conservancy
districts are probably just
Conservancy district of
existence and Thomas and any
counties is a special district
that that under the provisions
of the recollection Act there
they they recognize that that
there are governing body members
should be opted not to join our
local election acts are it's
just that we're when we went
through and we have our of the
the conforming amendments are.
Frankly we work them because
they have their own section of
their own their own article on
as we were landing on the
various difference special
districts also from as they were
needed initially they were
created to have a separate
collection because they actually
and then they go to a judge in
order to have the judge not to
mention because they've already
actually gone to to let the
judge know that that there are
election code our with prostate
collection vote and and Services
and like I said this is simply
making the conformance that
bring them into compliance with
that and so with that I'd be
happy to stand for question.
Do you senator for we move
twenty questions maybe then is
there anybody on the on the
zoom.
From the at community with who
opposes or Chapin's.
Add care hire me out members of
the committee.
There was a at no request to
indicate either opposition or at
the point of this bill.
And and members of the committee
do you have any questions or
comments at this time.
Senator Griggs followed by
Senator son just.
Thank you Mr vice chair thank
you Senator Ivy Soto are there I
guess these are are should shoot
terms I think I read in that in
the bill there any any
overlapping issues that are that
are caused by that at all we do
where we gonna see guys whose
terms extended just a little bit
you know like we ran into on
some of the others are are are
they pretty much okay what what
we know about these guys.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee so are so often
provided no elections that one
options in our January of the
even numbered year historically
and in so and and then they take
office
used to be right remember when
when you're of local public
bodies are running elections
nobody really knows elections
taking place so second cast and
and so they time to take profits
just a few days later so this
would result in a six year term
is a reduction of about ten days
in our current terms of office
and now we're that we have a
conversation.
All.
Thank you madam vice chair
Mister vice chair and that and
thank you Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Senator Griggs would
not go to senator Sanchez.
Mr vice chair of center Socorro
thank you for bringing the bill.
a little bit on what Griggs
touched touched on.
first question is on the six
year they running six years now
our the current four years like
the other Conservancy districts
in the in New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair on Mr Mr
chairman and senator Sanchez
they are currently one six year
terms since nineteen thirty one
they've been running six year
terms.
My recollection although my what
was going on back in the early
thirties level has about.
The second question.
Mr of vice chair and senator
local second question
Is this just for the Conservancy
districts and Eddy County you
mention and a few other counties
are just across New Mexico.
Mr chairman and senator Sanchez
the R. chapter seven three
article one applies only to the
papers finally artesian
Conservancy district actually
they got left out by accident is
because the the the normal
casual articles
Which should not have been
amended Representative but every
now and then we've been finding
there's there are these are
special districts that have
their own separate article blast
through some kind of historical
idiosyncrasy and that was the
case in this particular
situation so that's this as such
right now it addresses only the
biggest on the occasion
Conservancy district Mr Chairman
answer such as when I had a
conversation about what's
emissions related to emergency
building that used to work for
as well as our Charlie which is
instruments of the state and.
This that is not included in
this bill I want to know that
are.
Conversations we just haven't
finalized the language and I
don't want to bring something
for that they have not agreed to
and
so so the the particular the
management rep to no member of
running Conservancy district are
quite unique and and so that's
that's where that's where we
will continue the conversation
on to see if we can get an
alignment in terms of some
language that can be brought
forth in a separate bill or as
an amendment but but like I
said.
The reason nothing's been
introduced in the other
situation is because
was conferred on not just
problem in terms
of the conceptual implants.
Thank you Mr vice chair thank
you Senator so thank you.
Thank you senator Sanchez would
now go to Senator Shendo.
Thank you a a chair and and
thank you senator chairman
I I just had a question I I know
that the.
You know I guess the name
artesian kind of throws me I'll
try to figure out is it related
because it's in Artesia or the
artesian wells in that area or.
What what's the I guess the the
reason for that artesian
conservatory and it's plural
districts are we talking about
Senator districts are we talking
about just one districts in
Artesia or in the region what
what's what's going on maybe
educate me a little bit is first
time I heard about this one
currently I'm Mr chairman and
and Senator Shendo sometimes
there's only one artisan
seventeen district in the state
it is named after all the
occasions that used to live in
the valley and I'm just joking
actually I think I believe in
ghosts addition wells are exist
they are Senator Griggs actually
may know a bit more about the
the history of of where
our teachers are our Armstrong
in in that region senses
District extends over into any
kind of I don't think you go all
the way into artesian Mexico I
don't think it's the artesian
wells okay so so Senator so so
you're so this bill only
corrects one conservative
district or is it because I know
that in the FIR it talks about
you know like districts or
server diem districts employer
side and all of it was a few of
them but it's just one.
Okay all right thank you thank
you senator.
Thank you any other questions or
comments.
Seeing what's the pleasure of
the committee.
I motion for do paths.
Motion by Senator Pinto for do
passed I hear a second second
Senator Shendo.
And I think Senator McKenna
beach she said does the second
by Senator McKenna if I could
have a roll call please.
Yes Senator McKenna yes to pass
senator Sanchez.
Senator distribute.
yes.
Senator Shendo yes Senator.
Well yes Senator Pinto.
Yes we have six yes is for a do
pass.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you senator thank you for
joining us today.
Now there's no other bills madam
chairman is there anything that
you'd like to bring up to the
committee.
Are any discussion of any of the
committee members.
You have a bill on the
institution's Act.
We believe that all the bills
that were referred to our
committee of what they're say
what we have on the agenda was
an update from the social work
institute the native back and
social work institute in New
Mexico highlands university
which is kind of really related
to all of those bills that are
coming at there was supposed to
be work done by New Mexico
highlands university to have
social workers
educated and anybody in that
field to to really come down to
the data and how it where it
plays into all of this to expand
the rules and have a better
understanding of it so that was
what we had on the agenda I was
thinking we might have some role
over today but we did not so
we're good to go and I.
Because we'll be introducing
introduction maybe some
introduction when state I don't
unless we really that will be
the only thing on the agenda for
Thursday very short I think up
to.
No more than an hour.
Thirty minutes to an hour for
that presentation starting at
nine so please join us and we
will see you on Thursday are
actually we'll see you on the
floor when state before are
there is a meeting Mr any thing
from the committee.
Rebecca do you have anything.
Madam chair that is all.
Thank you thank you for today
and we got our business done
have a great preparation for the
our meeting C..
