Session and that can be found at
the bottom of your screen under
re actions.
As and that is all madam chair.
Thank you and any announcements
from any of the committee
members but we begin.
You madam chair just to let you
know that Senator McKenna has
joined us on time.
Yes hi Senator McKenna good
morning thank you for joining us
okay Senator souls are you all
ready to go.
Yes madam chair I certainly am.
All right thank you and please.
Thank you and and madam chair I
have to say I love the the
beautiful rugs that you always
have for your backdrop of the
changing ones it's always nice
to to get to see a little
different patterns and different
things and all and all the
cultural ball which is kind of
perfect for what this bill is is
in the legislature we always
have a fiscal impact report we
care about how much money things
are going to cost and rightly so
we have analysis agencies are
comfortable and used to doing
analysis on what's it going to
cost to do things.
But a lot of what we do as
legislators doesn't have a cost
to it it has a social racial
cultural impact and we need to
start making sure that we are
getting information we have
somebody looking at that and
twenty up to legislators that
well this may have a cost not
have a cost it impacts different
communities in different ways
and just to alert legislators
that that is the case and what
this bill proposes to do is for
each piece of legislation that
with that comes a statement on
the social cultural or racial
impacts some bills tax policy
may have extensive differences
on how it affects different
communities some bills may have
nothing to do with that and the
impact statement might say has
no significant social racial
cultural impact of as a result
of this legislation some may
have some of it as I've talked
to various people who and
agencies that might be tasked
with providing these they're
concerned with well it would
just be speculation.
One point out fiscal impact
reports are mostly speculation
also we had some that have been
grossly wrong after the fact
but it gets us to think about
and talk about what might be
important and so the point of
this and it's brand new I
envision it starting relatively
small but to have the different
agencies as they are looking at
the fiscal impact and how it
might affect their agency that
they also start putting in or
additional piece of paper how
it's going to affect communities
how it's going to affect people
as a result of this legislation
and some in order to demonstrate
and start that of the Alice's
that might to enlist in the
Education Committee have now
started putting a paragraph or
two in their analysis on social
racial and cultural impact of
those education bills I wanted
to do that because I went up a
little bit of data as was this a
burden on them as they were
doing that and for the most part
other than their comment of well
it's kind of speculation on our
part as to how it might.
Thank these areas it really is
not.
A huge burden on those couple of
bills that they dont and so you
know as we started I might madam
chair encouraged that even.
Bills that during Dallas
analysts go through have them
going to us just a paragraph on
social cultural racial impact
that we start looking at that as
an important part of all
legislation not just what is the
cost of legislation as
legislators we've got a
responsibility to deal with how
this impacts the people not just
the pocketbook and with that I
would stand for questions madam
chair.
Thank you senator souls what I
could do we have any public
comment.
Madam chair yes we do our zoom
authority is ready to go to
announce the public comment.
Go ahead make the.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Joining us first
I believe we have.
Secretary occurred PED griega as
well as at W. secretary makes
the auto from the DCA if there
are any questions for them.
The public we have.
At Rikki we have as right we
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico criminal defense lawyers
with their case and staff had
Rikki Lee.
Thank you so much everyone able
to hear me.
Yes yes.
Great thank you I'm first I
apologize for the car sounds I
did I'd like to watch my
children this morning so I could
provide up public comment my
name is Rikki Lee Chavez I am
the legislative coordinator for
the New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association I am do this
committee to support SB fifty
five from a criminal justice
perspective it's really
important to know what the
impact of legislation is going
to have in our criminal justice
system often when we're
presented with proposals that
create new crimes are increased
penalties people are unaware of
the impacts that those pieces of
legislation are going to have
especially on our communities of
color and so I think it's a
really important step in the
right direction to include these
sorts of statements when you're
looking at proposals and so I
would appreciate the Sanchez
work on this bill I think it's a
really important for staff and I
would encourage the committee to
support for those of you that
are new members The New Mexico
couple defense lawyers
association is a statewide
association of defense attorneys
both private and public and I
would encourage you to reach out
to me if you ever have any
questions about our criminal
justice reform process if I
can't answer that I guarantee I
can find someone who can thank
you so much madam chair members
of the committee for your time.
Thank you I think the.
Madam chair members of the
committee next we have Bill
Jordan from New Mexico voices
for children this.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee on Bill
Jordan New representing New
Mexico voices for children
really want to thank senator
souls for bringing this
important legislation forward
thank you know our country's
deeply divided right now and
racial tensions built on years
or racial and ethnic injustice
is at the heart of much of the
discontent.
New Mexico is not immune to
racial injustice we're dealing
with a couple of education
lawsuits that have race at their
core we're facing a pandemic
that is ravaging communities of
color at a much more devastating
right in white communities we
have a tax system that favors
rich whites over families of
color.
And of course I think we know
there are criminal and juvenile
justice system needs repair.
Much of how we got here was not
intentional but it happened
because we work us who are
policies favored you for not
asking the question what impact
will this legislation have on
various racial and ethnic groups
then how will we know it's not
enough to say will analyze
criminal justice bills when
racial inequities exist in
health care education tax the
budget voting rights the
environment business labor
housing water agriculture and
even transportation.
All legislation should be
analyzed forward impact on
racial equity.
When we face the next racial
crisis let's never be able to
say we didn't know better thank
you.
Thank you Mr garden and thank
them.
Madam chair members of the
committee next I believe we have
Johnny Powell president of the
international space hall of fame
foundation.
Our body how I'm during the
meeting just to to show the
foundation support for out the
the DCA at entities especially
the New Mexico museum of space
history are we appreciate
everything that the legislation
is doing out for museums and
we've got the good news that
we're about right re opened so
we really hope that you find
some good stuff we go out there
and and and and and get our job
done get back to work and that's
what we're all looking forward
to doing and I'm I won't take
anymore of your time and thank
you for your considerations.
Thank you Mr problem make them.
Thirty one madam chair members
of the committee.
Last we have.
Virginia.
The co chair I apologize to pay
mispronouncing name.
Executive director of the New
Mexico environmental law center.
Yes thank you Nate then Good
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is Dr
Bahamian echo chair and as the
executive director of the New
Mexico environmental law center
I'm here on behalf of our
organization to our express our
full support for Senate bill
fifty five for our organization
it's fundamental to name
environmental racism in all of
our DJ environmental justice
related work and given
everything that we've witnessed
stemming from continued racial
and social injustices across our
nation it is most appropriate
for New Mexico to take all the
necessary steps that ensure
important discussions that focus
on social racial and cultural
impacts are fully integrated and
that are elected officials have
a clear understanding of how any
and all legislation introduced
my disproportionately impact
historically marginalized and
under represented communities
this is not the time to treat
this important piece of
legislation as optional or as a
financial burden it is our
responsibility especially given
continued historic injustices
that we act with courage and
demonstrate to the people of New
Mexico that these impacts are as
important as any other component
included an impact statements an
analysis conducted by not being
intentional and not requiring
social and racial impacts these
critical components are often
dismissed minimized or
completely omitted as someone
who has personally focused on
equity and justice issues for at
least two decades I ask you to
show your commitment to justice
in all forms by supporting
Senate bill fifty five it is a
step in the right direction and
thank you senator souls for
introducing this important piece
of legislation.
Thank you doctor Nick and that
was the last comment native.
Madam chair of the last comment
for the bell.
Thank you and the chair will
entertain any questions from the
committee.
No questions from the committee
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Motion for the past Senator
Shendo.
Motion FOR do pass by Senator
Shendo do I have a second.
I can't by Senator how to meal
we have a second by Senator harm
meal and Rebecca would you
please call the roll.
Senator Griggs no.
Senator McKenna.
Yes to pass and I would like to
make a comment after the vote.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Shendo.
A yes.
Senator huh.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have four yeses and to not
use did you get Senator Padilla.
Senator.
Thank you.
On this note here to manage your
money to.
Some of the bill can I go for my
own.
Go ahead report the tally
Rebecca.
We have four yeses and two
males.
And you have a do pass Senator
cells in the thank you very much
for bringing this bill forward
and senator McCain that you have
the Madam.
Yes I thank you madam chair I I
and senator shoals I want to
thank you for offering this
insight I think that is an
excellent suggestion to your
fellow legislators that we
include this consideration in
future legislation so thank you.
Thank you committee I very much
appreciated and hope to see you
down the road more in person
thank you yes and you're on to
the next committee thank you
senator souls okay we got SB
seventy US Senator Padilla
public art project revolving
fund appropriations.
Thank you madam chair Mister
vice chairman members of the
committee I am wearing my mask
and not because I'm trying to
keep myself guarded from you but
we're we're literally busting at
the seams over in my business
and I have employees locally
working out of my office now
they gonna kick me out here
pretty soon so that that's what
this is all about but I I just
want to Senator I thought you
were trying to protect you from
yourself.
And that too Mr Mr chairman that
to madam chair so but thank you
all very much I've been
fortunate to be on the New
Mexico finance authority
committee as a voting member
since I came to the legislature
down my ninety year I do have an
expert witness the world
renowned super sensation
international superstar Marquita
Russel who is our chief
executive officer of the New
Mexico finance authority she's
going to have a few comments
madam chair and I'm just going
to introduce the bill and she's
going to take all the hard
questions but I carry a bill for
them it seems like once a year
now and I I just love it it's
it's worked out really well
Senate Bill seventies The New
Mexico finance authority's
public project revolving fund
appropriations bill and carrying
this legislation on behalf of
NMFA as I mentioned as I serve
on the oversight committee as a
voting member and the NMFA
oversight committee voted
unanimously to endorse this bill
that the bill appropriates
eleven point three million
dollars to the public project
revolving fund.
For for specific projects and
this is going to sound a little
bit different to probably
Senator Shendo Senator Griggs
and let's see who else I think
everyone else here might be
fairly new to this committee but
typically these bills are madam
chair introduced separately but
we we felt like it was a good
idea just to put it into an
omnibus bill because they're all
relational they all feel like
Nick we we feel like the that
they should have gonna come
together and and Marquita can
give us a little bit more
information why that is but to
break out the eleven point three
million madam chair two million
to the local government planning
fund two point five mil to the
drinking water state revolving
fund one point eight mil to the
wastewater facility construction
loan fund and five billion to
the cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure fund and I will
tell you that the oversight the
the the rigor and the.
I do diligence and all the
things that go into putting this
this the surface so this
authority together are there all
the safeguards are there all of
the things that ensure that you
know where they're good stewards
of public monies and this and
that but I think one of the more
important things to all of us
that sit in the legislation in
the Senate is that the bill does
not impact the state's general
fund and so this eleven point
three mil goes right down to the
ground toward actually needs to
be managed there isn't it isn't
stopping along the way and and
and losing a percentage this and
that it's made available to what
the work actually is so madam
chair with your permission can I
ask Marquita just to say a
couple words on why they want to
do it this way thank you.
Yes Senator Padilla COVID
nineteen thank you madam chair
so what's before you is a
request to move money from the
public project revolving fund
which is a fund that's
administered by the New Mexico
finance authority the seed money
for this annually is a stream of
governmental gross receipts tax
that comes from primarily though
water and wastewater operators
of the state
comes to the finance authority's
public project revolving fund
and is held there into our bond
holders are paid annually after
the bond holders are paid that
governmental gross receipts tax
typically is it used for bond
payments and so it then flows
through for some uses identified
in statute and then the
remainder goes to the finance
authority to make very low cost
loans to public entities
including tribal entities across
the state
This bill in front of you is the
bill that moves some of those
dollars over to those I put what
I'll call identified funds and
prior to this year's the senator
mentioned we had taken each of
these bills to you annually so
you would see a bill for
movement from the public project
revolving fund which we call the
PPRF over to the finance
authorities drinking water Fund
we have a separate bill for the
local government planning fund
appropriation and then of the
environment department would
similarly bring you one for the
it's state match for it's clean
water program and the last year
olds will leave the legislature
added cultural affairs facility
funds as an identified use of
those transfers so it got to be
a lot and so the purpose here is
to bring them all together so
that we understand in its
entirety the impact of these
appropriations to the public
project revolving fund and so
that you can also to sort of
reduce the confusion and traffic
at some of these levels so these
are not new uses of the fund
it's just coming to you is one
fund as one bill of one this
bill this year but ultimately
the for identified funds all
fall within the parameters of
the statute which says that
thirty percent or up to thirty
percent I'm sorry thirty five
percent of that governmental
gross receipts tax that's
received by the legislature but
the.
That's received by the finance
authority is able to be
appropriated out this all falls
within that thirty five percent
so the eleven point three
million dollars is just under
thirty five percent of last
year's collections so
I can stand for questions on how
the identified uses will be
administered again does the
Senator mentions Bill B. two
distributions that come to the
finance authority one
distribution that goes over to
the environment department and
lastly one distribution that
goes over to cultural affairs
for them to use on their on the
projects that they actually own
and oversee.
So with that madam chair I
however you'd like to handle
this another some new folks on
this committee and I'm happy to
go through the public project
revolving fund and what we do or
just stand for questions.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you senator Ortiz and
thank you thank you to we'll go
to public comments.
Proposing and supporting before
we move on to the committee.
Thank you are rejected.
At.
Madam chair there is no opposing
comments add to this bill.
In support we again have Johnny
Powell president of the
international space hall of fame
foundation.
At Johnny.
I'm good morning to get
everybody I think I got out of
turn awhile ago.
I I get to say twice.
What.
Very much appreciate dissent
Commission op consideration are
with us and you all have a good
day.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my apologies and we.
Also have at click hi then at
chair of the international space
hall of fame foundation.
Riding in a Mexican today in the
state's history.
Click you can go ahead and let
me tell.
Okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for being able to to
share with you and eco Johnny
supports a on behalf of the
international space hall of fame
foundation our support for SB
seventy.
It would provide five million
dollars to the department of
cultural affairs so these
infrastructure fund the DCA has
over a hundred ninety one
structures including museums and
historic sites in this portfolio
a hundred of them are state
cultural properties and on or on
the national register of
historic places.
This fund provides real needed
maintenance funds to protect our
heritage and provide support us
with these museums and sites are
available for all New Mexicans
to enjoy and again thank you so
much for the opportunity to come
before you today and we
appreciate your support for the
bill thank you.
Thank you they didn't is that it
are there any more.
At madam chair there are no more
at people on the call we had two
more members that had at signed
up in time though and.
Mary Ann Cortese a regent with
the museum of New Mexico in
support of the bell and Joanne
ball there with the New Mexico
arts commission also in support
of the bell.
Thank you in and now the chair
will entertain any questions
from the committee.
And senator ship Hermio Shinde
who was up for our meal was a
first okay how many of.
You madam chair and members of
the committee that my question
was actually you stated how is
it administered by two to.
So thank you madam chair senator
so the appropriations will be
moved from the public project
revolving fund to the various
agencies so at the end of June
we will move money from this
year's collections of
governmental gross receipts tax
of a portion to the environment
department a portion to the
department of cultural affairs
and then we will move internally
those monies into those to pop
the funds with the exception of
the cultural affairs money of
the dollars that are being
appropriated out will be used
for underlying projects so both
the environment department and
the finance authority to use the
money a state matching dollars
so that we can get in federal
dollars to administer low cost
loan programs and then the
finance authority also uses a
portion of it to make grants to
governmental entities who wish
to plan we get to undertake a
preliminary engineering report
or
some sort of comprehensive plan
to help them with their
infrastructure needs so the
funds and the money's get move
to those funds and then there it
ministered again some by the
environment department to by the
finance authority cultural
affairs ultimately has projects
of its own because they oversee
their own cultural properties
and so they will administer them
as as part of their capital
improvement processing thank you
my cannot madam chair does it
it's really important to note
that if we don't secure the
match we could lose up to eleven
million dollars when it comes to
federal funding for safe
drinking water now this is
something big in rural New
Mexico especially in district
five when we talked about the
threat of of water being
contaminated because of septic
tanks and us needing to ensure
that there's clean drinking
water for northern New Mexicans
so I really appreciate that part
of the bill that this of secure
that funding so we don't lose
federal funding because it's
something we tap into the
northern New Mexico thank you
Marquita thank you madam chair
no other questions.
Thank you Sir in the Makita
Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam chair and the.
Of.
Thank you
Senator Padilla for bringing
this bill forward of questions
for Marquita what is the total
amount is collected on the
government growth sees tax for
this purpose on an annual basis
sure so last year our
collections well let me say it
this way this year we anticipate
our collections to be just
around thirty two million
dollars the collections are down
because of of the economic
climate governmental gross
receipts tax which is a five
percent tax levied on the water
and primarily water and
waste water services that you're
municipalities primarily provide
that five percent tax will move
up and down just like gross
receipts tax does so when gross
receipts tax declines typically
governmental gross receipts tax
declines as well so we're
anticipating about thirty two
million dollars a little over
that to come in this fiscal year
and that's that is a good way
for us to gauge
the or conservative way forced
to gauge the impact the actual
legislation calls forced to use
last year's collections but
because there was a higher
amount
that might be a little
misleading but it's about thirty
four million that came in last
year okay and so so this thirty
percent of criteria so so can
you say that again you're not
allowed to use more than thirty
percent of the gross receipts
collected on an annualized basis
for project is that what you
were saying earlier yes so the
statute says the money comes to
the public project revolving
fund as the primary backstop for
bond holders in case any of our
underlying loans don't get paid
right so we're bonding
of based on collections we
expect to receive on the
underlying loans if some of our
underlying loans on the public
project revolving fund default
then this governmental gross
receipts tax is there to help
pay bondholders.
So that's the primary purpose of
the coming to the PPRF the
statute also says in or
recognizes that there may not be
a need to pay bondholders and
allows for up to thirty five
percent of those of these G. G.
R. T. collections to be
appropriated by the legislature
to one of I think five or six
identified funds and the active
funds now are before you those
are the two administered by the
finance authority the one by
NMED and one one of my cultural
affairs so those are the only
active funds but the cap is
thirty five percent the statute
has the identified uses in the
statute and these all fall
within both the cap and the
uses.
Thank you I think you also
touched on the fact that these
funds a particularly like
department of cultural affairs
of and so forth I know I get a
lot of capital outlay requests
from the borrower of historical
historic monuments that that are
in my district and so forth and
with this kind of money also be
now available to those entities
of course some of their
restoration projects of things
that you're doing on a
as well as that is that the tent
madam chair is I think as it
relates to the cultural affairs
use of the funds I would defer
to cultural affairs but my
understanding is they have this
series of properties that they
are responsible for upkeep on
and that they have identified
for the five million dollars are
planning out the use of those
funds but I would turn the I
know that secretary Garcia you
create goes on the phone and she
may be a better person to answer
the but she's absolutely a
better person to.
Secretary.
Madam chair Senators and the
members of the committee
actually Marquita did an
absolutely fantastic job of
answering that question yes we
do allocate them towards the
hundred and ninety one a
separate buildings and
structures that DCA maintains as
part of its statutory mandate so
it would be available for those
historic structures that are
owned by the CA it is not for
non D. C. A. facilities we have
about funding through the state
historic preservation office and
their tax credit program as well
as their grant program.
So so for a madam secretary so
for like a.
The the the Coronado
Of state or historic site now in
Berlin and we had no we have one
up in hema springs.
With those two entities then be
to your internal process be
eligible for funding through
through this process if it
continues to go forward.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee yes
both Coronado historic site and
has come as historic sites would
benefit from this funding and we
do have a list of projects that
we would plan to find out of the
spending with those thank you
but as well as all the other
hundred whatever size you have
across the state yes thank you
appreciate it thank you madam
secretary in a thank you
Marquita good to see you.
Thank you Senator Shendo do we
have any more questions from the
committee.
No.
Thanks thank you Senator Padilla
and thank you and NMFA and NMED
at E. M. and R. E. whiskey and
the BCA.
We will have been changed motion
from the committee.
Motion for the best Senator
motion forty pass from Senator
Shendo to have a second.
Senator had a meal at a second
by Senator harm you know Rebecca
would you please call the roll.
Yes Senator Griggs.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes to pass.
Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have six yeses and Zeronos.
For the past.
Thank you thank you Senator
Padilla and your bill has to
pass it on to the next committee
thank you for joining us today
and almost well almost
registered you can vote for the
Senate in the rural culture
Affairs Committee thank you
thank you madam chair I'll step
in anytime you want me and thank
you Mr vice chair members of the
committee have a wonderful day
thank you members.
Okay we have Senate bill one
eleven Senator Lopez higher up
to Mexico licensed surveyor an
attorney that was a rollover
bill that we
Had a discrepancy with Senator
McKenna as far as a.
Okay that was the other bill
okay do are we ready to go.
yes it doesn't look like Senator
Lopez has joined in with this
yet I called her office and she
is in another committee
with sponsoring another bill so
she is aware that we are ready
to hear Senate bill one eleven.
Then there's no co sponsor on
there any.
Sponsor.
This was for the Attorney.
Survey internet.
Excuse me madam chair our total
are to let her expert witness is
in the zoom meeting.
Okay I think
But we could go forward with
them our tools we want to
presented we cannot have any
comments on that on the bill
because I think that's why we
tabled the.
are rolled it over did you want
to thank you madam chair and
members of the committee yes
thank you for that time I was
able to confer with provided
services and because I don't
have any monetary interest in
this I am I'm free to vote on
the bill so I I really
appreciate your allowing me to
have that research time thank
you.
I think as far as we got with
the with Senator Lopez and Mr
Archuleta
items the committee had any
further questions are we wanted
to Senator Shendo.
Yes
I had the further I guess
questions of clarification of
this is probably for Mr
Archuleta.
Can you hear me.
Madam chair representative thank
you okay up you know that the
land grants a and you used to
charm common lands and so forth.
Of.
It and I'm just curious up are
these held in common or are
these lands held in fee simple
by family members with in that
Land Grant how how does that
work or.
And madam chair
Etcetera etcetera before I go on
I just received a text from
Senator Lopez who indicated she
had the wrong link for the
meeting
so if they could Center repeat
fussed you should get that right
wing secretary okay
thank you look back that sent or
make them think yes we'll send
it out again right one.
Thank you madam chair etcetera
etcetera so the common lands for
the land grants that would be
covered this act language or
political subdivisions of the
state they are owned few simple
by the land grants so they're on
their own by the land grant
itself through the titles in the
name of the land grant and
they're managed by the board of
trustees for the benefit of the
local community in the errors.
Okay.
The.
Or are there any late fee simple
that are owned by individuals
within those common lands you
like on like a resume because we
have we have tribal lands and
then we have a lot it lands so
even within the reservations in
some tribal communities you have
individual that are a lot of
those lands early on that have
different status than trust
lands so madam chair etcetera
etcetera yes on that is correct
I apologize for any confusion so
within eats every Land Grant
community there are private
allotments that individuals own
for you select at home and maybe
land for in on initially they
would like large strips of land
that type from the executive the
river and then over time some of
those have been divvied up in
order to sort of be divided by
family members so there are
private allotments and in.
Most of the and common lands for
a lot of the land grants have
been lost you those that did
that received a patent some of
our roster delinquent taxes of
those became privatized so what
we really talk about it in terms
of common lands are those lands
that are still on and managed by
the land grants our board of
trustees but since then some the
largest land grant that we have
in the state to be is the on but
Land Grant they still manage
about a hundred and forty
thousand acres of common land of
the largest by far the next one
is probably the this that we
have to has about thirty
thousand acres and then we have
some land grants that their
common land cities only the
Senator home maybe.
Can ten to twenty acres some
have just a community center and
maybe a couple acres attached to
that community center so it just
carries from I get community
community.
Mr yeah I was curious because a
you know if there was disputes
between you know
It go.
The simple landholders with the
common you know address
trustees.
Is this the kind of support that
will provide or or or tell us a
little bit about I guess the
surveyors work and what are some
of the issues that you're trying
to address will there be times
when.
Allottees or land owners with in
this ticket will be at odds and
is it the job of this survey are
in New.
Are you through resolve those
issues as well is that the
intent of this Madam chair
etcetera etcetera yeah that's
correct we do have times when
there's private sort of
landowners to maybe have a
property but they've extended
warrant crouch on the common
lands and so part of that is to
try to identify areas where that
me it happened we're to proper
surveys and then you know we do
have instances where folks are
claiming you know like I said
extended into or maybe an
unintentional encouragement and
so the surveyors able to try to
help identify where the line is
sometimes you can also do
something like known as boundary
agreement which will sort of fix
the boundary in the event that
the original deeds was too vague
and didn't really give good
boundary description so the the
purpose is to credit to try to
work with folks to you know get
good boundaries for the land
grants
I think I mentioned in the last
hearing we we've had instances
where an individual maybe buys a
piece of property that's
adjacent to a common road in
that common road may be used to
access additional questions of
the common land for to see if
you would on.
And so we had instances where
private landowners have sort of
said nope I'm have cleaned the
road itself and try to close the
road off I'm and that's become
an issue for the community at
large because now they're not
able to access other portions of
the common land and so those are
the type of scenarios where we
would hope to be able to sort of
help them resolve those issues
and ensure that that you spent
either it's it's an easement or
if it's truly as part of the
common lands that they're able
to continue to use and and
access that for the the
community.
Okay.
Thank you that's it for now
thank you.
Thank you Senator Shendo and my
Senator Griggs on there but it
looks like she stepped off
senator Sanchez.
Madam chair committee of the
question is for Mr to letter
that's what my hand things not
working out so I raise my hand
physically I'm trying to figure
out it.
So my question though same as
last time with the notes I took
last time.
So you feel that you're gonna
need it all right now you're
only using sixty one thousand a
year.
Is what you're using on your
budget now forty thousand in
legal fees and twenty one
thousand you said last time and
survey fees and you believe
going forward in the future
you'll need two hundred thousand
a year.
So
Madam chair of center such as so
correct currently we're we're
only able to allocate the sixty
one thousand in terms of the
amount of resources that the
council has in its current
budget so the allocation would
be more if if they could support
in the budget but right now
that's the only amount of the
can give and so what that piece
for is a.
Twenty thousand dollar contract
for the service here just you
know very limited in terms of
what what can be done at that
amount it's under contract and
then on the same with the legal
services it's about forty
thousand which
I think I mentioned last time we
get a rate of about a hundred
twenty five dollars an hour so
it comes out to about three
hundred hours personal work
and so that gets eaten up pretty
quickly particularly if we have
stuff like litigation going on
and so the those estimates in
terms of the amounts work based
on what the cost would be for
bringing in
a surveyor and the
Attorney on on staff and so
looking at sort of what those
costs are for the comparable
journey was at the state level
in terms of the classifications
for for jobs at the state level
and then also at the university
New Mexico which is going to
work how's that and so does
average doctor salary base just
sort of base salary about
seventy thousand and then what
you had sort of the budget and
all that it's going to get you
closer to the hundred thousand
so for both positions we
estimate that it would you know
when we would be able to sort of
expand on that amount within the
staff period.
Thank you Mr
one more question so at this
time you are using the full
sixty one thousand.
There's nothing left over you
guys are extending all of the
news in a.
Madam chair center such that's
correct and we actually have
work left over that doesn't get
attended to just because the the
contract amount once out for the
year.
Madam chair of the structural
one more question does this when
you send out for I know the the
legal would be at the UNM does a
survey go out for like of three
bids are due to go out to bid
for to the public how do you
guys put that out.
so madam chair Sir such as right
now because of the amount we're
able to just do a quick squeeze
State quotes on the records
because it's it's a small of
amount we have in the past when
we've done like the legal and
we've actually what we want to
spend more on the council's
maybe hadn't additional
resources but to in the past
we've done actual like request
for qualifications right now the
the legal service this contract
goes to directly the department
of finance administration and so
we don't do that we don't have
one here UNM anymore it's still
but to the council but it's goes
directly to DFA at this time.
And I think that are madam chair
a Senator ideally what we would
like is to be able to you know
have the budget at the council
increased to the extent that
would be able to and that sort
of are the ideal right that the
council's budget would allow us
to sort of have built schools
hires we just haven't reach that
market and this was sort of the
the method that was the approach
that was sort of provided by the
interim committee to transfer to
get us the funding level that
we.
Madam chair structure thank you.
Thank you senator Sanchez and
thank you Mr Gillette at Senator
Griggs and I know you had your
hand up there real quick and.
Do you do you have any
questions.
Thank you madam chair and I
don't mean to concern that I've
got really is the hiring of of
folks we're I think we can
operate just as well the way
we've been doing and so if
ultimately we need to increase
that budget somewhere that's
probably the more appropriate
way to me so I can't I can't
support the bill just because of
that but that's that's the
comment should I have Madam
chair thank you very much.
Thank you senator Graham senator
our meal.
Thank you madam chair is that Mr
Gillette that so as you know Rio
Arriba county has a large number
of land grants right here in
North there New Mexico and so
they reached out to me and
talked about how important this
bill is because of the cost is
for a survey or an attorney
those fees for a Land Grant are
way too high for them to take
that on and so a bill like this
so it's something that helps our
land grant communities in
northern New Mexico and is one
that I've been asked to support
so just to let you know northern
New Mexico appreciates we read
by county appreciates the fact
that this could become a bill
with that assistance that would
help the land grants in our area
more so because they're so large
here when it comes to survey our
they just can't afford that this
type of bill which support our
land that communities and I just
wanted to make that comment
thank you.
Thank you senator Hermio Senator
Shendo.
Thank you madam chair just
another of thought and I think a
agreed to Senator Griggs mention
this I did get an email you know
I know there's a of.
Your men and so forth that you
go through and now hiring
Of a single attorney or a single
surveyor as opposed to multiple
surveyors that might be familiar
with in all lands in different
regions it can you speak to that
I mean the I mean I know there's
a lot of surveyors I I think I
got you know from a survey here
that that would kind of take
them out of the you know if
they're interested in bidding
for some of these surveys and so
forth so.
What's the rationale for going
this route as opposed to just
increase in dollar amount it
that's the real issue and then
allowing the service to also
compete for that work.
So madam chair of center some of
that's a great question and
really we look at this similar
to our other store agencies that
sort of deal with land
management approach this and so
if you look at sort of examples
of the federal government the US
for service for example has a
server you're on staff as well
as I'm certain people on staff
and partly that's because some
of the unique nature right and
so with us it's it's very
similar
the there's a couple of reasons
germs of the survey or one
having sort of the expertise and
and leave dealing with sort of
the land grants and the deed
some of those needs are you know
these are still right in Spanish
from so those original
separations and so being able to
sort of understand interpret
those which you're not not all
surveyors deal with those in
every region
we also have the need to review
surveys that are done and so
if you were to take a of serving
from one region typically need
to be having folks would be
reviewing essentially their
peers work or their own work and
so you know that can be
problematic in terms of a
conflict because we have found
that there's instances where
surveys have had to be
challenged because of because of
the lack of information
sometimes you could have
surveyors will just take the
word of the individual at the
doing the survey for so whoever
the client is the kind of say
okay what will would make you a
survey and and there's a certain
language that could put in a
survey like lands claimed by an
individual order which makes it
sort of quit other surveyors
that this is a survey based on a
clean but it's not necessarily
based on the deed and and a
boundary and so.
You know we we look sort of like
that independence for service to
review some of that and then be
able to potentially I need the
help those communities challenge
those surveys through the the
process with the professional
server your board so that's one
reason in terms of and then also
in terms of the very similar
with the attorney
just having internet you can
sort of get familiar with some
of the cases and sort of
understand what some of those
issues are there specific to
land grants and kind of have
that level of expertise
it's kind of difficult to get
folks up to speed if if we
didn't have some continuity in
that regarding the what from
attorney to attorney you would
end up spending a lot of money I
just in sort of that building
that turning up to speed many of
those hours that we're able to
people would go to them just
we're trying to get on board and
understand that statutory land
grants for some of the history
and and if we have that in house
on that expertise will sort of
lent itself to future cases.
Appreciated thank you.
Thank you Senator Shendo do we
have any other questions from
the committee.
Know whether questions do we
have the a motion with the
pleasure of the committee.
What do ask Senator how to me.
I have a motion where do passed
by Senator on me you know do we
have a second to the motion.
I second the motion second the
representative look Lopez we're
right in the middle of the
motion I we have a second motion
by Senator McKenna.
Where do passed.
Do Rebecca if you call the roll.
Thanks no.
Senator McKenna.
Yes to pass.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Shendo.
Senator actions will
move to the next one Senator
Hotmail yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Back to Senator Shendo.
Of yes.
Madam chair and members of the
committee we have four yeses and
two males for the past.
Okay thank you Rebecca and the.
We have a motion our ability to
or do pass for Senate bill one
eleven Senator Lopez and thank
you Mr Gillette and Senator
Lopez and you're moving on to
the next committee.
And I think we're joining us
today and the it looks.
We
are are gender we welcome about
the bills and we will have the
agenda out for the next
committee meeting next Thursday
I don't know if we have any
other questions are
announcements Rebecca do you
have anymore anything further.
No further announcements madam
chair.
And so members you'll see Mr
Lindahl there Richard live calls
are any media analyst there
thank you for joining us today
and I will see you on Thursday
thank you all have a great day
today thank you madam chair.
Senator me thank you Rebecca
thank you.
