Hearings and thank you all for
joining us this morning the
weather we've been doing these
hearings is we've been asking
each member it's concrete to
give us I I'll just go down the
list calling on people to give
us a little background about
how you've come what what you do
the rest of your life.
And how it is that you came to
be this on Human Rights
Commission how long you been
serving.
And to give us a little bit of
your impression of of the work
you've been doing for to give us
a sense of of the projects
you've been working on
since you've been there so with
that let's begin with the chair
of the commission Mr metropolis
and then I'll I'll I'll call in
each member from there on the
schools.
Good morning thank you for
allowing us this opportunity we
were just informed yesterday
that we would be doing this so
please excuse are somewhat lack
of preparation of formal
preparation but.
I have been serving on the
commission now for at least four
years the governor did appointed
me as chairman chairperson of
the committee
I have to say that this
committee.
In its present form has been
extremely this commission is
present forms been extremely
active just compare to previous
administration this system of a
real pleasure.
To work with this group we have
been dividing in the panels in
hearing cases and trying to work
through the current backlog and
I can say without hesitation
that every single member that's
occurred before you today as
actively attended the annual
meetings and participate in the
training sessions and
participated in hearing cases in
trying to fulfill the mission of
the.
Human Rights Commission is we've
been assigned.
if I could point out anything
that we need if I could take
this opportunity to that
not having been briefed by
consider the director I did talk
to the administrative law judge
Katy support yeses and sort of
our mentor throughout this
process she's done a wonderful
job of teaching us keeping us in
line taking a lot of non lawyers
and teaching them how to here
what I characterize dizzy you'll
see your arms on a continuing
basis.
Trainings and excellent we we
had we were to commissioner
short of a full eleven
commission board
we put in the request to
hopefully get those to fill as
soon as possible.
we.
In appearing in holding hearing
this as my self I do is a lawyer
and have been doing this a
lawyer to out this pandemic by
zoom and I can tell you that we
find it extremely effective and
the actually accommodating to
the citizens of New Mexico and
appearing for their hearings in
remote locations throughout the
state it's been actually very
beneficial not only for the
commissioners before the.
Petitioner's and respondent's we
would like to see that continued
I think there's a need for some
legislative change to the open
meetings act such that we can
hold virtual zoom meetings we
have a requirement to do them in
person so we will have to go
back in and re confirm things in
person that we're doing zoom but
otherwise the commission is
functioning well the members are
serving well in the.
All anxiously we look forward to
a poll reappointment.
And I'm happy to answer any
questions that you may have.
Thank you very much Sir Jessica
Thompson.
Thank you I have been serving I
think about the same time as
thank since two thousand
nineteen I believe
I'm aware you're in Basel New
Mexico and I have also been
helpful server virtually on the
panels which I think has been
going.
Very well and.
Not much else to say but if
there's anything else that
happened answering questions
also.
Okay
what what you've been on the
commission of what issues have
been working on or or what
or or give us a little of the
impression of the research been
doing like even on the
commission.
I've served on several hearing
panels and we've cleared I think
quite a few cases off of the
back love just as was saying
it's been a really interesting
experience I have learned a lot.
And continue to learn a lot and
I enjoy sitting on the panels I
think we do a pretty thorough
job the sessions we had with
just the commissioners
afterwards sort of deliberating
have been I think a very
successful and I think that.
Excuse me we're just continuing
to do a good job where a lot of
those cases and just remember.
Thank you very much.
Maryland Meyer.
Thank you for this opportunity
on Maryland's and Meyer I am a
clinical supervisor for the city
of Gallup R. several of our
shelters detox centers I've
served on the committee since
twenty nineteen with thank and
Jessica and it's been my
privilege to participate in
hearings in terms of
deliberations and determining
The case it's been a learning
experience I'm not a lawyer and
psychologist and so I've learned
quite a bit terms of law and I
think I've been able to use my
psychology background.
In terms of.
Understanding human relations
and then once.
We've cleared the doctor quite a
bit since we've been on this
Committee eight we work well
together we're very respectful.
I'm and I think we take into
consideration quite a bit of the
needs of the.
Tensioners.
It's been a privilege to serve
with that and Jessica are you
the rest of the committee
And I think that serving.
And holding hearings virtually
has been a guest.
For many of us due to
transportation finances on the
like so I think it would be
good.
To follow six eight.
The some legislation to allow us
to.
More hearing spiritually.
I have nothing more to say to
have any questions for.
Thank you very much let's go
through the rest of the group
and then we'll come back around
questions.
merry our children.
Our children are.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm sorry.
Problem there with my computer
as you may have noticed I'm at
school right now Services
educational assistant with Kerr
or middle school in the special
education department.
and I and I must say that my
students that were in here
previously or fascinated with
the process and they they think
that you have a really big
hearing room I think meeting so
with that being said I too must
conquer.
Social commissioners that is the
of the line and enjoy for me to
serve in this capacity to serve
since twenty nineteen
appointment governor Lujan
Grisham and I'm eager to
continue my service I served I
have I have worked as an
attorney I did for twenty years
but it was in the state of
Georgia so it's been
interesting and a very good
experience for me to get back
into practicing law also speak I
want to mention our assistant
Attorney General Carlos Solari
issues that a great deal of help
to to me personally and all of
us I think and Katie Sartorio
stale Gen.
Is is a wonder I can't imagine
how she's been getting
everything done during the COVID
crisis and without the without
much help so
Only The I would concur with Mr
Polis that we continue our open
open open meetings act so that
the Zune meetings I continue I
live in the four corners area of
the state and so it has been the
an additional blessing that I
have to travel to Santa Fe all
the time.
I just wanted to mention one of
the cases that we did handle
was a hearing on unemployment
matter and.
It lasted three full days of
hearing and the three of us that
have been on that
K. are just getting ready to
deliberate so I think we are
definitely serving in our
capacity as commissioners for
the people of the state of New
Mexico and thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you so very much and I
appreciate your ability to multi
task as.
What the students and and make
an educational opportunity for
them and and actually we are in
a very large hearing room right
now with a lot of empty seats
and a TV set sitting in front of
us.
So the C. at Jacqueline coach
please.
Here hello everybody I'm happy
to be here I'm a retiree from
the state of New Mexico as a tax
auditor.
And I also work as a tax analyst
for the legislature.
And I've enjoyed my time on the
board on the commission and
everyone has been very helpful.
When I have a question they have
always answered my call and also
answered my question.
And.
Thank you just understand the
other side of the law and just
looking at the way the backside
of the way things are happening
with discrimination and
everything.
So I'm just happy to be here.
We continue to do that here and
on still has been very helpful.
Thank you.
Thank you very much that's the
David Overstreet place.
Mr Marshall the committee
down in Alamogordo.
The agents of course about
twenty five years business owner
for about twenty years already
martial arts academy and I've
been teaching our state all of
our rules about fifteen years
teaching paralegal informal
justice classes.
I've been on the commission for
about two years
Rewarding experience I want to
echo the sentiments the other.
Commissioners that the virtual.
Format really facilitates.
Sure participation
and not anywhere else chairs
which probably budgetary.
Impact
in terms of the work that we've
done it's been very rewarding.
I think.
You know the heart of the two
stars for everybody over there
make sure that the parties have
the opportunity to fully present
their side of the plan after the
deliberations are counted as
amazing job helping document the
findings of the parties
understand our ruling in the
reasoning for it and affirm that
you know we did hear them
whether we agree or disagree
with so.
We heard state.
and I would look for the
opportunity to serve.
Thank you very much
very Leslie.
Thank you senator
I'm an attorney inTaos I've been
practicing law for I hate to
admit it forty five years twenty
five inTaos served on the
commission since I was appointed
in twenty nineteen our with the
others I echo everyone's
sentiments also design meetings
are most helpful it does allow
the parties as well as the
commissioners to fully
understand the issues of each of
the hearings I think we've made
some very fair decisions in all
of the hearings that we have had
and they have been it's been a
substantial number the
the backlog when we all were
appointed in in.
The the last in the beginning of
this administration.
was very very high and Carla
and.
The administrative law judge
Katy have done such an amazing
job of organizing getting the
cases wind up getting the
commissioners lined up we have
also
I think we've all worked very
hard and I to have enjoyed it a
lot and would love to the
reappointed
one thing I'd like to say is
that the there's a very good
balance on the commission it is
bipartisan we did get along very
very well and the range of work
experience I think is extremely
helpful and
Please continue to send hearings
ladies that it would be a great
cost savings to the state and
it's also cost savings not only
to the commissioners but to all
of the parties is a large state
and for people who are
unrepresented by counsel to
appear for hearings in Santa Fe
I think would be a big burden on
the claimants and also probably
on all of the attorneys that are
involved
thank you that's all I have to
say and thank you for this
opportunity.
Thank you very much and finally
because football.
The chairman and and the rest of
the committee members thank you
for this opportunity to
to address you I I really concur
with everything that's been said
I I would just by way of example
before COVID hit we traveled
three of us travel down to.
Artesia to have a hearing in one
of the interesting things that
we do as in in the hearing is we
ask the.
The parties if they would like
one last chance to try and
resolve the dispute amongst
themselves and in this instance
that fact happen so three of us
went down Artesia only to have
the parties amicably resolved
their differences and there for
maybe half an hour to learn came
back and I just I just mention
that by with simple to to
To illustrate why having two
meetings of continue to be very
good good thing to do
it's interesting for me I'm a
lawyer I I practice in
Albuquerque on the in crowd us
it's interesting for me
to be on the commission because
I have an opportunity to see on
the other side of the are so to
speak step of
advocating for my clients acting
as a administrative judge if you
will winning the evidence
supplying the law that's been a
very interesting thing for me to
to experience I've enjoyed
working very much here the other
commissioners we take all of us
take our our
Our appointment to the
commission very seriously.
We work hard we spent many hours
all of us on panels going
through just to prove that the
backlog of cases and I believe
all of us consider privilege I
personally take a lot of.
Pride in knowing that we are
helping claimants and
respondents result work through
their claims.
Coming up with a decision
hopefully this is the right
decision and I would welcome the
opportunity to continue in my
role as a commission thank you.
I thank you very much so
let me let me go back to Mr pull
us real quick if you could just
yet kind of your I do some of it
but if you could just kind of
give us a bit of an update.
Where things are with commission
overall and with the members you
did indicate that there are two
vacancies right now on the
commission it doesn't like the
commission is relatively
balanced from around the state
as it is right now but but also
in terms of what the workload is
for members of the commission
and I think we've all heard very
clearly that you all like doing
your hearings by zoom.
but.
Please.
Yes the when I first began in
two thousand nineteen I also I'm
a forty five year lawyer and was
rather astonished at the backlog
of cases that we inherited
Katie support yes is the sort of
acting head of this division at
the time developed a system
whereby we would divide.
In the panels of three to hear
matters she didn't hear solely
as an administrative law judge
we have performed in that role
actually hearing cases and we
for all performed in the role of
an appellate panel where we the
confirm the ministry of law
judges decisions
and or.
Not a farm but overruled
administrative law judge's
decisions perhaps on occasion
and then we also hear various
motions by the parties for
continuances acceptance
settlement checks are up in the
last two years with the case
management system that they
brought into the agency it has
greatly assisted us in getting
the case materials out to the
commissioners on a timely basis.
Prior to the implementation of
this case management system they
had to do it almost literally by
fax or by hand there's a lot of
documents to review materials to
study prior to the hearing
affidavits position papers grief
is an ex etcetera so that the
implementation of the new system
has been very very beneficial.
Of the the addition of
investigators I think there's
been an additional investigator
to the spittle pointed this also
facilitated getting the cases
before us in a timely fashion I
can tell you that being a member
of the New Mexico state market
to spending a lot of conferences
that the reputation of the
agency in terms of the lawyers
that have to make a choice of
appearing before the state
agency you're going to the
federal the EEOC has been
altered dramatically by the
efficiency of the state.
The Human Rights Commission now
they are reverting back and
utilized the services of the
commission and for workers in
previous years just to not
appear that due to the time
deadlines the lack of
commissioners the delays that
worker that the system was not
utilized a Houston fully utilize
now and in a very efficient
manner and I I say that without
any briefing by the staff
without it in the talk to the
staff
frankly did not even know would
be asked to speak to these
issues today but they are
extremely efficient in the way
that they are now handling
thanks I think great park to
Katie support this
Leslie I think the the Attorney
General and the role that the
Attorney General has provided
us.
Even myself for instance not
being an employment lawyer the
role that they have provided us
in educating us on the
burdensome for the standards we
should be applied Xcerra has
been invaluable not once have I
felt that I am imposing by
asking a question or and asking
to be briefed on the applicable
law in the case of the Attorney
General the particular Carlos
been strangling support we up we
could use to more commissioners
I'm not sure who the
appointments are hello to but
we've informed of the change so
to speak of the need it would be
very helpful to get those and
very helpful to amend the open
meetings act so we can continue
to work is sufficiently as we
can by the.
Thank you very much I appreciate
that let me turn to members of
the committee for questions to
the companies to stay Human
Rights Commission.
Senator Ortiz Pena.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and and I'm deeply impressed
with the.
Professionalism and the and the
breadth of background of these
commissioners it it's clear that
the the this body which
unfortunately had become.
Something of a of a marginal.
The function of state
government.
In re in the recent past has
really taken hold now and is is
is fulfilling a lot of what was
intended of when it was first
created my question my first
question is actually for you Mr
chairman.
The need to to conduct their
business by zoom which I think
or rather telecommunication
methods it will that require
real of the the change in law or
could that be done
administratively.
Mr Chairman.
My question is for you.
This gentleman.
Not sure well Sir I was referred
to you Mr Chairman sorry yeah
I'm sorry I'm not sure furnace
falls you may want to chime in
on that as well yes under the
under the open meetings act the
those expectations of an in
person meeting if they open
meetings act does provide.
for having meetings if it's in
the annual
resolution that is adopted by
the by the public body.
where the meetings cam
occur where where members can
occur can can can join and.
Up telephonically or through
other means.
Where they can be heard
and the simultaneous manner
specifically the languages of
otherwise allowed by law or rule
of the public body.
So this should be a rule that's
been administrative rule that
they would pass a member of the
public body may participate in a
meeting of the public body by
means of telef teleconference
telephone or other similar
summer communications equipment
when is otherwise difficult or
impossible.
For the member to attend in
person provided that each member
participating in the conference
telephone can be identified been
speaking all dispensary will
hear each other at the same time
members of the public attending
the meeting were able to hear
any member the public who speaks
during the meeting and so I
think I think the issue that
comes in is whether.
The distance of the state is
something that would qualify is
difficult or impossible or not
but otherwise they could do it
by administrative rules of the
commission.
The Mr Bruce did you want to
comment on that.
I asked that question yesterday
and was informed that it needs
some modification of the open
meetings act the only that and
because of require in person and
perhaps by the petitioners and
respondents what I would
certainly take that issue back
to the commission see if they
can do it from the commission.
Position instead of having to
legislative action on.
I think that you have a lot of
support if it does require
legislative action.
But of course were about to
start a session so the.
If you double check that and let
us know I will then we can
expeditiously to to give you
whatever legal foundation you
need to to take that step.
Mr chairman rather question well
first of the just come in but
I'm impressed that of the bodies
that have come before us so far
this year this is by far the
most geographically
Representative the whole state
and and I'm impressed with the
with the governor's ability to
find people in every quadrant of
the state or willing to serve on
this commission it is
refreshing.
The the last question I have is
for anybody on the on the on the
commission any of the nominees
and it has to do with.
the need you may want to bring
to our attention for additional
resources I know it's already
been brought up that you need to
the more commissioners but how
about staffing level how about
other financial or or or
material resources that you need
to conduct business effectively.
Is the chair person
I am not been made aware of any
problems since the appointment
of New investigators so.
I cannot adequately.
Say that there is a need.
That's good to hear anybody else
have a comment on that.
Thank you Mr chairman those are
all my questions.
Several other members of the
committee center how do you
thank you so much Mr chairman I
want to thank everyone for what
you do as a member of the LGBTQ
plus community I'm happy to know
that you're out there and
helping and so I do remember
reading in the Farmington Daily
Times with the appointment
M. P. so thank you for all the
to do and so thanks to all of
you but my one question is in
addition to hearing
discrimination cases statewide
what else does the commission
do.
This is Victor Polis again I can
tell you that our charges the
broader than that actually is a
fair credit and discrimination
and credit and in house.
I can tell you though that well
I don't have the numbers at my
fingertips ninety percent or
ninety five percent of what
comes before us is that
typically employment related.
Very good thank you once again
thanks for your willingness to
serve it and that's all Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much other
members of the committee
let me ask a couple questions of
interest the nature of the cases
that you all are seeing.
there's a pretty broad brush in
New Mexico up for what is
covered by the Human Rights Act.
and and I'm I'm someone who was
in the past but practitioner in
this area.
and as we have.
I would this was the one things
I appreciate about our laws are
are locked in sports remediation
first.
and and doesn't start with a
dropship starts with fix the
problem.
but
up Mike my question there's been
several comments about a backlog
that existed that you all been
trying to get through is whether
or not
you all are seeing substantive
cases coming through.
cases of a of a of a little more
of a of a frivolous nature.
or cases that perhaps should be
brought in a different.
In a different setting than the
human Human Rights Act could
someone give me a sense of of
that please.
Yes the.
Chair person I'm happy to
address that would invite
comments from Mr brown Mr
Overstreet anyone wants to come
in
I can tell you that
Do we beach voluntarily brought
the names of private.
Mediators to the commission and
discussed with them would you
volunteer time in mediating
cases of that would assist us in
reducing the backlog we each
brought names of potential
mediators some legal some non
legal and I understand that
they've been serving in that
role and which greatly help
reduce the backlog.
the case is that we are seeing
at least I've seen on the panels
archer anything but frivolous.
We've literally.
Had deliberations that have
extended over many hours to
determine how we would vote on
them I probably heard twelve or
thirteen in the last year and I
don't think I would characterize
as single one is being for
Watson I invite into the other
commissioners on.
Please.
Yes ma'am miss our.
Yes yes I agree I don't I've
served on about as many panels
as they can I would say that
these these are cases of Care
Act and that they definitely
The loan in the form in which we
are hearing them I'm sure the
mediators might have a different
view perhaps but luckily the
mediations have been very
successful so I would say this
commission is needed and that it
is doing a very good job for the
state of New Mexico and for the
citizens of New Mexico who are
facing discrimination in the
workplace and in other ways also
thank you.
Thank you
any other
Any other
conferees agency Thompson
service right.
I would just add to the fact
that I serve on several panels
and I can't say that I've sat on
one that I thought was from
list.
I would say most of the time my
panel has been in agreement
whether or not that is right
away is not always the case
sometimes I'm not sure that I
have my mind made up when we
first started deliberations I
think that deliberations are
very thorough and that we are
always come to an agreement but
it is not always the faster
payments or anything but they're
certainly not not all for less
and certainly none that I have
been part of happened that way.
The only issue I noticed your
procedurally you know the
initial investigation of the
staff current Senator Steinborn
is this our local you know
there's definitely merit on both
sides I survived our panel where
you so I didn't have a valid
position.
I'm sorry which is the last part
of this.
Every time I served on both
sides had a valid decision you
know only ones I can pre-filled
I certainly by the time we get
to our level you know there
there's a valid use the
sincerely held.
Just got off okay okay so I mean
and that and and nothing else
that tells me that that at the
staff level they're doing a good
job of calling out.
Basis.
Your yeah before they get to you
are there are there.
In the in the work that you all
have been doing and as you've
been looking at cases.
Are there are there are areas
that we that you get a sense
maybe are tangential or not
directly related to what you're
able to rule on that maybe we
should consider amending our act
to include if that makes sense
and let me let me go to
miss a show more and and the
agency Kalash and then and then
and then work our way around
others.
Thank you Mr chair I have not.
Any issues that may be could be
added to the to the legal to the
law basically Human Rights Act.
thank there was a case where
some new legislation have been
passed and we deliberated on
that and that that was
interesting and enlightening so
we've been able to to use the
provisions of general state law
and discrimination law
specifically.
To to come to decisions in our
deliberations.
Thank you this collection.
I do not see any need to add
anything else to the Human
Rights Commission of what we
have done so far has worked.
And.
With the cases that I've heard.
We have always managed to come
to a conclusion.
And most of the staff has been
weeded out before we get to.
So most of the time we can make
a logical decision.
And sometimes you know it's a
long Representative one case was
three days.
Let us part of that down.
So we just we just all take it
in stride.
Thank you very much and and and
it's also very clear that you
all are very committed to the
work that you're doing and
putting a lot into it.
and as a group of people who who
get together deliberate for
thirty to sixty days at a time
on a number of issues we we
appreciate very much what you
all do and and the amount of
time that the stakes and know
that this is something that you
do in addition to everything
else happening in your life.
And it really is amazing that
these issues are able to be
dealt with in this manner on
behalf of the state of New
Mexico so as the chair of this
committee let me let me on
behalf of the committee thank
you all for the services this
limited offer the the of the
state Senator Ortiz can.
Just a couple of questions that
your questions raised in my mind
Mr chairman
Does the commission deal with
public employee the employment
discrimination or is that dealt
with separately.
It is chairman my understanding
that we do although I have not
had one yet the present.
It's it's good to know that that
that there is that back up to
the system and then my last
question the the the I was
curious about the percentages
because.
Not knowing I I would have
thought that housing
discrimination issues.
Would have would have played a
larger.
Would have been a lot of
comprised a larger percentage of
the cases you deal with that you
said it's it's rare that there's
a housing discrimination case it
comes up it before you.
Mr chairman of the committee I I
would refer to the other
commissions on the station as
well because in the of three to
four years and I've shared I
have never had one LESC the
complaint raised nor have I had
anyone come to me and stated
that they wish they had a form
for such a.
About what I will.
Just to follow up on that I will
let you know that.
there's been there's been talk
about how to how to deal with
the issue of of of restrictive
covenants.
Are these older restrictive
covenants on housing on on
property.
And and I think the approach
that we're going to take
is to is to.
that if if these are not is this
legislative process by which the
should be dealt with in the
normal course of business but
that if if they're not being
dealt with the mineral point of
business.
that it that it becomes a
violations to Human Rights Act
we don't think that will add
very many cases to what you all
do.
but it would be it would be
affected leave that that people
filing deeds whatever would have
an affirmative responsibility to
make sure that
that if there's restrictive
housing covenants related to
that to that the that would be
removed.
and so that would that would be
what if somebody's not not doing
the work on that so from a
suspect.
Yes I would say in my time on
the commission one of the things
I've become aware of is that.
The minutes sometimes don't even
know that they had these rights
many come into these hearings
and I think everything I've
heard has been on an employment
nature I haven't heard any of
the housing issue cases if any
have been filed but I will say
that yesterday I do real estate
in addition to some other work
and yesterday I was speaking
with the title company who told
me that there are still.
they're still dealing at the
title company level with deeds
that prohibit women from owning
property and I don't know if
that's something you'll be
addressing in this session but I
was rather astonished to hear
that that is even still a
problem in the state of New
Mexico of the apparently it
still is so that and I believe
that's in either restrictive
covenants for.
can be prohibitions in the title
itself that sense you know a
woman can own this property
is not a state that has that is
correct there are needs as a
woman cannot on this property
their deeds that say a person of
is not of the Caucasian race
cannot reside on the property
unless they are in a service
quarters
there are there are a variety of
other deeds in New Mexico along
those lines there may be some of
the religious nature as well it
all falls within the area that
the Human Rights Commission
deals with and within those
those those thematic areas of
discrimination and while all of
those under the federal housing
act or.
Are
For civil.
That doesn't change the fact
that they are there in that that
people would like something in
state law that allows the law is
the ability to say that that we
reject these on behalf of the
state so Michelle more you have
at hand.
Thank you Mr chair okay Kerr
with this Leslie that
Well first of all I've never had
anything except employment cases
either since twenty nineteen but
and I'm myself didn't wasn't
aware that the that are
commission could deal with
credit and housing basis so I
think what we it would be
incumbent upon us as a body
perhaps to do some publicity
we as you've heard we've been
dealing with quite a backlog in
really don't have a lot of extra
time that I think that that can
change and should change so that
we can make the citizens of New
Mexico more aware of what we can
handle.
You know you all been working so
hard want to clear up the
backlog you'll feel like you
have extra time.
So very well and there's nothing
more for the committee once
again we are we thank you all
for your service will be voting
on your confirmations during the
legislative session we will be
work with miss Salazar to make
sure that you all are aware of
when that will be taking place
and there will also be
scheduling when the floor votes
will be happening that is when
your Sanchez will be presenting
your nominations to the floor of
the Senate and the and you'll be
invited to come if you'd like
and and so that in the days of
the Senate.
Are there on the floor in front
of us but that is is not a
requirement but that is
something certainly this will be
invited to do and and of course
it will be webcast as well so
thank you all so very much for
your service and thank you for
joining us today to.
Thank you.
You're going to move to the a
hearing on the New Mexico
renewable energy transmission
authority and we have two people
for that.
Authority that are before us
today both of them
being sponsored by senator Wirth
if we had to step out to do to
take care of some of the
business but
he is you very much well aware.
that you all were coming up
to date and is excited to be
presenting you when you get the
for actually three of you.
and then and in addition we have
the director of Rita
Mr Fernando Martinez who's also
joining us.
and so if we can promote and Mr
Doug how.
Mr Robert bush.
And Mr Jeremy Lewis.
And and I'm going to ask Senator
how to meal if you would share
this part of the hearing for me.
And
and and so as soon as we get Mr
Lewis.
And as well.
There we go thank you very much
Mr Lewis and then what we will
do them again just follow the
same process of asking each of
you to give us a little run down
of of what to
what do you do the rest your
life what got you to the
commission.
Are the authority
and a little bit about the work
that you've been doing on the
thirty and then Serna will be
yielding to Mr Martinez to kind
of give us an overview of what's
happening with the authority
right now and then we'll open it
up for questions from the from
the committee Center how do we
have please proceed.
Good morning and thank you for
joining us I want to start in
the order of the names listed in
my agenda and with that I'm
gonna start with Mr Robert bush.
Good morning everyone thank you
for the opportunity once again
to address reappointment
I would appreciate it if you
would on your agenda make sure
that you managed to spell my
name correctly I just like to
tell people I'm spelled like the
beer not like the president.
So you may notice that my name
is it shown on the video is
correct.
my background is starting out
many years ago as an engineer on
the space program I worked on a
Pueblo I worked on the Mars
lander but eventually I got into
the utility business and for
most of the rest of my life I
worked for two large public
utilities I have a undergraduate
degree in electrical engineering
I have a graduate degree in
electrical engineering I have a
masters in business and I have a
specific drugs from Harvard in
both finance and Public
operations
I have been the chairman of the
renewable energy transmission
authority now for over ten years
we've had our ups and downs as
the nature of this business has
become more and more attuned to
what can be accomplished with
renewable energy resources
I would like to mention to you
is that about two years ago read
about did a very comprehensive
study of what can be
accomplished in New Mexico with
renewable energy and that study
is now just been updated and
will be released for public use
within just about a week to ten
days and it's very comprehensive
and looks at all of the various
opportunities we have in New
Mexico to take advantage of the
phenomenal renewable resources
that we have chair Mister
Martinez can give you a little
more of an update on the various
projects we've been working on
but
One thing I would just mention
is that now after.
Having worked on a project that
I started along with several
other colleagues over a decade
ago it has now going into
service it is a hundred and
sixty mile line three hundred
and forty five thousand volts
it'll carry over eight hundred
megawatts and the investment to
do all of this in the state of
New Mexico was well over a
billion app dollars this line
would not have happened without
reading.
so what was originally
envisioned by governor
Richardson
Way back when he originally
appointed me has now come very
much to fruition and I will let
our executive director Mr
Martinez tell you about some of
our other projects so that's
kind of a snapshot you asked
about the other things we do I'm
a licensed substitute teacher in
Santa Fe and when COVID isn't
raging I teach math and science
as assault so other duties as
assigned thank you for the
opportunity to talk with you
this morning and I'm sure if you
have any questions all four of
us will be able to help you with
that thank you so much and of
the former educator thank you
for being a substitute and just
as a side note I think I could
see everyone's eyes light up
with a smile when you send your
you serve as a substitute
teacher thank you for that I'm
not going to move on to Douglas
how.
Good morning my name is Doug
Allen I have had the pleasure of
meeting some of the asked that
all briefly introduce myself to
the committee.
I currently work as a consultant
to a number of organizations
here in the western United
States my focus is been on
helping to create a larger
western electricity markets
which would save consumers
billions of dollars electricity
costs and facilitate the
creation of a more robust
electricity transmission network
throughout the west.
Previously I had served as a
member of the governing board of
the western energy imbalance
market and us it's chair in
twenty seventeen I also provided
expert witness testimony and
utility cases across the western
states.
Twenty eleven I was self
appointed to fill a vacant seat
on the New Mexico public
regulation commission prior to
that I was a senior director of
energy consulting for a company
called Cambridge energy research
associates.
Before that I worked for
eighteen years for general
public utilities a large eastern
utility and in that role I was
vice president of its regulatory
policy.
The bachelor degree from Kansas
State University and a master's
and doctorate from the
university of Pennsylvania all.
Attics.
I served as an interim appointee
on the read four now for several
months no such a thing the value
of a brought to the organization
has been my nearly forty years
of experience in the electricity
industry and my current work in
helping to bring about a larger
western regional markets in
which read a complainant pork
roll with that I'll turn it back
to you thank you.
Perfect thank you so much And
next I'll go to Mr Jeremy Lewis.
Good morning everybody
okay to be here today to
introduce myself
similar similar to dog I've I've
met some of you before I worked
in state government for
just over a dozen years I lived
in New my name is Jeremy Lewis I
currently work as the director
of the office of renewable
energy at the State Land Office
and
I'm originally from
Massachusetts I attended your
university of Massachusetts
bachelor science and natural
resource studies
and after graduation attended
joined the Peace Corps and
served as an agro forestry
extension agent in Cameroon in
the mid nineties
upon return I move to thousand
and worked with the Rocky Mount
youth court for approximately
five years
moved out Albuquerque to earn my
graduate degree in community
regional planning our focus on
renewable energy
After that I joined the Energy
minerals and natural resources
department through the energy
conservation management division
I worked with this group for
possibly ten years focusing on
renewable energy energy
efficiency alternative
transportation our programs
projects policy
I also had a year and a half
working with the western
resource advocates as a
transmission policy analyst and
I'm really happy to be here
today to
hopefully joined of the reader
board to help support and
promote well conceived
transmission in support of
renewable energy and energy
storage in New Mexico.
Very good thank you so much and
so lastly I'd like to turn it
over to the director of the New
Mexico renewable energy
transmission authority Mr but
not in the Martinez if you have
any comments you'd like to make.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
committee members a appreciate
the opportunity it's always a
pleasure and honor to be able to
present to you all just take a
few minutes to to talk to you
know start off with the reason
New Mexico renewable energy
transmission authorities
background this is created in
recognition of the limitations
of New Mexicos aging electric
transmission grid and how that
pose.
Allen just to the development of
renewable energy generation in
New Mexico.
So reader for short was
established by the New Mexico
legislature in two thousand
seven to plant finance develop
and acquire high voltage
transmission lines and energy
storage projects to promote
economic development in New
Mexico.
So transmission renewable energy
development it creates thousands
of construction and permanent
jobs and it also created
billions of dollars in capital
investment in New Mexico.
Our whole mission at Rita is to
implement the electricity
transmission and energy storage
infrastructure needed to enable
aggressive development of our
extensive renewable resources.
Working hard to deliver clean
LFC electricity from wind and
solar both in state and out of
state export markets as part of
a statewide grid modernization
it's imperative to expand
transmission.
Otherwise the renewable and
clean energy electricity targets
are unattainable.
We've been working very hard
with developers utilities state
local officials tribe's military
installations in the public to
achieve a brighter energy future
for renewable energy and I'm
happy to report New Mexico's of
leader in clean energy across
the nation.
Everyone on this committee knows
that New Mexico has some of the
best wind geothermal and sort
solar resources in that country
and it read a we think that with
a thoughtful and deliberate
approach approach to the
development of its renewable
resources New Mexico can develop
a major renewable energy
industry so I think there's a
lot of potential here to really
expansions transmission and
renewable energy projects to
some date having the
manufacturing associated with
it.
I do want to highlight a few of
the of the retail projects is
and chairman bush mention the
reader pattern Western Spirit
project completed billions of
dollars of financing
for the transmission line and
the association went far and
both the transmission line and
the associated wind farms are
now in commercial operation this
is making eight hundred
megawatts of central New Mexico
renewable energy are this going
to be transmitted is being
transmitted on that on this
line.
so this is
Project the transmission line it
has been transferred over to PNM
they acquired the project in the
transmission line is now the
biggest transmission system
upgraded to PNM great since the
mid nineteen eighty so this is a
very major project in addition
R. in the last year we also
entered into a co development
relationship with sons here
sonji is a five hundred twenty
mile transmission project in New
Mexico and Arizona.
With three hundred fifty miles
of it being located in New
Mexico it's rated at four
thousand five hundred megawatts
and to give you a little bit of
scale one hundred megawatts of
power a hundred twenty thousand
homes so we're talking major
utility scale power here we were
also working with
average which is a company that
acquired the lucky corridor
projects in and we're working on
projects in the northeast part
of the state has tremendous
tremendous from renewable
resources we've entered into
the.
Memorandum of understanding with
Invenergy for the development of
several hundred miles of
electric transmission lines and
the associated thousands of
megawatts of renewable energy
projects that go along with that
we also have about a dozen other
major developers were working
with that are interested in
forming a relationship with read
up and we're currently working
on and advancing those
partnerships and working up some
of the treatments so the bottom
line here is billions of dollars
of transmission projects with
thousands of jobs are moving
towards completion our readers
this a second central building
to making renewables in our
state working and making the
energy transition work you know
we need transmission capacity
being built otherwise we can't
on lock up these renewable
energy transmission projects the
other thing I want to mention
that this the chairman did talk
a little bit about was the
reader transmission and energy
storage study in twenty twenty
we completed a landmark study of
renewable energy in New Mexico
now twenty twenty two as the
chairman mention we are about to
issue the update to the study so
we've assessed our renewable
energy potential how to
competitively develop this
renewable energy in the state.
We've evaluated the transmission
capacity needed to make all of
it possible and we've also
analyze economic benefits it
come to it with all that this
development sore study up it's
going to look at where New
Mexico's one with the ball the
from isolated individual
networks to regional upgraded
and flexible requests so we're
looking at regional efforts such
as regional transmission
organizations or similar
structure because we know at the
end of the day we need to have
more geographical diversity of
our transmission line you need
to have more interconnections
and needs to be a modern bread
across the west if we're going
to make all of this work we're
also looking very hard at it
utility scale storage and what
that means for dispatchable
capacity and the third thing
we're looking at in this study
up because our how to make a
state and federal permitting
processes more streamlined
without cutting corners to build
transmission capacity in less
time Mr Chairman mentioned the
Western Spirit project took over
ten years but if we want to meet
our clean energy goals and and
get all the economic benefits
from it we're gonna have to do
this at an unprecedented pace so
we're hoping we can run
permitting processes in parallel
and create a predictable of
regulatory landscape.
So with that I I think I all
leave that up to questions from
the committee for the members
are from myself thank you.
Thank you so much Mr Martinez
now come to members of the
Senate rules committee any
questions we have a question
from to Senator Ortiz the Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and and.
Thank you so much all the
nominees and Mr Martinez for
what is a very impressive.
essentially progress report on
how we're fully.
Or how we're approaching full
you utilization of the of the
potential for returns that was
envision when when we created
this back gosh it's hard to
believe almost fifteen years ago
It my question really has to do
it first of all water the
natural resources committee
visited the.
A pattern Western Spirit project
near corona this summer and I've
got to say that was it was mind
blowing the scale of it.
The the speed with which they
were erecting those enormous a
wind turbines the whole thing
was very impressive and and the
care with which it was being
done to protect the the the the
rights of the landowners and the
and the ranchers that that still
continue to utilize the land.
I guess my question really has
to focus in on.
Why did that take ten years
entertaining or other things
that we might be able to do.
Legislatively that would support
your efforts at at a more rapid
deployment of these natural
resources these these of
renewable resources.
As chairman if if the other
members are okay let me start Mr
Martinez mentioned several ideas
that we will propose to all of
you in the study that's just
being completed and I mentioned
this to secretary Grandhomme
when I met with for a couple
months ago when she was here in
the state of New Mexico
fundamentally.
We know where we need to build
new transmission to take
advantage of these simply
amazing.
Renewable energy resources that
exist in New Mexico so where to
build isn't the problem and as
you just mentioned.
We're pretty good at knowing how
to do it engineers and
constructors can build
transmission in the United
States.
Pretty much within a period of
about one to two years the
fundamental problem is getting
permission to build the lines
across a combination of federal
state and private lands and for
example Western Spirit took over
four hundred individual
easements and agreements with
landowners in New Mexico to be
allowed to build the line for
the routing that we now have in
place.
We do have suggestions about how
to do this without treading on
people's environmental concerns
or being unreasonable tune
ranchers and landowners and a
lot of it has to do with the
endless ability that we now have
in the United States to litigate
any.
people now use.
Lawsuits as a way to delay and
stop the construction of many
times of projects not just
transmission.
This doesn't take away people's
rights but it certainly makes
things expedited and without
going through all the details
those are generally the sorts of
things that we're suggesting we
asked the Legislature to
consider so Fernando mentioned a
couple ideas I'll let him take
these over for just a second but
that gives you a little
background on why did it take
ten years because it's very
difficult to get the approval of
the route.
Mr chairman and committee
members you know to take it from
there the chairman is exactly
right
You go through the scoping
process and you do all this
stuff in the permitting process
in the financing process in the
construction and really the most
difficult step is obtaining
approval to construct
transmission and renewable
energy projects more so the
transmission lines that's far
more difficult Mr chairman
mentioned you know when you're
talking hundreds of miles of
transmission lines you're
running through hundreds
literally hundreds of parcels of
land different landowners
whether the federal government
state government private
landowners tribes on you got to
be very careful not to affect
military installations because
we also know that they
Representative tens of billions
of dollars in investments and
thousands of jobs in the state
and they have.
The mission of protecting
national security so we have to
be very careful about how we
develop
Transmission lines does not
adversely affect other entities
in the state we need to be very
careful bottom line it's it's
difficult to get the permission
to do it you know and
environmental impact statement
process can be many many years
if you're running to federal
last page in New Mexico it's
it's very difficult to avoid
going through federal lands on
so that's one big hang up you're
dealing with different county
requirements every time you run
through several counties there's
there's different requirements
and different things you need to
do of course you always have to
look at community benefits and
things like that and you know
help people understand the
benefits if they're getting from
seen these transmission lines
you know it's not always evident
unless the lights go out just
how important transmission lines
are and you get these costly
power outages so I guess in
short some of the
recommendations will be making
our our to the permitting
processes at the state and the
federal levels to run things in
parallel so that it's not
sequential we're.
You get you have to get one
approval before you can move on
to the next process you know
that's one example of where we
can streamline and as the
chairman.
Mention we are not interested in
cutting and corners we are more
interested in making a more
efficient process and and so
that's what we're going to be
really focus in on is is just
how to make things more
efficient when this study comes
out we will make sure to present
it to the the appropriate
legislative committee so we can
go over in detail some of these
ideas that we have are we still
getting permission to bill
transmission renewable energy
projects can be expedited.
Well that's very encouraging and
and I look forward to seeing the
recommendations it's it's just
been the.
The head scratcher as to why
this process is taken so long
but I understand if you've got
four hundred different parcels
and each one raises in effect
the same issue each time that
files a separate action it it.
Yes I'm really eager to see what
you're recommending is a way of
of expediting of this because
You know I'm struck by the fact
that when.
The Europeans came and and sees
the land from the Indians there
was no
No question of recourse and when
the Santa Fe ring.
Let the seizure of land from the
Spanish settlers there was The
New Mexicans of course there was
no no real recourse but all of a
sudden now it takes a ten years
to get permitting to to just.
Move the line across property
That clearly of of of the an
issue of great importance to the
landowners but I wonder to what
extent some of the issues that
people getting raised.
Once a result they should be
resolved I mean the issue of
migratory birds for example they
brought that up at the at
pattern and they have a way of
dealing with that the the the
that makes real careful
provision for that where the
windmills will will will shut
down at certain times of there
is evidence of migration taking
place.
Once that's established it
shouldn't have to be
reestablished over and over
again in case after case but I
certainly defer to Urals
expertise on this and and look
forward to the recommendations
that are coming forward.
so thank you it's exciting to
see New Mexico finally starting
to take advantage of our of our
great potential and the I
appreciate the the efforts that
you all make it helping us
realize that also in the other
work that you all have done.
in your previous jobs in your
current jobs aside from your
work on the on the commission
thank you very much Mr chairman.
Thank you so much Senator any
other questions.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you to each of you for
your service as we always said
you you do have other lives and
then giving of your time to
service so appreciated.
I in in addition and thank you
senator Ortiz Pino for your your
questions and you briefly
mention the but what type of
relationship of those Rita have
with regards to the tribal
communities here in New Mexico.
We work very closely with the
various tribal communities for
example the line that I
mentioned and so did the our
executive director Mr Martinez
it's now just going into
operation goes through the just
let up wet well and we have a
very comprehensive and
satisfactory to them agreement
to allow that line to pass
through their tribal lands so
any time we affect one of the
tribal
areas we always work closely
with that particular tribal
entity to make sure that they
are satisfied with what is being
accomplished we've had more
recent overtures from for
example the Navajo Nation with
respect to how to move power to
the west.
Mexico has so much renewable
energy far more than we could
use our own state that we have
the very great advantage of
being able to potentially sell
this power to the west typically
through Arizona to California
where the demands are just
enormous and I know that the
Navajo reservation is quite
interested in how to.
Work on projects that will allow
that to take place so.
I think the answer to your
question is we always work with
the tribes whenever it's an
important part of the project
that we have under way.
and I appreciate the the
description Mr chairman
you know I guess one of the
things that always comes to mind
Mr chairs that we talk about
membership and it's not pretty
you know specifically on those
of you who are here but when we
look to make appointments to
serve on some of these very
important boards commissions and
such as to make sure that we
have across representation of
our communities and I know that
we talk about what we do with
regards to energy which to me is
land based right here in the
state of New Mexico
you need.
Ample space in which is why you
have the authority to condemn
property and such but I I would
encourage
that maybe some recruitment be
looked into to make sure that we
have a representative from one
of our tribal communities to sit
on this authority because I
think it just shows our of our
willingness and our commitment
to working with our tribes here
in the state since we have
twenty three of them I think we
need to make sure that that we
are Representative and and again
it's not your full team those of
you who are here but I just want
to put that out into the into
the air the world that we need
to make sure that we do and look
for representation on these up
committee so thank you thank you
very much Mr well if you allow
me you may not know that we have
a representative from one of the
tribes who has been appointed to
our board of CDJ senha has
recently been appointed last
year and she has a travel
membership so
I think we're trying to do
exactly what you asked.
No and I appreciate that because
we don't have the list of the
current board members here in
front of us so I'm operating
just a little bit and and.
Harshest that the dark but just
without having the the last so
I'm glad that there is
representation but my statement
still stands to make sure that
we do have across our boards and
commissions that we do have
representation so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you so much Senator any
other questions Senators.
I do have one question so we
know that by the year twenty
forty five California needs to
meet the mandate of of being one
hundred percent clean energy and
so Mister Martinez talked about
New Mexico leading the way and
the needs of modernizing the
grid across the west Mr Martinez
is there any projects under way
with New Mexico being able to
deliver energy to neighboring
states or states out west like
California.
Yes Mr chairman and committee
members the Western Spirit
project is going to circle that
in state needs and an out of
state export markets we do have
is you know in New Mexico the
energy transition act which is
going to also requires zero
carbon electricity by twenty
forty five for utilities and
twenty fifty four rural electric
cooperative so very similar
California that way and there's
other states in the west have
similar clean energy policies
and goals but our whole mission
and read as meet our in state
needs which is quite small in
comparison to the western other
western states so we're working
very hard to do both and and we
have a.
We're we're meeting both schools
with the projects that we're
undertaking now.
Thank you thank you for that
that's exciting to hear so just
as a reminder we're not going to
be voting today we'll be taking
a vote during the session next
week and then planning on moving
ahead to the full Senate
confirmation letter later and
the thirty day session and so
you are welcome to come and so
on that date of the Senate
confirmation he can also
participate in the is to so with
no other questions I'm going to.
Sure.
If I could rooftop we just
really quickly I apologize for
walking into the back in but I
think I am the.
Floor sponsor of all three of
these confirmation so I figure
it's important to say a few
things
First I very much appreciate
each of these individuals state
to serve and having watched
Rita.
over many many years being
around when it was created.
Being around when it almost went
away.
On the work that was done to
keep it going and now watching
it being.
Reinvigoration really what.
And doing what it was intended
to do it's just been very
rewarding thing and I I'm very
happy to sponsor these three
individuals who I think.
Again all have tremendous
backgrounds and bring huge
wealth of knowledge and it's
exciting to see what's happening
with the build out of renewables
and transmission such an
important thing in this public
private.
Partnerships.
Is really beginning to work so I
just want to say that I kind of
ran up the stairs to get here in
another meeting so apologize for
being late but we'll be there as
the sponsor on the floor for
each of you along with the floor
about self thank you Mr chair
thank you senator Wirth and so
thank you for making it on the
Nick of time so with that we're
going to recess for lunch will
be reconvening at one thirty
where we'll be hearing from the
conferees of the spaceport
Authority technology research
collaborative the tourism
commission at New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy board thank
you gentlemen for joining us
this morning and we'll be
