All right we are without we are
broadcasting right now.
Well.
Stronger Mr chair if you'd be so
kind as to call the roll Senator
Baca.
Senator Lopez.
Here Senator Moores.
Senator o'neill.
Senator TCP now.
Senator Pirtle I see him
connecting.
Senator Stewart.
Your Senator Wirth.
In order to route
would.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Duhigg care Senator Ivey
Soto.
I am president if you would go
back to the ones that the answer
Senator Baca.
You just Senator Pirtle.
Okay Senator you have a quorum.
I thank you very much I
appreciate it Senator Moores is
also drained us if you could
not that and this is been very
impressed that you that you are
going for these for these
meetings from are are you are
you sitting on a part time
share.
On the floor is this
background.
I cannot disclose my location
currently.
To use this background it's a
with the band with issues that
we have I'm not in the capital
but it just looks better than
what I have to offer share.
Well what about.
Well I'll just.
Administrative things on our
meeting today the first is
Senator Williams has requested
that we remember Senate bill
forty eight.
So I just sort of everybody is
aware of that I think the or
that we're going to go in and
we're going to do Senate bill
Rio for our first.
Senate bill three oh four am
going to take some public
comments our our on December one
hundred which is the fusion
voting bill I don't remember the
date with that bill.
Given the time frame we had on
that day we didn't take public
comment.
And so on since Senator Woods
our work is bill I just I wanted
to Senator Ortiz Y. Pino had
requested if we could set aside
fifteen minutes offer public
comment on that bill and and so
that that seems to be a good
time to do that after that we'll
go to.
Senate bill two fifty four
which is Senators Senator Moores
and Representative Eli and then
will and the day with Senator
resolution eight which I see on
the agenda they promised are
correctly statewide millage for
schools originally it's that
statewide all of which were
schools and I was really
interested to see what Senator
was doing and I would urge in
the constitution
so Senator so we will get to
that point but before we get to
Senator McKenna has
been on very district you
graphic data I want to be able
to Senator Baca for couple
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members
I wanted to address the the
remarks in the line of
questioning for writing that I
made with the referee in
reference to the confirmation of
secretary Smith up and I I
wanted to let the the body know
that I spoke to her and did
apologize to her for that
insensitive line of questioning
that I did leave her through.
And the and we had a great
conversation and talked about
New Mexico in our families and
and really really just a great
lady that I plan on a of.
I plan on supporting on the
floor here coming up this week
hopefully on the other thing is
is that I wanted to next extend
an apology to you all and not
really I I know that that that
we do a lot of work here and I
certainly understand that a
couple of you probably had some
unwanted attention as a by
product of my actions and I sure
did not want to lay that on your
shoulders and I do not want to
detract from the good work that
we have done so far and the work
that I expect that we'll do
going forward so I appreciate
your indulgence this morning I
look forward to a productive
week and getting some things
done for the people of New
Mexico thank you for your time.
Thank you very much for those
words very much appreciated.
Senator McKenna Senate Bill R.
three four one districts should
replicate.
Yes good morning chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for I'm hearing this bill
this morning hi
Like I said this is just be
three oh four voting districts
geographic data I would chairman
if you allow I would like to
make an opening statement about
the bill and then also welcome
my subject matter expert agency
contact where she has a one to
two minute statement that would
be okay Sir I'm gonna okay great
so that's the three oh four
would authorize our secretary of
state to ask our thirty three
counties to share their
geographic information data also
known as GIS with her office.
In turn a contractor which will
be assigned later will ensure
that the consistency of this
data will be posted to the sos
website.
So that users such as
elected officials members of the
public and organizations that
helps you get voters information
so that they can vote
intelligently can use it for
their respective uses.
it's my understanding are
secretary of state is aware of
this legislation and supports it
I'm she in fact was
Had intentions to propose it for
statute and Sir she's pleased
that we are following through
with the and this bill.
Moreover importantly of this
work would not have any cost to
the treasury as it's my
understanding the secretary has
a federal grant to achieve this.
I'm so with that I would like to
introduce chairman and members
of the committee agency contact
pack she is an open data expert
and she's also a.
Very trusted volunteer with the
league of women voters I I asked
if she could say a couple things
about their experience with the
current status
thank you chairman.
Thank you very much miss
practice proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
This bill came out of the league
of women voters efforts last
year to produce our nonpartisan
voter guide as an online website
covering the entire state of New
Mexico.
To show each voter a customized
valid we needed a way to figure
out that voters from the voters
address which districts that
border was and it turned out
that was hard to get for New
Mexico the data it is initially
available we spent many hours
chasing it down some counties to
know where they kept the data
some wanted to charge us and for
some counties we never did get
that so we could ensure those
voters who their candidate for.
Is B. three oh four is intended
to fix that the bill has two
important provisions first that
the data be available to the
public without charge all in one
place to find consistency and
seconded to be available in a
geographic improve information
system for Matt.
What do I just formats because
that's the way computers
Representative maps some
counties find a PDF for JPEG of
their districts on their website
but if you try to zoom in and
find out where your house might
be there is not enough detail
and you can't use it to provide
an interactive map that lets you
zoom in enlighten your house or
to build an application like our
voter guide.
Having all the data in one place
and in the same format provides
uniformity across counties in
her districts are set up that
would make things easier I hope
for the secretary of state and
for anyone printing ballots as
well as for organizations like
the league that want to provide
voting information.
I'm happy to answer any
questions you have about the
bill thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you Senator.
Chairman and members of the
committee we stand for any
questions that you were the
meeting may have for us thank
you.
Our thank you very much I do
note that the secretary of state
itself is with us this morning
this does affect your office so
let me actually as we go to
comments are begin with you and
then we'll proceed to see if
there's on what logged in for
COVID.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
Maggie Toulouse Oliver New
Mexico secretary of state I want
to think Senator McKenna and the
league of women voters for
bringing this legislation
forward as Senator McKenna
mention this was already a
project that my office was
beginning to work on as part of
election modernization and
security we do have some grant
funds from the federal
governments to improve our
election modernization work in
the secretary of state's office
that had already been at your
marks for this project and I
think it's really important for
folks to know
when I first came to the
secretary of state's office four
years ago I was actually
incredibly surprised that we did
not already have this data built
out this mapping data on in
Berlin county where I was the
clerk we had our own internal
GIS project in New maps
available and what I didn't know
was that other county clerks did
not and for variety of reasons
right I mean you know whether or
not they even have that capacity
internally within the county
etcetera and this is something
that you know four years at
citizens and constituents have
been asking where can I access
to the state at so we we noticed
a while back that it's very much
necessary not just for the
purposes of having voters in
campaigns and candidates and
citizens have access to the
state of our for our own ability
to effectively administer
elections to be able to build
out districts at all levels of
government as we are preparing
for elections so I with that Mr
chair and members thank you
again we're very much in support
of this legislation and and
would appreciate your support as
well thank you.
Thank you very much madam
secretary
misquote we have anybody who has
indicated a desire to find
public comments on this.
I'm sure we do not have anybody
for public comment on the stock.
Well in that case our questions
and comments from committee.
Senator Ortiz it can.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator McKenna.
I guess exactly what it is is
this does.
Is some of the Leeward voters
wanted to let somebody know
who's.
There were you just find out
what precinct State Lyndon and
given that information from that
why do they need a man to do
that.
Doesn't County already assigned
increasing to every voter.
Thank you a chairman and thank
you senator Ortiz you can now
because I was not first hand
working with the.
The voters guide last year I'd
like to defer to my subject
matter expert agency kept a pack
to answer the question Mr back
would you please answer the
question from Senator cheesy
Pino and chairman thank you
Senator to subpoena.
And Mr Chairman that it is not
available to the public.
There there probably is a record
somewhere of which presented
voter lives in but it's not
something that we were able to
get as as an outside
organization.
So that's part of what we're
asking for.
Mr Chairman and Mr.
Senator mission in the state of.
So would the solution we
recently made precinct assigned
remember.
Available.
Why do we have to go to issue I
just.
To get to that.
Well yes for a list of precincts
are kind of equivalent if you
have the precincts of the
precinct list you can make the
day I just and vice versa so
actually we would be happy with
either one although you would
also need.
A list of which precincts
comprise which districts because
the water doesn't really care
what presentation he only cares
about what district is in and
who is candidates are.
Is it any clearer.
I'm sorry I'm still a little.
It seems like this is a much
more grandiose solution for what
would be a the minutes from much
more grandiose illusion to
what's a relatively simple
problem that is the the blue
voters have the precinct.
And the district of them
available I mean.
The county clerk she tells me
what creases coming in at the
electors all online I just enter
my address and the precinct
is coming off of the GIS system
or is just coming up off of.
Representative registration card
and tells me what precinct I'm
in.
so I'm I guess I'm.
This will cause any money
apparently the federal
government will pay for for it
was a great I I'm just not.
It all clear on.
Why is this solution.
Yeah yes on tractor doing all
this information on mapping if
the county is already assigned a
the county is already assigned
increasing to each voter.
What information is and what's
available to you or anybody else
wanting to know the list of
folders in district.
I'm not sure.
Senator to the panel I'm not
sure that.
There would be any easier a list
of every voter in the state.
Is already pretty big list and
that's actually more data than
just having the geographic
boundaries of each district but
as I said either one would be
adequate because if you have
that list you can create the J.
S. districts and vice versa.
Mr chairman and and and and
Senator McKenna possibly of the
secretary of state has answers
as well.
Mr Chairman representative
cheesy Pino I think and and I
you know I am not.
Eckley familiar with that.
Work that went into the vote
four one one project that
the league of women voters
generation same not intimately
familiar with that but what I
can say is so it's a difference
between talking about
a specific voter and how their
precinct and at their address
where they're registered verses
where is that address precinct
it right and so I think you know
the the goal that the league has
and and you know that sort of
over and above what what we're
intending to do with this
project what we're intending to
do with this project is to
ensure that we can provide
publicly available maps for any
political district in the state
right which doesn't currently
exist and then what we can do
with that data if they choose is
is created
directory for no matter where
you live to be able to see what
district that is starting from
congressional district all the
way down to water conservation
district present right and so I
think that that it's it may be a
distinction without a difference
and so in most cases but but I
think that's the goal Mr chair
and and Senator Ortiz Y. Pino if
I'm not mistaken.
Will I will.
The Mr chairman or listen to
further debate on this.
Just one other question that I
had.
for the sponsor or possibly for
for the secretary of state or
Mr.
Is there.
It is going to be available to
anybody who calls and wants to
know four different people the I
mean is this going to be.
subject to any kind of controls
over who can access this data.
Maybe Mr go ahead.
Go ahead US secretary.
Mr chair senator Ortiz Pino this
is not going to be in terms of
the publicly available
information that will be on the
secretary of state's website so
I'm gonna be tied directly to
any individual voter it's just
going to be tied to.
District maps right so I want to
know I have an address in mind I
want to know what district of
falls into or I want to map of
all of the districts in the
whatever distract I can I can
access that data it's not going
to be like.
It I have a person in mind and I
want to find out where they live
that that.
Be publicly available.
Mr chairman if the legal owners
is trying to hello.
Well yes the issue there is
person self making the request.
The
would only be available in
person himself we're making the
request not some other person's
saying where does my ex wife
Lynn.
Kurt Kurt correct yes.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman.
Well just just to clarify Sir
he's been.
You have to know where your
export lives.
Williams I live what we could
figure out who represents your.
Thank.
Thank you very much Senator
Wirth thank you Mr Marcoux
follow up on your score COVID
there that's for sure thank you
US senator Wirth Senate rules
committee thank you madam
secretary thank your FIR
witnessed Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
at some of the some questions I
did but Maggie Mr secretary when
your county clerk of first time
I ran.
We have a vision we're talking
about is like when we went on to
your office the growing county
clerk's office we were able to
pay to get a map of the district
eleven put up at my office and
my walking program or just what
you're envisioning taking on as
a state secretary of state's
office what you for what we have
in rural county clerk.
correct madam chair and senator
Morris and better than that
you'll just be able to go online
and access it and print it out
for yourself at no charge.
Okay.
It's what you know the the
follow up question I would be
there is there a a cost or lost
revenue opportunity for the
county clerk's is this unfunded
mandate for them the legislative
information are they losing a
source of revenue from
Bernalillo county Corker maybe
other kind of course are using
this Mr chair and senator Morris
and my experience and and again
to my knowledge Bernalillo
county is the only county that
currently has this sort of
mapping service capacity there
may be others and so I apologize
if I'm speaking out of turn
I'm but at the you know.
If you want to print say a large
size map that's going to go on
your wall you're gonna have to
print it out in like twenty
different pages or something
like that at home or if you want
you know the big nice printed
out on the water you know two by
three or whatever that would be
something you get from the
county clerk's office and that
is primarily what they provide
in terms of maps anyway so Mr
chair and senator there there
may be some extremely minimal
lost revenue but I I you know
and unfortunately I don't know
for sure I'd have to defer to
those county clerks but I think
it'll be extremely minimal and
you'll still be able to get
those sort of our size nice maps
printed from any county that has
that capacity.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
secretary at the center and and
last question several counties
in one doing this is an example
of rural county subsidizing say
rural counties like Travis
counties or others our expertise
and knowledge.
After taxes on par.
no no Mr chair only because
right now Bernalillo county only
does provides that service and
has that capacity or Bernalillo
county.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you senator.
Thank you senator Morris
central.
Thank you Mr chairman trying to
this is my first time using zoom
on the next best props on trying
to figure out where all the.
But things are compared to my
phone thank you Mr chair and the
Senator McKenna for.
Bring this
this questions for the secretary
of state
and I and you answer one
question I have is how many
counties already do this of
course Bernalillo county but for
the other thirty two counties
How many of the counties even
have the capability or the staff
or or.
The infrastructure in place to
even do something like this
having the maps available and
things like that.
So again to my knowledge Mr
chair and senator I'm not aware
I am not aware of any other
counties that do
and and so part of the idea
behind this is to create a value
added
for the constituents of every
county that there for the county
clerk does not have to provide
directly on the other hand if
you wanted to go to your county
clerk's office and say Hey could
you get these maps for me all
they would have to do is go on
to our website and pull them
down for you so it's it's at I I
believe again Mr chair and
senator just to evaluate added
as a service that the counties
can take advantage of that they
don't have to provide for
themselves.
Mr chair madam secretary state
yeah I think I can appreciate
that that here we're kind of
going the other way and say Hey
let's make it easier on these
rural counties that don't have
this ability so that every
single constituent in the state
can get on there and say who is
my school board.
Member who is the we have our
water districts are those going
to be included as well so I
think some of those are the most
confusing things for people to
try to navigate so if we have a
way for somebody in very rural
Sierra County or Katrin or even
Chavis with the amount of people
we have there's a lot of time
spent by clerks physically
looking these are running this
about emailing these things and
so I think if if we can be more
efficient with our time which it
seems like it will be you know
this seems like something at
first when I first read it was
something I was going to get
behind but as as I'm hearing the
testimony I think you know this
is really going to help our
rural counties that you know
already struggle to have enough
personnel to to carry out the
duties of the clerk's office so
I think this is something that
the it's gonna be good for the
entire state not just one County
thank you.
Remembers.
So I do have a few things on
this bill and the and so one of
them first of all on direct.
We are the committee's
attention.
To
section one dash three dash one
our subsection E. of the
election code and what that
provides is the secretary of
state businesses are dealing
with our six the major precincts
subsection eight says the press
secretary station provided
maintain miscible map showing
the geographical boundaries with
designation of each president
local government representative
district and senatorial district
in the county.
The size of the problem such map
shall be prescribed as a
cristata work description of the
geographical boundaries this has
to each map along with the
description the changes from the
previous map of the area for the
past disruption is a public
record.
Not previously madam.
Two thousand and nineteen that
was actually a requirement on
every county and that and I did
post some some problems for some
counties to be able to have the
resources to be able to are to
implement that and so that's one
reason I was with the statistics
office as soon as actually as as
being compatible with the
requirement that is already in
statute the the the primary
difference between the two is
that that section one district
as one of the.
Is requirement of secretary of
state to produce maps which
requires the GIS data.
Not and this bill is requirement
to to make that GIS data
available publicly so that
people can produce their own
maps that they would like to and
not only do report be reliant
upon the secretary of state.
But I do have some suggestions
to make on the bill senator
McKenna and if if I could just
lead you through a few things
here on the bill.
The reference to be page one one
sixteen.
And I'm more interested in
seeing what put it under
under article two which is
option officials as as we
responsibility for secretary of
state given that we have this
this provision article three I'm
a suggestion actually would be
that we on page one line sixteen
our strike to were to answer the
work for you so this would
actually be added to article
three of election code which is
under prisons in polling places.
Chairman once again here on page
one line sixteen yes to strike
what was the word includes a
destructive over to.
Number two right number three
okay.
Right the R. and then the our.
The the next thing would be and
I'm just I just personally I
don't like having dates in and
statutes press one.
So this is the secretary of
defense right thank but I would
propose that we on page one line
twenty.
We strive no later than January
one twenty twenty two comma.
And instead we create section to
applicability.
The provisions of section one on
Google affected January one
twenty twenty two.
That keeps the deadline.
Are present for the secretary of
state's office right but it
doesn't.
Eight years from now we're not
still looking at a date that no
longer has any relevance.
Okay.
We are the current chains are
not suggesting I'm and I'm gonna
make a motion on all these at
the end.
on the the first one would be on
page one eight twenty two and
twenty four.
And and that is our to strive to
phrase that is elected pursuant
to the election code.
Because actually and district is
not opted candidate is elected.
Instead in certain number of in
the states.
So.
The geographic information
system data for each voting
district in the state and the
district in the defined term so
grand so then it just defaults
to the defined term at that
point.
Okay.
And then
The next one will be on page two
one two.
When you have our so if you have
in there that it should be
provided essential format should
file formats.
Comparable GIS problem at
what to suggest and and I would
actually trying to miss pike
online which here is after the
road come up from double.
To answer the words open source
or convertible.
J. I. S. system format what we
make is that while they may not
always use you shape from which
is currently the industry
standard if they go to a
different standard and has to be
something that other people are
able to open or convert into
this practice that language.
Is that there is a better
linguistically used.
Languages excellent shape files
are actually not an open source
format but they're convertible
to open source formats and you
know I'm I'm all for that I
think that's a good change
yes we often source or
convertible on page two our
mission right to after the war
comparable.
The next day on page two one
five minutes question press
secretary state run sessional
promptly updates
on madam secretary would you
need miserably speaking to
update promptly is kind of a.
As the work.
Mr Chairman
I have the bill vote no I don't
know where it went
I
just closed it.
No I haven't open interest in
art when technology
Where were you again in the bill
needs to I.
I I don't know is the short
answer I mean we're we're sort
of on the cusp of creating this
project as as you know I would
say it as soon as practicable
would that be
Friendly language.
So right so resist okay.
Right now but I would I would I
would encourage you guys to
figure out like like would you
need thirty sixty ninety days
something like that just so that
there's a there's a time frame.
In the in the statute I know
that I know that your office is
diligent but there will be other
secretaries of state that will
follow you and so we got if we
if we actually provided some
kind of a time frame and there
Mr chair a suggestion that came
in from one of my staff is
Once a year or as notified we
would undertake
an annual sort of assessment if
you will to ensure that we have
everything incorporated
correctly and or if we are
notified by the district or the
county clerk that there has been
a change we can note you know we
can make that change.
As soon as we get.
Works
right now okay but then the last
thing would be just on page two
one nine.
Our for the words elected office
would that just be the insert
the article M. A. N..
That is represented by an
elected office.
And hi.
I am yeah so I am an office very
good okay insertion okay thank
you.
Sorry Committee amendment.
The amendments are and and we
can find these are people wanted
someone largement provided an
example.
but it would be on page one.
One sixteen smart number two and
insert the number three and
there have.
Engine one one twenty.
Smarter praise no later than
January one twenty twenty two
comma and capitalize that see of
the.
Page one line twenty three.
Sprunk beginning of the work
that.
The end of the sentence so you
strike that is elected president
election code.
And insert before the period in
the states.
Page two right to.
After the work comparable insert
open source for convertible.
Page two one nine.
After the word by insert the
article and HM.
And page and then
and then between lines nine and
ten.
Insert section to ability.
The provisions of section one
our couple affected January one
twenty twenty two.
Are there any questions on the
amendment.
Single questions on the
amendment is there any objection
to the amendments.
And so we can and just cover
this is permanent.
Yeah I I don't see them as being
Objectionable our chairman and
I'm really pleased that miss
pack and our secretary here to
hear Senator I have no
indication that they're
unfriendly.
Well so there.
And also okay so I'm not seeing
anybody objecting messed me hero
if you will note all members
present voting in the
affirmative on the amendments.
So now we go to proceed to the
amended bill is there any
further discussion or not what
is the pleasure of the committee
on the amended bill.
Senator Stewart.
The to pass as amended on Senate
bill three oh four.
Thank you very much so we have a
do promotion for two passed as
amended on the Senate bill three
or four from Senator US tourists
are with a second from Senator
Moores.
And that are on the scene of the
LESC in recognition Miss Vigil
if you please call the roll
Senator Baca yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Moores yes.
Senator o'neill yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth.
Senator Ingle.
Did you say Senator Ingle I'm
sorry I just got on yeah.
Hello yes.
Senator do yes and Senator Ivy
Soto yes ma'am.
Yes ten two zero.
Senator McKenna congratulations
on attendance zero vote you have
a do pass recommendation from
the Senate rules committee.
Thank you very much chairman and
thank you members of the
committee I really appreciate
your time I think also this pack
in our secretary of state.
So you know there's a
this back at some point if
you're interested in following
up during the interim some of us
have been interested in in doing
an open sore part and open data
project with regard to a number
of issues on that and in terms
of state local government and I
would like to our our budget for
the at some point during the
interim to work with next year
Mr chairman I'd be very
interested in that thank you
thank you very much
so Senator let's move to.
Senator one hundred and if you
wanted to I just thought I'd let
me if you were just very briefly
remind everybody
on Senate bill one hundred and
then we will move to see about
fifteen minutes of public
comment on that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Senate
bill one hundred was the the
measure that was before us last
week I believe and it is
included
It involves the.
Possibility of a candidate
running as both a major party
candidate and also of a minor
party candidate in same time to
was called fusion voting if
something is done in several
states and this proposal would
emit impossible to do that here
the idea behind it is to.
Reach out to those voters who.
Participate in the in the voting
process because of their
disagreements with the major
parties that were part of a
minor party and this gives them
an extra incentive to actually
participate in the following.
And
I believe there are people who
want to make a comment because
of the time we were unable to
take public comment and when
this.
Roll over Senator Woods billing
current today's and chairman
suggested this might be an
opportunity to at least hear
from them many of them are are
I'm told many of them are young
people who had specific reasons
why they supported fusion
voting.
But so let me for you know to
the secretary of state's are and
then and then and also
properties talking and then
we'll we're gonna just click and
see if we can admit to the
waiting room and and also for
those of you who are listening
in the waiting room let me just
simply advise you that when you
see your screen be activated
please turn off the audio of the
webcast so that you can listen
to the audio from the zoom there
is about thirty second delay and
you were not being responsive
when we ask you for your comment
if you're still listening to the
webcast so madam secretary.
Mr chair actually celebrating
Mexico secretary of state I I
wasn't planning on speaking this
bill today because I didn't know
we were going to have public
comment but just just briefly a
I did want to let the committee
now in in general I support
legislation that fosters
participation as you all know
because I believe a more
participatory democracy is a
better democracy although I know
Senator course and I debate
about democracy versus our
public but Mr chair and and that
members I just wanted to let you
know that we had worked with
some of the advocates behind
this bill to make it
administratively feasible for
the state given serve our
current voting systems at and
the way that we tally and
produce election night results
and that we we do believe that
the way that bill was drafted in
sort of the the technological
tools that we have available
could have achieved that you
know and so for just for future
reference for the committee
moving forward if this in the
future you know comes back for
that the committee's
consideration and we can of
course talk more about how that
would work at the appropriate
time but just wanted to weigh in
on that briefly thank you Mr
chair thank you madam secretary
very well so let us begin the
first person I see in is
Arcimoto Mr chair what on it.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is there tomorrow and I stand in
support of SB one hundred and
fusion voting because fusion
brings people into our civic
light and elections and it
strengthens our Republic I'm
thinking specifically about
people that I meet when I knock
on doors or making phone calls
for candidates campaign and and
you meet people all of us have
done this you meet people are
disillusioned Senator my vote
doesn't matter both parties in
the same nothing ever happens
anyway and that's what I'm
working up the candidates walk
list as a precinct chair I have
also intentionally cut turf
that's full of infrequent voters
so I can meet the rest of my
president and and two things
about this people or this one
nobody nobody is knocking on the
stores the way that we run
campaigns right now simply
writes off a large swath of our
electorate is being unreachable
and to the people who answer
those stars doors are exactly
the people that the data tells
us that they will be their young
people folks without a college
degree a whole lot of decline to
state voters and the black and
brown folks infusion can help us
reach those people in the places
that are using fusion right now
New York the voters most likely
to use that minor party line to
vote for a major party candidate
are those same people write
their young non college black
and brown also
a bunch of new citizens and they
are so they're largely the same
people that we're missing right
now and and that's why I believe
in the the power of fusion to
increase turnout and even in
twenty twenty here in New Mexico
nearly a third of our voters
couldn't find anything they
wanted to vote for anywhere on
the whole balance that's in a
presidential year so so I ask
you to take a good hard look at
SB one hundred to take a good
look at the ocean boating to
advance fusion voting as an
invitation and as a path for
those voters and also also for
those of us like myself we're
out here try.
And to engage those voters and
especially those of us who are
committed to doing that work
without putting spoiler
candidates on the ballot because
fusion allows us to do it in
that way which I think is the
best way just waiting I
encourage you to look at fusion
voting and I thank you for your
time.
I thank you very much
mechanicals.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee I
really appreciate this
opportunity I am a member of New
Mexico working families and I am
a volunteer political on here I
started my political path in two
thousand sixteen as a volunteer
reaching out to voters to help
them vote in two thousand
sixteen it was very common to
get tax back if they were
unfamiliar with the candidate
they would ask what party and
they would respond back well
that's fine I always vote
Democrat or I always vote
Republican I've been as you know
is running campaign yourself
when you have a good can of all
in tier your tend to be asked to
help a lot so I've been asked to
join teams all over the country
I've texted for local campaigns
in New Mexico as well as
Pennsylvania California New York
I honestly can't remember all
the state's I've helped and
during this path I'm reaching
more voters who want to know
that where a candidate stands on
an issue it's no longer they
will always vote Democrat they
will always vote Republican and
so my job as a volunteer to
provide that information
they it's very rare now as a
volunteer that I get someone who
asks what the party is they're
much more concerned on how it'll
affect our life they want to
know how this will affect their
wages will they have health care
where do they stand on court
issues and with fusion voting
when you have the opportunity
for a major and a minor party to
both cross endorsed that
provides more information on the
ballot we have someone who is
really involved in fire mental
issues and then environmental
minor party endorses that
candidate they know that and
they know that they will be
aligned with their values if you
don't have that information I'm
guilty as as well looking at the
ballot I'm not familiar with the
down ballot candidates and I
just.
Staring at a name and it's like
well I like this name over
another I don't necessarily know
if they're aligned with my
values as with fusion voting I
feel we will have more informed
ballots people will be able to
make a more informed choice and
they'll have that information
right there in front of them and
they will be able to vote in
line with our values I
appreciate you allowing us to
testify today and how this
opportunity and ask for your
support fusion voting moving
forward thank you very much
thank you very much miss
guidance Mr Matthews.
Hi Mr chair thank you for the
time and also thank you senator
Ortiz Pino of for a pushing for
a public comment I appreciate
that as well my name she
Matthews on the cyclical
director New Mexico working
families but I'm also a
Democratic Party elected words
here and I represent parts of
Senator do X. District and
Senator more and and senator
nails across the north valley
and so one of the exciting
things I see about fusion voting
is
not only getting more people to
vote but also having a higher
quality of representation for
the candidates themselves and
for the voters and feeling
connected to our electoral
system I want to talk about a
few things that that came up
last week at the Monday hearing
one was you know we we worked
and I'm and I appreciate the
secretary of state of us
speaking today to about some of
the administrative
questions answering those we
work with council services on
the legislation to and and
everybody can always be improved
and we look forward to working
together with some of you Mr
chairman and committee members
on those issues I also wanted to
bring up one of the issues that
came up open primaries in the
last.
Committee hearing and and I
wanted to make sure that folks
knew that this is not an either
or right you know we can pass
open primaries and fusion
boating and both systems can
work with voters in all cases
with the general election and
the the primary elections
they're not an either or we
don't have to pick one or the
other and both have different
ways in organizing people we're
not going to get all the
independents to vote in the
primary if we pass open
primaries right but we will get
more people of voting I just
like fusion fusion is not going
to be a one hundred percent
voting in the general election
unfortunately we don't have a
secret secret weapon to make
that happen but it's one tool a
tactic to make it more
accessible so that more people
participate and feel connected
to our electoral system another
issue that came up was the
ballot design from our our
graphic artist and and the
reason we brought that forward
was just to show the two bottles
of the last you know what the
ballot could look like we
totally expected
that if user voting were to pass
the the election experts at the
secretary of state's office and
county parks would be riding
instructions that they that they
feel best would would bring the
intention and the instructions
to the ballot to the voters
and and one last thing I just
want to say really quickly is is
I think you I do think public
comment is important I
appreciate Mr chair and and
committee members for for adding
this opportunity and I do want
to respectfully ask the
committee to reconsider this
issue and and work together with
us on this so that we can have
as many tools as possible to get
people to vote so thank you Mr
chair I appreciate the time and
thank you committee members for
the time as well.
Thank you very much Mr Matthews
miss Clark we have.
I've seen a couple other staff
come in and out I'm not sure
that technical issues are honest
I just see Mr on address on July
to proceed.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Andrés about on the executive
director of a lady I'm speaking
in support of SB one hundred and
I appreciate the opportunity to
be able to add public comment
this morning you know I in order
to continue to build our
democracy our our Republic as a
nod to senator Morris I think we
have to build a bigger tent as
possible and I think any
legislation that's going to
advance voting
you know that they work together
they don't they actually don't
conflict with one another and so
I appreciate senator do had a
speaking to open primaries last
week but to echo Mister Matthews
you know they're they're
separate issues that that can
actually work together really
well because one is a primary
function and one of functions in
the general fusion voting
allows voters to express their
values and how the boat and now
more than ever I think people
feeling like they have a strong
voice is key to preserving and
growing our democracy I eight
also echo Mr Matthews a request
and respectfully asking that
this issue be reconsidered by
committee but we also just
appreciate the opportunity to
speak this morning thank you Mr
chair you're welcome this press.
Good morning everyone and thank
you to it Mr chair and members
of the committee for the
opportunity to speak today in
support of Senate bill one
hundred my name is that we craft
and I'm a community organizer
primarily with the organization
fight for our lives in
Albuquerque and I currently
attend the university of New
Mexico and I'm sure in support
of Senate bill one hundred for
fusion voting because I truly
believe that voters need more
choices on the ballot and I'm
someone who doesn't you don't
want to sacrifice my values
simply to prevent an opposing
party from winning the election
I'm registered with the
Democratic Party but I
frequently aligned with the
views of some third parties and
I know that I've personally
struggled in the last few
elections in determining who to
vote for because I feel that
that the two major parties don't
necessarily consistently
represent my values so fusion
voting is something that I
believe will benefit me as well
as all other New Mexicans who
don't feel that their choices
are fully represented on the
ballot and as I previously
stated I'm a community organizer
and I'm very active in politics
and conversations with their
community and do these
conversations I realize that I'm
not the only one who's
frustrated and that so many New
Mexicans are frustrated they
constantly I feel that they have
to choose between the lesser of
two evils on the ballot in order
to prevent whoever the H. they
consider to be the worst
candidate from winning so I
believe that passing Senate bill
one hundred can change that and
by giving voters more options on
the ballot I know they all feel
more confident you know casting
my ballot because I'll be able
to vote under the party that I
most closely aligned with as
well as the candidate that I
prefer without being afraid of
spoiling the vote or taking away
votes from the two major party
candidates because fusion voting
has already been implemented in
other states we know that this
is a system that can work chair
New Mexico and with with this
bill.
He said I strongly urge the
committee to
to vote in support of Senate
bill one hundred to make New
Mexico the next state to
implement fusion voting Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for your time.
I thank you very much.
Our agency we have anybody else.
If Mr chair argument you know is
you're not be available Mr
americana.
Morning madam or of the morning
Mr chair Senators my name is our
initial Romero cover I'm here as
a spokesperson for yucca youth
United for kind of crisis action
yeah because goal as an
organization is to raise the
voices of young
environmentalists especially in
the world with the tort politics
so we stand in complete support
of HB to as a path to a more
inclusive democracy if passed H.
B. ten would help increase voter
participation in political
representation in New Mexico the
building courage is all voters
to participate in democracy
allowing them to select Canada's
the best represent their values
without the need to compromise
against a single party lie
addition.
Mr part it appears you're having
technical difficulties I'm gonna
go to Mr on notice and then
actually will go back to you to
see if you get it if you're
audio has cleared up Mr Thomas.
Good morning chairman the ally.
I just applied applied to the
committee members my name is
some way that I know about it
I'm twenty seven years old and
activist and community organizer
for the Democratic Party of New
Mexico this young voting in the
voting that they were a major
political party in a minor party
can nominate the bank kind and
they have a pandemic it'd show
up under both parties it is a
more inclusive and that allows
voters to not vote if we do not
identify with one of the major
parties to be more engaged in
our elections.
And then in SB one hundred part
of the legislation New Mexico
would be the nine eight in the
United States I live in the
voting system in recent years
with the not a lot of people the
by a bipod and young people
voting outside of major
political parties what else to
you will get this done their
voices aren't heard loud.
Maybe the the ball at the one
hundred it W. W. may apply to
any political party the voters
get to pick which party line to
fill in the bubble on the ballot
how the only ball one about have
more choice on where their vote
is counted I've been in SB one
hundred all both for act kind of
it will come together every
single one of prevent the eight
boiler or a wasted vote please
repeat at B. one hundred thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr Committee
cover on if you want to finish
your states.
Yes absolutely thank you again
for the top super sorry I think
my wife cut out about halfway
through.
I'm assuming I'm not quite sure
cut out I'm just going to be
from the top if that's okay it's
a relatively short statement but
okay good morning chair Senators
my name is on a mission of I'm
here as a spokesperson for yucca
youth United for comic crisis
action yeah because goal as an
organization is to raise the
voices of young
environmentalists especially in
the world of electoral politics
so we stand in support of HB ten
as the path to a more inclusive
democracy if passed H. B. ten
would help increase voter
participation in political
representation New Mexico the
bill encourages all voters to
participate in democracy
allowing them to select
candidates the best represent
their values with the need to
compromise against a single
party line additionally HB ten
is expected to bring in new
voters voters of color you
photos and independent voters
almost a quarter of registered
New Mexicans or declined to say
or have not picked one of the
major political parties we are a
diverse state with many
different opinions on how to
best serve the people in New
Mexico fusion voting provides
more choices on the ballot more
opportunities for candidates to
win their constituents folks
creates a more inclusive
democracy thank you for your
time.
Thank you very much appreciated.
Our last person.
Our.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Carla
creating have for and I'm
speaking on behalf of the center
for civic policy we stand in
support of SB one hundred we
believe that this is a great way
to increase voter participation
across demographics in strength
in our democracy with that we
are it's a do pass on this bill
thank you so much thank you very
much appreciate it Senator Ortiz
appeared.
Mr chairman thank you very much
for your for your intelligence
in the committee's intelligence
and in taking this testimony I
think I think it was important
for us to to realize just how
broadly this is this measure was
supported and and what I would
hope is in during the during the
interim we might work on dealing
with some of the.
I'm a technical issues that the
chairman and and vice chairman
Reyes in connection with this
measure and see if we can get it
worked out with the secretary of
state's assistance in a way that
would would be able to be re
introduced in the future thank
you Mr chairman there are
several before Ron to send about
two fifty for optimizing Center
president.
Thank you Mr chair and I just
had one
quick question is that is that
the candidate would have to
agree to being nominated by the
minor party correct that that a
minor party couldn't just
nominate with up without their
consent.
I understanding of the proposal
is that it would require a
technician came to see to be
filed by the by the candidates
that requires a notarized
statement from Canada.
It thank you Mr what.
Okay well senators for
administration I know that you
and I talked about
the the of the interest in
instead of a one hundred and
that that there was a point that
we were able to do public
comment on that day I appreciate
your willingness to to reach out
to folks
over the weekend in order to
make sure that we're able to to
have the
the public comment happen today
so thank you very much for that.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
want to thank the people and
didn't come in because a human
on very short notice but they
they were able to get on and and
appreciated their comments
general support question or
concern about the fate of
Senator one hundred I want to
show everybody Senate bill one
hundred still lives because
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino is still
obligated for party as a result
of a sponsoring Senate bill one
hundred.
It may not be quite as the party
is as originally if if we hadn't
able to to we'll we'll we'll
make something just.
Of
Thank you Mr are given
Representative the last seconds
if you want to jump on it wasn't
a house committee and said he
was he just actually said he was
watching would be on in the
second.
watching so I'm just going to
get started I think you all
special on this committee know
the issue are involved in Senate
bill two fifty four what this
would do is would add a primary
election in the case of an US
congressional races if there's a
vacancy now we've had a number
of these because US constitution
requires that members of
Congress be up elected by the
pop the people as opposed to US
senators or governors or even
our offices there's a vacancy so
we have to have per US
constitution special election
and I would assume everyone on
this committee including the
secretary stated others are on
their individual parties Senator
committees and why am Senator
per was I think our rules are
are on there so I will be
involved if we do have a back
vacancy of Mike myself and my
wife are a one of the two
hundred thirty four Republicans
and arcs us commercial district
one
a nominating committee that will
choose a replacement for or
about person to be on the ballot
I think your site we are Mr
chair has one hundred seventy
Maso minerals are members of
their central Committee on their
bank on their on the more so
when you're talking about is in
a race.
All thanks to our figures for
five people on our side running
seven rated twenty on your side
are ready Mr chair zero talking
about thirty five to fifty
people on a central Committee
you know economic needs of four
US congressional seat
and the person will serve on one
of those two people will serve
in Congress on life we for a
long long time that Office
specially the CD one has been in
the pipeline for higher office
for number years so we just
wanted to get when
Representative Eli and I had a
great conversation early in this
process and we just wanted a
little more democracy in this
process by having the primary
instead of the central
committees that we all belong to
a picking a political insider
for this job so you all know the
issue in order for the debate on
turn it over to my friend
Representative.
Thank you senator on chair
members of the committee
I think we're all proving that
you can be in more than one
place the same talking since I
appear to be in three places at
once so the Senate been
interesting process let me start
with you there's another our
example of an election process
where we have literally taken
the ability of voters to vote
away from them I'm not aware of
it this is the only situation
where at one point voters have
the ability to vote in the
second season we've taken that
away from.
what we've done in this
situation yes we have
disenfranchised
I am for round numbers about a
hundred thirty three thousand
plus people that's the number of
Democrats and Republicans that
voted in the last primary for
this congressional election and
we replace that with Senator
talks about roughly three
hundred fifty people
I want to be very clear about
this nobody could mistake me for
work for being something other
than a partisan Democrat and
Central Committee members many
of whom I count as my friends
my dad was state chair of the
Arizona Democratic Party I know
state Central Committee members
so I grew up with
so this is not all that somehow
an attack on the central
committee process what it is is
it's a we are trying to
reinstate the ability of people
to vote.
For those people that would like
to the democratic process and
one when franchise worse and I
just for the secretary of state
talk about how philosophy is to
constantly make sure that people
have the ability to vote this is
that built yes we and franchises
about forward
Thirty three plus thousand
dollars on there is no reason
for us not to do this the
history of this country as many
of you know is a struggle
towards in franchising people
women struggled for sixty years
from some award in nineteen
twenty in a long hard five times
violent struggle for the right
to vote we as a legislature and
written out the ability of
people to vote in this one
circumstance so I I know I I
really applaud our in the
objections from the secretary of
state noted that yes going to be
expensive on and it is
cumbersome.
Right all I remember the chairs
bill on same day voter
registration when it hit our
house floor and the debate with
my colleague Representative
carrot somebody asked her isn't
it can be more expensive to do
this and her answer was yeah is
that an awesome problem to have
it's going to cost us more money
so that more people can vote and
that really ultimately is the
question at what point does it
become too expensive and too
complicated that we just throw
up our hands and say you know
what let's just disenfranchise a
bunch of orders so what we're
really trying to do in this bill
yes to restore the democratic
process do this one circumstance
where you have a vacancy on in
our congressional action done
apply to centers because there
are plenty of the constitution
so we're just talking about this
one circumstance said on it is a
bipartisan effort I very much
enjoyed working with senator
Morris I not had a chance to
work with and so we're hoping
the committee will consider it
seriously and then that in the
last my colleague center Moores
has anything what else to add we
would stand for questions.
Thank you Representative and I
just want to echo what
Representative said it is more
expensive it does take about
thirty days longer a lot of
vacancy it is more lower place
K. D. democratic there we have
and I think there I agree on
this issue we don't create a lot
of issues program this issues
that need to be opened up to the
people to vote on the support
office and with that we will
stand I'm glad secretary states
here to promote expanding our
voter participation once again.
Thank you very much and before
we go to public comment madam
secretary would you please
comment about expansion of
democracy.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members Maggie Toulouse Oliver
New Mexico secretary of state
let me start off by saying I
agree.
I agree that the current system
is not as democratic as I think
we would all like it to be
and I remember that twenty years
ago we went through this process
with a couple of congressional
vacancies at at that time and I
I was on the state Central
Committee back then and and
participated in that process and
I always thought I was kind of
weird
that so few people were waiting
in to to make a decision a
momentous decisions such as who
to nominate to a a special or
general election ballot for
Congress I'm we've had twenty
years.
Since the last time this was
done and unfortunately this bill
is coming.
Maybe two weeks before that they
can see is going to occur and so
I personally support the concept
of this legislation at I.
Don't object to it the costs you
know.
We may end up running a deficit
or deficiency in will have to
come back to the legislature I
had to ask for that and next
year in order to cover the real
expenses of elections but my
major concern.
Is with the emergency class this
legislation I think we are
already too far out of the gate
getting ready for the selection
the election may not happen
there is a possibility right the
the vacancy isn't.
Doesn't exist yet but you know
in in elections and you all
heard me use this metaphor many
times were we're always changing
the tire on the car the car's
going but usually we have you
know we have a the legislative
session.
You know we we we we consider
policy proposals that you all in
your wisdom as the Legislature
make those decisions the
governor signs off or not and
then we usually have time to
implement those before the next
election or we have a delayed
implementation or something like
that my biggest issue is with
the emergency clause on this L.
my other concerns are noted in
just in terms of you know the
inequity around how do you get
on the ballot I personally would
rather see a single ranked
choice election rather than to
elections things like that and
and I feel like those are things
that we can all kind of talk
about and work on for the future
because I do agree that for the
future we need to we need a more
democratic small D. Senator
Wirth democratic process this is
going to be really difficult to
do right now and so with that Mr
chairman and and senator and
representative again I
appreciate ring this forward I
do support that bill and concept
I would have some suggested
changes to work with you on and
and bottom line I just think the
emergency clause at peace it is
my biggest concern thank you
very much Mr chair and senator
and representative members.
Thank you so much let's go to
public comment was quick to have
anybody who's center for public
comment this.
Sure we do I'm going to be a lot
of women right now.
And again those of you who are
listening on webcast for center
for public comment when you see
your screen be activated please
off the audio on your.
webcast so that you can listen
to the zoom there's about a
thirty second delay between the
two and you will not be
responsive when we call on you
to speak if you're still
listening to the webcast this.
This proceed.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee good morning my
name is Dick Mason I'm sure the
action committee of the legal
boundaries of New Mexico I'm
just people that was later found
a hundred and one years ago.
People eight to encourage people
to get engaged in the political
process
and I understand you know the
secretaries objection to this
but the league has a very clear
position on this
that the position is that we we
we encourage more direct citizen
involvement in the candidate
selection processes for special
elections to fill a vacancy this
legislation clearly
So that that that position on
the league of the league of
women voters
so we are in need I do pass on
this legislation thank you for
allowing us to comment thank
you.
Thank you very much Mister Mason
you minutes the third.
Hello yes thank you Mr chair
good morning members of the
committee again what a few
minutes of the half coming
College New Mexico coming
because the Mexico supports
inclusion in good government and
see this piece of legislation is
just that as laid out in the FAA
are of the legislation the
current path to becoming a
candidate requires each
respective party Central
Committee to nominate a
candidate we place on the ballot
this bill would take the power
away from a handful of
individuals in the places it in
the hands of the voters where it
belongs we acknowledge there are
some administrative challenges
as addressed by the secretary of
state in the FIR and hope the
committee will take those into
consideration I will also add
that I also agree with madam
secretary that we would prefer
this be a right choice voting
option but with that said Mr
chair members of the committee I
to ask that you support Senate
bill two fifty four and ensure
that the individual taking
office this truly elected by the
people of their day of that
respective district and not a
small handful of individuals
thank you.
I wrote this and also I'm
noticing the background behind
you and that's a whole lot of
pendants I don't know what you
did it's a lot across well it
took a lot of time Mr chair.
Around the letter.
Mr dean.
One Mr chair members of the
committee mining school being a
member of the democratic state
Central Committee in Berlin
county I'm here to speak in
opposition to this bill our the
question came up as to whether
we have any other examples of
where the voters don't pick
candidates when there's a
vacancy I'd like to remind the
committee that the state
constitution does say that in
the state legislature the county
commission appoints replacements
unless that a district crosses
to counties then the governor
alone appoints the replacement.
Not to mention in the US Senate
if there's a vacancy the
governor alone appoints the
replacement in our city council
in Albuquerque if there's a
vacancy refer recommendations
made to the more and the more
points the replacement so there
are several examples of
emergency provisions.
Our what we have now is an
emergency provision the only
difference is we have a four
seen vacancy as opposed to an
unforeseen vacancy.
Are the reason why we have these
provisions are because it is
cheaper.
It is are less time consuming to
implement.
We have a process in place there
is no real emergency the idea is
if you that the legislature
wishes to change this to a more
open primary process that's fine
but I don't see there's been
twenty years since the last
vacancy in CD one happened
suddenly there's been no rush to
change it and then I don't see
the rush in now and at least
letting its pass under normal
time to take effect July first
like normal legislation would
thank you very much.
I thank you very much.
Miss Clark to have anybody else.
The public comment.
Well in that case we'll go to
questions from committee and
will begin with Senator o'neill
thank you I thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator and
representative for bring this
bipartisan bill forward what.
I understand it's going to be
complicated a delay it'll be
more money there's an emergency
clause involved but this is
important this is Congress isn't
going like a random community
you know
You know in the state Senate
seat of birth the county
commission does of the whatever
this is Congress.
Right and I've had the wonderful
experience of trying to explain
this process to people to voters
who have no idea who the Central
Committee isn't who are these
people etcetera you know
I strongly support this bill and
yes it's a it'll be a hassle you
know me to delay but again this
is our congressional seat and.
You know people need to feel
engaged in our voting process so
I strongly support this
bipartisan bill and I appreciate
our chair for scheduling this
time sensitive legislation and
so you know that's all I have to
say thank you both for bringing
it and with a listen to the
debate.
Thank you senator senator doing.
Thank you Mr chair
I wonder and I I can see that
this includes the unity of our
get nominating petition
signatures or pay a three
thousand dollar filing fee how
does that three thousand dollar
filing fee compared to two other
filing fee as we currently have
in New Mexico at that that seems
that seems high to me and and
I'm and I'm wondering if I know
that for example if you're ready
for county commission I believe
you pay a filing fee rather than
getting on a petition
signatures.
What I'm just wondering how this
three thousand dollars compares
other filing fees that we have
currently.
All.
Sure.
Our vice chair Representative
Eli and I had a very long
conversation on that on that
point as we're having this
conversation about the bill and
we did we sense what senator
Neil talked about that this is
US Congress we want to turn the
primary into a city council
rates were it is free I believe
it's fifty dollars the county
commission races Center on
chairman correct I'm wrong there
are offices that you just have a
diminished fee or a
on free filing fee also this was
a on a was sort of a litmus
test.
Are working of organisations
bill Clark our petitions for
this sport.
The and that was the third
behind what Representative I.
Representative wanted to join
at.
Share or Senator.
The short answer is I don't know
and it's frankly it's the idea
was to send a number that was
significant enough but again
people an option so that you
know they can either get the
signatures for the filing fee
and that's particularly
important for independence where
you know the the the number of
signature petitions is so large
so we were just trying to figure
out kind of a balance and I can
I'm happy to look at that but it
was something that you know we
could have and with them would
be willing to look at
but you know that's where we're
at.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Representative I'm I'm really
struggling on this bill because.
I I don't I don't like the
current process it I I don't
think it's a it's a democratic
process to have such a small
number of of folks determining
Who is on that general ballet
But but I also have real
concerns about the timing issues
around the US
and your concerns about just the
practicalities with the
emergency clause.
And and I got a I I hate the use
of filing fees rather than
petition signatures
I think.
I I don't I don't like setting a
and economic hurdle for folks to
get on the ballot for small and
and I also think that it's
really important to be able to.
To reflect the support to show
that you have the support from
the community with those
nominating signatures I I think
that is in a much better
approach and so I don't I don't
like having the out of the
filing fee and especially such a
high one
So I'm.
I I'm very I'm very torn on this
bill I I I would love to see a
process of a more democratic
process created going forward
so that this doesn't come up in
another twenty years when
something like this happens
again
but I don't know that I'm to a
point where I could support this
bill right now for the with with
this race.
Mr chairman my vice chair if you
want to make an amendment to get
rid of the three thousand
dollars and secures your vote on
a due pass I consider that from.
Mr chair Senators but I think
about that.
But I do want to want to thank
you all for for trying to come
up with a solution to this
problem because this is a real
problem and and I really
appreciate the fact that that
you are trying to make this
a democratic a more democratic
process and I commend you for
doing so.
Mr thank you.
I thank you very much Senator
Ortiz if you.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the Representative Eli and
senator Morris thanks for
bringing this up for discussion.
The.
This part in the ward increasing
meetings.
That would ultimately produce
our local representatives on the
state Central Committee who will
make this decision.
It was a very democratic process
it was open to anybody in the
ward anybody in the precinct it
was well advertised it was not
particularly well intended
although the you know a you know
something like a hundred and
fifty people signed up for the
course in our precinct had about
eight or ten people there.
Those people from our precinct
selection to.
Representative is on the county
Central Committee and then
essential committee will select
the state Central Committee
people and make the decision on
who the democratic nominee will
be it was a very democratic
process I don't think it was a
handful of insiders sitting
around a smoke filled room the
exchanging cash for their votes
it was very open and it was
absolutely available to anybody
who wanted to participate to is
registered as a Democrat.
I don't.
Classifying our current system
as the somehow undemocratic or
hand
is it all an accurate
description of it.
When we take our nominees for it
and primary as will do next
June.
Coming soon the following June
for the twenty twenty to
balance.
We'll have a state convention.
The state convention will will
will take the order we see
appear on the ballot.
You'll get twenty percent of the
state convention to actually get
on the primary ballot.
Just a similar process to what
we're talking about here that is
people who go to the state
convention get to have a role in
the people who are active in the
party get to have a roll and
people go out and knock on doors
and raise money for the party
are the ones who get to have
some say in in.
It's interesting that some of
the people bringing up open
primaries are now saying that
these.
This approach that we're having
in this system
is undemocratic.
Either we believe that the party
structure has value or we don't.
We ought to let it play out.
There are six people running for
the democratic nomination that
I'm aware of maybe there are
more than that.
And.
Any one of them I think looking
at them and watching their
records would be fine thank you
Sir very well in Congress.
I'm willing to let the voters
decide.
In November or whenever this
whenever the actual election
occurs.
Because I guess if we had a
primary would push it back so I
don't know exactly when this
special election would take
place but I'm willing to let the
Central Committee Democrat.
And I was.
Minor parties are available for
those who who who are.
Because we will have our primary
a rule against
What do we call it the other day
the sore loser candidacy any of
them can become a candidate for
a minor party and get on the
ballot to if they want to.
I also think the reality is
that.
Many many of our so called
democratic elections are
essentially decided by who has
the most money.
Then who can raise the most
money and who the wealthy
backers will we'll line up
behind.
So I'm not I'm not.
All that sanguine about the the.
So called democratic process in
which.
Money raising is a proxy for
actual the public support.
This is the system we have now
is as good as any other one.
And
I'm just concerned that what
you're gonna have now is a this
bill were to pass you have a.
Primary election in the special
election sometime in the fall.
Then another primary election
next spring.
And then another general
election.
Each time money being raised in
the proxy for actual public
support.
And until we have a public
financing of candidates in
elections for these
congressional seats is it just
is it's a it's an open
invitation for big money dark
money to come in and have a say
and
Force for shots that apple
issues and questions of the
apple and and if any if any of
the candidates don't get the
nomination when the Central
Committee decides now.
There they have only to wait one
year and they can run in the
primary election in June of
twenty twenty twenty two and
make their case and
I'm not sure this bill solves
any of the the the problems we
really face in our electoral
system
One thing I.
I I do think is if we're going
to do this that ranked choice
related to it because then you
just have one election it would
be one of those.
All get on the ballot in the
ones that did survive for the
winners.
With that Mr Chairman L. well
listen to the rest of the
debate.
Thank you very much.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The places at once so I
appreciate the the time to
comment on this legislation and
I you know I think this is
definitely move in the right
direction I think this is
something we have to do having
been a congressional candidate
myself and going through the
process of getting nomination
signatures and then not being
part of the in crowd at the time
and not getting twenty percent
of the vote at the convention
and then being able to go get
those petition signatures to
ensure that the board had a
choice was very important to me
at the time and it really opened
my eyes to how how the system
works and how it doesn't work
for the average person.
And so I think this is what we
have to do to ensure that the
public has a real choice and
built like they're not being
left out in the decision on who
represents them in Washington
thank you.
Thank you very much as R. Pirtle
also the way just so that you
know during the meeting I've
been checking the rules I
haven't quite gotten a
definitive really yeah I know
that we we said that it is the
equivalent of a time I don't
know what we did on a tie
I'm looking into that.
Mr chair it's it's okay you know
not everybody can be part of the
bow tie in eight but we just do
what we can to to keep it up a
high class level in the New
Mexico Senate.
One of more able to Taiwan so
that's why I don't want.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman
I have a couple of questions
I'll I'll try Senator Moores
because areas right from me of
the I don't understand on page
twenty two lines nine through
ten what sections year
repealing.
Chapter nine sections five and
seven being repealed what what
are those sections.
I'm not withstanding the faith
in you placed in me madam pro
tem I'm gonna let my employer
close spot for as a cause I'm
trying to look that up real
quickly if you have some from
madam chair my recollection is
not having it in front of me I
I'm looking for it is that what
we're doing is we're limiting
the Central Committee process
and replacing it for the and I'm
getting it right now for the
the even years you'll see that
that process then becomes a
three tier process so that's
what we're trying to replace it
with
The problem presents itself in
the even years not the odd years
like we're in right now and so
we're trying to replace that
process with this kind of three
two year and it's kind of an
elegant solution so we're
getting rid of is the Central
Committee process sent and I
want to say that we do have a
central Committee process where
the election is already happened
so yeah or if it's too late to
get on the ballot so for example
we see that all the time in
judicial races seems to crop up
quite a bit for the appellate
courts where there is a vacancy
either after the primary has
occurred just prior to the
primary which to a to get on the
ballot in that situation you
still have a central Committee
process because you have the
primary election this is the
only time that we've taken
totally out the primary and
replaced it with the Central
Committee process at all I'm
proud of that pre center so I
have a real answer.
All right Mr Chairman I
appreciate that my other so the.
Our FIR has suggested that
there's a conflict on page
sixteen.
lines twenty through assist new
language to the top of seventeen
I'm not quite sure why the FIR
said that there was a conflict
there and maybe you looking at
it will understand what that is
and if not I'll go on to the
next question.
Madam chair just a minute on
voting and the committee and not
just a minute.
I don't remember a time on the
FIR I saw on line.
I don't recall had that so that
the your caucus FY are.
I don't believe so let me find
it Mr chairman.
Mr Burke from the online of our
recall reading that.
Technical issues.
Mr chairman senator Morris page
sixteen line twenty through rate
to seventeen here's the
potential conflict with other
provisions of the bill
suggesting them major parties
would still nominate candidate
to run in the special election.
Now then program where I
understand that sentence.
Explain this madam chair I'm
sure share not madam chairman
and senator so what's happening
is if it gets too close to the
primary where you cannot have a
person on the ballot.
That's the point at which the
central committee comes in
that's always been our system so
secretary states as well as the
primaries coming up we're within
a certain amount of days there's
we can't now we print the
ballots of vacancies appear
that's what is central Committee
comes at that is in no way
inconsistent with current law if
it's prior to that then you'll
see the three tier system and an
eight in an audit I'm sorry even
year election.
Chairman and Representative Eli.
I guess I'm a little confused as
to what parts in this bill are
just temporary is the three
thousand dollar filing fee
temporary or is that a change
you are making for the future I
mean is there any part of this
bill that's temporary just for
right now or is this just the
change that we would go forward
if we find ourselves in this
position again and especially
referencing that three thousand
dollars is that Justin addition
you're making current law that
will go forward.
Chair representative it is just
we are literally just talking
about this kind of election
we're talking about the vacancy
that occurs in a congressional
election that's what we're
talking about and it would be
for this election and the
election twenty years from now
and I
I mean that's the answer okay so
madam chair pro temp Armah it
would be for not a temporary
provision but only for this very
small election like we had once
the ship died when I work with
Steve the.
When Richardson went on to
Tom energy department
Was it wasn't just a time.
Not the are you want in in in
this case with Department
terrier.
Okay so those are my questions
Mister chairman I have one more
I guess it's to the secretary of
state if she's still online
So.
Mr chairman and madam secretary
of state so you're.
Your opposition to the emergency
clause.
Is that it would mean that we
would have to do it right now
Senator opposition.
Yes Mr chair and madam correct.
Okay.
All right well those are my
questions thank you so much and
I relinquish the floor Mr
chairman.
I'm not sure is there anybody
else on the committee that are
six recognition before I ask my
questions Senator o'neill for
second time.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thanks for the debate you know
this is a reporting discussion
so let me just respond to some
of the issues brought up as to
the filing fee three thousand
dollars well.
You know the current candidates
per running for this open seat
in my in my distant I side of
the aisle I just want to well
how much do you have to raise to
do this because even surprised
the attic campaign committee you
said two hundred thousand
dollars all right so can we can
we be real about if you're gonna
run for Congress you better be
raising some money right SO
three thousand dollars to me
this not egregious and that's
hardly a reason to vote in my
opinion that's just like down
the list of issues on this bill
secondly I'm.
To Senator Ortiz Y. Pino is very
good points as always I love my
wards I love my precinct chairs
I have the utmost respect for
the Central Committee I don't
see them as a smoke filled room
cigar smoking etcetera the point
here is that can we do better
with this process than the
current one that we're looking
at right now and I believe we
can it you know it's.
The Central Committee does great
work and you know nobody's
calling them like cigar smoking
party operatives right and so my
my point is look if you if you
want to run for Congress you're
crazy enough to want to run for
Congress and you don't know who
the Central Committee is or what
they are good luck I think the
center hurdles point despite his
bow tie which I'm really
thinking is not not in line with
his usual sartorial.
Minus you know yeah good luck
with that so I just feel like
we're talking about Congress
street not a county commission
seat not something you know that
needs to be appointed by the
county commission it etcetera
etcetera this is Congress and
it's important and I'm sorry
that it would take longer and
cost longer and also finally you
know I don't know why I feel
this way but that's just my
sense I think primary is a
really important this more so
than in the past to just you
know we just need to open up our
our system to people there's
such a disconnect between voters
and what we do people need to
really feel engaged in the
process so that's all I have
thank you.
Thank you very much R. as in
Romeo Senator significant
secular Commission the chair has
a few questions I want to start
with Representative Eli and
there's something you said in
your opening that I had a
question about you said that
providers have the ability to do
this and we've taken away from
them what you mean by that.
Mr chair I mean exactly that if
there's a vacancy there is
nothing in our constitution like
Senate the status where you do
an appointment process we've
taken away from my legislation
so we said G. ordinarily that
would be a primary but we're not
gonna have that so I do think
fairly we've taken waivers not
our constitution like it would
be present for the governor.
So are you.
You're not registered
representatives have the ability
to do that.
They have the ability.
This is the primary.
What's the address in question
about we
have the ability to do that.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure I
understand your question if we
invest this legislation.
That said in a fact we are going
to replace a primary system.
We have a central Committee
process and there would be a
prior I I don't see any reason
why that would be there's
nothing in our constitution that
sets out the process for
congressional vacancies the way
it does with sent so yes I
understand I guess.
Hello from your statement.
Reference have a party used to
have the ability to have a
primary that I don't know.
I don't know.
We what we put some pressure for
you thank.
Since when are.
Primaries until the nineteen
thirties so the plan was to.
Primaries.
And we're partners with green in
the state there are no reply
from out of cycle election for
Congress.
And it and and certainly since
the adoption of our current
location code in nineteen sixty
nine.
The ability to have a special
partnership.
Transaction management employees
are never availability.
Sorry some sort of interest
from them I think as a
fundamentally inaccurate
statements.
As far as our partner is never
existed at the time the
statement.
So there is nothing more about
the primary that is a
fundamental role as sense
statement that has existed.
Well almost functions for
Congress.
The ability of our Hey are
correction signal primary
referring physician.
Representative mission consent
that.
Yes it's very important that we
not subject us.
What also spent some hard
existed and was taken away from
the members.
Fact it is nonexistent.
M. Representative Grove well
Mister chairman we just look at
this differently native
Americans should have the right
to vote in this state until
nineteen forty five I would say
we took their vote away from
they should have been allowed to
vote period so just as a
semantic difference between us I
think we both agree that the
legislature has it within its
power to enfranchise voters
that's our choice we have
decided that we're going to
disenfranchise voters in this
kind of election so I really
think it's a matter of semantics
more than anything else but I
don't think we disagree on the
ultimate conclusion that we have
the power to say a hundred
thirty three thousand plus
people.
And we decided up until now they
don't have that right to vote I
don't hi I'm Mrs Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino talk about the Central
Committee process I have no
problems with that process so
long as it doesn't replace a
primary election which should be
happy that's my only point.
Okay
I just I just tried to tell you
the reason that you get to use
people to believe that used to
be on there and it was taken out
I statute.
And the and so I'm gonna make
sure you that feedback because
there are people who believe.
Some do you speak about this was
the case.
One of us your clear I I don't
mean to imply that I'm standing
we have it within our power to
do this and we should.
Thank
you and those that you're
absolutely right resources to do
that so.
And you want to
There are however because
because are there are there are
conflicts time frames within the
election code.
And and and their complex
processes within election coat
and and so the so for example I
see on page three.
But you're establishing on page
three.
That settlement they can send me
also because Representative
should be sometime number of
other super one percent of the
total number of votes cast in
the district given that you
place this.
In a sectional that presents us
and cycle election.
Congress.
I'm.
I'm just I'm not sure that that
that that that is easily read
when you have it.
Right running for Congress and
any time whether it is out of
cycle or in cycle would need to
get one percent we need to get
the number of signatures signed
by this one percent of the time
pro number votes cast in the
district.
And and so what you're doing
there is that you are raising
the majority party nomination
requirements for
percent of the total of people
who cast a ballot on the ballot
for governor in their in their
In their last party primary.
Changing it to a a and one
percent's.
Actually under one percent is a
one percent of the total vote
and the total vote is defined as
those people who cast are.
Two passed a vote for governor
in the last our.
Ready primary for governor so
what you're doing is you're
reducing.
Are in the cycle Alexion's
you're reducing from three
percent to one percent the
number the total number of
of Senator is required.
It in in doing this I'm not sure
that was your chance.
That located that is the effect
of that this.
No you're right senator Clemente
Mr chair that was not hesitant
to change it for the the regular
elections are ten was to try to
come up with the system and
that's where the three thousand
dollar came in and the dropping
of the searchers so so was ace
more compressed time frame on
these elections we were trying
to get another ballot access to
secretary Toulouse Oliver's
point one about access blended
with the crunch of the time
frame it was not our intention
to change it for the regular
general normal options.
Was on page ten.
Are you have
the four independent candidates
are used to have to get three
percent of the total vote cast
for governor in the in the last
general election.
Two years ago we reduced it to
ten percent right wise right
wise you are reducing here on
we're down to our work presents
and and and what's.
Marginally you're not just
reducing from two percent to one
percent.
because the plan has.
If you if you look at so now so
section G. so if you look on
page ten starting at line twenty
three.
It is actually.
Right so.
Fewer than sixty days from
announcement of the vacancy
there are also found that
question candidacy.
Number one number my two
daughters.
March election code.
In two thousand nineteen was one
from an excellent three percent
Representative one for four in a
pandemic Candice's we went on to
present.
Senator Pittman sixty days.
Yes.
Two percent.
Less than thirty days in total
there are ten percent.
The is for Congress specifically
number actually adjusted those
numbers to one percent and then
the current subsection of
section I have not subsection
G..
Are you still there.
Them and independent candidate
has to get now
it sixty days announcement of
the vacancy to the prognostic
project candidacy working then
at two thirds of one percent.
Budget thirty days working at
arms no one third of one percent
so you can actually work we
change the number of what's
required for these positions and
reception to.
Mr chair I think in the last
nine years I've always enjoyed
watching you do this to other
people and I still don't like
you do it to me but you know my
up my respect for you and
especially in this in this field
is desired this committee to
agreed to the merits of the idea
I am more than happy to help you
dissect this and making sure
it's actually you know
logistically correct.
What is particularly those
religious sects I'm missing a
page for all.
We don't have to speak to them
all all all of Mr chair.
I'm.
There is a reason one of the.
on page twelve I do see that
that you've changed the time
frame for independent
candidacies instead of the fifty
six state proceeding the
election
seven days following a special
primary election.
So.
In addition and then independent
Canada at.
Our nominating petitions.
I do seventy days after.
Special primary election is act
as a delivery that correctly.
You're more money you read it
correctly out Mr Chairman you
did not address the seventh day
not the seventieth.
Okay got it so on the seventh
day finally in any special
primary election thank you
appreciate that very much
Because of that is that you have
the operation of team building
event have the general actually
sixty three days after the date
of the special primary election
so basically then you're
setting.
No sending the there are there
are the independent nomination
day.
So the fact of only seventy
days.
Also special prime is Alexis
Arnold sixty three days out
after the date of the
proclamation then seven days
after that is when the
independent.
Tensions would be required is
that correct.
Representative one yeah I'm
looking again you help me with
that again give me the page
number the line currently so on
on on page
seventeen seventeen okay I'm
sorry I was on twelve you know
sort of the point.
He seventeen line but so so
we've got some section of the
sort of time frame and
subsection the.
It is in his memorandum attempt
dairy.
Okay.
What also that's okay with party
here excuse me I'll get back to
that so the.
I chose working on on the
pavement but what we're going to
this for a second so one of the
property right now and it's it's
people.
Norman the temporary problem in
the special primary election so
you've got you've got
independent candidate funding
day seven days following the
special primary election but
you've got minor parties ten
days following the special
primary election is that correct
do you want to know it's in the
same week.
Mr chairman I think that is
correct I'm looking at it now.
Refinery water okay.
Number.
The
are in that same paragraph the
bellflower there there the
question Tennessee northern part
of him on the seventh day so how
is the nominee to personal it on
the tenth day but that the fire
got a question Candace you three
days before that.
Can you explain how that works.
This has to do with Senator
portals on daylight saving still
gives a couple of days.
Three days.
so.
And then and then you've got
you've got broke in on page
seventeen you got on a fairly
candidates.
Representative Hennessey
relevant private PM on the tenth
day following the special
primary election.
But again going back to page
the independent candidate filing
their nominating petitions on
the seventh day source of the
secretaries of attempting to
confuse.
The problem days and would be on
the.
About.
The context again page problem
nine eleven.
Independent candidacy Under
Secretary yeah.
Right and then page seventeen.
One twenty five.
Mr chairman I think I can answer
the question okay you're looking
at page twelve if I'm
understanding this right that's
in even numbered years.
The rest is for odd numbered
years that's that's the
difference.
The way I'm reading.
Representative even numbered
years operational if you look at
page twelve at line nine it says
following a primary election of
each even numbered year.
Correct that's that's the
primary election limited says
Williams.
And after the member did you
have your model is what comes
before and what comes after it.
Yeah and within the seven day
following the special primary
election that's right programs
primarily in even numbered years
I guess we I mean that's I I I'm
I would believe that that would
be a correction we can make to
make that clear.
I'm just back on the on the time
frames when you get to.
Section one dash eight dash
fifteen point run.
with that begins.
So we're not sure that I want to
raise program begins on on at
the bottom page fourteen the
proceeds for several pages after
that so when I'm looking at page
fifteen.
You know her.
There was a ring which is right
now the front language.
What we are paid fifteen hundred
struck out on online stream for
is that the secretary has a
window.
Secretary of state has in is not
less than seventy seven or more
than ninety one days after the
date of the vacancy.
On lines are open through
sixteen.
The secretary of state has at
least sixty three days.
More from that vacancy from the
date of the proclamation.
At sixty three days from the
special primary so as to the
number of days so the secretary
of state alright so the special
primary election three hundred
politics proclamation.
So the special general election
Senator days from the date of a
special election.
That's right.
I'm.
What's important as I look at
this is because I think there's
some confusion and I kind of
mapped out is that if you're
looking at on the number you
years that's right you have a
special election special primary
special general about a hundred
twenty days out in odd numbered
years because you're not running
into other deadlines if the
vacancy occurs less than a
hundred sixty days before the
November election she is vacant
that is just like what's
happening now with like judicial
elections works too close to the
primary or after the primary
that then you would you would
you would do the system as it is
now you would we're workers had
not points I'm sorry you can
destroy the Marcus at that
point.
Well only because you can't put
people on the primary ballot
it's too late so you have it you
at that point you just can't do
anything about it says you have
you know if you had a vacancy
the day before the general
election you can't do anything
about that so the whole idea is
if it's after the primary that's
where the central committee
comes up or if it's after the
ballots should be treated which
I think is roughly what the
secretary state could tell us
but it's prior to the primary
it's just too late and that's
for the Central Committee does
fill Roland has filled the role
you're not replacing the primary
system with the Central
Committee process and then we
get to the three tier process
that comes after that in even
numbered years when you're too
close to the primary election
and
we're back to principal you
don't distinguish between even
number hundred years although I
hear you saying that you
understood it to be even and odd
number but it doesn't actually
say even on number on here and
effect anywhere in the bill in
terms of your guidance but it
does it does say
But again I want to go back to
the point I was making here on
page fifteen we have a minimum
number of days but you don't
have a maximum number of dates.
Our and so and so in fact that
I'm secretary of state's let's
say.
And the and the secretary of
state has decided not to run for
the seats although I do know
that she considered it might
know that because I considered
insurable talked about with what
Senator meant right but the
secretary of state slide your
all right I want there to be a
special election.
There are two.
To our two things this into
effectively the next process.
Secretary of state and would say
you know it's not it's it is I'm
hundred ninety days until the
next primary election and I'm
going to under our proclamation
I'm gonna decide what the
primary will be held
concurrently with the next
election our vision of the two
hundred seventy days from now or
three hundred eighty days from.
This is.
No more than sixty three days
about German.
Actually one of the biggest
problem in page thirteen one
fourteen.
Representative was at least
sixty three that's what's on my
CV.
Mr Chairman I think you're right
you should say no more than
sixty three decks and then on
page thirteen or nine fifteen
the council says at least.
About four.
Okay.
Just as.
Our and and so
Thank yes yes.
Are we.
So
this.
Representative this is our main
office which we haven't kind of
cycle collection.
We're office we have an onsite
collection.
Because of the response to
Shimon has only served in the US
house of representatives by
point.
Bodies in the entire.
Has ever so five point.
Everyone yes in United States
also represents the people's
house that's not through the
people.
As much as there's been
commentary.
I don't know nature of our
current process and I.
Next at farmers.
People.
Option.
One in this conversation.
Conversation about about.
References Senate moderate
Representative Eli our state
constitution there's no our
point into the lesson.
Stature.
Constitution.
Alright let me to the Wilson and
Jim
all ran Senator identity passed
away my former boss.
We are passed away and but also
in Massachusetts had a special
session I'll stop we're also
looking.
And former operational fund
House.
That sentence.
What this one is because they
had and recycle shin instead of
an apartment would require
training for the muscle.
Welcome to the US on.
The staff were only I'm not I
don't know if we were to the
motors statutorily.
Offices.
They can see in the office we do
report.
Not.
This.
This call center and maybe our
on on Senator that was the
committee building on the spot.
Senator Stewart.
The state Senate through the
very anti democratic process
being appointed by the county
commission because there was a
mid term vacancy in that office.
Let's.
Our democratic process
for committee members should
only because we have a party
withdrew his name.
From.
Our server
was elected.
The state science we have an
opportunity to check which
server this is appointed to the
Senate.
And then took the issue to the
voters to see are one of the
voters want to keep the
appointed person or have a
different option in the initial
Senator Moores and insight
Senator programmable by was able
to run for the state Senate and
comment because she was able to
challenge our president who was
appointed to the Senate.
Senator Rodriguez
the Senate by means of
replacements are to the office
and has continued to sort of a
sense just like Senator Stewart
house Senator Stefanics was able
to run once again to join the
Senate for the second time
because she was able to
challenge a president and been
appointed to the office and then
was able to take that to the
voters are making option other
examples within.
Money on this issue.
And so the matter is is that and
I jumped in and out
Representative public we have
some of course.
That we have.
The product Republic.
We don't.
Our issue building determined by
the voters.
At the appropriate time.
Representative.
Funds to go to the voters.
Decision as to.
Romani repeat.
Right now.
Eight to press will be.
It's with me what are those are.
Did.
Where are paid off in the fall
in this process with US house
representatives in fact want to
share a little history on this
issue Representative regional
seats in this state each of them
over the last fifty years has
had already prior to this year
has had at least one part of
cycle option
the second congressional
district.
A Democrat was in the state he
passed away after the primary.
The Republicans that year we're
not against after passed away
the Democratic Party got
together and decided to nominate
is not a Republican actually
aren't change.
The governor governor is not you
are in position.
And this they are Republican
Party to nominates our jobs
brought
will report because they might
not have
one of the right there is no
vacancy on the Republican
ballot.
Madam chair representative on
appeals were sustained and Russ
Johnston ran as.
Candid.
Major political party.
As a candidate.
This process.
With the district the veterans
one of the pandemic.
Yes.
In the history of the red states
of America.
To
it's also possible percent as.
June the motional District.
Sen what this our.
Congressman appointed to the to
the United Nations right you are
announcer to the unit.
They are not on the number of
Central Committee I'll point it
our server that position.
And Republican Party I'm trying
to find the I. to the opposition
in terms of the.
Here's democratic district
actually.
Was decided.
After winning the two candidates
decided to choose our.
With that said.
and we're in very and the first
initial district.
Our students who passed away.
The primary number was already
running against.
Our our each of the two set top
committees then got together the
democratic Central Committee
decided we're gonna stick with
with was already running the
guy's a billionaire that nobody
has to give me money we.
What what
was your role in that.
Well as I work for Steve when he
passed away.
Representative all right and and
and that and Republican Party
chose her once and for the
seats.
And our and we saw another
example where money in politics
doesn't respond.
And the and
and I have a lesson that
to think about this process.
Nation was never gonna for the
Democrats I'm I'm not realizing.
Representative you all that as a
partisan Democrat Jocelyn we
should just dispense with with
process issues and because
apparently we had this very well
but the Republicans have a down
our in terms of in terms of how
to do this.
I mean this is this is a process
I just happen it's never did a
perfect process again.
The decision
three cases was made by our
members.
The decision as to what Sir.
It's.
Your.
All of this we cases.
Our parents.
Representative.
Part eight hundred ninety
breaking news decisions are.
And and and the process that
that.
So Senator right I'm I'm you
know my my concern I want to
you right Michael to my concern
if you are part of the.
That this process for everybody
to get on the ballot and then
had implemented rents rise
building
and and I've been able to stick
with the same time frames that
we have a seventy seven ninety
one days Representative and
very sympathetic to the ability
and with I'm myself are
What the.
Work part about maybe even
asking if I could be co
sponsoring the.
What Burke process that you're
doing remember this is a this is
a state that is a twenty four
month.
Office.
Term of office.
We are in a month.
I'm gonna tell you what we're
going from a mark some of.
What are.
Ninety one dates.
On a on a thirty six states.
In terms of out there in the
State Farm hired for that.
In the states in a primary arms
I'm gonna try to apartment.
All
system does not.
Is this
a service it is in a small
chairman is that retention.
Chairman office.
And we're and we're extending by
one on one intervention with a
half.
They can see and report
accident.
Time of the vacancy.
Representative.
Just in the state.
Hey.
The surgeon yes ma'am I have
renters as to.
Actually Sir it's not for.
Representative.
If you're interested I do other
structural issues okay going to
add as an addresses request I've
I've I've.
As for the number of them but.
Supporters of the committee.
Two passed.
For us but let's let's see right
us.
I got so tired to the.
Digital hand.
Okay.
What.
This is rather.
And then the on page eighteen I
I felt like the three thousand
dollars was a was a hi as well
and so I wanted to see about
amending that down so on page
eighteen wind fifteen.
the three I would change to one
and that would propose online
sixteen within the parentheses
changing that three two is one
oh one as well so that the the
filing fee amount would be one
thousand dollars rather than
three thousand dollars.
As well page one page eighteen
thank.
One sixteen our content in
sixteen starts three answer one
in stride three insert one is
that correct that's correct.
Well internet junction on.
No objections to that amendment
is adopted.
Senator anything else.
Moving to pass.
So we have not wanted to pass
not should be on Senator Baca
was second from Santo our our
meal.
Our panel on.
But.
Else anybody else again
recognition.
Senator Baca yes Senator Lopez.
Mr Chairman representative the
bill as amended correct.
Okay now.
Senator Moores yes Senator
o'neill yes Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Senator do it now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
No ma'am.
One of six I do have a due
prostituted
Committee it's always a pleasure
thank you thank you all
committee thank you very much
thank you very much.
We
are.
Students.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I bring you I think the fifth or
sixth time a Senate joint
resolution eight.
This would allow the voters in
our state.
To decide if they would be
willing to raise their property
taxes by two mills.
The proceeds of which would go
directly to the public schools
fund which is the state
equalization guarantee.
So I started doing this bill
after the education initiatives
accountability task force in two
thousand eight.
it certainly also one of the
items that was mentioned and
judge singleton's ruling.
Of this is a way to add
approximately a hundred forty
million dollars to our public
school fund it does the the STR
eight does not lay out
specifically how that is used it
could be used for variety of
purposes at responding salaries
extended learning that would be
up to the legislature and all
the parties involved I will say
that Randall our who is the
author of the study of our taxes
that we all heard from in the
interim I said clearly that we
just don't utilize property tax
at all for our public schools no
that's not totally true but it's
in general it's true we allow
districts a half mill levy I
think all but two district seven
pose that a sense
for at least for twenty or
thirty years we have been taking
credit for seventy five percent
of that half mill levy so that
districts only keep.
Roughly five or six million
through all the districts of
this joint resolution would
raise the.
We have currently we currently
has eight twenty bill cap that
was put in place in nineteen
thirty three and has not been
changed with the exception of in
the eighties when the state
basically gave their ability to
raise money for the public
schools through millage to the
cities and the county.
so right now the cities have a
seven point six five percent of
that twenty now they had only
two point two five in in
nineteen eighty seven that was
raised to seven point six five
the counties have eleven point
eight I.
Percent of that twenty mills
schools have point five the
state has nothing.
So this would a race that cap
from twenty to twenty to impose
those first two male statewide
impose those first two males and
the funding would go into the
public school fund A. K. A. the
state equalization guarantee.
it's about twenty dollars per
thousand dollars net value of
the house and it fell you not
for the the bigger amount
we are the number four in the
least amount of a property tax
being used for the public
schools Vermont why use no
property tax Arkansas uses eight
point four they say we use
fifteen percent but I do not
believe that so accurate I think
that counts the cities and
counties but taxation and there
so it would be approximately as
I said hundred forty million
that's about four hundred and
four four hundred forty dollars
per student and of course it
goes to the voters.
Many districts in our state
would not be raising as much as
other districts which is why
this would go to the state to
distribute equally among our
public schools and that is it
this is another one of those
bills that I do all the time I
have no lobbyist I I may have
some people in support of it
opposed to it but there
unbeknownst to me so Mr Chairman
I'm ready for you to do whatever
you want with public comment if
there is any.
Well as find out of the blue
as quick as anybody who is not a
public comment on this.
Yes Mister chairman how one
person could find that the
public comment today.
Well okay let's skip the
numbers.
I am admitting him right now
thank you for joining.
Mr.
Mr please proceed.
Mr please proceed.
Sorry about that good morning Mr
chair and members of the
committee Bill Jordan with New
Mexico voices for children and I
want to thank Senator Stewart
for her perseverance and
bringing this back again and
again.
At voices you know we spent a
lot of time debating tax policy
and those debates are almost
always limited to personal
income taxes and gross receipts
taxes but the third leg of the
school is actually the lead that
most states used to support
their schools.
With some of the lowest property
taxes in the nation New Mexico
is under utilizing our property
taxes and as a result we're over
relying on more regressive gross
receipts taxes.
If we're going to provide fuel
for the moonshot and if we're
going to get off our over
reliance on volatile oil and gas
revenues this is one of the best
and most equitable ways to do
that we urge you to let the
voters themselves vote on
whether or not to raise their
own property taxes to support
our schools thank you.
Thank you very much.
Our
was because everybody else.
Mr chair that was that.
By well.
In that case.
Thank you.
Mr chair and the members of the
committee thank you Senator
Stewart bringing this I do have
a question we're gonna be
raising the property tax on the
private citizens.
but again are we gonna let the
federal government off Scot free
and not.
Pursue a higher bill payment
because I think being one of the
largest property owners in the
state
for too many years we've we've
let them off the hook and they
have not paid their fair share
of owning property especially at
the local level is there any
drive from our Attorney General
if if.
You know I think maybe a
memorial might be
a great way to handle this but
you know really they they pay
way less than what we would
receive a if the land was
privately held so I I I still
have concern with this is we're
putting a higher tax on the
private citizens we get we let
the federal government not pay
their their share that they
should for owning property is
there any drive in doing that I
understand you brought this many
years but I think there's better
ways to to fund education ensure
equity especially across the
country because our western
states that have a lot of
federal land all have the same
problem.
We we have similar issues you
look at states like Nevada
that's ninety seven percent
public land or something like
that just a ridiculous amount of
public land they struggle to
fund education as well and so as
long as our illustrious states
continue to have high numbers of
federal land in them and and
we're not logging or doing
things like that to to create
revenue or we're just going to
continue to kick this can down
the road.
Mr chair and senator.
Hello Mr chairman the you know
what you've raise is not the
subject of this as J. R. eight
I I certainly agree with you
that we should look into that
but that's that's not the
subject of what you have before
us we we have some of the latest
statistics I heard is that we
New Mexico's forty nine in the
nation on taxation of property
so
I just can't I can't answer any
further about your issue it
certainly I certainly would join
you in a memorial if you're
tempted to do that I would join
you in doing that but that's not
really the subject of this.
Senator I think you know what
let's do that I think that's so
that would be for for for United
to come together on something
and and push for something like
that purging the Attorney
General to pursue
litigation against the federal
government for not paying their
fair share and so I think you
know I think that's something
that we would really
spark that interest and and
really bring attention to that I
think being forty ninth in
property taxes Mr chair Senators
on to be proud of it says we
want you to on property we want
you to build a factory here we
want you to build and create and
you're not to be punished for
improving a property and things
like that so I think you know
being forty north of something
that we can be proud of that
that's one way that sets us
apart from our neighbors to the
east in our neighbors to the
north and in our other neighbors
that do taxed property very high
they don't have income tax so we
we make up for a little property
tax with that but you know I I I
still struggle with this and and
there's a lot of reasons why
because owning property is an
inalienable right that it's it's
put out there that having
private property and what can
happen if you get property taxes
too high is the last thing I
want to see somebody up to sell
their house or sell their farm
or sell their business because
they can't afford the property
tax because we've we've put it
too high
and and that's what we see a lot
in in your rural areas whenever
property taxes go up there's a
lot of cattle ranchers that
don't have control over how much
money they make how much is
there before how much is their
core gonna go for and so we
don't want to price ourselves to
where family farms are having to
sell just because they can't pay
for the inheritance tax or the
property taxes are two of the
major things that family farms
out of business and so as we see
corporate farms and and things
like that started become the
norm it's because state center.
It's made it impossible to
operator owner or do a of a
small family farm and it's it's
things like this increasing
property taxes that's the
unintended consequence I think
that I'm definitely not against
you know improving education and
doing things like that I just I
think the statement was made
that this is the most admirable
way and and and I I would have
to disagree that you know this
isn't equitable
That are are small family farms
are going to be punished
the most for this and and so I'm
I'm gonna have to oppose it but
hopefully you and I can agree on
on the bill payments and and
come together in a nonpartisan
way in a bipartisan way and and
push for a solution moving
forward that we can both agree
on thank you Mr chair.
Thank you and and I'm I'm just
Senator how would you propose we
force the federal government to
do.
Mr Mr chair you know litigation
is always a good way to do that
and and I think some of our
other western states have
already pushed for that so we
can just join them you know more
than one state.
Coming together you might be
able to make something happen
but until we we joined forces
with all the other western
states will continue to all
struggle with education.
I'm
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator is onto a good thing
with this bill this
constitutional amendment.
we are funding.
Our schools now largely with
gross receipts tax which is the
least.
Bill approach.
And
You know
Property tax that would be
increased the money from
property that would be generated
by this measure would come
largely from urban areas for the
property values are high.
And it would be a way to send
some of those that that value to
the rural communities where
property values are low.
And.
Cultural and is taxable the low.
So this is a way of I would
point out for Senator Pirtle to
to see some of the of the issues
he's raised several times in
this committee about the the.
The.
The bias towards urban areas the
the season the legislature to be
rectified this would actually be
a way of spreading the money to
communities that have very low
property values currently
because the generation would be
spread evenly through the
equalization formula.
I I think my only concern is.
Will future legislators see this
as a way to supplant current
funding levels.
And are we simply we simply
diversifying the revenue stream
into schools.
Rather than actually increasing
it but I think it's it's
certainly that that would fall
on our shoulders to take care of
that.
And so I would support this
measure and and I think it's a
it is.
Rings is more in line with that
the the the as as bill shorten
sentences the equal distribution
among the three legs of the
stool that finance governmental
operations so I think this is a
good bill which is supported.
Thank you Senator Moores thank
you Mr thank you madam program
it's not available for this but
just want to just point out
something about we talk about
revenue stabilization Law Center
on and the are we going to
counteract what to Mr Jordan
said is that state of New Mexico
doesn't factor Stewart Klay
going back to the thirties have
low property taxes ever since to
taxpayer protection bolts that
happened back then but in
Bernalillo county we do not when
you look at the the national
averages of property taxes but
can we tend to be about average
the third leg of the stool that
is often talked about earlier
County we tend to be about
average for the nation because
we spend a lot more money for
property tax for.
Over different issues the big
one with them those are
supporting the UNM eight show
mercy Roman we Bernalillo county
health fund but there's a couple
of things in there too so our
property tax billing County not
so I want to clarify news about
nationally average what we talk
about with that for years to one
New Mexico ID shows restaurant
looked up I know I paid over
seven thousand dollars last year
that was closely thousand
dollars property tax so that's
not that's not cheap
so if we're if this amendment
was to encourage the rest of the
state Travis county in Roswell
county and all the other ones to
catch up to us and we will
County maybe definitely Santa Fe
County omitted by all the
valuations of Santa Fe County
was free loaders and Eldorado
and all those expensive houses
up there is not paying their
fair share to keep New York
hospital open Mike we you and I
are Senator on Stewart also if
it if they want to chip in for
help fund for the airport to the
hospital and all the things that
you and I pay for that be great
to get ours are where they are I
think that would be of the sport
that but we're do have high
enough high we have average
property taxes Bernalillo county
indefinitely high compared to
the rest of state so I
appreciate what you're trying to
do with tax policy or something
we have talked about revenue
stabilization many times
but there are it's not I
equitable around the state as it
is as we know and so if what you
want Senator per one join our
memorial two if the other
counties to to join us on our
taxation rates are maybe also on
on that one but so I appreciate
forgiveness up this is a
complicated issue.
I do represent from county so in
my district
without our support even higher
property taxes at this time
thank you thank you Mr.
Thank you very much.
I see no one else seeking
recognition of the spine I have
a couple quick questions Senator
Stewart on page two lines twelve
and thirteen.
I'm I'm curious about having
that last sentence in their.
In that the previous sentence
states very clearly that two
males.
Our show we distributed public
schools through the stated
position guarantee distribution
I don't see where it allows an
option and I'm not sure why we
have that last sentence
statement this for any other
purpose.
Well Mister chairman you know I
think it was Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino who.
mentioned the issue of
supplanting.
Us so rather than supplementing
so
I'm I'm not sure if this is been
in my previous attempts to do
this but
you definitely don't want
planting we want to supplement
so I think that is the purpose
of that.
I I like it in there
because I I the I think this
issue of supplanting are
supplementing is has always been
a big one and in two thousand
and three.
When we last raised the land
grant permanent fund
distribution.
Up many of us of four years
after that we're trying to track
you know where that increased
funding was was hard to track
it.
so I think the purpose of this
is to say we really really
really really need that
I'm you can take it out if you
want I know you can't help
yourself I know you've got to
amend every bill before you
that's just the way you are but
I kind of like it that it says
we really really need to.
because I I I.
You know I know people don't
like property taxes and I think
it's important that we say this
is specifically for the public
schools and we will use it for
no other purposes well then I
think if we do say that and if
people believe us we have a
higher percentage of people that
will vote for no other states
are averaging about forty
percent forty percent of the
property tax and other states of
those to the public schools they
are dependent on it and we just
think of it as an after thought
here in New Mexico it's partly
our history.
but never the less you know when
I continue to hear these reports
from these
Tax studies and they say.
To using any property tax at all
three public schools I just
think that it's time to ask the
voters if they're willing to do
that and I do think this gets to
a more equity I'm looking at the
very end of your FIR you will
see how there are just some
areas of the state of where they
cannot raise very much but never
the less they raise some and the
redistribution of the wealth is
something that we believe in in
New Mexico so I was a long
winded answer because previous
three speakers have been asking
any questions I've been dying to
talk.
So it and.
Scared.
Senator Morris.
And and and and and and and and
Senator Stewart I I hear what
you're saying I will not vote.
That last sentence doesn't say
that you have to supplement and
you cannot supplant.
It was that said you had a
supplement income not supplant I
would I would that would be
supportive of that and Mr
because property taxes.
Not any as we have the lowest
property taxes in the nation.
The and server sentiments are.
Thank you yes I'm you.
I always try to point out the
Bernalillo county aspects.
What was with some we we
subsidize a hospital for the
entire state right
the state for Center pearl.
Exactly but but the
Is that I did not personally
believe on property taxes.
All sure should be
program the friends for some
time in the country more not
that fifty first percentile.
The first place.
The the the or one percent top
this was the senator I think
property taxes which a lot.
In terms of having a functional
governments
it is it is not so that's that's
that's not my concern like I
said I I'm here to support
something that would that would
require just like as we.
As as a share one is coming
over.
You know I would support I'm
just looking at language that
would that would require that
this be supplanting money not
not replacing my.
When includes not taking on this
last
day not surprisingly
so running up on the other
expanding your desire to make
sure that we say we really need
to.
Let me just suggest that that
that maybe those last two
sentences to be combined.
Them are the so and and and and
what I would suggest is actually
to strike.
Our.
And from the word to the words
tax on the next line and
afterward shall insert the would
not it's so it would say number
of the twenty two member
equipment.
What should be distributed to
the public school through a
state position guarantee
distribution and shall not be
used for any other purpose.
and are actually at the keeps it
consistent with them the two men
that were talking about
because the thing is in this in
this paragraph we're talking
about.
Romero's.
And then we talk about
attendance.
Talk about twenty terminals in
the end of this too.
Property tax.
The questions in which to not
property taxes at the point of
the tunnel with twenty two miles
but if you provided in the same
sentence I think it gets to
where you were intending to go
with that.
And so Mr chairman I I do
believe that impose statewide is
an important two words have in
there.
Are you not.
What was the question is going
to go to is that I believe this
is impose statewide.
Is it is it knocks.
I mean this entire paragraph.
Was about a statewide
The tax.
And and I'm not sure about that
Mr Chairman because you know as
I said up this twenty mills
eight point eight five percent
goes to counties seven point six
five to municipalities and point
five to public schools so
I don't think the municipalities
are the counties are imposed
statewide that's why Senator
mourners brought up early on.
Bernalillo is probably one of
the top two or three highest tax
counties in the state so I could
be wrong I I don't I don't have
article eight section two for me
you know if it says.
Statewide course the title says
imposed a statewide knowledge.
So just run your amendment by me
again if you would.
Once the latter part and that
would be on page to run twelve.
Start comparing it.
And strike to the end of the
line.
One thirteen.
Striker once property tax and
inserts the right hander.
Workshop all sorts of read more
it's.
So that Amanda those lines would
we need.
Author of the State equalization
guarantee distribution and shall
not be used for any other
purpose and that's a very
friendly amendment.
Is there is there any objections
the amendments.
Well having having succeeded at
I want to I don't feel more
strongly on the next one okay
maybe you can forget about it.
What are.
Does it does lead me.
One some questions about the
status of the twenty two males.
If.
We think of the twenty two males
shopping impose statewide.
Question what the status of the
one twenty morals is and the
other twenty mills are impose
statewide that is I think
something I would honor our.
In that between now and the next
committee.
in.
Twenty two armed pro statewide.
My suggestion would be.
Simply distort the words and
post statewide to be.
So that would be so when I was
on the twenty two mile limit
shall be distributed public
schools this actually I want to
point out that would be
distribute is that not that this
is not my case.
I know well well Mister chairman
the the point I see is
That is individually by
district.
And don't impose it see there
you go.
Like the point I is not a
statewide the municipalities
counties are not statewide this
we want to be statewide so I I
would that would not be friendly
to take out the statewide not
I understand that I hear that
you're saying.
and and and so I do think I do
think there's a structural issue
again I don't want to mess with
it right now because because
these are complex issues then
and there that I don't have
nearly the facility is as Adam
was a bill to be able to.
A nice act on the flight
but
But I'm just incredulous at the
rest of the structure of the
sentence just just to make sure
that we're having a problem with
a half mill being disallowed at
some point.
So this.
Well as.
Do pass on this Senate joint
resolution eight as amended.
Thank you very much.
Can you give secure could you
give a history lesson on
property taxes Senator Stewart
since we had one about Alexion's
earlier maybe.
We should we are.
Retract a motion.
What what state is actually
working on a states that is
really something that she could
get a little bit administrative
management we we will instead of
Senator taxed fifty times when
other property taxes doesn't run
private ownership in western
society as opposed to communal
ownership of the of the
indigenous societies in our
region I but we have a motion
for the past Senator leader over
the second from Senator strokes
it is seeking saying nobody else
are all seeking recognition to
finish the history lesson.
Miss Vigil if you'll please call
the roll Senator Baca.
thank you know Senator Lopez
yes.
Senator Morris now.
Senator o'neill yes Senator T.
C. Pino.
Yes Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do it yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am what
was the what number seventy
three also on a bird of seven to
three you have a do pass
recommendation to impacts the
democratic areas of the state
and on to the next committee.
Well.
The money to the Republican
areas of the state.
Well as thank you.
Suite Mr.
Are we going to commit.
That makes sense we do have a
closed session on Wednesday so
we will not be meeting Wednesday
morning
and will be looking to do small
confirmations on Friday and then
also do wanted to build thank
you all very much on the
bachelor Business.
