Right welcome to the Senate
rules committee we have eight
different people to.
Consider for the various boards
of regents.
Morning we're looking at.
Read for northern New Mexico
college whether Mexico military
institute New Mexico school for
the blind and visually impaired
first of all let me just thank
everybody for for your
willingness to serve and to to
help out in in the management of
these institutions for the state
of New Mexico.
This is something that we truly
appreciate as people are willing
to step up and do that for the
for the communities either the
physical community or the or the
a community in which state in
which they operate.
In the state.
We're gonna go ahead and in
order to make sure that we have
to everybody we're gonna go
ahead and start in the
sub committee with presentations
and and that will allow us to
ensure that we're able to get
everybody ought to before today
so that so that
so that everybody can in the
service.
So with that we're gonna start
with
northern New Mexico college
board of regents and as you do
the presentation do more money
we do have eight people to get
through in less than two hours
so a brief presentation would be
helpful and then we will go to
to the concrete at for us the
words and then we'll go to the
next person and then and then
we'll be able to follow back in
with some questions at the end
so with that let us begin with
our meal and that money Evelyn
want to spot.
He's on the.
Still have that problem morning
Mr chairman good morning members
of the committee born in
Chihuahua Mexico and raised in
the beautiful Espanola valley
have led what this product is
the first generation immigrant
daca student attending northern
New Mexico college where she has
maintained an impressive four
point zero two GPA miss what
this product is majoring in
biology with a concentration in
health sciences on a pre med
track and is also currently
serving northern New Mexico
college as the student Senate
president miss what is part I
was recently selected out of
five hundred sixty nationwide
applicants for George town's
medical schools academy for
research clinical and health
equity fellowship better known
as arches now Mr chairman of the
arches program aims to help
students who are interested in
medical studies and are
committed to advancing
opportunities for underserved
populations to bolster their
future careers now being a daca
student has played a major role
in this what is drugs career and
research schools which has also
been a driving force in her
conducting literature research
on nationwide health care
disparities and as to why she
successfully completed her
capstone project on undocumented
immigrants and barriers to
access health care during the
COVID nineteen outside of our
studies Mr chairman she works as
a part time employee for the Los
Alamos National Laboratory
foundations early childhood
program a program designed to
empower patients and caregivers
to be their child's first and
best teachers miss waters pada
also gives back to our community
on weekends by singing and
playing guitar at something
close to like kind of a holy
Christ Church and with that Mr
president I yield the floor to
miss Evelyn eight one eight.
Good morning good morning
everyone thank you so much
Senator had any of for that
beautiful introduction Mr
chairman Ben Ben Senators all on
this call I feel extremely
blessed and grateful to be here
with you all this morning also
very blessed and grateful to
be considered for this position
estate agent I initially found
out about the position through
doctor Bailey Brianna Bailey and
at first I thought this is so
intimidating and this is a huge
responsibility and I I soon came
to realize that that was
And I know this is going to be a
really big responsibility and
I'll have a full voting right
and I also know that everything
that I will share as far as my
thoughts my ideas my opinions on
topics that will be presented I
will do so with equity with
diversity and with inclusion in
mind at all times thank you all
so much.
Thank you very much depreciate
that them you do make also of an
incredibly important point I try
to make on the floor what I
would do the conferees and that
is you're not a student regions
your regents who is the students
who are all right.
We move now to let's see is
Senator Gonzales in the in the
zoom when he comes then we will
move to Senator Gonzales let me
switch over thank you all very
also provides us please press.
Good morning Mr chairman good
morning members of the committee
of.
with my part time he'd worked so
very honored to present to you
Mr Rubin are true that the.
And Star to eight it is so as
being the the president of the
Espanola school board vice
president.
Residents are Hispanic national.
national school boards
association a lifelong member of
the Espanola valley and he also
has so his career working at the
radiology assistant manager for
the hospital and he is a board
member of the the label not
available the little board
member.
He has two children two sons one
in the ninth grade and one in
the sixth grade and that's why a
graduate of northern New Mexico
college and the Mr chairman
members so a very valuable asset
to you know to the northern
community college and that a
high percent to Mr Ruben
Archuleta.
Mr laptop and my fellow nalo
board member please proceed.
And your muted.
Yes likely all.
Good morning everyone thank you
for the presentation Senator
Gonzales yes Representative the
Senate rules committee my name
is Ruben except as an honor to
be nominated in order New Mexico
college border regions
this is a very proud moment for
me
I've always kept up with
northern follow northern and I
see more than a ball from the
committee college two or four
year college under the great
leadership of Dr Bailey.
Most recently I've worked in Dr
Bailey this almost national
laboratory.
To create a trace program for
our high school students in the
area.
But this pulled up with this
collaboration students in
northern economic opportunity to
work
up for employment of national
that's updated on the program so
this is a great thing going on
in order right now also curly a
frontline health care worker get
prescription hospital this bill.
And it's a it's an honor to see
that about eighty percent of our
nurses are graduates with more
than college I want to be part
of this our collaboration to
continue to have our nursing
program thrive
and that is.
Also real quickly are northern
college's been named the most
affordable colleges southwest
most recently.
And it is my hope that I will be
able to work to keep tuition
affordable accessible to
students especially those in
rural communities so again thank
you yes my Chris to be nominated
for the position of what a
regents of northern college
thank you.
Thank you very much
Senator rents on your account
for easy money accuracy in a
month I have for the New Mexico
military institute for regents
thank you Mr chairman and I am
proud to be able to sponsor.
Miss Toyota she is a graduate
from New Mexico military
institute hello Sir bachelor of
social work of New Mexico
highlands university
she is license a special
education teacher with
experience as behavioral support
specialist in teaching English
as a second language to
students.
With disabilities.
She is excited to be joining the
regents at me and the I am
excited to have there and we'll
turn it over to you a little bit
more about yourself.
This.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
honorable senators and members
of the Senate rules committee
I'd like to give my heartfelt
thanks to the governor for this
nomination and to senator rand
for sponsoring and introducing
you so graciously please allow
me two and a half minutes of
your time as a first generation
college graduate alone now and
educator and social worker I
treasure and then my as an
institution of learning the core
values of interim I are aligned
with the core values of
organizational leadership and
code of ethics and social work
it's also lined with the
humanistic and holistic approach
to learning students which is to
go to and I might do so because
I'm looking for a challenging
educational experience that will
not only prepare them for a
career but prepare them mentally
and physically for life I lost
my parents
quite quite sometime ago and
much earlier in life than I ever
believe that I would and NM I
Education and help me develop a
skillset and mindset that
prepared me for the world
without them so that's as the
parent of a cadet and respective
regions the term in local
parentis has never been far from
my thoughts especially during
this COVID nineteen pandemic so.
It's our accomplished and
impacting our communities
locally and globally in both
military and civilian careers
the male to female ratio was
eight two two when I attended an
after twenty five years is
relatively the same so my
appointment is confirmed today
as one of a handful of women to
serve as an animal my region I
look forward to working to see a
greater presence of female
cadets on post.
With a yearly enrollment overall
thousand students who come from
thirty six states two U. S.
territories and thirty three
foreign nations the
institutional unparalleled
access and opportunity to those
who desire to take it in such a
diverse environment by accepting
a teaching need to value myself
as a unique individual within
the could it lead quarter making
my interests my strands it
demonstrated what it looks like
to value all others at a young
age as I wrap up I'd like to
share something that I heard a
fellow and my god change of
command ceremony I heard from
the outgoing a district
commander don't let the
bureaucrat silence the advocate
bureaucracy can have a tendency
to cycle advocacy and innovation
this resonated with me as a
social worker and coming from an
army District commander the
statement stood out as an
example of how excellent
institutional values are
universally applicable the
legacy of an MMI is to provide
an education that goes beyond
academics to help instill self
confidence at least intrinsic
motivation and discipline that
provide a lifetime of benefits
the enhancement of ethical
values and standards congruent
with exemplary leadership and
excellence institutional values
which are in that universally
applicable to say that I'm
honored and humbled to be
nominated and considered for
this appointment does not even
come close thank you so much.
Thank you so very much but
Gloria appreciate very much your
up willingness to serve and the
perspective that you bring
Senator Kernan I believe you are
in our room yes you are there
you are yes.
If you would if you would please
proceed to present Herald Allen
Edmonds and junior.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
it is my pleasure to present Mr
and that's in today for
approximation to the New Mexico
military institute of Mr
Edmundson has been teaching in
New Mexico classrooms for the
past eighteen years also serving
as head basketball coach being
in the classroom and mentoring
use is a role that he is very
grateful for and has the utmost
pride in anyone who knows Mr
Edmundson will tell you that
he's very passionate about are
you and education is Monto has
been every student every day I
believe it's important he says
to interact with every one of
his students every single day on
a personal level every student
leaves his class ring knowing
that there is an adult you
general genuinely cares about
there and less and it is
eighteen years of teaching he
has presented training seminars
and mentored aspiring teachers
at central New Mexico college he
has done presentations for
teachers in future teachers at
educational conferences he has
served as a mentor teacher
department head and has been
part of several superintendents
Advisory Council he is a firm
believer in community service
projects and has passed that
passion down to many students
and former athletes every year
his baseball teams commit to
several community service
projects within their community
they include work with Christmas
anonymous prostate cancer
awareness campaigns and a
nationwide community service
challenge.
He has started a prostate cancer
awareness night during the
baseball season in which his
team raises money for local
cancer cases.
And along with one of his peers
he started the nation wide
community service project called
the right challenge it was
featured on several national
publications and newspapers
around the nation he is married
to miss Andrea Edmundson who is
a current principal at Carlsbad
intermediate school they have
four children I'm again I'll
just share with the support
County sheriff's department
medics sophomore crosspad high
school Anderson a freshman at
Carlsbad high school in Brooklyn
a fifth grader at moderate
moderate elementary so with that
I'll believe I'll let him tell
you a little bit more about
himself thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much Mr evidence
that if you are able to activate
your account and you please
proceed.
This represents.
We'll get back to them for this
statement just a.
Right now yes we can okay
Senator Kernan thank you for the
introduction first off I want to
say that I am completely humbled
and honored to be able to
service the reason for this
decision such as the New Mexico
military institute
I spent twenty years around the
place with my father being a a
faculty member teacher there and
the.
Coach and so I understand the
importance of honor tradition
respect and integrity that all
comes with such a great
institution
I'm a big believer in investing
in education whether the
secondary post secondary
education
Education is generational we see
that as parents are educated the
likelihood of their children
become educated all.
It's exponentially increases and
so I'm such a firm believer in
making sure that education is a
priority for all citizens of the
state and all children in the
state.
You know the committee is
mentioned multiple times in the
previous states that the COVID
world has brought new challenges
to education
I did not like we're challenges
on such an optimist and I look
at challenges as opportunities
and so these are opportunities
for the state the state's
educational institutions to grow
and I'm glad to get chance to be
part of that
you know highlighted in some of
the meetings were you know lack
of teacher preparation and and
lack of students stay in state
those are the opportunities that
we have to invest in our use and
opportunities that we have to
make education of the utmost
importance in our state so once
again
on Google to server I think the
Senate committee for for having
us here today and once again
I can't wait to to take this
opportunity on thank you.
Thank you very much of a true
teacher who logs in for the
classroom so
very well we move now to Senator
Tallman resent the first of four
region range for the Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired miss merry
will Senator call.
Good morning.
Good morning as Mr chairman
members of the committee very
pleased to the present yes
sponsor of the.
Very well so racing Chicago and
spending most of her career
working current California.
I'm very pleased to presenters
has a very distinguished career
and not only the education of
the blind also a strong advocate
of the blind just been blind
since the age of fourteen due to
an auto accident.
She has a master's in education
and a bachelors of arts both
from San Francisco State
University she is the recipient
of many awards I'm just going to
mention two of them choose two
thousand two blind educator of
the year is presented by the
national federation of the blind
and she was the nominee for
Disney teacher of the year in
nineteen ninety seven.
they mention the extensive that.
Well as expensive work and
advocating for blind children
and adults so also been very
active international in a lot of
work related professional
organizations she was president
of the national federation of
the blind of California.
And she was also present.
Of the national association of
blind educators and in the late
nineties.
and she's also
Spent a lot of time working with
parents to make them aware of
their rights.
and Mr chair the has two grown
sons.
And she moved to Albuquerque
four years ago after eight
friend successfully persuaded
her to move here and that she
but at she's very glad that she
made that decision she loves
well as the Albuquerque.
And finally Mr chair she's very
excited about the kids getting
back to school on April six
that the.
And the again I'm very pleased
to Representative the.
Merry rose to I will.
I just think it's career I think
will make an excellent
Member of the.
The New Mexico school for the
blind and visually impaired
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much miss Willis please
proceed.
Thank you senator Toleman to the
members of the committee thank
you for inviting me today it is
a pleasure to serve as a member
of the board of regents for the
New Mexico school for the blind
as senator tall is that I've
spent my career educating and
advocating for blind children
and adults I've taught all grade
levels in the regular school
room and in the California
school for the blind so coming
to New Mexico and learning that
there is there is it of a school
for the blind do
people that care as much as I
did about the education and
rehabilitation of our blind
children I am pleased and
honored to serve on that board
of regents and after all the
goal for all the children is to
get a good education get out
there and get a job and be a tax
paying member of society and so
that's what I it worked to our.
Thank you very much we
appreciate that so much and am
glad that you're eight friends
ganged up on you to get you out.
Yes.
Senator Hickey we move to you
presentation of Catherine and
gray Senator Hickey.
Who was in the room.
Are there you go please omit.
My apologies S. thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senators it is my pleasure this
morning to introduce to you
Catherine right for region for
the board member for the New
Mexico school of the blind and
visually impaired she has had
quite a career in teaching
throughout New Mexico including
Los Lunas Albuquerque New
Alamogordo and not only that he
has done a lot of what's called
itinerant work that is going
into homes and working with
students are.
Who are so
And the cap that and
she did retire but she didn't
stop she has continued to teach
our rail and preschool and also
working in the Moriarty school
so someone who truly knows New
Mexico and truly knows the needs
of the students who are visually
impaired and that is my pleasure
to present kids.
Miss great please proceed.
Thank you Senator Hickey like to
speak to the rest of you once a
teacher always a teacher I
started when I was fourteen
teaching swimming lessons in my
local community in Ohio and I've
continued on through their in
the blind this community it was
all just happenstance I showed
up in Alamogordo with my
military husband and they didn't
want teachers in the classroom
so I went to I asked if I could
volunteer down at the school for
the blind
little fun fact one of the first
people I volunteered to work
with was the governor's sister.
When she was a student there we
did water aerobics together had
a great time but at the same
time I also met the governor's
mother when she was a region at
our school thank her for her
service to.
She was there for a long time
the school has been a wonderful
place for me I have love
teaching the students I love the
doing the extra curricular
activities with them didn't
mention all of those but we
played a lot I would is that
cheerleading sponsoring we had
so many fun trips I didn't
realize that wrestling was
actually a sport I thought it
was that funny stuff they did on
TV with their the grunting and
moaning and sweating and your.
Quite an athletic event.
So I've enjoyed all of it I've
seen I've worked with all of the
kids from birth through age
twenty one
I think I have a lot to still
offer although I don't have the
stamina to last in the classroom
anymore those kids are very very
active but I think you for real
pointing me to this position
thank you for your
consideration.
I was muted sorry thank you very
much we appreciate very much
your willingness to continue to
serve in this position with with
the
we're regions for the medical
school for the blind and
visually impaired.
Senator o'neill is
he was in the committee until
about one forty five in the
morning so he will be coming in
and joining us very soon but in
the meantime we have Gerry
smothers who has also been
appointed to the to serve on the
board of regents for the New
Mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired
Mr us mothers is somebody who
here is wife adopted six
children with multiple
disabilities over the past
twenty years they've also serves
as far thanks and work of the
disability community from for
most of of of his career.
Rep retiring in two thousand
one.
And and so with that Mr OSK
Metalist please proceed.
I thank you very much good
morning Senator and up thank you
to the committee for allowing me
to appear it is an honor.
To search and.
The last twenty two years my
wife and I have had to great
July of.
Bringing children into our home
we have.
Had serious injuries and
disabilities and watch them grow
and change and part of what I
want to say today words thank
you to all of the legislators
past and present to show up and
understand and give support and
guidance and regulation to all
of the things that happened so
that we can do what we do
UNM hospital.
To work with all of the children
who suffered serious injuries
that we've adopted
UNM hospice program.
Great care and follow up with us
one of our jewel.
Hospice.
Where our home is right now.
This is so hard I'm and he is
eight years old in response way
and he's doing great work at the
school for the blind and so I
just wanted you all to know that
as parents we such deeply
appreciate your your conviction
your strength and your support
and I so look forward to this we
have three children graduate
from the preschool applying and
it's a phenomenal institution
and I'm so happy to serve on the
board and as a parent help
structure and guidance to the
program that is already an
outstanding program in this
country thank you so much for
honoring me with a nomination I
look forward to serving New so
my regards to Senator o'neill
when he was our representative I
he knocked on our door not
United and then.
You really got to see what.
Working with doing which was
bringing to fruition here in our
home so we we miss him and I
want to pass on my highest
regards to him so thank you all
very much for the nomination I
really look forward to serving
thank you thank you Mr and thank
you for your willingness to
serve in the midst of running
your own Brady bunch there are.
Thank.
We now come to and again Senator
Griggs is preparing for another
committee this morning.
And so we come to
robin Holmes I have to confess a
particular biased about.
Robin is one of my absolute
favorite people in the world she
is a county clerk down in Terrel
County.
Some of that I have worked with
over the last more than fifteen
years and not just work with but
also been very good friends with
she also serves right now as the
vice president of New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired foundation she
is she also works with the board
of the ZF therapy center and I
went and she has among other
things like at she is a
continuous.
Having gotten three different
medications for New Mexico
County college largely no doubt
to the outstanding teachers and
that program and with that
miss Holmes please proceed.
Good morning chairman Ivey Soto.
Members of the committee my name
is robin holds and it is my
great pleasure and privilege to
appear before you this morning
with respect to my nomination as
regent of the New Mexico school
for the blind and visually
impaired first I would like to
thank governor Lujan Grisham for
my appointment I was very
honored that Lujan Grisham would
consider me for such an
important position.
The New Mexico school for the
blind and visually impaired
holds a very special place for
me growing up in Alamogordo and
having a visually impaired
sister I know first hand what a
big difference that the school
can make on people's lives
more so than almost any other
state institutions the school
for the blind and visually
impaired can transform a person
given that personal dignity and
purpose and he quit that person
with the tools needed to lead a
more meaningful and productive
life if confirmed I would use my
very best efforts to maximize
and leverage this unique state
treasurer for the benefits of
all New Mexicans I believe that
I would be a good steward for
this resource and would make
sure to the greatest extent
possible that it's resources
being used for its students and
for the larger population that
it serves I believe that my
background in managing people
and resources quips me for the
job I have been managing
employees and assets in the
public sector for almost three
decades and I think the skills
that I have learned in my
professional career would serve
me well if I working for to the
board of regents I have also
been a board member obviously as
Senator Ivy Soto told you for
the school for the visually
handicapped foundation board
through this volunteer effort
I because I'm even more familiar
with the school's mission I am
committed to learning everything
necessary to do a good job I am
also a team player and if
confirmed I promise to work with
the other regions to marshal all
of our talents and collective
experiences to best serve our
constituents again I am very
grateful for the opportunity
would appreciate this
committee's recommendation that
I be confirmed by the entire
Senate thank you as well for the
chance to address you have a
great day.
Thank you very much and I just
to the center of grace's joined
us are great so if you'd like to
say a few words about robin
Holmes.
Thank you Mr chair I've known
robin for a long time and longer
than robin would probably like
for me to talk about.
Robert graduated from high
school with my baby brother and
robin has done something she may
have never told you about
senator as far as that you know
you've heard about her abilities
as county clerk and.
Robin has been outstanding in
that position but robin was also
outstanding as a magician's
assistant.
And the many people won't be
aware of that
so robin I won't tell that well
I will tell that to the whole
CENIC but robin is extraordinary
she would be a fantastic asset
to the.
Order regions for the New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired and I hope
that this committee.
Considers that considered robin
for the position and and
recommender to the full Senate.
Thank you very much senator
grace I will note that someone
is able to make magic happen
that is one of the precursors
for becoming a good kind of.
let me R. we're gonna go to
public comments now at this time
but I do want to want to.
just make a quick note about the
people who are up for
confirmation today.
We have a daca students.
I'm actually at the leader.
A woman to have sex with
succeeded in a male dominated
environments.
A lifetime educator.
Formally cited blind educator.
and adoptive and foster adoptive
and and and foster parents a
local elected official.
Some mazing group of people that
we have before us today.
I am so proud to be a New
Mexico.
And so proud of the folks have
been chosen for these positions
so with that let us go to public
comments and and so if you would
like to speak on behalf of one
of these
our our breeze what I will do is
I will ask Miss Vigil if you
will moderate going through the
various people who are here to
give public comment miss.
Mr chair for the first conferees
for northern New Mexico college
I have president Rick Bailey.
We'll start with the president
and wells actually you know what
this bill let's let's start with
the with the three directors of
the institutions and we will
just work our way around with
the other people in the room of
that are there because this
person knew Mister.
You thank you good morning Mr
chairman good morning members of
the committee ought to in the
interest of time by Mr chairman
I'll I'll go ahead and speak
about both of our our nominees
and I'm honored to be with you
today I want to say a special
thank you to Senators hi to me
on consolidate for sponsoring
these two amazing nominees
Evelyn what is true story the
very first day I met her I said
to myself you know I'm pretty
sure I'm going to work for that
woman some day I did not know we
would be so soon to be to be
Frank but when I and I don't say
this lightly Evelyn is an out
and out superstar and I very
much look forward to serving
under her guidance and her
leadership she is community
minded she is a fierce advocate
for her classmates and maybe
most of all everything she does
she does from a heart centered
place and we could not ask for a
better leader at northern New
Mexico college so again to
Savall and I very much look look
forward to her leadership and
guidance
Ruben R. to let the as he had
mentioned his service to the
Espanola public school board a
lot of people on the in this
meeting know that two years ago
we had a crazy idea at northern
to create and and the chairman
had a lot of words with me on
this but to to create a co
located branch community college
that didn't cost the stated time
first of its kind in history of
New Mexico we've been partnered
with five public school
districts to really make this
happen and provide this
education Ruben Archuleta led
the charge on that I don't know
that we would have enjoyed the
success is that we have enjoyed
as an institution over these
last few years without his
prominent voice and leadership
so similar to Evelyn I very much
look forward to serving under
his guidance and leadership and
very very grateful to all of you
for your consideration thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Hi Mr chair next for New Mexico
military institute we have Major
General Christopher.
Mr chair thank you as a present
Bailey all addressed both of our
nominees.
We're very honored to have both.
Christina as she mentioned is in
the long run a very active alarm
she tends all of our functions
in the Santa Fe Albuquerque area
actually we just featured her in
a recruiting video of our
parents.
Testifying as to why other
parents should send their sons
and daughters to New Mexico
military institute she's the
proud mother of a cadet.
And I'm sure she knows getting
ready to be the proud mother of
two could that for younger
daughter and just been accepted
to New Mexico military institute
for next year so she will have
to connect your next year for
very honored to have an alarm on
the board it really helps the
learning curve about the culture
here in a minute by it Alan the
is.
A different.
Learning curve as he mentioned
his father was a twenty year
faculty member at New Mexico
military institute New Mexico so
he literally grew up here so his
learning curve is a little
different we don't have to
explain the nuances of New
Mexico military institute to him
he lived a messy grew up I'm
also a little prejudice Allen's
wife as you heard is a public
school principal in Carlsbad New
Mexico she is the principal for
my two granddaughters and coral
for that so that I am honored to
have both of them join our board
we look forward to working with
them I've already had great
discussions with them hold on to
essentially Saval up as all
those on this call no in higher
ed we have requirement to have
our budget to the state of New
Mexico by one may show regents
of got to get on board and be
ready to provide to approve that
budget by one may so our regions
will be working right off the
bat so Mr chairman thank you for
this opportunity Senator Kernan
the other Sanchez thank you for
your willingness to do this.
Mr chair next for New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired we have
Patricia Beecher.
Good morning senators first
thank you very much for your
sponsoring the four regions that
we have at NMSC V. I. N. first
I'd like to just speak quickly
to Catherine gray she is
currently acting as our
president of our board of
regents she has worked as a
teacher of the visually impaired
for many years and worked at New
Mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired for many years
we appreciate the guidance that
she is provided to us over the
last several years particularly
over this last year which has
been quite challenging for all
of us so thank you region great
president gray for continuing
with us
next I'd like to
address Mr Smethurst he's been
in NMAA BVI parents for many
many years he's worked very
closely with the NMAA BDI and
understands the nuances of being
a parent of many students that
have disabilities but also with
vision impairment and blindness
we we.
Can't express enough how
important it is to have a parent
voice on our board so we
appreciate you Mr Smethurst
for for continuing your service
with us as well
very willows has been acting as
a region for the last I think
here and and we appreciate how
she is a mentor to the students
she's a role model for our
students and she has again put a
voice to this the population of
students that we work with we
appreciate her guidance over the
last year as well and we thank
you for your service region
willow's and then lastly of
regents.
Region homes she is active in
the community down here in
Alamogordo and we appreciate her
active involvement with the NMAA
BVI foundation she is as you've
heard of well respected in the
community and then in the county
and we welcome all of her
expertise and her voice and her
involvement with MSP the I. as
well thank you senators for for
considering them.
Mr chairman Lee that's all for
the administrators.
Next to speak for Reuben archer
let the is do you know someone.
Good morning Mr chairman rules
committee members
and like this state that is a
school board member Ruben R. to
let those dedicated his time to
improving the educational
opportunities for the students
of Espanola valley schools have
worked with Ruben for over five
years in his capacity as a board
member board vice president and
board president it Espanola
public schools his most notable
achievement as board president
was leading the effort and
working with New Mexico public
education department in the
governor's office to regain the
school board's authority over
district finances Authority that
had been lost several years
earlier under different board
leadership.
During his leadership the school
district improved its financial
practices and return the
communities focus to supporting
students educational needs.
Representative not only
demonstrated his leadership as
the local level but as we've
heard he's also demonstrated his
leadership at the national level
he's recently he was recently
voted to be president elect of
the national Hispanic council of
school board members for the
national association of Latino
elected and appointed officials
and he's a national board member
for now Lehel.
On a personal note and this is
what brings me most here is that
all be forever grateful to Ruben
and his family for his prayers
and personal support of my
family after my brother Diego
was diagnosed with pancreatic
cancer the several of the
members of new new Diego I each
time I saw Ruben at a school
board meeting Reuven would let
me know that he and his family
kept a candle lit at this time
twenty of the two mile for my
brother.
Rubens kindness in his support
for my family will not be
forgotten they were a true sign
of the same compassion that
Rubin has for the people of his
community.
Northern New Mexico would be
lucky to to have him serve on
the board of regents and
therefore Mr chair and committee
members I'm on I'm I'm honored
to highly recommend Ruben R. to
let.
Thank you.
Mr chair next for agency Montoya
we have Karen what lock.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen Witt lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico.
I will be brief but Christina is
one of our and she's a social
worker and NSW board member a
special ed teacher and a friend
she is very active in and and
then hi a long and I'm more than
and then it MMI student and as I
learned today as students to be
she is exactly what is needed in
a position and this position to
give our expertise expertise in
life and social work to bring an
end to the NM and my board we
strongly urge you make this
important appointment thank you.
Mr chair next we have Mister
Fred Santa to speak for miss
Montoya as well.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee give me
great pleasure to speak in favor
Kristina Montoya there's so much
to say so trying to say that in
a short amount of time will be
challenged but I'll keep it
short thank you so much the
executive director for the
national of you know behavioral
health association and on the
former deputy secretary for the
department of health for the
state of New Mexico and former
income support division for the
state so it gives me great
pleasure to be amongst many
other public servants here today
it's a privilege and honor to be
able to support Christina for
number reasons but as you may
know.
The NM my motto is duty honor
achievement.
And that model and large measure
mirrors the qualities of
Christina as my colleague in
cohort and professional board
member she has the character
leadership and the courage that
it takes to serve on the
governing body of the board of
regents as a member of our
national board of directors she
has been very instrumental in
her leadership role along with
another MMI alumni Dr Andrew
Wheatley Martinez for her strong
sense of policy and governance
is going to sue the board of
regents an excellent ways so as
Mister Jerry grizzle said
commander she's ready prepared
and able to serve to approve the
budget come may first so is very
aptly prepared Sir having said
that as a professionally
licensed social worker and our
colleague Jerry or these Pino
certainly knows this she has
both the strength of the meter
to protect the human welfare of
all New Mexicans in our state as
a longtime MMI she's not only
been active but she's and still
that tradition in her own
children and I'll speak for the
years to come of the leadership
that'll come from our own family
as a New Mexico and American
citizenship fulfills that sense
of duty that's important by
honoring serving as a public
servant and continuing to
support the credence of our
democracy I stand in their favor
of her nomination appointment
confirmation and look forward to
hearing your approval today
thank you so much.
Mr chair next for Mr Edmundson
we have accurate and admins.
Good morning committee I had the
distinct honor of being Allen's
sister I am and we moved to
Roswell New Mexico specifically
for my father to work at the New
Mexico military institute with
that my mom was also in
education on the public side of
education and worked as both a
counselor and a teacher I think
that just to let you know that I
think first and foremost
education is about modeling the
expectations and what we want to
see from others and I can say
without a doubt that that was
modeled for us from the get go I
am will be the first to tell you
we woke every morning to my
father in his uniform with his
makeshift finger bugle I'm and
we heard the rising shining and
get up and get ready for the day
but something about seeing him
equipment uniforms and just
walking on the grounds of the
New Mexico military institute
you notice in our it's tradition
and the beauty of an added Tory
and the chapel I I can just
speak so vividly about each part
of that campus and that really
was a family affair for us into
it does not surprise me at all
down and finds himself in this
unique opportunity and he really
does believe in the values of
the institution and in education
itself and I think we'll do a
fine job of really advocating on
behalf of the New Mexico
military institute I think he is
I would say a creative
contagious contagious sleep
creative problem solver he looks
at thanks for or what it is and
also its possibility and never
stop striving to really make the
best out of what New Mexico has
to offer if he is definitely a
proud New Mexican indefinitely a
proud educator I wholeheartedly
recommend him for this position.
Mr chair we had to others but I
don't see them log on I'll call
out Andrew chandelier and Kevin
zinc and those are also for Mr
Edmundson.
Okay.
Those little was not had a
chance to speak at.
Mr chairman Jeremy Rutherford is
also on.
For these regions.
Good morning members of the
committee
German referred on the
registered lobbyists for the
school for the blind and
visually impaired.
Wasn't really intending to speak
but.
I want you to know it's been an
honor to advocate on behalf of
the school the students and then
getting to hear.
Local legislators speak of their
connections to our
Reappointed and new members is.
Extremely touch it.
A few years ago Kerry was at the
capitol and we had our
innovation fair.
And asked me to take him in to
see Senator o'neill.
And it was wonderful getting to
watch them we can act.
Don't believe that I have met
miss willows in person yet same
with miss Holmes what are it
really is an honor to to work
for thank you all for your
consideration.
Thank you very much is there
anybody else.
Very well so here's what we're
going to do we have five members
of the Senate rules committee up
presents and so we are still
within a sub committee however
we're gonna go ahead and start
taking some motions and voting
and then with the provision of
the committee we will then
gather the additional votes
afterwards so that we can
present these candidates to the
floor today.
I'm and I am given our schedule
so maybe so maybe so maybe
tomorrow but let me yield to
senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
you are one option for all or a
reason and institutions
situation Warner time around.
Why don't we go ahead and
We can go ahead and take what
motion for all and then and then
we will jobs simply proceed to
take votes on each one
individually.
Well I move that we confirm all
of these nominees I.
Thank you continue to be just so
proud and and and so and
expressed.
The caliber of the nominees we
we had an incentive to assess
your for confirmation and this
group today is is just
remarkable so hi I really of the
really a little further the
committee endorsement
confirmation.
well so we have a motion from
senator if you know with a
second from.
Senator.
Senator Ingle very well and so
we will then proceed to
mess up the hill on each of them
if you would call the roll with
regard.
Members of the committee that
are present.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes it will with.
So let's start with with a Maria
Evelyn part is fine.
Thank Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Ingle.
And Senator Ivey Soto.
Yeah.
We will circle back with the
other members of the committee
with regard to prevent out so
that.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Ingle yes and
senator Ivey Soto yes thank you
very much with regard to money
actually spent one billion.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Ingle yes and
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
With regard to Harold Allen
Edmonds and junior.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Ingle yes and
senator Ovie soko yes.
With regard to Mary wells.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator work.
Yes Senator Ingle yes.
Yes ma'am.
With regard to Catherine and
great.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
Ingle yes and senator.
Yes ma'am with regard to Gary
smothers.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Ingle yes Senator
Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am and with regard to
robin Holmes Senator Ortiz Pena.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Ingle.
And Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
What congratulates all of the
region candidates today.
This is really truly an
outstanding group people very
grateful for all each of you
your willingness to serve and
and just so impressed to meet
all of you albeit virtually.
Today and I'm looking forward to
to see you all in service as we
proceed over the over the course
of your term so with that is
there anything else for me to
the members of the Senate rules
committee at this time Senator
yes.
Yes I just like to tell region
from the it for the institute
that I achieved the rank of
corporal when I was there.
Also some Representative is
always such a so that's good to
know that you got to go.
Quorum corporal forever Ingle.
I anything else remaining
members of the committee.
Seeing nothing else from any of
the members of the committee
then the Senate rules committee
it will be in recess until
further notice all the chair
thank you all very much thank
you for your time.
I.
Thank you thank you so much by
thank you so much the non
aggressor.
Thanks everybody.
Thank you everyone thank you.
