Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
today by rabbi Neal Ms which
from temple Beth Shalom and
please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be led
today by Senator Hickey the
As we gather together it's cold
it's cold and snowy morning.
Thanks everyone hear it be
filled with the wall.
Maybe the work done yet bring
about a New Mexico glowing with
equality and liberty.
with the divine talks of
creating a just and fair
society.
Give light to today and the
continue to help those suffering
throughout our state.
Maybe lift New Mexicans from
hardship remove from that misery
and districts.
We seek today to continue the
good work of this insanity we
pray for the strength to fulfill
a top.
We pray for determination to
bring about the vision of a
We pray for the ability to
afford the committee.
To everyone in our state.
And as the days get longer the
snow begins to melt.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
I'm at the land that I love in
data the Los estados o'neill's
even if that was the Sierra but
at those.
Wirth thank you Mr president
good to have you back in the
chamber as always and huge
temple again right here in Santa
Fe so thank you rabbi for being
here.
I just as a reminder today's the
last day for introduction of
bills.
on today during our session the
junior appropriation list are
due to the Senate finance
committee by five o'clock today.
And just a couple of things to
Allocations must add to existing
state agency program
appropriations that are already
in house bill two and I was
actually asked this morning
about a.
cannot happen so it needs to be
in house bill two also it can't
go to a private organization so
I just want to highlight those
with that Mr president yield
other members and then I'll come
back to me and I'll give
everyone a road map for what
we're gonna do thanks thank you
senator Wirth we are that order
business announcements and
of you that are during your
junior money we will have from
Senate finance in the Senate
lounge to help gather some of
those forms and if you need any
help John Gaspard it'll be down
Thank you centerman us any
further announcements.
See no announcements.
To acknowledge the hard work
that is done by the department
of transportation especially
when we have the weather that we
have been seeing the last few
days.
Most important to notice on the
long hours that they work and
the dedication and all.
The department has been a you
know a year after year you know
this department for state with
the Mr president and members of
thank you very much thank you
Senator Gonzales and I agree the
work that's done there by our
department transportation
employees keep in a safe.
I see none senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so the
plan for today as I mentioned
yesterday house bill eleven
which is the lead a bill will be
six and kind of see where we are
we will be on the floor again
tomorrow so just to give
everyone a heads up that's the
direction we're going to go so
Mr president.
Your finance committee to whom
has been referred house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
Respectfully submitted senator
George K. Munoz chairman Senator
many of us reduction of the
committee report.
And Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill twenty one
as amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
on with them with one motion and
the General Fleck that they're
acted upon individually.
Thank you Cena Gen objection
Senator this is the last that's
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too home has been
referred Senate bill seventy
one.
Has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that it do not
Senator is about this Mr
president apologies Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to
read all the committee reports
from the Senate Judiciary
do pass as amended.
And Senate Bill to twelve as
amended do passed as amended.
They no objection committee
reports been adopted and the
journal so that they were acted
upon individually.
pass as amended and thence
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Senator is a bit of Mr
president I ask unanimous
Seeing no objection the
committee for the recovery of
the committee reports Senate
bill one ninety do not pass but
that Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one ninety do pass
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
two twenty two do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Senator anticipate a Mr
president move the adoption of
the committee report have a
motion to doubt the committee
report.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
Where are order business
announces miscellaneous senator
consent that the rules be
suspended another journal show
that all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
no objection it is so ordered.
objection it is so ordered
Senator Wirth Mr president
having eleven fifty nine AM I
move we adjourn until twelve or
one PM the Senate will come to
order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
to third reading it again first
up will be house bill eleven the
fiscal impact report and Senate
finance amendment have been
passed out so everyone has those
Senator is this a reminder as we
are going into third reading.
As we do have our master we can
keep the conversations and the
volume to anymore.
from the house is in everyone's
books of the amendment is to the
house substitute just so
everyone knows exactly where we
are so with that I would yield
House taxed revenues for house
bill Levin.
And.
Eleven as amended on file.
One final passionate and is now
house taxation revenue Committee
substitute for house bill eleven
as amended centerman us to
explain the bill.
You Mr president what this bill
does is it allows
mortgages and gets money out
into the into the state for
recovery plan and so.
We have language in here that
also has.
projects are run the loans and
they apply to NMFA there is
language in here for broadband
that allows us to access
We do have a form the reader to
read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill eleven as amended
tax revenues health bills eleven
with emergency clause Mr
president what the amendment
does is it allows us because
Anyone wishing to debate.
Mr present ask then consent of
the Senate the motion to adopt.
Senator has been request a
unanimous consent to adopt
I see no objection senator
member number one has been
adopted in the bill.
president I think I heard you
state your introduction to Mr
president that some of the
dollars here are focused on
broadband can you give us a
little more detail please.
Thank you Mr president there is
there is not a direct year mark.
or appropriation for broadband
in the bill that is correct what
unanimously passed legislation
that authorized local
governments to ensure Angelita
agreements to fund broadband
governments are going to enter
into leader agreements for
broadband that they must meet
FCC baseline requirements as
state investments are directed
to areas that have the greatest
need Mr president thank you.
Senator by the thank you Mr
president I want to thank the
legislature should link up with
FCC standards period that's
going to help us to bring in
leverage our dollars for other
dollars that may be available
that we just wanna make sure
that right thank you Mr
have really and.
Nothing on the bill because I
had no idea the bill's going on
the floor today.
and
It's not on the calendar.
So I am just bring it up because
the the one on the calendar so
the public has not seen that
this bill is going to be up
today don't have any problems
yes Senator Wirth Mr as I'm
happy to yield and yesterday
made it very clear in the
announcements I want to make
sure the public knew and the
members knew that we were going
clear you know it was a it was
specifically announced so that
we didn't have you know issue
for members or the public.
doing all the stuff virtually we
don't have any public here to be
able to talk to us about bills I
don't think this bills an issue
on that.
But I think we need to be very
careful about that thank you
Of amendments to to the house
version of the bill that came
across but I did have a question
for the sponsor if if if he
FIR and the synopsis of the
finance committees amendment
says that
the very first change that it
does is it removes the bills
permanent changes.
three hundred and fifty million
dollars.
What what was that about and why
did we drop it.
million that they would apply a
portion of their gross receipts
tax with approval of the cities
and counties and for only during
construction period for that
and counties would be paying for
other cities and counties leave
us so we stripped the and Senate
finance so thank you Mr
president thank you senator
version is that that the way it
was Mr president sent and
senator everybody shared in the
G. R. T. during the construction
the municipalities and the state
complicated and and so one thing
that we saw that did happen if
Albuquerque got a project like
this and they had a balance in
the fund they would be funding
other lead up projects in other
communities and we didn't know
specific project that that would
I it is such a strange figure
three hundred fifty million was
there a specific project that
was in mind or or is it just.
I don't know of any project that
was specific to or any city or
county thank you thank you thank
you Mr president thank you
senator Munoz.
Thank you center the subpoena.
president I move that house bill
house tax and revenue committee
for house bill Levin as amended
with emergency clause do now
pass and ask Miss consent of the
seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes senator to run
this yes Senator to run this
test Senator Diamond.
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal Senator huh
I'm here yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
has passed the Senate Senator
Brandt explains vote.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
think all I'll just meet with
the majority floor leader talked
about thank you thanks Senator
state for our New Mexico people
to help them and and we're gonna
get the money out and get the
process rolling and this is what
we should be doing as
legislators in the state is
Thank you Mr president so again
we're going to items one through
six so ideal Senator Lopez for
Senate bill ninety two as
amended.
placing Senate bill ninety two
as amended on final passage has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution see no objections
Senator Lopez to explain the
proposing is to amend the
missing persons
Act and it prohibits a law
enforcement agency for reporting
the results of its inquiry about
enforcement agency or the
missing persons who then that
the law enforcement agency that
reports to do it missing persons
information clearinghouse for
And what the amendment does is
that if the missing person who
request confidentiality
regarding the person's status
and location.
Is a person with custodian
person status and location.
And Mr president members of the
Senate this was an issue of
concern that was raised in the
Senate Judiciary.
oversight are guardians so that
the notification is given via
the court so with that Mr
president I will stand for
questions Senator Lopez we do
Senator moving explain
amendment.
This presentation of floor
amendment number one is Senate
bill ninety two as amended.
be identified is not a minor
child there was discussion that
this would not apply to minors
but I could not find anywhere
where they would be excluded or
away and says he doesn't to be
found that that he doesn't get
lost in the system Mr president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle Senator
Lopez Mister president senator I
president it's not it's not a
not a friendly.
Senator debating senator member
number one is Senate bill ninety
two as amended.
with the sponsor the bill please
you'll please for questions.
Mr president Senator yes.
Thank you Mr president and
If there's other areas of law
the someone automatically have
to refer to that other area of
law meaning in that other area
of law
you you don't have that in less
you have a particular exception
and I would just feel a lot more
comfortable voting for this bill
if we explicitly war.
exclude minors and you think
this amendment is unnecessary
and redundant or is the intent
of the bill to include minors.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you Mr president budget
that just service it and it may
be the masks that are basking in
our ability to speak clearly but
debate on this floor amendment.
Si no further debate Senator
Pirtle the clothes on the
amendment.
confusion came in but I'm glad
the that we're in agreement that
that this could help the bill
and make it something that we
can all support and with that I
move Senate floor amendment
Senate unanimous consent either
way and mistress I ask for
unanimous consent.
No objections Senator is that we
are voting on Senate floor
member number one.
Seeing no objection.
See no debate on the bill
Senator Lopez to close.
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative by a show of rope or
by corporal called thank you
senator Senator is tier C..
We're voting.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Get this voice.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator one is.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator share known Senator
Shendo.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator sure DS
Senator Tallman.
Senate.
Moving on a third reading we go
to Senator Ivey Soto I thank
very much Mr president is
present us us some of the Senate
the record show that all actions
Soto explained the bill and my
dad with the bars across.
Thanks very much I miss
president this president this
bill is one that deals with
primarily the.
by April first.
And so the statue that we have
right now assumes that assume
certain things will be done by
dates it builds out based on Oct
on numbers of days since we get
the data from the from the
federal government and that way
definitions that because as this
applies both to local public
bodies as well as to the state.
makes it easier for them when
they do the registry with that
I'll be happy to stand for
questions Senator Ivey so the
center so the just for
clarification on the I just want
Senators we're debating Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield for a question
Senator said the deal agency
president happy to thank you Mr
where we're not withstanding
whatever
but I I would like to address
and and have you address how the
nominating petitions will work.
page seven of the bill we do
have as the bill was originally
drafted had not withstanding
language senator Morris pointed
out that not withstanding is a
strike that clause all together.
so we strike from the word and
all the way to the end of the of
the sentence of their if
anybody's looking at with regard
petitions are not made available
for the wrong relevant offices
until completion of the
procedures specified in
subsection D. or or E. of this
redistricting so that would not
inhibit people getting petitions
if there's court action but the
thing is because they won't know
we have finalized our work here
in the legislature Mr president
Sir I appreciate you clarifying
the at that as far as the court
his nominating petitions go if
we pass a redistricting bill
signed by the governor and then
Mr president and center Brandt
so when when the petitions are
released to that point then
people would be free to get
signatures and would get
makes just slight modifications
then probably we would not
change the filing dates or
anything of that nature depend
upon how long the court action
talk.
But that is where it would be
on on the other hand if if there
were to be some fairly
significant changes that the
court would do what has in fact
turn in petitions because it
would not have been fair
otherwise it would not have had
enough time to do that but that
would be that would be subject
to to that process of course
on doing redistricting
then then with any luck we won't
end up with a court ordered
redistricting but instead it
will be it will be what this
body decides.
This presents Senator a god
because I can see you know what
what happened.
The ten years ago now or almost
ten years ago for my district is
Because my aunt and we're
supposed to put that number on
those petitions before we go out
and collect them because the top
part supposed to be filled out
there may be some issues around
to get those petition signatures
done some of us the I had to get
almost two hundred the first
time that took some time
sometimes we only have to get
need to be careful on and we
need to kind of keep an eye on
as things go forward what is one
of the areas of concern for me
on
president Mr president Madam for
now as Mr president thank you
senator thank you senator Brent
any further debate Senators.
is a there is a level of change
that happens in some unknowns
that could be resolved in some
that cannot be resolved I think
center presents accurate about
that we're trying to we're
process on that
and so with that Mr president I
move that set of bills for as
amended with the mercy Clause do
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
I'm sorry.
Candelaria yes Senators around
this yes Senator syringes yes
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes Senator Duhigg Senator
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Pinto
RTZ being no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator shows yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
affirmative zero on the negative
Senate bill four as amended with
emergency clause has passed the
Senate Senator Ivey Soto thank
you very much calling for the
conversation appreciate it thank
you Mr president thank you
Thank you Mr president I ask for
unanimous consent of the Senate.
That the record show that all
actions have been taken.
And placed
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
nine on final passage has been
taken and that it is now subject
Thank you Mr president first I'd
like to call out the standard
Senators the phonics and Senator
Griggs that gave me a lot of
economic development bill and it
was amended several times and it
still has the same concept but
it has been amended and let me
tell you what the bill does now.
using their own funds.
They still can't use our state
G. R. the gross receipts funds.
portions of the county and
removes the restrictions that
state funds.
Only can be used for a project
that is more than ten miles from
just the construction which is
under current law.
For use of a qualifying entity.
I think this pretty much
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Woods in for many years
Representative McQueen and I
have been trying to assist our
abandoned buildings and to
renovate them and this bill did
as Senator Woods indicated go
through the interim committee
just give Senator Griggs would
like to comment on this bill he
gave me a lot of help on it also
Senator Griggs detailed.
Yes I will.
Use their money for projects
they believe is important to
them and it also allows
communities that are and
so it's it's you know it's
actually letting people on the
ground have the opportunity use
money in such a way that they
Mr president one more note I
have a good expert witness on
the telephone line here it is
more Mike Morse out of Clovis
who was very beneficial and
president thanks center was
saying no objection.
So ordered we aren't debate of
the bill we have Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president will
either one of the sponsors yield
Where we strike some interesting
language I I know a there was a
Senator that put some of this in
the last time we saw a bill like
this come through.
And so that for for many reasons
gives me concern that somehow
we're gonna use legal money and
some of these municipalities to
entice or bring in a business is
going to compete with one that's
Thank you Senator Mr president
and senator thank you for
bringing that point forward.
There's there's the main reason
I struck that language.
It said one not addressed in
this bill in order for menace
palletized to the next local
gross receipts taxes G. R. T.
for later it must go to a
referendum and it must
retail as Porter there's tax
use.
It is and it was not indicated
in the national referendum then
a new election would need to be
uses which would be what the
problem that you're addressing
there is
A competition with the existing
They are the ones that will be
brought on the carpet if a local
business our our existing
business has competition.
decisions instead of the state
government making those
decisions Mr president.
Thank you Mr president and
senator
This has a pretty good list of
businesses that can be used for
I think should page and Senator
Pirtle would you repeat your
your question.
Thank you Mr president Senator
whenever the referendum would go
In the interview in the bill
Senator knives your apologize I
can't say it directly but I
think that any time.
include include retail many of
these communities have already
done that what the state is done
with this amendment that was
the state land commissioner was
a house members I don't know how
long ago that was.
I'm.
Thank you Mr president center
adds attic I just know who put
is communities have faced
different challenges the fact
that leader was designed solely
initially to bring in economic
Have just gone more than one
occasion to change the legal law
to allow for them to to attract
change in the law allows local
communities to make that
decision themselves but they can
only use the money that they've.
She doesn't usually state
dollars.
Unless the community is under
fifteen thousand four.
Is outside.
Those communities and areas
opportunities to to grow
retail is always been
challenging for for communities
One of the times when I was when
I was mayor of Alamogordo.
We put out a questionnaire for.
The first one number one almost
in an Alamogordo and in most
community seems to be a hobby
lobby.
With this with the shore for
funding and bring them to their
community.
As it stands currently they
cannot show up.
when you're sitting there behind
the dyers addressing local
sedition about.
A business so that might come
into that community.
your right answers you better be
ready to go because if it's
important your community.
You need to stand firm and and
go from there but it does put
And thank you for that Mr
president I just the concern is
is more more specific than you
know if the community wants to
wear which is a local mom and
pop western store and what could
eventually happen is through
this Leda funding people would
vote that yes we want to bring
And Benny's western where's been
in Artesia for and as long as I
can remember.
And and providing jobs to the
community and you know
guy and his spouse or or whoever
trying to fight an entire city
council saying you know.
You put all these roadblocks on
me as a business I have to go
through zoning I have to go
or through taxes and things to
then put a business in
competition and so I think think
is a body yes I understand the
the point of local control but
family mom and pop shop they
employed probably a hundred some
people.
It would give me much concern if
through legal money we brought
bring a man on on those types of
instances I would I would
really.
Be upset if.
My public money was used to the
input of a family friend or.
day for using public money to
bring in competition against
private businesses we need to be
careful in doing that.
Adamant about this short of
change has been the community
brought up of artesian.
they have wanted to bring in a
variety of things.
And they were unable to.
The ride or the means then to
make the decision it's not the
We do have a floor amendment the
reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one.
Two Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
president I move Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
tax business entrance.
Partition Committee substitute
for Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill forty nine.
Thank you Mr president I rise in
support of this amendment and I
had actually drafted very
similar moment to my good
one I will be proposing next
it would not being in conflict
but it would actually work I do
support Mr president a lot of
removing the guard rails that
are in the existing law and so
the amendment I have submitted
to the clerk you'll see in a
Expanding.
The anti competitive provisions
of this act and I say expanding
only applies to municipalities
with fifteen thousand or more
apologize I didn't explain the
amendment to the body I'll do so
quickly but on page seven
line eleven there's.
you to my good friend from
Rossell would you agree with me
Mr president that under the
current statute as written
municipality with fifteen or
You know invested in a leader
retail project that did.
Engage in the sale of similar
governments is that correct
would you agree with you Mr
president and Mr president
senator that is correct.
So Mister president I raise that
expanding as I said this isn't
some of which we are expanding
anti competition there is
already anti competitive
fifteen which basically states
that a policy.
Can as I read it that a County.
subsection B. and so Mr
president for those reasons
because ultimately this is a
fine balance none of us are
cavalier or insensitive to the
real concerns the diverse
be very careful about striking
the right balance in a free
market economy between state
intervention and letting the
market too with the market's
going to do so thank you Mr
Griggs to respond to this
ammendment if you choose to do
so.
Thank you Mr president.
You know what I am going to say
that this is a non friendly
Whether you have a competition.
I will ask you this.
Is a grocery store.
allowed to do that in a larger
town is not.
The the real rentals in the
All these other towns that are
bigger than Clovis that's what's
going to be affected by this
bill.
No.
We can bring in any other retail
that might sell something.
The convenience store might
sell.
from other sponsors and see what
they have to say.
Senator Stefanics would you like
to chime in on this Senator
Stefanics detailed.
Mr president I do yield.
allowing a grocery store to come
in with fresh fruits and
vegetables because there's
already and also by selling
convenience foods is that right
which is one of my communities
there are two convenience stores
but there is not one grocery
store which means no fresh
fruits no fresh vegetables no
They don't have any options so I
do think your example Senator
Woods is right on.
Thank you senator CENIC's.
That that the point here is not
whether or not.
Large companies are allowed in.
They would just locate and they
would do so based on whether
they few the market sufficient
for locating their.
and decided there's not enough
business here to justify our
spending our money but if they
want to spend their money if
they want to spend public money
then that's fine then we'll take
to attract a Walmart.
They don't need the public by
the public this is just I think
this is a common sense approach
the Senator Pirtle is proposing
can't do it unless the
government pays for us.
That's what this is all about
and who in their right mind
would would vote against a
a dozen local businesses out of
out of commission but that's not
the way those ballots
items on the ballot or phrased
This yield very nicely with the
non competitive quality that
that we need to restore.
I'm still concerned about the
subpoena we do have for the
debate on the amendment so for
the clarification of the body so
you'll know which order to go in
well that center Steinborn
Senator Candelaria Senator
gentleman I guess about the
amendment.
Senator Pirtle is that here
question Senator Steinborn the
sponsor of the Amanda yes
Senator Pirtle deals yes Mr
president I yield.
It would seem to me that the
intent of what you're trying to
do here on this language.
By by the.
Reinstating this non compete
Granted in existing statute why
would that be better under a
then be in the first place one
am I missing there since a is
and that was just a little
oversight on my part that that
was not included before but
we're dealing with currently
just the stricken language in
B..
We're basically saying that in a
community more than fifteen
thousand people because of
course we have the language
already struck an out that we're
not arguing with this is less
than thirty five basically more
And that's correct Mr president
and just for clarification it
was stated earlier that a
convenience store would somehow
be used to prevent a grocery
store but if you look at the IRS
supermarkets and other grocery
except convenience stores and
convenience stores have a
completely different activity
code so they wouldn't even be
able to be used to prevent a
similar in activity Mr president
Senator thank you for the answer
with you real quick because I
don't understand the business
activity code now that applies
business activity code to
determine what type of business
you are so they have a broken
down into Ag food manufacturing
Nine different subgroups and so
if you were a convenience store
you were getting an E. I. N.
number of with the federal
government you would put that
code in and that's what code you
I'm familiar with what you're
talking about although shut out
for those that are listening it
is not completely and all
encompassing list everything
perfectly fits in there but I
guess my my problem with that
HSS a similar
You know sell selling similar
products so I won't belabor it
was going to raise about you
know technically the amendment
says if you are competing at all
and that could be to kind of
different entities mobile cell
candy bars you're competing with
so I worry that well being well
intended because of the other
language this is for communities
over fifteen thousand people it
could be committees of twenty or
thirty thousand people not the
product they sell maybe it's
beer maybe it's candy bars this
the same as an existing business
so my have an unintended
presence than you Senator
Steinborn Sierra Nevada thank
you Mr president and I I think
Senator Pirtle sort of hit on
on.
we're doing a shot gun hatchet
approach we should be using a
scalpel and it sounds like the
scalpel we should be using is
seriously considering amendments
competition I will say Mr
chairman Mr president sorry I I
do share the concern about I
think we can put this amendment
on and then later if that body
you why because if you remove
that fifteen thousand that
thirty five thousand dollars
left thirty five thousand person
limit out the City of
came from Albuquerque the last
thing I want to do.
Is is is authorize that and and
Mr president what I'm gonna
respectfully suggest and I will
make a motion.
this is not you know I think
Mr president to the sponsor the
amendment am I correct.
And Mister president and and
senator Candelaria I I believe
it did not go to finance Mr
president and I think the Senate
finance committee has
this room.
And we're gonna make amendments
to it I think we need to be very
just take a scalpel not a hatch
and what concerns me Mr
I'm so.
I'm gonna move that Senate tax
business transportation
committee just pop SB forty
I'm on the today is a beautiful
day.
In this neighborhood
but but I I hope people
understand I do think during the
center finance we can find some
language that accomplishes
exactly what the sponsors intend
but does not because these other
side effects so I move that
referred back to Senate finance.
Thank you Sierra Lara I will go
to the chair of Senate finance
first and then I'll go to the
sponsor of the bills.
There were there are you are you
going to be good with that that
motion I want to make sure that
we get this bill fixed correctly
and and then we get a pass
because I think it's important
to the state and so are you good
with that motion.
floor and then we're making
another motion so is that a a
parliamentary move that is the
Thank you Senator Woods.
I make just a point of
parliamentary inquiry Mr
presentar parliamentarians
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thanks very much Mr president
members of the chamber.
So what this does is it has the
fact.
referral so what this so so if
this were to go to a vote it
sounds like it may be able to
happen by unanimous consent if
it were to go to a vote however
do want to go to Senator Moores
and then I'll go to Senator
Pirtle senator Morris thank you
Mr president point of order we
all respect us and our risotto's
Committee skills but it's
beginning of the session we did
session we did we did not do it
this time thank you thank you
senator and just for
clarification that it was
requested if Senator Ivey Soto
would yield and so he he did
preclude all debate on the main
question thank you Mr president
thank you Mr president I think
in light of that what I would do
is amend my motion so it's clear
the chairman of finance advise
To commit the bill I I do want
to just go there just to see
Senator Woods was that unanimous
consent was that something that
you're comfortable with did you
language tweaking and I would
change the M. the the request
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that this bill be
referred back to Senate finance.
as a technical matter it would
not be back it would be a it
would be given a third referral
to Senate finance thank you for
that Mr correct etcetera so the.
there's a question of removing
it from the floor and having
that go to Senate finance
there's millions consensus.
Any objection.
body.
Where we're gonna go on to the
next order of business that's
gonna be Senate bill thirty five
that'll be Senator Steinborn.
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
I see no objections understand
more to explain the bill thank
you Mr president Senate bill
calling Senate bill thirty five
pay high school students less
and they pay everybody else and
caps their minimum wage to eight
dollars and fifty cents an hour
while the minimum wage for
everybody else goes up and
they're doing the same work as
could be an older colleague
standing right next to him on
the line they're also providing
we try to help those with them
and we out we just gave a which
is again a financial payment to
them and yet we have a secondary
classes students here of workers
here literally that we're
incentivizing employers to
replace older workers with
secondary students and wage just
wanted for ten fifteen everyone
else next year it's going to go
up to eleven the following year
somebody else for a high school
student so I think it's going to
create an even bigger problem of
displacement if we don't fix it
now and for those reasons Mr
You Mr president I wish somebody
else will stand up and to be.
Mr president.
It's interesting we talk a lot
about minimum wage to know what
minimum wage is anywhere in any
state any city.
It's what the number one meal is
Your big mac is minimum wage.
If you make minimum wage a
hundred dollars now your big mac
the hundred dollars now.
And if they show up to work.
For a whole week.
There's a raise because all of a
sudden it's exciting to the
Get into the work force and
figure out how to how to do it.
It's not a punishment to
anybody.
get in what you effectively do
is keep them out.
Because you know what I have a
big mac meal isn't expense so
expensive today it's not fifteen
dollars today.
Because of automation.
So now we have fewer teenagers
working.
Fewer teenagers that are getting
into the how to do business.
I think this is counter
productive I understand the goal
I understand what we're trying
to do but this is
counterproductive to reality.
They will be a minimum wage very
long if they do that.
In fact I don't think anybody.
Is actually getting paid minimum
wage in a fast food world anyway
bogus argument I think it's
counterproductive to actually
teaching people how to
participate.
In the economy.
get into the market thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator we do have
further debate on them on the
bill Senator Lopez.
COVID has brought to the
forefront in my community about
what.
What we pay our young people are
COVID the bread earners are not
allowed them to work of course.
Their illness has precluded
them.
And what is happening in my
community Mr president members
enough money that helps to pay
the bills of the family I know
six families in particular.
That have been asking for help
financially because the parents
fast food it could be at maybe
you know another of small
business in the community.
Mr president we do have to value
what our young people are
contributing today.
for persons with disabilities
for the work also it's about
doing what's right what's doing
about what we can find and
valuing the work that every
Senate committees.
Thank you Mr president
Senator Sherrod had made their
Iglesias wish more people stand
up so I guess it is common it is
a.
coming through a committee I
served on just want to share a
couple of points hopefully have
some bipartisanship on this bill
and
increasing wages is to give
people skills to give young
people skills at a more early
age so I think the the longer
term bipartisan solution of this
that will help them achieve a
higher wage instead of just
mandating higher wage and so I'd
encourage is budgeted to
continue take a look at that and
at increasing that minimum wage
for people disabilities and at
least in that meeting we had a
very very strong opposition to
raising the minimum wage from
about the wage for the most
about the job and and so I think
we we really need to be careful
here about what is the value of
the job it's gonna be different
sometimes as has been said in
this debate it's the actual job
experience that is the priority
and so in in more of a one and I
we need to really pay attention
that different families have
different needs and I think this
bill well yes I will help wages
for certain people it will hurt
have a job because whatever it
is nine dollars and I was just
eleven dollars an hour well
which one's more eleven or zero.
And so some of these jobs are
store the patient of mine who
was saved by a job.
use the very very young was an
alcoholic at a very young age.
answer was one word work.
He got a job as a roofer he was
afraid would fall off the roof
when he was drinking and his he
entry point and just having a
job is so much more important in
the wage can help people get off
drugs help people get off
alcohol help people learn how to
work.
Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr president trump to
rise in opposition to this this
was the this was put into law
try to vote against this but the
this was actually part of the
compromise those worked out very
hard was long tough debate and
Senators meaty so talked about
we all have that first job you
Mr president
no money was so deliver
newspapers and Maryland outside
longer in existence here you
don't see paper boys on
delivering newspapers anymore
are you when you go the filling
station you do it yourself so
those those jobs that we once
much money but I made enough
money to from a little bit of
fun on the side Mr president so
those things are important in
the teenage employment rate is
so high it's the highest a level
and I look back to those jobs
are with fond memories and help
me develop develop those are
working skills on that later in
life in very successful so this
was part of the compromise on
Thank you senator Morris further
debate we have Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president I I keep
having to think about whether to
call you madam or Mr I'm sorry
but it is good to have you back
to the agency president with the
Mr president
I don't know the answer to that
question it's certainly not in
this bill.
the the big picture.
Because there is restrictions
there's only certain number of
hours that they can work them
they can only schedule them
get something signed a release
used to office still in law by
their schools saying that their
student in good standing to be
able to be employed so there are
a lot of restrictions put on
and that's one of the reasons
that employers need to have a
little bit lower wage this so
Almost present senator if you
were an employer and a twenty
one year old with no
restrictions came in applied for
the same job that a fifteen year
hire the best person for the
job.
So you can hire the twenty one
year old.
This presents senator gonna hire
the best person for the job.
not brand new and.
I don't have all these
restrictions so to try to help
young people get into the work
force and get that first
school and I did.
and.
If it was between me and a
twenty one year old at the place
I work because of the
And so I am very grateful for
that first job.
I'm very grateful for the
probably today I wouldn't be
allowed to do.
and so you know it's it's it is
one of those things.
That.
With the restrictions that we
have in law.
Then we have to provide an
incentive for employers to hire
them this is that incentive that
they can pay them a little bit
I think center shares correct
you talk to most employers.
Yeah if they show up on time for
a week they're getting a bump in
pay they're not left at that
longer works with them and help
them develop.
This is a developmental way this
is helping them become good
employees and so I urged the
it's it is no one's hiring.
The fifteen or sixteen year old
which is what this really
happening just to save a couple
dollars because you're gonna get
much less restricted work hours
and and a much better worker
usually with the older person
Thank you very much Mr president
I ate.
I just don't have a question for
the sponsor but I just right the
rise and support I I've been
hearing the debate back and
forth and I wasn't gonna get up
who's doing the very same work
and pay that person less.
Probably wouldn't hire the
person that I was willing to pay
less.
Because I want my business is
thing I just wanted to mention
today I think that's super
important.
And that Mr present thing is
I've you know we've all disclose
many things about ourselves and
it's the one of the ways we tell
a very young age and I'll tell
you another thing I would never
dream of doing as a business
owners paying one worker less
than the other worker but maybe
that workers how they you know
effort to make this happen for
families that that's where the
income is coming from and that's
how the putting food on the
table Mr president I think
that's very very important it's
sits next to somebody else does
the exact same work.
And pay them differently.
It just makes no sense to me and
I'm not quite sure why we're
even debating this for our
fellow man.
Thank you Mr president I also
rise in support of this bill.
And I think what I was gonna say
has been said
and I would argue that.
You know raising the minimum
wage has not.
Because opportunities for young
folks to not get jobs.
So I just don't understand.
Why we would.
Push legislation our fight
counterpart.
And the argument about this is
an entry point if they're not
qualified to do the job then
they should be hired they should
be let go.
meal then Senator Gonzales
center how to mail Mr president
thank you so much members of the
Senate thank you and so I too
don't have a question for the
sponsor but I'm speaking in
support of the bill I come from
teenagers to work to ensure that
there's food on the table but
the light stays on and that we
continue to have a safe place to
call home as a former educator
and a former coach I worked with
because of my background and
because of the background of
students I have taught I also
stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you Senator Gonzales.
When I was the superintendent of
the schools.
We have a policy.
And what we would call it is a
And also by a counselor and also
by the superintendent.
The reasoning for that is we
just wanted to see the status of
the reasoning behind you know
the part of.
Hello Mr president I I apologize
the.
I don't need the sponsor to
Nine out of ten of this permits
were very well justified the you
know that there was a need you
know for that family for that
there you know requesting for
the permit you know to be
granted.
So
Mr president and members of.
You know of.
Recommendation of not providing
training.
Two were why would you want to
bring someone without training
that we've mentioned there that
even be worse for someone else
who was mentioned that the
person next to them was doing
the same job and getting paid
more.
You know I find that you know I
found that the he was always you
know that there was a very
strong reasoning behind you know
Thank you Mr president thank you
our colleagues for this
wonderful debate I I I want to
talk to the sponsor about this
And became a contracted swim
instructor the age of fourteen
and then became a lifeguard at
the age of sixteen because I was
the most qualified for the job
bottle the brother and I was
hoping to support my family and
so I'm grateful for this
legislation and I strongly
support you in these efforts
thank you thank you Mr
president.
say that I still don't think
it's enough for our poor
families I still think that we
need at least a fifteen dollar
of the fifteen dollar an hour
minimum wage and it should be
committee and he said I'm I
that's a whole different build
of but I really appreciate this
I think all of our.
Everyone who works does it
Thanks Senator Lopez Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Mr president I do have
a question for the sponsor.
This presents level yield to my
Mr president.
Senator I would say everybody go
through training face when
they're when they're new and so
their learning but but in theory
Mr present center I would say we
do I would say that's what this
bill seeks to get rid of we
create a sub minimum wage for
the secondary students.
Yes but we don't have a sub
think that's how people are kind
of mis characterizing this and I
think it's we're hearing from
the debate it's not about that.
And.
less than fifty percent.
Mr president Center yes I'm
aware that there's a different
minimum wage structure there.
incentivizing to businesses to
bring learners are Cheney's onto
the businesses then I think
that's another separate issue
Si no further debate Senator
Steinborn to close on the bill
thank you Mr president drugs for
the debate the discussion you
know.
was lots to debate on this
provision in the Senate I I
introduced an amendment they got
quite a few of us try to take it
out and ultimately the bill
passed.
and.
so with that Mr president I do
move the Senate bill thirty I do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the record
show that the role has been
called and all those present
voting to your seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator serve on
this yes Senator Brandt is yes
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Duhigg.
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs knows Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal yes Senator had a
meal yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Moores no Senator money
or.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
Senator Stewart a yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sanchez no Senator
sweeties.
Senator Swedish no Senator
severe Lopez.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senators definitive Senator
Steinborn Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Senator Woods no.
Twenty six fifty.
unanimous consent until he
returns to the chamber see no
objections so ordered Senator
thank you by a vote of twenty
six in the affirmative fifteen
the negative Senate bill thirty
Right up there Senator rules the
one Republican who had voted for
this in a bipartisan manner
before and yet the machine still
to come up behind which at and
talk about so that's what the
machine things about
Senate bill one thirty seven the
emergency clause that senators
serve on this.
We're going to roll over that
Senator pope.
Thank you Mr president I I guess
Senator is as we do have a
Senator Wirth and communication
with Senator about this senator
Wirth Mr chair why don't we go
to number item number six
Thank you very much Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
objections Senator Campos
explained the bill thank you
very much Mr president members
school capital outlay fund for
broadband projects that connects
students teachers and
educational resources to the
council develop guidelines for a
statewide education technology
infrastructure network and
necessary technology projects
for education additionally the
thank you Senator Campos says
we're debating Senate bill one
forty four with emergency
because.
Anyone wishing to debate.
It will hold.
on thank you Mr president
Senator so the the technology
infrastructure are we are we on
a single kind of technology
because I'm reasonably sure that
Thank you very much Mr president
senator share it would be open
to other types of technology
aside from some of the suggested
council to take action and
approve these requests right now
there's about ten million
dollars within the fund that is
available on an annual basis
there's about two point five
deal with the current issues
that our young people are
dealing with in the area of
technology but it would be open
if those guidelines were
prepared thank you Mr president.
we don't need this I I agree we
need this but I don't want to
get caught up on that we need
technology a.
Because that's what the the of
At least be open to looking at
doing it so that's almost
president senator thank thank
you Mr president thank Senator
share thank you senator we do
have further debate Senator
Brandt.
the money going to come from to
pay for this.
So Mister president these of the
resources that we allocate each
Thomas present where those funds
come from.
Mr president Senator Brandt from
taxpayers.
Brandt they're usually used for
issues like building this
infrastructure the
The capital structures within
available to put internet into
individual homes.
Mr president the Senator Brandt
it's a very good question
because in essence if through
neighborhood and again that
would be loaned to the school
district of them those resources
would go to help.
Those areas where right now
So much president Center would
would anyone be able to make
money off of that a line that we
put into someone's home the
as we go forward as an example
working directly with the
providers one of the things that
can be developed through the
The line if you will fiber
optics that's a cat I can go
ahead and be run to a particular
station and then from there that
would provide if you will if
it's in the guidelines things
if you will that level of
internet or if you will of any
type of transmission of
information so that that be able
Thank you Mr president of the
center for sheet that how many
students throughout the state
don't have access to internet do
we know that.
Mr president Senator Brandt I
anticipate that as we do move
forward.
I'm gonna go ahead and Dave was
just informed by a center by the
other he does have some of that
Thank you Mr president happy to
yield and help Senator Campos I
think this initiative is a
fantastic one I would say that
Mr president we have
approximately twenty one percent
his but even in the
Seventy nine percent Mr
president a state that does have
a broadband only about eighty
percent of that meets federal FC
some sorry only about twenty one
learning Mr president.
Thank you Mr president in in
center
Do you have any concerns with
the.
Senator Senator Brandt I do not
I've seen in the past as we
continue to go and deal with
issues where we are assisting
guidelines of course the proper
procurement processes will be
followed so I'm very confident
that this is a another tool that
young people throughout our
entire state thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Mr president center
and I'm I I personally support
the bill I'm just concerned
claiming that there's not enough
funding going to certain school
districts mainly those in the
school district with several
other school districts for their
area that yes we need to dress
but I'm not sure this is the
right.
Part of money to address it from
can you address that please
thank you very much Mr president
have continued to be highlighted
have been that for our native
American population for rural
areas for our poor populations
individuals the plaintiffs that
have continued to move this
forward in terms of the
suggestion how can we get
internet to those areas that are
that we have some deficiencies
all the way to north eastern New
Mexico where in some of the
smaller areas like one feet the
technology services this would
definitely assist that thank you
very much Mr president Senator
Browne thank you Mr president
center I appreciate that answer
is still concerns me that with
school capital outlay council we
didn't have one before that
lawsuit it was important to
directly deal with the situation
that we're watering down that
fund and by moving that money
has a shown clearly shown that
we have some adequacy problems
throughout the state when it
comes to
connectivity issues one way we
can solve part of that is
you know that concerns me but
even with kids in school Mr
president answer Campos
and how it would affect kids on
a normal basis we're back to
being in school in front of
their teachers.
Thank you very much Mr president
school regardless of what we're
going through right now with
COVID nineteen.
It is going to be and it is
incumbent upon each and everyone
believe that as an example when
we work our way through COVID
nineteen one of the other issues
will be how are we going to
tell with the change in the way
that we do provide
communication.
That is it is going to be a
bigger issue than than it is now
so taking advantage of an
technology for all of us.
That is going to be something
that will be looking at and
again at that time as a Senator
share had indicated earlier
ever changing world but we all
need to be part of it thank you
very much Mr president Senator
Brandt thank you Mr president
thank you Sir combos I I do
appreciate it I am just
struggling with the fact of
where this money's coming from I
school building in the state
there may be a few areas
outlined areas that we're trying
to get finished up but that's
been an issue that he's really
pushed forward I think we've
it is something that can be very
useful for homework at some
would be very useful outside of
the classroom something that
maybe can even help students
when they get sick maybe they
able to do that on a limited
basis so I do think it's
important I'm just concerned
about where the money's coming
from on this because of the
lawsuits that are out there
thank you thank you center
Brandt thank you Mr president.
Senator Ingle.
legislation the years I've been
around you.
At some point it seems to me
that whenever I've seen this
legislation after signed into
law and things like that
work that you know would be.
Or this would you be using that
to.
Of fifteen year old picture
there are you have a more recent
one.
really worked on together
there still hasn't been that
picture for they're showing both
of us so what I would anticipate
that with this if this were to
and take a group picture so that
you would also be in one of the
pictures that I'm in thank you
Mr president.
Present at the.
were had paid for that it seems
to me there's a certain time of
the day that your picture came
up on the pavement.
And I was just curious how you
did that you never would explain
some of our use could get a
picture of us.
Perhaps you and when they turn
the computer on.
Mr president to Senator Ingle
you never cease to amaze me.
Mexico highlands university this
morning.
During that presentation even
though at the beginning there
are lights on in the room the
lights went off and all of a
for the future to ensure that my
picture will be part of.
Technology in the future.
Thank you Mr president thank you
school Catholic education bill
and we've done a great job with
our with our schools using this
and.
I sometimes in a little bit
worried sometimes that we
and it's done a great job for
our schools and I remember when
we passed it to you had to be
bonded to a pretty high level
before you you've got it and as
shortage of bonding capacity and
you and I discussed it after we
got it passed and we wondered
how long it would take before
Albuquerque could get a change
years but to go ahead and talk a
little bit about how we've
worked on resources going
directly into technology so with
the severance tax bonds the
buildings then from there that
continued to expand and we're
dealing more with issues that
are essential as people of use
doing in this is a big concern
with the future of what's gonna
happen in New Mexico with
technology especially if that
becomes something that we get
available so you keep bringing
up so many of these important
points in order for us to move
forward and it's going to be
seismic in the sense that as we
bring that up because with your
vision whenever we started
working on if you will this
particular issue I still
recalled that because of those
code compliant and as we move
forward they're still used in
the community in a lot of cases
not only for educational
purposes but also for general
with our school districts we're
gonna have some major issues to
be concerned about when we work
passed if you will the hybrid
situation and into the future
in the schools with their
teachers in those buildings
because of the virtual education
system is just simply not
working in many cases and we
and the virtual education is
certainly going to be something
that will be considered but we
still did a better job educating
our kids with the teachers in
education concerts can be a
supplement but there is no
substitute for a good teacher in
the classroom thank you.
Thank you Mr president thank you
very much Senator Ingle thank
the sponsor I rise to support
this bill as he indicated the
rural areas really need some
relief and I it is my
expectation that all of these
all the efforts for the schools
as Senator Campos indicated some
of my school children sit in
parents cars and hot spots in
internet services in your own
home so thank you very much
Senator Campos for this bill.
Thank you senator CENIC's.
Any further debate Senators.
When we talk about the concern
in the credit then it goes to
each and everyone of us as we
move forward because in working
on all these issues whether it
to us today.
A year down the road those tools
may change and of course in our
approach will continue to change
but within that the big concern
in all corners of the state to
ensure that our young people are
given the opportunity with the
tools available to receive the
best education possible.
to do be decided by a roll call
vote thank you very much Mr
president thank you Senator
Campos senators we're voting.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt passes senator
Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
to run this those.
I.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond DS Senator
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Ingle.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal yes Senator huh I'm
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores now Senator my
nose.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the year yes Senator
Stewart a yes Senator Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
charges.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees.
Senator Schmidt is now senators
of the office.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn then Senator
Stewart yes.
Senator Woods no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator back Senator Shendo is
not back.
affirmative a in the negative
Senate bill one forty four with
emergency clause has passed the
Senate center comes loaded
explained his vote thank you Mr
president I support certainly
support the intent of the bill I
least forty seven million
dollars and completely
discretionary money to spend on
education I would strongly
encourage local education
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr president members of the
Senate really appreciate not
only the concerned the
Mr president unanimous consent
we go about our business
introduction of legislation
around that order business
introduction legislation the
reader to read.
Connect relating to public
education and acting the family
income index act requiring
calculation to the family income
index and providing for funding
distributions to school
Senate bill seventeen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate Education Committee
then Senate finance committee
employer to include joint
employers Senate bill four oh
five Senate bill four I have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate tax this is a
management contracts for public
schools Senate bill four oh six
Senate bill four oh six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the our shelter rescue fund
Senate bill four oh seven Senate
Bill Foro seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate engine rural and cultural
Guaranteeing all residents of
the state the rate of bodily
integrity.
Prohibiting public or private
discrimination requiring
informed consent limiting
is ordered printed and referred
to Senate health of public
affairs committee then Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
four oh eight Senate bill four
oh nine introduced by senator
facilities from the public
regulation commission to the oil
conservation division of the
Energy minerals and natural
resources department.
Amending the pipeline safety act
Baking conforming and technical
changes amending and repealing
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight.
Recompiling section eight dash
eight dash eleven NMSA nineteen
one two thousand twenty three
effective date Senate bill four
oh nine.
Senate bill four oh nine having
been read twice by title is
An act relating to taxation
amending sections of the tax
administration act in amending
and enacting sections of the
withholding tax act to address
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill for ten.
camera requirement for certain
peace officers Senate bill four
eleven Senate bill four eleven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
In person sixteen and seventeen
years of age to be qualified
electors repealing sections of
the MSA nineteen seventy eight
Munoz and act relating to
telecommunications.
Connecting the regional
broadband franchise Act
providing for the establishment
of regional broadband franchises
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill four thirteen Senate bill
insurance to employers of minor
apprentices.
Requiring rules requiring a
report making appropriation
Senate bill four fourteen.
four fifteen introduced by
senator Sanchez.
An act relating to special
districts establishing a two
percent limit for increases in
hundred thousand acres situate
in four or more counties Senate
bill four fifteen Senate bill
for fifteen having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
peace health safety and welfare
Senate bill four sixteen the
bill for sixteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
is ordered not printed.
Senate Bill for seventeen Senate
bill four seventeen having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to
finance you're gonna bill for
seventeen Senate bill for
ordered not printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee Senate
bill fourteen Senate bill four
nineteen introduced by senator
Wirth.
Senate tax business
transportation committee Senate
bill four nineteen Senate bill
for twenty introduced by senator
Wirth.
An act relating to the public
introduced by senator Wirth and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare.
Senate bill for twenty one
Senate bill for twenty one is
ordered not printed dents and
Lopez an act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare.
Senate bill for twenty two at
four twenty two is ordered not
printed and referred to the
Senate bill four twenty three
four twenty three is our having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee Senate
bill four twenty three Senate
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee Senate bill for
twenty four Senate bill for
twenty five introduced by
Senator Baca.
And act relating to the public
Senate bill four twenty six
introduced by Senator Baca an
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare.
Senate bill for twenty six and
the public peace health safety
and welfare Senate bill for
twenty seven at four twenty
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to finance Senate bill
Senate bill for twenty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed this
referred to the rules committee
sent a bill for twenty eight
Senate bill four twenty nine
is Judiciary Committee Senate
bill four twenty nine Senate
bill four thirty introduced by
Senator Brandt and act relating
to the public peace health
safety and welfare Senate bill
by Senator Stefanics and
potentially leading to the
public peace health safety and
welfare Senate bill four thirty
one Senate bill four thirty one
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
and welfare Senate bill four
thirty to at about four thirty
two having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the Senate
conservation committee Senate
bill four thirty two Senate bill
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the Senate conservation
committee Senate bill four
thirty three Senate bill four
thirty four introduced by
Senator souls and potentially
bill four thirty four Senate
bill four thirty five introduced
by Senator souls an act relating
to the public peace health
safety and welfare Senate bill
four thirty five Senate bill
four thirty five having been
the public peace health safety
and welfare Senate bill four
thirty six Senate bill four
thirty six having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed that's referred to the
Senate Education Committee
bill four thirty seven Senate
bill four thirty seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed that's
referred to finance committees
Senate bill four thirty seven
Senate bill four thirty eight
bill four thirty eight Senate
bill four thirty nine introduced
by senator my nose and act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill four thirty nine the bill
for thirty nine having been read
public peace health safety and
welfare Senate bill four forty
four forty having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed that's referred to the
tax business transportation
forty one having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee Senate bill four forty
one Senate bill for forty two
referred to the Senate tax.
Business transportation
committee Senate bill four forty
two Senate bill four forty three
introduced by senator Ortiz Pino
an act relating to the public
Senate bill four forty four
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino an actual leading to the
public peace health safety and
welfare Senate bill four forty
four Senate bill four forty four
senator Ortiz Pino an act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill four forty five and a bill
for forty five having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
bill four forty six the bill for
forty six having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
this referred to the engine
rural and cultural affairs
committee Senate bill four forty
six Senate bill for forty seven
printed and referred to the
Senate and in rural because of
Affairs Committee Senate bill
four forty seven Senate bill for
forty eight introduced by
Senator Pinto an act relating to
the public peace health safety
committee Senate bill four forty
eight Senate bill for forty nine
introduced by senator say about
this and actually need to the
public peace health safety and
welfare Senate bill four forty
nine at about four forty nine
Senate bill four fifty
introduced by Senator sirventes
and act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare
Senate bill four fifty Senate
bill four fifty having been read
twice by title is ordered not
bill four fifty one Senate bill
four fifty one having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed this referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill four fifty one
Senate bill four fifty two
not printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee sent of a
bill for fifty two Senate bill
four fifty three introduced by
Senator Ivey Soto.
And act relating to the public
three Senate bill four fifty
four introduced by Senator Ivey
Soto an act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare Senate bill four fifty
twenty one introduced by senator
Shannon D. Pinto.
They memorial requesting the
office of the governor the
children youth and families
department the department of
Senate memorial twenty one.
Seven memorial twenty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Thank you Mr president Ms
ensure the capital outlay
requests.
Thank you Mr president go back
to that order business
Correction on that I'm just
going to go and clarify this
president act instructs the
clerk to enter into the general
consent we go about our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports
the reader to read.
Mr president your conservation
committee to home has been
referred Senate bill one fifty
Respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Stefanics chair this
spans Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
and Senate bill two ninety six
do pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Stefanics chairman
finished Effects Mr president I
move the adoption of the
journal so that they were acted
upon individually.
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so we just before
committee chairs make their
announcements we will be on the
floor tomorrow at eleven thirty
parliamentarian cell I hereby
appoint Senator Ivy Soto is the
Senate parliamentarian.
I object from back here.
Senator Wirth so this will be
time for committee chairs to
announce their committees.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president the Santa
Fe Indian rural culture affairs
we've got a full slate of bills
that we're still working on
getting through thank you.
Thank you senator so centers of
annex.
Thank you Mr president your
Senate conservation committee
Mr Chairman for chairman Shendo
you want me to say that these
tax business and transportation
committee will meet
approximately fifteen minutes
after the floor session today.
Make sure that they're in by
five o'clock and then and then
maybe a little earlier than five
so if you need help again
there's help in in our office
L. is in your money or what
Mr president.
Senator Ingle treasurer center
Monnow shield NMSC yield Mister
president and he's going to want
Present I'll just want to insure
charging your usual commission.
Mr president said that there's
no commission we already pay
taxes.
everybody's getting this first
time offer of junior money and
we're adding some clarity to the
process and so everyone is
Person I do too and I'm just so
proud of you.
You're just such a genuine
person estimate your maze me.
Thank you Mr president and maybe
Mr president we're Senate
finance will go in.
If the members of the body want
to tune in if they want us to
send a link or let us know how
we're gonna have a broadband
presentation because I don't
asking for two hundred million
for her broadband that of our
share of capital but we believe
there's roughly five hundred
million and broadband money that
exists throughout the state and
broadband but that's going to be
a highly important topic and and
Senate finance.
Thank you centerman Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much Mr
president this president of just
a reminder for the rules
conferees you need to be logged
in from your office they'll be
delivered to your office of for
their
and and then pick up after its
out the agenda then I just
because or the floor I.
Unilaterally changing it's nine
o'clock not eight thirty thank
you Mr presents are for the the
On why we're still having.
Wire in regards in police and
National Guard and what we
worried about Mr presidents can
Senator are you asking a
particular member I don't know
maybe the floor leader can
answer if you can answer I don't
know.
But certainly the floor leader
leadership discussion and on
going I don't want to get into
specifics I don't think that's
appropriate given security
issues but again I know Center
Bach and I have also had a
I I know that certainly our
leader had myself and I don't
know I heard that somebody else
in this room a I have served in
the military and we we have some
Rise to the level of security
that we have so that's just my
point Mr president hope we can
talk about it thank thank you
senator I do want to before we
we break I do want to see if
good I but I raise my hand but I
think I need a different.
And gesture to get attention
sometimes all all work on
something a little different Mr
president the first well I
things about senator my nose as
well two four five o'clock
evidently that said Mr president
Senate judiciary will make more
about twenty minutes on
redistricting the status of the
law changes in the Supreme Court
regarding redistricting and
electoral law so it may be
inching even are coming special
Thank you Mr president and and
the the Senate health and public
affairs committee meeting
tomorrow will be a half hour
A lot of people signed up to
speak on it we're going to try
to.
Keep it to no more than a half
hour forty minutes of public
firearms in a secure place away
from children so that's a
controversial bill it'll take a
lot of time that's tomorrow half
hour after the floor session
thank you senator anticipate any
seeing no objection the senator
Senator recess to eleven thirty
tomorrow morning.
