Mr chairman online.
Thank you very much everybody
welcome to Senate rules
committee
I do have a few administrative
announcements before we get
going on this morning and I also
run wrecked everybody know kind
of the roadmap for this morning
also that charm this morning it
is we're going to begin with
secretary designate Tracy
Collins
right on the department of
health and and then from there
we're going to go to our
secretary designate of your
properties what time for the
proper performance security.
Our.
That we will be right at
discussion on Senate bill forty
eight and then the plan is to
come back and vote on Senate
bill forty eight our next the
next
on Monday.
So I'm.
They do have also a couple of
administrative announcements on
the first as we weren't walks in
taking any public comment on
Senate bill forty eight today.
We're not going to today we will
allow public comment on Senate
bill forty eights on Monday in
addition to that because there
is a committee substitutes.
Are we are of the public
Department that is planned I
know is based upon are some
provisions that renting visual
bill that have locally been
modified with regard to the
committee substitute.
In all members of the public
with copy from committee
substitute Senate bill ninety
eight Senator Pat Woods.
Williams email but Canadian
address SRC at I just don't
know.
The registar go.
Working in today we will send
you a copy of the committee
substitute so that your your
public comments with the
relevant we make.
In addition to that if you just
as a just an FYI thank.
Were intelligent and emailing
right now saying please send me
a copy.
Of the present during that it's
a little bit with the moment but
I'm gonna tear on the time we
are going to go to the floor.
With regard to that also need to
have a floor session beginning
at eleven thirty today.
And so what we're doing to them
is rolled out of the plan as
will be spending about forty
five minutes are up I'm sorry.
And then and then after that we
will be doing the rest of the
time on Senate bill forty eight
discussion that should give us
enough time to be able to
address each of the issues we
have to do today in the
committee so I want to let
everybody know what that would
not for us honestly people can
find a plan out there morning as
well as for those who did reach
out to get a copy of of the
committee substitute.
With that are outlined by doing
so one of the administrative
announcement before I ask
Mr not to call the roll and that
is going to be having a change
of community our personal.
That will be happening over the
weekend and that is we'll be
having a different must face are
showing up with regard to those
extra for the committee.
Remember last by having Act
brought as ours you Mr invoice
of god during up until now after
the first after the legislative
session are we are going to
transition to having Morgan
Roberts are joining us to be the
I was in my strong points of god
out for the second half of the
legislative session the reason
for that in the past miss Clark
what has enticed into a position
with armed with a vigorous is K.
and and it's going to be moving
and and and what I probation
office when I when I when I sat
down to try and see what we
could do what about this
legislative session she
commented to me among other
things that
That that the campaign which is
temporary in nature and being
set up providing health care.
Branch of government that's not
providing healthcare for people
for us during the legislative
session.
Not because it doesn't affect
particularly as chairman of the
secretary of health this point.
Because we are.
R. and so and so on that was
actually an apartment to to
being able to keep somebody from
have been working with us on
American opted manner and it's
something that I think at some
point we need to you can review
in terms of how we drop
procedures for the entire
legislature enrollment and are
on and
The resources how we manage the
human resources are people who
regularly property thing in our
lives here are during the
legislative session and and
support the work that we do so
what I'm Miss Vigil if you'd be
so kind as possible Senator
Baca.
Senator Lopez.
Here.
Senator Moores.
Your.
Senator Oneal.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle here Senator
Stewart here Senator Wirth.
Your Senator Ingle.
Senator Duhigg I understand is
excused Senator Ivey Soto I am
here you have a quorum.
Thank you very much are also if
there's nothing else I mean it
Mr mission to come before the
committee the straps under law
office did we miss present are
your our country.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning everyone.
I am so honored to sit in front
of the committee to present Dr
Tracy Collins.
She has been working for the
state of New Mexico and many
different facets but currently
her new position of course is as
the secretary designate that the
department of health.
Just a little bit of background
Mr chairman members of the
committee and of course doctor
Collins will continue I know I'm
sure much more with us in just a
few minutes but doctor Collins
Received a bachelor of science
in chemistry back in may of
nineteen eighty nine I heard
doctor of medicine at the
university of Oklahoma college
of medicine was a June nineteen
ninety three she also has a
master of public health out of
Harvard school of public health
and a master of health care
delivery science out of
Dartmouth College in and wary of
twenty eighteen.
Excuse me most recently a doctor
Collins has served as dean and
professor in the college of
population health here at the
university of New Mexico health
sciences center she has also
been the chair professor
preventative medicine and public
health she also served in the
Kansas health foundation
distinguished professor in
public health she's been a
professor of internal medicine
at the Kansas University School
of medicine in Wichita.
I'm she's also been a co leader
primary care research consortium
and university of Minnesota.
And I'm Mr chairman members of
the committee I know that we all
have copies of the tape and I
know that.
With her extensive work in the
service in the area of health
care in our in not just here in
New Mexico but across this
country I think is phenomenal
and much to be wanted on.
I'm sure where she's she's a
community member she's involved
in our community here in the
state of New Mexico and of
course Albuquerque New I am.
So grateful that she is willing
to leave the University of New
Mexico health sciences center
and come and work with us at the
state level as you know the
department of health is crucial
it what we're going through at
this point in you know with
regards to the pandemic and I
know in in her and in my
conversation that we had she has
again extensive knowledge and
working as to what we can make
sure that our services are
distributed equitably in the
state and I know that's been one
of the issues that's come up in
front of us as even as
legislators so Mr chairman
members of the committee if I
could I would like to welcome Dr
Collins to the Senate rules
committee and if she could of Mr
Chairman allowed you allowed to
say a few words to the committee
this morning.
Those are the rules committee.
Thanks for as yours.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and Senator Lopez
thank you for that introduction.
Hi and just honored to be here
today to speak with you I do
want to thank governor Lujan
Grisham I nomination and I want
to acknowledge the people who
come to speak on my do have Dr
Mike Richards secretary Scrase
this time the Covington Mister
Gregory or tease I also want to
thank my family and friends who
are watching first a bit about
me I'm the youngest of four
daughters born to to rather
young parents in Oakland
California I grew up in Oakland
California and then moved to
Oklahoma City just before high
school my mom is a severe
illness right after move and
what I perceived as a lack of
listening by doctors implement
city that led to my initial
interest in medicine in high
school I really enjoyed
chemistry so I decided that my
future would somehow be tied to
a love for science I majored in
chemistry at the university of
central Oklahoma and one of the
complete medical school the
university of Oklahoma as a
medical student I was struck by
what seem to be a disparity in
nontraumatic lowerextremity
amputation.
Once I complete my residency in
internal medicine I did love
seeing patients but I decided I
wanted to have more of an
influence and how we deliver
care so I completed a fellowship
in general internal medicine at
Harvard at the west Roxbury VA
taking care of veterans during
which time I obtain my in PH are
masters of public health.
During my fellowship I use my
mentors large searchable
database to take an initial look
at racial ethnic disparities and
nontraumatic lowerextremity
amputation and in fact African
Americans and Latinos within the
VA or one point four one point
three times more likely
respectively and not just
panicked whites to undergo a
lower extremity amputations as I
look further of the reasons one
compelling reason was for full
artery disease or Ph.D also
known as poor leg circulation it
disproportionately affects
people of color.
I've been conducting research on
Ph.D for over twenty years as
part of my interest in having an
impact on healthcare delivery I
also completed as central as
mention a combined MBA and
health policy degree from
Dartmouth also known as a master
of health care delivery science
curriculum places a significant
emphasis on the social
determinants of care as
explaining much of health
outcomes about sixty percent as
to compare to genetics or
healthcare it is really an
underlying component of
population health which is the
impact of upstream factors that
largely influence health and the
absolute need for partnerships
between public health and
healthcare delivery to greatly
affect positive health outcomes
I was fortunate in twenty
nineteen to begin serving as a
teen University of New Mexico
college of population health is
the newest college at UNM and
only one of four such colleges
in the country.
Then the pandemic at and I found
myself serving not only as a
dean but also supporting efforts
specific to the impact of the
pandemic on the university.
In October of twenty twenty I
was asked to consider working to
help the state address the
pandemic and additional needs
around health inequities I feel
fortunate to serve in this role
and I see that health equity
with improved health for all New
Mexicans as a goal.
Using compassion strategy and
innovation combined with having
a great group of people to work
with both internal and external
to the agency is a formula for
success let me say that I
appreciate the opportunity to
visit with many of you in recent
weeks some months.
I suspect that the health
emergency has helped us get to
know each other more quickly
than we might have otherwise and
I'm thankful for that silver
lining as I see it it is
essential for the department of
health to understand the
challenges and opportunities
facing each of our communities
at each of you know if you're on
community management late I'm
grateful for the chance to learn
from you.
As you know I did serve in this
role unofficially since November
and officially since December
and it has already been
extraordinary journey.
Much of the O. H. is work this
year has focused on pandemic
responses testing contact
tracing sequencing multiple
variants of COVID nineteen and
now vaccine distribution that
work rightly remains our primary
focus but New Mexico is more
than this pandemic and public
health is certainly more than
any single virus is also bigger
than anyone department as a
physician and professor of
medicine and population health I
know that health outcomes depend
on more than just access to care
as important as that may be
rather as I've mentioned a range
of social determinants including
education socio economic
opportunity and the strength and
quality of our relationships
these all clear rules in our
individual and collective well
being so while delays let has a
lead role to play all of state
government as well as counties
municipal governments and other
partners have much to contribute
and the pandemic has taught us a
great deal about how much of a
difference we can make when we
collaborate problem solve and
support one another we are
living in extraordinary times
and times again I see New
Mexicans within and beyond state
government respond with
extraordinary creativity hard
work and commitment that's
especially true when it comes to
addressing ongoing equities
across our state's diverse
communities governor Lujan
Grisham says that well we're all
together New Mexico and that
means all of us and with that
allow me to again express my
gratitude for the chance to be
with you today I'm happy to help
to address your questions thank
you.
Our phones and and before we go
to a public comment let me in
the tradition of Senator Lopez
your sponsor and many years that
she was the chair of this
committee thank you so much for
your willingness to serve the
state of New Mexico.
we all have busy lives and and
we all have the options and as
I'm looking at your.
Ninety three page resume I think
you have more options than the
rest of us and so so we very
much appreciate your willingness
to serve in this capacity at
this very personal time some of
that let's go to a public
comments and and let me begin
we're going to go to this coming
Covington Mr teams Mr Richards
and Mr scripts this Madam.
Thank you very much
I just want to say the African
American community is proud of
our own doctor Tracy Collins
we're proud of the work she does
the person she is and the
difference that we know she will
make for all New Mexicans thank
you for this confirmation.
Thank you very much our.
This is.
Your.
You're still the.
About now yep okay great thank
you first a good morning
everyone and thank you for this
this honors screen to
be asked by US secretary
designate to Collins to speak on
her behalf.
Do is very quickly my name is
Greg Ortiz on from the Pueblo
back from I've served as the
vice chairman of the all the
Public Council and as as well as
service first lieutenant
governor for my Pueblo and in my
brief time that I've met with
doctor Collins when she up begin
the efforts to establish the
college of population health at
the university of New Mexico
is where where we began our
initial introduction and one of
the first things that we
discussed was reaching out to
the various proposals
presentations up indigenous to
New Mexico and as you recall
many of the when the when the
virus first get you Mr there
were two of the main pueblos are
indeed real grant that we're
greatly impacted and affected
and
and I just want to just kind of
I want to highlight that because
they were your efforts on her
part as well as interaction with
the state that address those
those impacts that occurred at
these two pueblo so with that I
want to
state that.
I am very honored
to.
To confirm and support doctor
Collins has her in her capacity
as the secretary of the
department of health so thank
you very much and the old by the
way I did serve as a term for
them former governor
Bill Richardson in the
department of transportation.
I may have made a very great
many people throughout the state
as well as out of state one of
the best experiences of my life
so well with that thank you
doctor Collins for thinking of
me and and supporting you I
wholeheartedly hope that
Everyone will join in your
support so thank you.
Mr Dees are we Mexico to Mr two
Dr Mike Richards you're at.
So thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and Senator Lopez
I I really appreciate the
opportunity to come and speak on
behalf of secretary designate
comments from my name is Mike
Richards I'm the senior vice
chancellor of clinical affairs
at the university of New Mexico
I've I've been in New Mexico
over twenty years and and that
twenty years I've had the
opportunity to serve as a
medical director in the
department of health for over
seven years I've also recently
worked with secretary Scrase and
secretary comical as a member of
the medical advisory team and
throughout my career I've worked
very closely with the department
of health given all the
synergies between the health
sciences center and the
department of health and so from
that I believe I have a real
experience and familiarity with
the importance of the role of
the secretary of the department
of health in the importance of
that leader for our state and so
with that in mind and I'm very
pleased just offer up my highest
possible endorsement for
secretary does any Collins for
this position I've had the
pleasure of working with her
since she joined the faculty as
a professor in the dean of our
college of population health but
she brought to that role
incredible experience and public
health including you know
leaving her prior prior job as
chair of the department of
preventive medicine and public
health at the university of
Kansas you've heard a bit about
her credentials which are not
just national level but they are
truly world class level
credentials secretary Collins is
a you know a physician who is
trained in internal medicine and
preventive medicine in the at
the university of Oklahoma but
what really kind of
distinguish is for is for
fellowship training in amatory
Care which she received at
Harvard also at that time a
masters of public health from
Harvard and then going.
Back in in in getting additional
training with masters of health
care delivery science from
Dartmouth so from those of us
who are in the world of medicine
these are impeccable credentials
that really put her on a
worldwide stage
so you've heard that secretary
Collins continues with a
clinical practice which is
admirable given the incredible
work that she does in addition
to her public health expertise
she is also a nationally funded
scientist she has significant
administrative experience to
include recent completion of the
leadership training programs and
the American medical association
she's a community leader and so
with this you've kind of seen
that she has true commitment to
underserved populations
vulnerable populations and
people of color we've also seen
that recently that she's
developed considerable expertise
and disaster response and COVID
response and and played a
significant role in helping
prepare the university for our
internal code response and
participation in collaboration
with the state having secretary
a dozen Collins leave the
university was certainly a great
loss for our college of
population health but I can say
that Dr Doug C. donors are
executive vice president
president Stokes myself all
recognize that that loss to our
college temporarily why she does
this public service really just
done a great benefit to the
state and the university as a
whole and so I can just say that
I I again give secretary Bentsen
Collins my highest possible
endorsement for this position I
believe that we are incredibly
fortunate to have someone with
her experience and credentials
who is willing to serve in this
role thank you Sir.
Thank you Sir.
And madam justice.
Yes Mr chair Senator Lopez
members of the committee I'm
actually here today on behalf of
myself but more importantly
Brian Blaylock secretary of CYFD
Katrina how term Lopez from
aging and Elizabeth Groginsky
from ECC day we are wildly
enthusiastic about this
nomination and not just for
selfish reasons up getting
desperately needed help to fight
this pandemic but because of
Senator doesn't columns mazing
credentials Dr Richard sorry
went through it you know it's
been my dream to see population
health expert heading up the
department of health just
because that's what the state
needs R. as an expert in
disparities an expert in
managing large scale health
programs to improve the health
of the population and I just
think we're incredibly lucky to
have her here you heard how well
respected she is indeed at UNM
nationally and even
internationally and up governor
as this a former secretary of
health as you all now.
Thinks and believes as I do and
all of us to that Tracy is the
ideal candidate for this
position I just want to speak
directly to what I think is one
of the most important things I
in assessing the current and
future performance of an
executive in and that is
actually what does that person
accomplish the first Hundred
Days on the job and keep in mind
that as I go through this I'm
pretty sure I didn't do the
exact math but I think secretary
designate columns here isn't
even two thirds of the way
through these first Hundred Days
but in those in the last two
months she stepped in to the
middle of the pandemic it
literally our darkest hour your
increases standards of care we
were looking at whether or not
we are in need to ration care
and she has brought a tremendous
amount of.
Broad strategy an overview Mr
chair of the pandemic which is
been really really helpful I
would like to creditor with a
complete following Case counts I
think there are other factors
such as the people of New Mexico
you know of going along with
public health orders wearing
masks and the like but her
leadership is made a dent in
that Kerr there's absolutely no
question second the way she's
handled the vaccine in New
Mexico has been in the top three
states there is a little bit of
that interesting math going on
right now because I checked the
website this morning we
currently have delivered a
hundred and two point five
percent of the doses we received
in the state into people's arms
well you might be saying that's
impossible but it turns out and
up until this week we're getting
I doses of the Fizer vaccine
according to government records
secretary Colin center team
figure out a way to make sure
the delivery system had
sufficient supplies to get that
six those out so.
Search the web let me know if
you find any other state about a
hundred percent right now in
vaccine delivery also need
higher Lara para Han you know
hiring great leaders another
evidence of of strong potential
in this role Laura set up a very
complicated box affected
structure I'd I'd complicated
isn't the word affected
structure three ministry was
vaccine and it involves supply
and delivery and delivery system
relationships and communication
and the like but I am quite
confident we'll continue to get
us to the point where every
Mexican wants a vaccine gets a
vaccine I wish we had triple the
amount of vaccine.
With that we're getting now I
I'm confident that under her
leadership we can get every one
of those in the arms as well her
commitment to equity in the
state not just with vaccines but
every aspect of public health
has been relentless she's like
constantly speaking out on
behalf of equity she has not
only expressed our commitment as
a leader and made it clear to
her all of us that this is
important to her which is
actively setting up data systems
to ensure we can track and
measure the degree to which
populations are.
Races ethnicities and counties
and other forms of geography are
getting equal distribution she's
also taken on.
A sober and thorough assessment
of the existing structure of the
department of health which I
think is needed and as really
creating an image and vision
amongst them of one department
of Health working together to
improve out The New Mexicans and
I commend there for that so I'm
gonna close now I I just one
last thing out.
Secretary doesn't accounts is
really been my partner in doing
press conferences ever since
she's been here.
I have so much to learn more
about how to be concise Is Your
all experiencing right now but
she's amazing I.
Voice for the state of New
Mexico and ensuring our
population that they will be
taking care of that they will be
vaccinated and her commitments
to transparency I getting out in
front of the press in a press
conference I think maybe in our
first week on the job which is
no small feat have been amazing
so in closing I.
She's a great partner to work
with during the pandemic.
I'm really looking forward to
working with her and the
university with the Medicaid
program and the entire
department health in HSD to
improve the health of New
Mexicans in our post pandemic
world I and we all all the
health secretary's believe she
is the right person for this job
and that she can do it thank you
very much thank you very much Dr
Scrase I'd appreciate
The efficiency are for cabinet
officers and and one R. a
statement.
And it's a little disoriented
not to have you using charts as
you're describing what she's
done in the first Hundred Days
but memberlist with that let's
let's go to questions from the
committee and will begin with a
number of.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you
Secretary Collins doctor Collins
And thank you to our governor
for an amazing appointments
and for doctor Collins to step
up as Dr Scrase said at a moment
when we really needed you are to
help all of us and it's it's
greatly appreciated we had a
really good chance to visits
beforehand and that also is is
much appreciated just to get to
know you and your background and
it's clear from your colleagues
that you it's their loss and are
we in
having you take the helm of
department of health of the
state.
Given our time what I'd like to
do is just focus on one kind of
question that I'd like you to
help robots because it's an
argument that continues to be
brought up by some of of our
colleagues on the floor and the
argument is that we would've
been just as just as good in New
Mexico if we just left all the
businesses open.
just let everyone work as some
of our states have done
and and what I'd like you to do
is just just respond to that and
explain why the science based
approach that our governor is
taken on that dot you and Dr
Scrase are implementing just
really why that is spin so
important in our state and why
it's worked and that way rather
than having the debate that with
another politician on the floor
I'd like to get the expert in
the house to kind of go through
that argument because I'm sure
we'll have that discussion again
on the floor so if I can ask you
that that'd be great thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Senator work
I appreciate that question from
a public health plans if we
think about the pandemic and
what it could have done to our
hospitals healthcare had we not
put in measures to contain it we
could have been overwhelmed
beyond what we experienced with
this recent surge and so we
really have to think about
what's in the interest of
keeping New Mexicans alive and
so the borders that were put in
place to look at shutting down
businesses in keeping people
safe is really about the health
of the state if you're going to
control this fires keep it from
spreading to multiple people
reduce the cases reduce the daps
you really have to take
aggressive measures so I applaud
what the governor has done prior
to my arrival and I think that
we have to keep an eye on we
balancing the needs of New
Mexicans from the health
perspective as well as business
I completely agree with what's
happened today and I think it
was necessary.
Well I really appreciate that
answer and I think it's
important to remember and Dr
Scrase mentioned this as well
just how close we were to
rationing care in our state are
you know it's amazing how fast
we as things go on the date on
the the the curve goes down and
we're very thankful that some of
our counties are transitioning
into yellow because that really
helps them find it yes it's it
helps me to kind of put this
again back in perspective and I
really appreciate the answer and
again appreciate you stepping up
for this job so thank you I look
forward to voting for you on the
floor for sure and and have you
continue to lead in the way you
are thank you so much thank you.
How much Senator Wirth center
members thank you Mr chair thank
you doctor Collins and I want to
echo the appreciation of talk to
on the phone about it if you
remember my question I'll ask
you do you remember the question
to doctor.
About taking this job.
I remember sorry Mr chair will
remembered somewhat loosely
Maybe a question of my mental
health and that's the pretty
close so because we know what
you are by far the most
qualified secretary of health
that we've ever.
you're you're of personality in
your your what you preach the
table is definitely appreciated
you're stepping into the breach
it the the worst possible time
modern history and with your
credentials in your background
your personality I can't tell
you how happy to be we will work
with you and I'm glad you're
here to answer questions because
there there is a lot of
important questions to ask you
you know about the science alone
frustration as well Dr about
what's going on but again I just
really really happy with your
your breasts basically even
better looking at a paper that I
thought was when you were
appointed going to your CV was
just since its amazing
but we do have also questions
asked constituents are called
it's our questions so I hope
you'll bear with us and you'll
answer those questions with us a
promise won't take forty hours
three days or three years but we
do need some
Opportunity to ask these
questions are really appreciate
that
so just a dive in really quickly
you and I talked about before it
just for disclosure as most you
know are my business does COVID
testing we never have contracted
with the department of health we
have talked to our health a
number of times where one time
talked about maybe contract to
do a rapid responses with
businesses but quite frankly we
were also busy at the time
during the heat of it that never
came to fruition and I wasn't we
never had that conversation are
also support someone.
Well so we work very closely
with our.
Ships throughout thank the
department of health and Human
Services what we needed to do at
the beginning of this new
processors really helped us make
sure that we're able to bat
COVID testing in rural New
Mexico are running because
number one of us to get PPE.
So that that was the assistance
we received from sick or at that
time but
we've been we've been in the
breach to doing this sorry I
know what it's been like this
last summer but I have you know
having been seen this one of the
things that serve more promise
legislative path is the money
that has been sent without
appropriations to the
legislative process I'm aware of
the situation during the heat of
the
The supply chain problems
instrumentation problems we
actually have a viral instrument
that you're aware of Dr Cohn so
our pamper unit that we're
actually doing our all star on.
You see our base yes and then we
found out that there was a
million dollar spent four and
not I'm not under you arms uses
a sample million dollars to buy
a.
Another camper unit for New
Mexico state and then set up a
laboratory there and then they
didn't use it except for to do
about five hundred yes a week
and so the question I have is
you know this was the issue to
the pandemic when are we going
to get some some kind of audit
of the efficiency and how that
money was spent my username
issue as an example of million
dollars you're going dollars
there but you're talking about
real money when we're gonna
actually you'll have an audit of
what will Spence how will spent
so that we can be a small.
Aspirants with taxpayers.
Yes so Mister chair is our thank
you for that question so yes in
the pandemic there was frantic
moving parts and money in
dollars and I think once we can
come to a point where we are a
bit more stable with the vaccine
roll out and we have more doses
we can then I will then turn my
attention towards an audit and
looking more closely at our
budget and what how the state
money and how we can do better
moving forward but I think right
now the focus is still really on
the vaccine rollout as well as
continued testing and tracing to
keep New Mexico state.
That's a great answer I agree
with you on the about hope hope
we have a committee that
eventually we'll get to that and
speaking of the vaccine roll out
you know we I talked to a couple
weeks ago about what in our our
systems to that efforts and we
still haven't received word from
the vaccine people I'm sure
that's probably are indicative
of lots of providers special
rules so it Mexico we still were
are willing to help you transfer
our ability of what we were
doing with COVID tested in a
vaccine solar encouraging
whatever the hold up is with
reaching out to smaller
providers mid size providers you
could talk about that and then
also do want to talk about and
that ties into the Arbuckle mail
free journal today about the the
roll out of which is concerns me
about
the lower adaptation with
minority populations aftermarket
population staff population that
was discussed in Albuquerque
journal so if you could talk
about Hey how you can get more
providers like us and all the
people involved with that
efforts on in and talk about
what we're doing with some to
address without per journal
talked about this morning doctor
Mr chair Mr chair Senator Moores
thank you for that question and
so regarding disruption that
secretary Scrase alluded to the
incident command structure that
drive home is implemented we've
got tired vaccine teen with
logistics operations and so I
forwarded your name to that team
to get you on board it and so I
need to follow up with them to
see where we are we have more
than four hundred people are
providers potentially currently
we have two hundred and eighty
nine providers who have doses so
we're trying to ramp up as we
get more doses but please keep
in mind that one of the issues
is that the initial rollout did
not address equity appropriately
and so we're looking at we're
doses of going and wanting to
make sure the most vulnerable
populations that we have that.
Seen providers in those areas so
we're the effort is under way
right now to really move forward
with equity and making sure
vaccine doses are distributed
equitably so we are reaching out
to smaller providers because
they're in these remote areas so
that's ongoing as we speak
regarding vaccine hesitancy it
is very concerning there's a lot
of history in our country their
structural racism there's a lack
of trust in the health care
system and so we can expect
because the pandemic is yes that
some people are going to trust
the health care system I want to
actually receive a vaccine so
the onus is ours the department
of health and others to work
with these communities to
understand what their concerns
are to provide clear information
on vaccines on their efficacy
what we know and that the value
of them to save lives and
actually help those hardest hit
which are communities of color
so we are actually we have an
equity team and we are working
on messaging around making sure
we reach those who are going to
be has a path to get the vaccine
once we actually have that
wonderful supply we can just
start you know putting shots in
arms for everyone and not having
to go about a priority list.
Thank you there's many New
Mexico is willing to help you
out with that efforts and I know
you're drinking from a firehose
right now please reach out the
list of the army of people out
there myself included and
definitely all target was sent
to your previous question more
of
the con con study respectively
comments and questions there are
not the people on your side of
the aisle so are COVID deniers
are you know I was in the breach
at the beginning of this vote
now no one no one in this
chamber or this legislature's
more advocate provided to spend.
Include the gentleman from
South States so with him and I
will will tease each other about
that later sure
I got on your resume which is
currently wearing I just want to
as you all know I'm low in the
house but I noticed that on your
resume so you're currently on
leave I thank Dr Richards said
you were temporarily John can
you go over the nature of that
are you on sabbatical arguably
you are you
what what's what's happening
where that we promised to come
back as to you when you're done
with the fighting this pandemic.
So yes sorry Mr chair and
senator Charles my fault Mr
chair I got all property
proconsuls.
So I I appreciate that question
yes I am on leave State and that
was you know coming to New
Mexico my passion was to make a
difference and so this
opportunity to serve as dean was
the reason I moved here but then
looking at a larger scale at the
state level I have decided that
okay I'm gonna take this lady
from university and they've
actually extended it as long as
I want to serve in this capacity
to really focus on a state level
role as secretary department of
health looking at the pandemic
and the other issues around
health inequities so in fact I
am on leave from the university
of New Mexico.
And and for disclosure is does
that mean you're not receiving a
salary from them as compensation
or private practice.
As I does on the disclosure
finances you did say you were
sued any any any other
compensation radio stated to see
Mr chair Senator Moores that's
correct I am not receiving a
salary from UNM at this time
private practice either.
Mr chair yes Mr chair of course
no not private practice either
although I think with patients
but are.
Of course in the reason drive
your you're not meeting your
long enough to realize that
issues were.
The government sectors of the
pass so we always struggled
transparency issues this
committee to make sure we all
fall.
I have a question a couple
questions here quickly from
Senator requests he said he said
something letter to you again we
know you're drinking from a
firehose but add to what's the
situation in Rio Rancho with the
teachers are getting vaccinated
also return the school could you
address his concerns if you did
get the letter and talk about
what's going on with schools and
with vaccinations and which
would give teachers and schools
over.
Mr chair Senator Moores yes
please keep in mind that I am
working from home so the letter
actually went to my Albuquerque
office or Santa Fe office in
fact I may not have seen it yet
and my apologies for that
regarding that Rio Rancho
that was awful that we should
not have had messaging that was
using really basically what
happened was the one.
My apologies okay there were
plans made to do a vaccine event
for teachers but in fact we were
not at that point in our career
decision last for provider
guidance on who can be
vaccinated next so there's a
communication problem within the
department of health we have
sense got corrected that and
keep in mind the focus on the
vaccine rollout given the
limited supply is to prioritize
the groups that are most at risk
for morbidity and mortality and
those people are the health care
personnel in one day and the
first two subgroups and one B.
those seventy five or older as
well as those are sixteen or
older the chronic condition once
we have more supply we reach at
least sixty percent of those
groups then we can open it up to
the front line essential workers
who can't work remotely which
will include K. through twelve
educators so we really want to
get teachers vaccinated and if
they're seventy five or older or
have a chronic condition they
are in line to tax today that
the currently per prioritizing
one a in the first two subgroups
of one B..
The Senator so you make sure we
got that letter to to you
directly just in case and he
appreciates your comments on
that.
Thank you thank you for that.
My dad is about to die some
frantically trying to get on my
other laptop.
So I can get so get on here if I
lose you so Mister chair I will
are you asking these questions
officer approval.
As I try difference find a
charger.
When
what is your best guess Mr chair
doctor of what the vaccine
rollout and with the authority
of the possibly right that we at
where we think you will really
get to that mythical
and unity.
Moores the herd immunity and
reaching that no region about
seventy percent or more of our
population.
If we continue with the current
cadence of the doses are
receiving so we're about at
about sixty thousand twelve to
seventy two thousand next week
and if we consider that that
stable we're looking at into the
summer or he actually even the
fall now things could change if
we get more vaccine doses were
also having newer vaccines are
coming on board were hoping to
see Johnson Johnson receiving
the way in the next few weeks so
we will know more moving forward
but as of now it's a bit of a
crap shoot but it looks like
it's more towards the end of
summer early fall.
With the job what what are the
follow up question on that Mr
chair is what are the plans when
the Johnson Johnson vaccine
rolls out hopefully by.
First week of March is worried
from an actual for us.
Mr chairman of course really the
plant are to see how many doses
we get of Johnson Johnson the
wonderful thing about Johnson
Johnson is it's one does and
they'll fly not all triple
storage issue so what we're
hoping to do is to look at
logistically what makes sense
for people who are hard to reach
transient we don't stay one
place long enough that we would
try and use that vaccine
depending on the number of doses
in those populations.
Okay guys work will practices
like ours noticed right.
with this with the Johnson
Johnson versus the circle chart
don't have a charger for.
While more technology Mr chair
thank you
I was just that you know
The order after you then is
Senator Ingle Senator
Vogel synergies.
Thank you Mr thank you doctor.
All.
What we did is I have a lot of
constituents who asked me to ask
questions and in I don't want to
be redundant on your fight
endemic noted respect for your
time but I really appreciate
your willingness to answer our
questions there are some
questions here and I think our
words
And what will break it was a
great question for Madonna from
what we can County
When we started out with a pro
trucker raised of course you
know with Facebook question so
it's not appropriate for us to
you Senator circle as these
questions so when the pandemic
started we're told we're
required for to help to the
hospital to make sure that we
were we have the capacity in
your opinion did we reduced the
curve or just plan it out to
expand over a longer period of
time.
Mr chairman of course we
actually did a good job with I'm
gonna use the term containing
the virus that we didn't
overwhelm hospitals and so we
did see and our December January
there was concern but now we're
on a downward trend which is
very good but the efforts around
us and washing distancing we're
really necessary and they worked
New Mexico did really well at
this pandemic and so we actually
very fortunate and so yes we did
not only flat net but now we're
seeing that things are
increasing so we're on the right
path with controlling this
pandemic.
Mr drive and that's where I
think some of the of the
questions and concerns have been
when you look at the numbers one
when we are arguably the most
restrictive state in the union
on our on orders yes our capital
positivity rate is still from
media market we're twenty four
twenty third last time I looked
so there's questions about did
we really reduce we were the
most restrictive runaways
decisions were made for you got
there for you be able comments
is for moving forward on that.
Do we really reduce some because
we still have about it same
numbers as everyone else in the
nation over over the like to the
pandemic versus the most
restrictive problem workers in
the nation.
Mr chair and senator Morris
thank you and really think about
when we were first hit with the
case in March and then we were
pretty steady and pretty good as
far as not having a lot of cases
it wasn't until I I'm gonna say
COVID fifty seven.
Overplayed October's what we saw
Mr chair on our to our drive
through lion to stop it also we
just saw a skyrocketing number
of patients coming in what's
with sickness right Mr Chairman
or so when you think about how
well we were doing but we backed
off of best practices things
really started to pick up we
have the surgeon cases we start
seeing a lot of yes really
that's even more evidence of the
value of what we were doing
before when people really
adhering to the recommendations
so I think we did we did a great
job of flattening that curve of
protecting our health care
system and with protecting New
Mexico so I even though I wasn't
part of those decisions I stand
by them and I think we did an
excellent job.
In you know going back to our
line of laboratory work as what
we've seen is since the
beginning of the pandemic a of I
think we're still about thirty
percent down on our cancer
registry our reports across the
basis and I think at one point
were to slow sixty percent so
our doctors are all just looking
at the looming on until care
that's coming up next year
students insert restriction or
access to way down about sixty
percent one point
Are you know all the steps that
what are we doing to prepare
where art so what I see is that
will be public health crisis so
the care that's not be taken
care of right now those tumors
so growing to people right now
what are plans to address that
issue as we move forward.
Mr chair answer to Moores the
messaging always had even before
coming over to the state role
has been do not abandon your
care you need to receive
preventive care you need to get
your mammograms your pap smear
so it's really messaging and
making sure we keep that going
with communicating with the
public that even while we're in
this pandemic that we try and
maintain as best possible the
healthcare needs and don't stay
at home for having chest pain
really you see care and don't be
afraid to come to the hospital
and I think that messaging we
have to continue with it and at
times it's dwindled as we have
senator in cases but it's the
only says with the O. H. to make
sure that we are consistent and
making sure that wording gets
out there and what we work with
the health care system
understand where they are in
their capacity to continue with
these preventive measures
measures to make sure that we
take care of New Mexicans.
Yeah I think it's really
important so thankfully for the
federal PPP loans within apple
way out of when this thing
started we were frankly looking
at getting rid of having way
office so taxed with Allah just
we're just tired she was all
just right when the started from
Maine to rural New Mexico Water
State which we we call the unit
which is was amazing to find two
highly qualified colleges want
to move and get out of the cold
maybe come to New Mexico
we write likely able to keep
them going thank you employees
for the duration but we expected
to get credibility busy next
year if we go through so that
that is something I think we
need to get out because I think
that the lady chairs huge
problem.
Four I was you know the
frustration of our trans
transitional bits and that's it
so doing schools a lot of the
comments we we've got from
decisions how to deal with
schools I got pages and pages of
this but basically I think one
of the nurses wires schools of
business shut down these are
people who live near Texas Los
crucis all out so area or on the
side of states the kids need to
be in school we what they watch
searches in cross the border
Texas going to school the range
you know are we are a little bit
higher but not significantly
higher throughout the entire
pandemic we have reports of kids
movies to Texas especially
athletes I personally got a
couple constituents say they
have to all council so that kids
can play football so it's
could potentially go look out
for our Lujan so level
scholarships.
The frustration is when you know
you got the CDC saying schools
should be open one.
It seems the frustration I think
we're seeing from parents across
the nation specially New Mexico
closes so be closed is that the
Who are frustrated Dr Mr chair
people are frustrated Ali
Representative that and we we
need to get the schools open
secure trust that white white
was so late and this one all the
other states seem to be doing a
better job in the schools open.
Mr chair Senator Moores please
know that the governor has
really worked and we're now
seeing an opening of the schools
currently with a hybrid approach
so that is under way and when we
think about what we did before
the month of February we really
were looking at the senator in
cases and understanding how we
can continue to keep our
students safe and our parents
you know students may contract
this and not have the
complications from that but then
they could take home to their
parents and so we really want to
again the messages keeping us
safe and healthy and so I think
the delay in opening schools
which is one more effort towards
protecting New Mexico but now
we're moving towards opening
schools are moving in our in the
right direction I do agree with
you the mental health of our
kids for them to have you know
some semblance of a normal
experience despite how bad COVID
has been it is time to move
towards opening.
For saying that I think it's the
frustrations that out there for
statutes all of our constituents
for.
And the next line of questions
of this program we say ways is
about mental health are we are
we tracking of the mental health
of demographics suicides you
were your actual anecdotally
about so two suicides the.
Higher what are we doing on that
retracting the mental health
aspects as we move forward and
how we do it for last month's.
Mr chair and senator Morris
thank you you know there's a
behavioral health collaborative
that's looking at mental health
and on on the part that working
with secretary Scrase and others
and also one of our **** in our
budget was to to really focus on
teen suicide and so we as a
department are tracking this and
we're looking to address that as
well.
It's it's just.
Here's a fantastic question sort
of skateboarders where do we go
after green.
Mr chair Senator course we got a
happy we go.
We let our hair down eight.
A little bit more normal life
for sure.
The question is I think of a
great answer Mr chair madam
secretary Dr the question I
think of the green level we were
still at fifty percent
restrictions I I'm I'm going so
we're.
Your source so be happy half
close some restaurants and
elsewhere so once we do get a
little bit further is there
another level after remember to
get to where we get fully fully
open orders that need there's
what we're gonna go to four
hundred percent is that after we
don't have anymore yes what
you're so what happens that you
get fully open after three.
Mr chairman of course thank you
for that question really after
grain it's a matter of
evaluating are we really on the
downward slope have we really
done a good job with less than
eight per one hundred thousand
each county less than five
percent positivity and is it
consistent and just how many
folks have we gotten vaccinated
to get back to that one hundred
percent with restaurants and
other places being opened so
we're ongoing late collecting
data and tracking this to make
the best decision as of today I
don't have a date for you or
what that looks like exactly but
that is the goal all the state
to move back to one hundred
percent capacity and these
businesses.
So Mister secretary do you what
do you envision a major through
matrix is been there for a while
since I think what November
about ready great.
Do you see coming out with a new
matrix about the governor hinted
at something at the last press
conference coming up with
something more what.
What do something more we got a
platinum and gold what what are
you lookin you matrix for I
think we note down you know so
looking over rice.
Mr chair Senator Moores it's
really moving from the red green
framework to completely open and
so there is not another sort of
color scheme that we're thinking
about it's more about following
the trans and looking at not
only basis but baxeen race and
then understanding is it safe so
once again are we going to keep
New Mexican state and can we do
that and if we can we go to one
hundred percent but we're not
going to redo the matrix per se
it's really a matter of coming
out with updated messaging based
on what we see in the trans and
how well we're doing as a state
to really further decrease the
number of cases of this virus.
I'm I'm of the belief that COVID
is here forever I think it's
part of their commercial so
files viruses we're gonna be
facing major face forever so.
That's what I believe is a non
drive it's you know we're we're
you are our grandchildren are
probably gonna get when you're
young and is to be part of the
six of our systems like every
other pandemic we've ever had
what I read from the national
news site based center Corey
with that so I guess the
question is is the gold and to
to not when no one else will be
forced a simple.
Our words with the death rate is
much lower is that when we go to
a hundred percent what it what
is the goal to stop I assume
it's for people stop dying in
large numbers of this disease.
Mr chair Senator Moores death as
one of the outcomes last one
obviously but it's sort of the
morbidity from this as well
there are things are learning
about this viruses are long
COVID long term sentence
understanding that so we're
reducing morbidity and mortality
or death and so what we're
looking at and what we're
discussing with the governor is
looking at the various like the
evidence and the metrics and
understanding when is it safe so
that is just one of those
components it's also cases also
hospitalizations and so we have
to factor in all of those issues
of those those metrics to make
the best decision and so as of
today it's a conversation we're
having and we're looking at the
red yellow green but it's not to
go through you know two platen
or another color it's when can
we move from fifty to a hundred
percent and what does that look
like as far as for New Mexico.
Well Mister chair of madam
secretary since you're a Lobo Dr
Scrase is a local local cherry
and sober as the next level so
I'm able to do that I like that
At my last question so chair is
so I I think a more
philosophical question I.
Restoration of the legislature
not being involved in the
process but I get the
legislature passed in two
thousand three in the past laws
that gave the governor this
immense power
during the during and and
secretary of health for to
declare these emergencies
without legislative and checks
and balances.
I personally don't think many
Legislature field that was my
stages completely cutting out
the legislature from that
process I think in our Republic
we deserve to have balanced and
I don't blame the governor quite
frankly she's the one is held
responsible for this the
legislature again for her and
the governorship our to do this
and she didn't do what she was
going to be held responsible I
do believe legislature needs to
be involved in the next public
health emergency which hopefully
won't be for another hundred
years but it's going back so I
want to ask you a personal
question where do you think the
role of the Legislative Council
power should be as you had to
deal with the stuff in the box
stops with you but start with
the governor I get that but I
think the public perception has
been that it's unlimited.
All were for on limited time in
in a Republic I think that's
what pushes against our
tradition American as a
Republican democracy where do
you believe in the future we
need to be going with that kind
of power so that there is that
balance and I do believe that
some of the push back we've
gotten from the public
especially in certain areas
state is because they didn't
feel they have a voice in what
was happening to their elected
representation I think that past
that are active mastaba closures
would have been better if.
It felt like they had a state in
the process to their elected
representation so your thoughts
on what you feel like that.
Mr.
Mr chair Senator Moores really I
believe that the legislature is
the voice of your constituents
and that you represent their
voices so you bring that to the
table as decisions are made now
if there is an emergency going
on and there's not the
capability of bringing everyone
together to hear their voices
and we have to create a space
for you to communicate with
senior leadership the governor
and myself on what you want to
see happen and it's a collective
discussion about what's best for
the state but ultimately the
statues of the law D. O. H. is
focused on the health and making
sure we're doing right by the
state regarding the health and
the governor overseas you know
what we're all doing but I think
you I don't think the intent and
what she's done today is yes
certainly have all this power I
really think it's to protect New
Mexico and to the extent that we
can engage legislature and
accomplish that goal I'm all
for.
Thank you madam chair of our
managers Mr chairman madam
secretary Dr and that is poured
in in again I'm not one of the
guys moments because that is the
power of the Legislature Cape
proprioceptive and other
governors have this power if
there at all birds I'm looking
at what happens the next time
and there will be a next time
we although there will be a next
time hopeless hundred years but
with localizations I think it's
going to be much this.
Much more frequently with our
around the world as we are.
Questions are really do
appreciate it
again my constituents are our
caucuses so wanted this
opportunity to talk about these
things I really appreciate it
again I I'm just tickled about
your qualifications.
you are a very impressive what
leader Michel fashion show it's
in our I continue for you to
work for both the Senate and on
as a provider try to so of this
issue and other issues are
questions thank you doctor what
works for you it's all going I
thank you madam chair and
senator Morris and everybody
this body was senator Morris on
Facebook Senator Inc.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
and the doctor it's a pleasure
to visit with you this morning
and.
I know I've been just had a
sleepless night thinking I might
vote for somebody that went to
the university of Oklahoma.
I went to Oklahoma state in the.
There's just there's just
something about you people are
just.
You know what what I want to god
University you know Oklahoma
state and Oklahoma was always
disruption.
Such a.
A party school wasn't interested
in education like we were but I
know that you're the exception.
But anyway I appreciate you
being here with us this morning
and your qualifications are
correct thank and the work of
the images that we had was
terrific as well and not are we
are our rural areas getting at
that issue as much.
Injection material as they can
use or do we a do we need to get
more where we can get protecting
our border counties you know
whatever they need.
Mr chair Senator Ingle thank you
and yes we are increasing the
number of doses going to rural
areas we're also looking at
options for mobile units to go
out and actually those who are
in really remote areas and they
can't get to a vaccine provider
and also to get to homes for
those who can't leave their
house so we are working on that
and more doses are going out
each week to these very rural
areas.
In the what is the.
I'm the.
Mr chairman Dr thank the I guess
the shelf life is the of course
the shelf life of this vaccine
it's just a few days later you
know Mr chair Senator Ingle you
know depending on when you saw
it you might have about five
days so it's very short with the
Fizer vaccine and during the
issue with that is transport
three comes on stable if you
move it too many times and so
with Johnson Johnson it has a
very long still deadline I'm not
sure the exact issue much longer
and you don't have to have the
ultra cold storage so it's a lot
easier to work with.
Chairman Dr Nash throughout the
we're hoping maybe around the
first of March that that soon Mr
chair Senator Ingle it's
probably going to be approved in
the next two weeks and so
probably looking at mid March to
actually start.
Yeah right very good well I yeah
I'm anxious to I've had both of
my injections and their import
talus and.
I know David Shaw in Lee County
years has really done a
magnificent job they're getting
at at the action making the
number of people and it's a if
you anybody needs an example of
how to do things that have David
really have set that up well and
it's given hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds of injections and
and I know what but what I hear
sometimes appear more than I as
people are driving to Amarillo
up from here in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque to get shots I had
some folks in Albuquerque called
me and they were able to get
their injections import talus
and and go down for the first
and second injection chin.
It's so I'm not being critical
of the IDA I I don't know their
situations and I.
But they were certainly in the
older type age group and but the
they didn't seem to be.
I feel like they were will be
able to get the vaccination as
soon as they could but like in
this in the City of Santa Fe
here how many injections
newsmaker given today.
Mr chair Senator Ingle really
when you think about on our
average we've known for about
nine thousand jobs per day
that's distributed among the
thirty three counties I know
Santa Fe.
Act and so they were actually
able to construct an arms to at
least maybe a thousand a day
depending appointments so that
they're in a good position sure.
Mr chairman and doctor of the of
the the vaccine there is enough
vaccine available.
That almost any is it are we
still us the certain age groups
that were active
Giving more shots to and on and
morning those folks to come in
the older folks sure are we
where we are the Google page
fifty years old from a and they
feel like they need those
injections can I get.
Mr chair Senator Ingle
unfortunately we still don't
have enough vaccine doses so
we're still having to prioritize
those groups that are most at
risk first so right now it's
still completing the
vaccinations of one a health
care person and then the first
two subgroups of one B. which of
those seventy five or older are
those sixteen or older with a
chronic condition so we haven't
been able to move down a little
the last on our priority group
but we will once we have more
vaccine or at least sixty
percent of these groups have
been vaccinated.
Chairman Dr if I were in my
fifties and I had a
Problem with diabetes this or
some other kind of a would I be
able to get an impact right be
able to get the injection.
Mr chair Senator Ingle their
eight hundred thousand people
meet the criteria of being
eligible currently based on one
A. and then seventy five or
older with a chronic condition
we're getting about sixty
thousand doses of the vaccine
usually next week we're going to
get seventy two thousand but
we've got to get primary doses
and booster doses into these
people for the current vaccines
we have available so the supply
demand mismatch is great and if
you really think about it we're
talking about more than ten
weeks actually about fifteen to
get through those groups however
we get more vaccine will reduce
that length of time so what I
encourage you to do who ever is
listening to get on the
registration at Register so we
can get you in the queue and
that once we have those
available for you at a provider
to give you a shot in your arm
we can push you to that provider
to get your vaccine.
Most folks want once they get to
the first of the first injection
the prime the primary injection
Mr chairman Dr to do if they're
pretty good return for the
second.
Mr chair Senator Ingle we're
actually looking at that data
currently because initially we
felt like with the health care
person there was a good number
that we're coming back to the
second does what we're beginning
to get a little worried that
people are getting controls one
does so we're gonna look data
and make sure they are in fact
coming back for that booster
because you need that for school
immune response and to be a
protected against COVID so we're
looking at the data currently
thank you.
Thank you relation Mr chairman
Dr you think it's at least fifty
percent come back.
Mr chair Senator Ingle we're
looking at the numbers I did to
the state you know that it's at
least fifty percent but I can't
give you a number today until I
see the numbers from nineteen on
how many people who are eligible
for the second actually
completed their second does.
Thank you very much and I
appreciate your efforts you've
done a great job in the in the
six counties that I represent on
the southeastern side and most
of more border county shin in
Ghana.
The next one job getting the
back change you know to the
places for the folks can go and
get the shots in the information
that has been put out for people
know when it's coming and when
they're when they're to be
there's been there's been done
very well so I thank you for
doing such a terrific job on
that and it sure it's one of the
things that you're you hope
won't happen again but I
I don't know I just a all right
I'm I had enough microbiology
and and my majority of the
animal science and nutrition
these things can not be
sanctioned keep happening
unfortunately so anyway thank
you for your great efforts and
not I can be of assistance to
you in any way please let me
know.
Thank you thank you.
I thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Ingle I'm so
we move now to Senator
and senator Ortiz rate center
for.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you doctor.
Thank you for being on with us
today.
I really appreciate you reaching
out to me seems like an eternity
ago but it was probably about
three weeks maybe a month ago
reaching out and really taking
the time to of.
Answer any questions I had
explained what was going on with
the roll out of the vaccine and
I really appreciate that because
I hadn't had that under any
other secretary so I really
appreciated that you're
definitely this resume my
goodness so one of the best
resumes I've seen and I've been
on rules committee for about
nine years you're definitely
qualified for the job
and probably the most qualified
health secretary we've ever had
so I I think that's that's
really awesome that that you're
on board and it says a lot about
you wanting to get back in this
in this way so I really
appreciate that I do have some
questions as as was stated money
have come from people within my
district some of these are my
own after they came that come in
I added a little bit to them but
there's a lot of concern down in
my neck of the woods especially
around the citations that have
been issued
Under the current order it says
any and all state officials
authorized by the D. O. H. then
forces order by issuing a
citation of violation which may
result in civil administrative
penalties of up to five thousand
for each violation.
but it's my understanding that
in every single situation it's
been a five thousand dollar fine
and I'm really curious to know
is it appropriate for every
single one of these
To be five thousand dollars
can you answer that for.
Mr chair and drive.
Senator Pirtle the citation
language is up to five thousand
I'd have to look at each of the
situations that you're alluding
to to better understand why they
decided to enforce enforce the
five thousand exactly but really
that language allows some
flexibility it's not absolute it
has to be five thousand.
And Mister chair and drive the
secretary does may I appreciate
that that's that's why the
concern because I think it's up
to five thousand and then
they're still supposed to be a
lot of discretion that goes in
that if it's a small business
and these are a lot of the ones
that are are getting hit with
these fines are small businesses
that don't have the the big
banks like a lot of the other
Businesses do so you know it I
don't think it's appropriate and
and hopefully if you would agree
with me that it may not be
appropriate in every instance on
on on the scale of business that
is five thousand every time can
you allude to Mr chairman and
doctor how you feel about that
that maybe there should be a
little bit more discretion that
goes into how much the fines
are.
Mr chair Senator portal I'm
definitely open to looking at
each of these individual
situations and I would I'm gonna
venture to say that there should
be flexibility and I know server
range and that the five thousand
would be the Max but I'm happy
to visit with you further and
figure out kind of for given
business what was a violation
and how did you decide on five
thousand for that particular
situation.
And I appreciate that and and I
look forward to working with you
moving forward as as you stated
earlier looks like we're gonna
be doing some type of a shut
down or or modify
daily life for a few more months
at least into the fall so I
appreciate that I think were
gonna be in this for a little
bit longer so I would like to
work with you on that the other
question that was sent to me is
who are the state officials
authorized by the O. H. was that
specifically.
Mr chair Senator portal at this
time you know we have our myself
and other leaders India H. but I
don't have a list of names for
you I can certainly get that for
you but it includes like our
council myself and other leaders
within the O. H..
So on the enforcement of the of
the order of whose issuing the
citations I guess is is my main
question who is the D. O. H.
authorized to do that on on
behalf of the pure Department so
Mr chair Senator portal that's
coming through our general
counsel and they are working to
enforce what's going on as well
as with our division of health
improvement so we have to and to
introduce their that are taking
care of this.
And what is the process for
issuing a citation do of does
the I guess officers of the
authorized agent for the
department do they make a
written requests do they receive
approval to do the citation can
can you walk me through how that
process works.
Mr chairman to record all I
would have to actually send you
a document to actually explain
exactly how we do this in my
second month here I'm not
actually have to personally do
it but I'm happy to get that
information for you.
And and with that if you're
gonna do that can I get a copy
of of the requests
and and authorizations that were
made with regard to that I think
it would be
prudent for for this committee
or at least myself if others
don't want to die I definitely
want to see how all of this laid
out under under the statute
what is the process for one of
these businesses that's hit with
of these funds what is their
process to appeal it help what
does that look like
where where would someone find
that.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle I could
have my general counsel reach
out to you and give you that
information for sure.
And and Mr chair and doctors at
in rural somewhere.
Mr chair Senator could you
please clarify in rural
somewhere this is it within the
the the state rules the you know
that statute just lays out this
is the citation of where would
somebody go to find what they're
process would be to to yield one
of these.
Finds is that within rural.
So Mister chairs referral that's
actually that's another question
I have to follow up with you
want to give you the specifics
on where they would find that.
So it okay I'm assuming it's an
administrative code but
these are all just things that
came up in you know I'd like to
know L. look into it I'm sure I
can find it when the rule was
adopted if anybody knows feel
free to on that point but
it's my understanding that it's
a very lengthy process and
that's where a lot of the
concern is coming in with the
time frame you know it's like
forty five to sixty days and
then there's a hearing officer
appointed
then there's so many days after
that so.
It's almost half a year is how
it's been explained to to a few
the businesses that have reached
out to me in the last couple
days and so I really think in in
a I hope that you would agree Mr
chair and and doctor that you
know someone gets hit with a
fine and they have to wait a
hundred fifty days to find out
if they were right or wrong and
in the meantime they have to be
closed so hopefully that's
another thing that we can work
on to really see that out
because that's not fair that's
that's not justice that's that's
not the government working on
behalf of the people so
hopefully if you could look into
that and and maybe Mr chair and
and and Dr make a commitment to
to try to make that process a
little bit more friendly for the
public I would appreciate that
if you want to address that now
that that would be.
Appropriate Mr chair Dr.
Mr chair and I appreciate that
absolutely I'm open to I'm
definitely gonna look into that
and I will follow up with you
and make sure that we get an
understanding of this and really
a resolution.
In.
Mr chairman and Dr
You know it's been made public
that the state doesn't feel like
they're responsible for any of
the damages to the businesses
being closed down but I'm in
your opinion do you feel like
businesses sacrifice for the
public good for for the public
health of New Mexico.
Mr chair Dr Mr chair Senator I
feel like my focus says
secretary designate for the O.
H. is really about the health of
New Mexico and making sure that
we keep people safe within the
statute a law
certainly don't want to see that
your health is compromised
because your business is shut
down but my curfew is really
about keeping this virus
contained and from that vantage
point I think that we've done
the right thing I do think right
now it's time to figure out how
to help these businesses recover
and to get people back up and
running and to balance that with
containing the virus.
Mr chair and drive I really
appreciate that that balanced
approach I think it's long
overdue but the the question
really is is about the
businesses sacrificing for the
public health
and and I think they have and I
and I don't I don't think you
would disagree that by closing
their business whether forced or
voluntary the the point of that
was for the public good the
public health so I think it's
it's a little bit disingenuous
to demonise businesses basically
but then.
Have them sacrifice so much so I
think if we could just change
the tone Mr chair and drive and
I think you're you're the one
that can do that I've had
conversations with you and I and
I know you know how how
important it is and to rally
people and I I think that's one
of your strongest suits is that
you can rally people and so I I
think if we put out that you
know thank you businesses were
or sacrificing so much many of
them have been closed for a year
so I think if we can get that
message out there it'll build
You know the confidence of a lot
of these communities because
that's what we've seen is is
basically
Just constant constant talking
down to these businesses and
places and and we need to say
thank you thank you for for
doing your part going above and
beyond of what what we expected
of anyone else
One one other thing while I'm
I'm thinking about it
With regard to this balanced
approach that we're talking
about.
What.
This is what information goes
into the decisions on where we
reaching out to find that
balance to who do we bring in Mr
chair and drive to find that
balance between.
Keeping people safe from the
virus but also the other aspects
of of health within the state
whether it's mental health
Senator Moores alluded to
earlier about you know a lot of
the hospitals being closed down
early on so people weren't
having the surgeries knee
surgeries and quality of life
things
and then with education where we
what information are we getting
where we getting it from to to
try to strike that balance.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that I think the strike the
balance issue is really about
looking at multiple diverse
voices so we have our Economic
RecoveryCouncil we have health
care systems we have those who
have their businesses that have
just been closed having them at
the table to talk with us about
where we go next will be vital
to getting people back up and
running and I certainly agree
with thanking the businesses
that have the you know supported
us and that here to our public
health orders and so I really
think that there has to be a lot
of engagement of these diverse
voices and understanding what we
need to do next to help people
move through this pandemic and
certainly engaging behavioral
health collaborative and other
entities as he.
Thank you
You know there's been a lot done
with regard to of getting
resources out with DFA there's
federal money
and and the order specifically
directs all branches of state
government cooperate with
federal authority states and
private agencies to provide
resources and services necessary
to minimize physical and
economic harm can you speak
specifically to what the do it
D. O. H. has done the department
of health Mr Mr chair and
Secretary doesn't need doctor
what what have we done
specifically in that direction
to to help with the economic
impacts that's happened.
Mr Chairman report all what
we've done is we've really
ramped up our efforts around
addressing this pandemic to work
with the various communities so
you know when I mentioned the
contact tracing the testing the
vaccine distribution those
monies that we have received
have gone to those efforts you
have to think that we as a
department and public health
around the country typically is
under funded so you combine that
with the pandemic and you don't
have enough people to do all the
work and understanding where we
were in October November
December with the increased
cases the need to complete
contact tracing to ramp up
testing to do it efficiently the
money has gone to support those
efforts and I think we've been
very diligent about using that
money wisely but there is a lot
that's going on with D. S. D.
and our other divisions and so
we've had a lot of overtime
hours for our staff there's been
a lot to try to keep New Mexico
state.
And and thank you Mr chairman
and doctor I really appreciate
that I hope the the O. H. as we
move forward really goes as far
as they can with getting the
economic part of this back to
where it needs to be so so that
we don't see places like Henry's
barbecued Artesia leaving a huge
successful business that that
left artesian they moved their
family to Texas so that their
kids could be in school so I
think we're really at a point
our state red cross road where
we're going to see it great
exodus if we don't strike that
balance so I'm glad and happy of
Mister chair and and doctor that
that you're dedicated to that
and you understand the
importance of finding that
balance of of doing everything
we can but not going to the
point where it really causes
unintended consequences and
Harmon and you know we've we've
seen a lot of unintended
consequence of within a lot of
these orders early on and so I
hope we we've learned from those
so somewhere we we write in the
playbook what not to do
especially with regard to the
grocery stores in my district
you know there were people
standing out in the the the cold
waiting to go into grocery
stores because to we're shut
down and Ross will cause the
number it was a hard number
instead of a percentage of
employees and so one of the
larger grocery stores I has more
employees hit the threshold
they're shut down but then a
smaller store where people are
gonna be closer together and
more concentrated was left open
and so the unintended
consequence was we put people in
a more dangerous situation so we
really got to think those
through hopefully under your
leadership Mr chair and and
drive will will write this
playbook out the things we've
learned the that don't do it
again you know consider these
things
is is is important and I I hope
that we we write that down
somewhere for future generations
for the next time it's been a
alluded to.
Bye bye other legislators and
senators that you know will
probably see this again that not
maybe not this specific disease
but another
health or order
I'm curious to see how the the
numbers are calculated has been
up probably for five of the
questions out of my district
Mr chair doctors how the numbers
are calculated especially with
relate relation to of false
positives are are there is there
a kind of a number out there on
what percentage of tester false
positive and if there is to be
factored that in.
So Mister chair and senator
portal regarding how the numbers
are calculated we really are
looking at the test itself and
the positive or negative we're
not doing an assessment of the
this being a false positive test
that goes into factoring in the
sensitivity and specificity of
the test but as we look at
calculations around county level
basis we're looking at the
number of cases and forty
fourteen day period divided by
the population number of that
county devided by fourteen and
multiply by hundred thousand to
get to that eight per one
hundred thousand point regarding
positivity we're looking at the
number of positive testified
about the number of total yes a
fourteen day period removing
duplicates and that gets us out
that Cup one of the five percent
positivity and that's what we're
using as metrics now to decide
the ready occurring.
So Mr chair and and drive is
there a number out there that we
know of that's the false
positives.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle we know
the sensitivity of our P. C. R.
or genetic testing for the virus
and that that typically is
pretty high but the false
positive rate to pull that out
for you I don't have that number
now.
And and thank you Mr chair and
drive if I can get that as well
I think that's important that we
we factor that in there and and
use that as a
in just best practices that if
you have X. number and it's
understood that say one percent
or two percent are false
positives that it would be safe
and prudent to to go ahead and
apply that to those numbers just
to ensure that we we have the
most accurate information when
we're talking about counties
going red yellow green
especially since we saw I think
there's one county that missed
the yellow they were at ten
point one
you know they they're working
really hard to get there so that
the restaurants can vote and to
be at ten point one and not not
make it you know I really feel
Mr chair and drive and I sent a
letter to the governor's office
yesterday
and and I'll get to you as well
Rick Representative requesting
that we look at that how we're
doing the red yellow green and
and hopefully address that
moving forward and I can get a
copy of that to the committee as
well if they would like to see
it but you know I think looking
at the numbers we really need to
Take that into account false
positives and.
what effect that might have Ana
County going from.
Red yellow Mr.
I might jump in I just want to
encourage you that looking at
false positives is gonna be very
by the test that you use what
you're what you really want when
you think of sensitivity is true
positives are true positives
false negatives and so when
you're looking at that
positivity right if I may give
you some guidance here you
really want to understand that
we don't have duplicates in the
positives and that we're
capturing the true negatives in
the total number yes and so is
the true value searching for
false positives fight need to
given sort of lap is not going
to help you get to the answer
that you're looking for.
At M. Mr chair Dr thank you I
appreciate that you did address
one of my other questions
what within within your answer
so I appreciate that as well
now back to the the county
Red yellow green that Senator
Moores talk a little bit about
You know that's one of the
things that there were there was
something Mr chair Dr that stuck
out at me from the very
beginning that's a green county
is still fifty percent closed
with some businesses still a
hundred percent closed.
Which.
What businesses will still have
to remain closed even when we go
to green.
Mr chair Senator part is really
looking at the county level K.
rates and understanding we're
County as for risk for the
threat from Mexico that and the
fifty percent is that is not
zero cases is just the percent
is lower enough that it's safe
to have some indoor dining is an
example so we go to a higher
capacity fifty percent so the
fact that some businesses are
closed it really reflects the
level of positivity and again in
town T. where that business
recites and it's really
frustrating it this pandemic was
not something that any of us
orchestrated and we're hoping
that we'll never have to see it
in our lifetime again it is
probably going to be one become
one of those viruses that each
year we have to get an updated
version of the vaccine but we're
waiting to see what the evidence
shows us but this idea of we've
got a L. again balance what
state for the state while
keeping businesses open and you
know having a business
completely closed that person's
health is compromised because
there stress they can't pay
their bills and they're not
being able to take your family
so I completely get that and
what we have currently what I am
here to it where these metrics
about how to do this safely and
so what we're doing now is
navigating the regulatory and
being consistent in our
messaging but also keeping New
Mexico state.
Mr chairman Dr I I appreciate
that and you know I I I think
you hit the nail on the head
with the for who was health and
so what I think you know we're
strict we're starting to talk
about that balance of.
Being in those schools other
issues of the mental health of
some of these business owners
and just people in general but I
I think if I'm not mistaken
movie theaters or those types of
businesses even under green Mr
chair and drive I'm not gonna be
allowed to vote gems
I'm trying to remember I looked
at it last night but there was a
pretty good list of those
But they were mostly
recreational I think it's a
like.
Miniature golf sporting events
and things are those the ones
that are gonna be able open Mr
chair and drive even more green
so Mister chair Sir Karl if it's
a close recreational activity
and your risk for that being
able to keep your mask on are
not distance yes those are the
ones for still you can close.
Okay yeah that's what we're
gonna Mr chair and and Dr I was
looking for was that the close
contact recreational facilities
I appreciate that I'm trying to
go off of memory on that one
so those are your movie theaters
and and and things like that
Has that definition of what a
close
Contact facility recreational
facility as a definition close
changed over to I know you've
only been here since
December it's been three months
but has that definition closed
even prior to your service Mr
chair and drive.
Mr chair and senator portal I'm
not aware of the changing the
definition.
and.
Mr chair and drive having been
to Texas and a few times
recently
How do other states compare with
regard to these I know driving
through there were people at
movie theaters and and things
like that how do other states
compare we one of the only ones
Mr chair and and drive that
still have these facilities
closed.
Mr chairman Sir part we are
among the states are really
being aggressive and contain
contain the virus and being and
making sure keep in New Mexico
state I think that has really
been in our favor for quite some
time in Texas they were beyond
their capacity in our hospitals
so we do sort of among other
states we are more restrictive
but we are safer as well and so
when you look at Arizona and the
number of cases that they were
hit with when they were not as
restrictive it was pretty
devastating to the health care
system.
And
Mr chair Dr I appreciate that so
it's just a couple states I mean
will it maybe two or three that
that R. as restrictive as as we
are at this point.
Mr chair Senator part there are
states that have been a sort of
like New Hampshire Connecticut
that that are really doing a
good job so I don't think we're
alone I was more considering the
neighboring states is kind of a
comparison.
And and Mr Mr chair Dr what
about with the a state that the
is very similar in in population
and help spread out we are we
have a large state with a
population spread out
with with regard to say South
Dakota or some of the other
western states even Colorado you
know they didn't it's my
understanding Mr chairman and
and drive that they didn't go as
restricted they have opened as
fast as some of the others but
it's my understanding didn't
close out the coated in close at
all but Colorado didn't go as
restrictive are are we seeing
similar numbers Mr chair and Dr
to those states or is it just a
are we've just blown way out of
the water that I mean the
numbers can't lie.
Mr chair and your part what we
are seeing numbers now we're
actually on the downward trend
currently we were doing really
well until about October
November when we begin to sort
of relax and thank well let our
guards down I'm trying to make
sure I'm understanding your
question though is it where we
rank among other states or I'm
not sure I understand the
question and Mr chairman Dr
If we change chairs I apologize
Mr chair Dr I just other states
have done it differently I know
Colorado to our nor
didn't shut down to the level
that we did and I know they're
slowly opening up in an open
back as fast as some of the
others but how do our numbers
compare to theirs with
positivity rate infection rate
those types of numbers.
Mr chair and I believe it's
still Mr chair this time and
Senator Pirtle we're actually
it's at this point we're column
we were doing better and then we
had a surge and now we're column
is other states and so really
have to think about our
population is our large
geographically but we have a
very vulnerable populations
first chronic conditions and so
I think we're justified in being
more restrictive to keep those
people say given that risk of
COVID to those with chronic
conditions.
And and thank you Mr chair and
and drive for that
Your you've been the secretary
of health since the the
vaccinations have come out and
I think you guys have done a
fantastic job I know from time
to time there's a little
confusion from some of the
people within my district on
where to get the the vaccine and
so I would ask
maybe getting that information
to us within our specific
districts of the places that are
providing that
if we could do that Mr chair and
drive I had a teacher who
actually taught me back in high
school call me up you know
really concerned internet
seventies and still teaching
thank god for for teachers like
her that still want want to do
that
and and trying to get her to the
the help in the direction
what I think would be really
appreciate especially the rural
areas
on on where these locations are
that we can that we can direct
our constituents to get the
vaccine that look at the
vulnerable populations.
we calculated the impact of the
vaccinations on the transmission
Do you Mr chair Dr we have those
numbers on any reduction or or
anything.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle through
land all we've been able to look
at a modeling approach it looks
like the vaccines today have
impacted our cases by reducing
the about twenty percent.
And and Mr chair and drive I I
appreciate that and
what can you we try to avoid
using too many acronyms of what
can you just quickly Mr chair
and drive however what Landel is
yes Los Alamos National
Laboratory.
Mr chair Dr thank you that's
just where we we live in a world
of of acronyms and we're all
used to it but the public's
watching so we try to make sure
that they know who who that is
and and how that's working.
Is as there been a regression
analysis done
after the shut downs after the
vaccination Mr chair Dr really
see if we can map and track how
all of these decisions and and
policies and things that are
being implemented how effective
they are Mr chair Dr.
Mr chair I apologize I didn't
say Mr chair before again that
last answer Senator Pirtle there
I wouldn't say there's been a
regression we looked at so the
various components of masking
and other issues and its impact
on containment but not all
factors combined we've not done
that.
Okay so we don't we haven't had
a Mr chair Dr of a regression
analysis on
when we've got into the new this
red yellow green since the
vaccinations have come out
so we don't have anything like
that to really track how these
work we just the N. M. Mr chair
Dr I'm not trying to be critical
I just know we hear a lot that
we you know possibly and all of
these I I think it would be
great being of a numbers geek
like I am
Seeing if there could be some
type of a row of regression
analysis after these decisions
are made to see if they did have
a positive impact in you know
lowering the numbers
transmission rates how
vaccinations have done where we
are after so many doses of input
out compared to where we were
before yeah this is the kind of
information that you know I
think would really be
interesting to me to see how
that is progressing and how you
know how well an important
regression analysis would be
So Mr chair and drive it has has
those Department independently
without any direction
try to study or do an analysis
on on the effectiveness of the
shut downs has there been
anything independent from
you know of a request by the
legislature I guess we could
pass a memorial page you know
I'm not a big fan of memorials
Mr chair and and drive but
sometimes they are necessary to
just really no moving for
because there's already a lot of
policy being made there's a lot
of
statutes being put out there
with regard to health orders and
and powers and things like that
so I think this information is
going to be needed it's going to
be asked or I would definitely
like to know if it is is the
agency on its own currently
looking into the effectiveness
of the shut downs compared to I
mean I I know it's a little bit
apples to oranges and a lot of
situations but sometimes you can
get some some some good data
when you look at how other
states that it how we did it and
really see what shut downs were
the most what closures were the
most effective which ones you
know possibly we could do
without next time how they were
applied if they were applied
equitably you know those types
of things is the department Mr
chair and Dr doing any of that
internally currently.
Mr chair Senator alright we do
have a modeling team that meets
weekly and we have been
consistently over the last
several months looking at the
impact of best practices to
contain COVID and their impact
on the number of cases and
reducing them and that's still
ongoing sort of looking at the
vaccine rollout so we have some
of the information I'm happy to
share what we have available
today.
And
there's Mr chair okay I'll just
make sure you were still here Mr
chair and and Dr
So I think it be important if we
could get a regression analysis
to really determine whether.
The shut down
you know and and so many of
these businesses having to shut
down many of them forever
there's actually a great
burger joint big these downtown
dive that just announced on
Facebook a week ago that you
know he's he's out for good he's
out permanently
That we could get a regression
analysis and.
Also analysis of the of the shut
downs and and the effects and so
that we can see if they were
affected to the point that that
we think they were hope that
they were
would that be possible or
something we can work towards in
the future Mr chairman and
doctor.
Mr Chairman portal regression
analysis looking at dependent
variables on the right hand of
the equation and independent on
the left is something that we're
us ongoing but we're certainly
willing to work with you and
share more of that information.
Covered
Mr chair Dr I just really
appreciate you know you at you
sticking with us this is a very
important issue you know in my
district so I really appreciate
you
You know when we look at the the
economic damages and and putting
people
you know being out of work I I
think we're number one in
unemployment right now as a
state which hopefully we can get
the people back under employment
of because that's a big part of
mental health and just having a
little bit of of self worth and
pride in and and so I think we
we might be hurting people in
that way
But is there.
Considerations or studies are
things being done really looking
in the long term negative
effects of the shutdown them on
people that aren't getting the
virus
you know mental health wise and
and
you know
Binge eating that food should I
mean when we get stressed we do
all the things that were told
not to by our doctors increased
alcohol consumption people
turning to drugs and and other
substances to try to get through
it is is there
any studies or anything going
into any increase in these
activities
you know are we gonna see an
increase and and like diabetes
or alcoholism or drug dependency
and if there is are those being
considered when when the
decisions on these orders are
are are being put out.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle at this
time the focus is looking at
several prevalence vaccine
rollout and so but more studies
are going to be under way
currently those studies are not
underway.
And Mr chair Dr in as as we've
talked about I mean we're
definitely seeing health issues
with a lot of these business
owners and and and people that
do that can't go to a gym I had
no idea until recently that
people who are struggling
with substance abuse actually
use gems you know weightlifting
and exercise and things that it
took to get their endorphins
going and and adrenaline going
to
to help them.
Stay off of those substances
Mr chair and drive is is that
true and and it is that a an
actual thing of being a a
medical doctors that something
that people use to help with
substance abuse.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle of
people can use yoga and
meditation they can use exercise
so depends on the person and
what they choose as far as how
they deal with stress.
And.
Mr Mister chair and drive is
there any consideration with
with regard to to those types of
of people struggling with
substance abuse on on opening
gymnasiums and and
or not gymnasiums but the
exercise of facilities
So that they they get the
services they need maybe make
exceptions instead of it just
being a cookie cutter
everybody's closed our list.
Mr Perot I appreciate the
question I think what we need to
focus on is the underlying issue
around substance use disorder
and also about alternatives to
making sure you get your
exercise throughout the public
health orders we've not told
people to not exercise we
actually encourage them to get
outdoors walk but that Jim and
the use of that and so we can
keep people safe we have to be
more cautious and so but we're
not sort of looking at
the data on jams and then mental
health what we're looking at is
a date on COVID and death and
morbidity from COVID.
And and thank you Mr chair and
Dr
You know I I think as we this we
look at things and I'm not
saying that decisions were wrong
or or there were mistakes made
you know I'm I'm more looking
from here forward how do we go
from here forward how do we keep
people safe from the virus but
how do we protect people from
state suicides depression
We don't
having we we have to have a
better of education system which
I think we're working on
We saw food insecurity during
the pandemic with some of the
decisions you know BC rates up
possibly could rise diabetes
unemployment
You know I think all of these
things have gotten worse and so
I think moving forward if if you
can Mr chair and Dr hopefully
help us work to somewhere where
we can help keep those health
issues those social issues and
improve them because they
definitely are getting worse but
but we have to work moving
forward that the unintended
consequences don't become just
as bad as as what the original
intent was and finding that
balance and Mr chair Dr I
appreciate you know you already
stating that we're gonna work
towards that that balance that I
that I think is important with
overall health.
but you know there's so many
things that that.
Are going on with this you know
some of them are huge issues
like like I said with diabetes
and alcoholism and substance
abuse
but you know there's housing
issues across the state due to
what what we've had to do to to
try to stop the spread of COVID
They're the screenings that that
senator Morris talked about the
anxiety that people are having
to go through you know all of
these parents of of small
children's and children and the
and the anxiety that they go to
go through every day trying to
log on and and what I've seen my
my wife have to go through and
and speaking with our other
family members you know we have
to take that into account
hopefully get them the the
health coverage in the and the
need that they need but you know
really it's social isolation is
one of the ones that is so
detrimental to people and
you know I went many many months
without seeing my my grandmother
and and
you know Mr chair Dr that was
really really hard
for her.
Because she has the mentioned
she just didn't understand why.
You know we we weren't coming
around anymore so you know
there's so much around this
that that we really got to take
into account I know when the
Aging the one of the nursing
homes would allow
somebody within my district to
go in and and the promise he
made twenty twenty had is that
go to the facility was that he
wasn't just gonna you know.
Walking then and then never come
back in and it was really really
hurting his father's mental
health and thankfully we were
right able to work through and
get some things changed and and
stuff but there was a lot of
people that went through that a
lot of people feeling neglected
at and so hopefully we can.
Think about those when we make
our decisions that sometimes
with our our aging population
just having their seeing their
kiddos you know really brightens
their day and and and keeps them
of keep their health that
because your your perception of
the world in your just being
happy really helps your overall
health just just being happy and
smiling and and seeing other
people in interacting is is very
important so finding that
balance is is huge you know
we've been at this for about a
year and it's it's definitely
time
But I'm just really happy with
speaking with you Mr chair and
drive a month ago I could tell
you were writing down some of
the things I was saying and so
that was that was you know very
refreshing for me I know you'll
you'll do a fantastic job
Mr chair Dr you listen very well
and and I just appreciate you
taking these questions for my
district I mean these are these
are things that everybody's been
wanting to ask for a year and
then I think it's it's great
that they that they have the
opportunity especially with the
session that we're having to do
you know where they already feel
like they're they're not part of
the equation so this is a way
that we can really make them
feel part of it their questions
were asked they were answered so
Mr chairman and doctor I really
appreciated and I look forward
to supporting you today.
Thank you.
I thank you very much Senator
Pirtle for those questions just
let me know what the plan is at
this point it is now eleven
o'clock in the excellent range.
Are we I've been in touch with
secretary designate Ortiz worth
nine.
well and she has very graciously
agreed for us to move on her
confirmation hearing to Monday
Senator on that is the plan in
addition to that we were going
to have a discussion on the
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty eight.
That are many substitute we're
going to also one of.
Are to be wrapped on on to have
the discussion on Monday and
then I will votes on that
Chairman and vote on Wednesday
sort of the rules will be no
public comment on that bill on
Monday they'll be simply
orientation and discussion on
that bill in the committee on
Monday on that we will have a
chance to to to get to know that
bill better before we the
proceeds are I.
Will repeat also though anybody
who's interested in seeing the
committee substitute go ahead
and please email S. R. C. at and
let's just talk about to get a
copy of it the number the public
will be have to sent out to you
Appreciate the the in depth
discussion without I think I I I
think this is been a really
insightful hearing that a lot of
important issues that need to be
explored out with that let me
give it over to senator Ortiz
the piano and senator you know
about ten more minutes that we
can do in the in the committee
of if you want to ask a couple
more questions before making a
much.
Mr I yes so just just on your
point about the forty are also
are simple forty to have a to a
two for that
so to that you're talking about
yet so that we keep an eye out
for what's the difference you so
the only time I will I make sure
the restitution number were
working off of this to the
doctor okay thank you thank you
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez and the secretary
designate Colin system.
I agree with Senator Pirtle that
you immensely qualified for this
position.
Thank you it's always a balance
in state government when you
bring people in who haven't been
part of the previous department
they're gonna head previously
Changes in disadvantages I think
it's really high time that we
brought in somebody from
outside.
With a great background you have
to a public health agency in the
state to really give us a chance
to.
Revitalize or you public health
and it's not just I mean this is
the COVID obviously now is is
everybody's been consumed with
our concern or that.
No responding to it in with the
effects of impairment how we
clawed our way out of this.
But what I really look forward
to in your tenure at the health
department to would be how we
can revitalize Public Health
Division.
I saw a figure the other day
that we now are spending less
than two percent of the state
budget on public health.
We're spending something like
twenty percent on Medicaid
alone.
And that imbalance between the
effort in dealing with the
social causes health problems.
And heading them off before they
become medical problems.
Dealing with the after effects
of it which is where we're
putting all our energy and now
we keep washing washing the the
course is washed down the river
instead of running up to the top
find out what's causing all
these deaths that are getting
into the water.
So I would hope by next summer.
The the the pandemic response
our response to the pandemic
within sufficiently established
that we could have you come to
the interim committee on health
and Human Services and really
share with the initiatives you
might and developed by then or
maybe already have.
For how we can revitalize the
public health work in the state.
Begin integrating.
Our efforts in dealing with the
social determinants of health
with.
Our on going programs which you
really impoverished over the
last ten or twelve years I have
to tell you we we probably have
less capacity now than we did
ten or twelve years ago because
so much of the focus is been on.
We casualties the the the ill
effects rather than how we
prevent them from happening in
the first place so wonder if you
had just a few minutes to spare
with us you're thinking on on
that particular aspect of your
job.
Mr.
You know thank you for that
question I do see that beyond
the pandemic although we're
going to have COVID with us for
quite some time that we need to
look at optional health for all
New Mexicans and that really
requires looking at our funding
how we can increase that funding
and also looking at communities
that are most at risk and what
their needs are and coming up
with a strategy to really reach
out to those who are at risk for
mental health disorders the
poverty PED's Education and
ensuring that we have a
comprehensive plan to move New
Mexico forward to improve the
health for everyone.
I appreciate hearing that in and
I look forward to to the ongoing
conversation with you through
that interim committee on health
and Human Services so we can
begin shaping some legislative
response to the to these issues.
For a long time I've been
working in my colleagues and
working on.
Making sure we have Medicaid
adequately funded Medicaid
adequately funded it's such a
temptation because the federal
match is so.
So very strong.
Forty one
dollar we appropriate brings in
for federal dollars.
Session we really have to start
asking is.
What are those dollars doing for
the overall health of New Mexico
we're sending them we're getting
the money ciation Moser
guarantee their monthly
capitation the doctors are
getting paid the hospitals are
getting paid the nursing homes
are getting a.
But our people's health.
Conditions getting improved at
all.
And that's I think what we
really should be focusing on the
overall level of health wellness
in our state.
And.
So I look forward to that I just
wanted to make one other comment
about your.
Your of performance so far on
the job.
I just I just swell with pride
when I see the not just the
numbers of.
Basis coming down steadily is a
bit over the last month and a
half.
The incredible business or
vaccination program and when I
saw this in the paper this
morning.
We had a minister in.
To present more doses than the
ones we have been delivering to
a confused those things.
Hundred to presenter and three
percent of all the actions of
the new minister.
No states are going to manage
that.
Just congratulations thank you
very much thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much what is the
our pleasure of the committee at
this time.
Would you pass Mr chair I'm
sorry about.
That's your response your
sponsor.
Thank you Senator Mr.
Yes we
are on grant our motion from
Senator Lopez with a second from
senator Morris got a vote
and is there anything else come
before the committee the four we
are before we roll singer when
seeking recognition Miss Vigil
will you please call the roll
Senator Baca.
Yes Senator Lopez.
Yes senator Morris yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator Duhigg.
Yes and senator Ivey Soto yes
ma'am what was about.
And two zero.
Questions are madam secretary
doesn't appears you very soon
grins that the president part of
your title all right you have a
unanimous do pass recommendation
from the Senate rules committee.
Mr chair Senator Lopez members
of the committee thank you so
much it's an honor.
And I'm in.
And I.
Important issues that which is
the reason why we continued on
our with that with the hearing
and and moved other things off
I'm you know I did not get a
chance to ask questions today
during the hearing but but I
will just tell you that the
conversation I had with you
prior to the hearing was one
that I just moved on they are
like the and and I just really
appreciate the work that you're
doing for New Mexico and and and
your ability to synthesize
things happening out in the
world in terms of of the of the
responsibilities of the
department of health is really
and costs.
So thank you very much for that
and so let me just let the
committee in our first of all as
indicated before that does
finalize the work of the
committee today the the tool to
number on Senate bill forty
eight will be working off of is
two one nine eight eight one
point two
eight eight one point two and
even though the LFC normally
does not do enough money on the
proposed committees I did get
word from the secretary of
state's office that they're
planning to share over the
weekend there are there are
Alice's and and there FIR
implements that they would
normally send the LFC that will
be sent out to the committee so
the committee can have that in
advance of Monday and once again
in terms of that bill on Monday
we will not take public comment
on it the world have interviewed
for the sponsors of the bill and
and the opportunity for members
to ask questions and then that
there will come up for vote on
Wednesday given our schedule of
four sessions that will not
delay the bill at all in its
progress forward so are some of
that are thank you very much and
I will see everybody on the
Senate floor in a few minutes
Representative said was
committee is non response and
while in recess.
