Senate rules committee thank you
all for being patience let me
just give everybody a little
sense of the of the morning
we're going to be starting off
this morning with Senate bill
three point two nine.
and then based on where we are
after that bill we are
if we have enough time we'll go
to S. J. R. nine if not we'll go
directly to Senate bill forty
eight well caucuses are
caucusing today at ten thirty so
they'll be hard stop on Senate
bill forty eight.
what we're gonna shoot for ten
fifteen but certainly no later
than than ten twenty we're gonna
take a motion and and both where
we're at on that bill at that
time I do see several people.
I do see several people who are
log in the speaker I'm presuming
most of them on Senate bill
forty eight we will get to you
when we get to that bills given
where we are with the caucus
meeting this morning I am going
to ask everybody to be sustained
with regard to your comments
make your point so we know what
your issue is in support or
against an offense against
please be specific and that way
we can move on and the committee
will have time to actually do
some work on the bill if we need
to be of I just also want to
remind everybody with regard to
set of a forty eight this is the
first hearing for that built the
first committee so there may be
some issues that can identified
with where we end up
Not wanting to do something on
the fly but instead of working
towards some of the things we
get Senate Judiciary Committee.
but with that let us go to
Senate bill three fifty nine
Senator Candelaria welcome back
to the Senate rules committee is
going to practice our thank you
Mr chairman thank you it's
always a pleasure and members of
the committee members of the
public good morning Senate bill
three fifty nine.
Seeks to.
Propose a new solution to what I
think is a.
Fortunate loophole in our law
that that we really have no
choice about so as as the
committee knows New Mexico law
contemplates and provides for
prohibited period that is a
restriction on the ability of
legislators and a sitting
governor to request or solicit
rather campaign contributions
for any office that is covered
by the campaign finance
reporting.
where the election now
Federal offices of course are
not covered by either of those
acts and so during the
prohibited period under our
current law.
At the sitting legislator or
sitting governor can solicit
campaign contributions for a
federal office there is no
restriction and that is probably
for good reason as most likely
your FIR FIR notes regarding the
original form of this bill which
simply order to include federal
offices in the prohibited period
the federal government has
basically tied our hands the
doctrine of federal privacy and
preemption.
Actually I do agree with the
opinion from the attorney
general's office and some other
folks that I've been able to
consult in the weeks since I
introduced this bill that we as
a legislature quite frankly do
not have the power to prohibit a
legislator or governor from
soliciting campaign
contributions for federal office
during appurtenant period now I
disagree with that as a as
probably a states rights
proponent because I recognize
like the rest of this committee
that New Mexico does have a
compelling interest in
prohibiting the solicitation of
contributions when we are in our
positions making law and making
decisions on public financing I
want to be clear that this
legislation you know I don't
mean to imply in any way that
you know any of the folks who
are currently serving in running
for Congress have done anything
wrong.
But that's not the point we make
this law does not really
interested in individuals it's
interested in a principle which
is that we as a legislature have
concluded that the risk of undue
influence is too great so we
infringe upon our first
amendment rights to solicit
contributions so I have
submitted a committee substitute
Mr chairman to this committee
since we do not have the
authority to actually prohibits.
Legislators or the governor from
soliciting campaign
contributions for federal office
what I propose is instead the
state exercise our ability to
require a portion.
so what this committee
substitute does is it's simply
requires that a sitting
legislator or sitting governor
who engages in the active
soliciting contributions for a
federal office must file reports
for every ten day period during
the prohibited period setting
forth number one they solicited
a campaign contribution from and
it it what money if any was
donated by that person now
you'll know Mr chairman and
members that that reporting
requirement is certainly
different than the reporting
requirements applicable to
federal candidates under federal
law federal Canada it as I
understand it does not have to
report all the individuals they
solicited money from but who
ultimately did not make a
contribution this reporting
requirement is slightly
different of course because our
interest as a legislature is to
prohibit the solicitation right
we in the are prohibited period
statute does not prohibit us
from receiving contributions
rather from soliciting them.
So what this legislation does is
it continues to allow sitting
legislators and the any governor
becomes a candidate for federal
office during the prohibited
period to solicit contributions
but it simply states that we as
the public have the right to
know who those asks are being
made us I will submit to the
committee that I believe this
approach is is not.
Is not preempted by federal law
because it does not conflict
with federal law for example an
individual legislator who is a
candidate for Congress can
easily comply with federal law
in submitting their reports and
engaging in their protected
activity and they can
simultaneously complied with
their duty under this new state
law to file these reports
filing of these reports does not
frustrate preclude or prevent an
individual running for federal
office from enjoying the full
scope of their rights under the
first amendment and under
federal campaign finance law so
Mister chairman that is what the
legislation does in its revised
form I'm happy to answer any
questions I truly appreciate the
committee dedicating time to
have this discussion I
introduced this bill because I
think it is a matter of public
concern and we should not we we
should we should always be
concerned about making sure that
our laws involving keep pace
with with elections which is the
chairman knows are ever evolving
beast so thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
You're on mute Mr chairman thank
you very much and actually if we
can if we can ask the US to
Meister to move up the order so
we can see what comes on the
next page well the other
direction.
Very good but leave that on the
on the screen.
All right now so the public can
see that and first of all Mister
Roberts is there anybody who
just signed up to speak on this
bill.
Mr chair there's now of non
registered for public comment.
Right well in that case let us
go to questions and comments
from committee and senator do
head.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Candelaria so I'm I'm
wondering and and and I'm
looking in the election code
now.
For a definition of solicits.
I'm not finding one in the
general definition section and
and looking under article
nineteen campaign practices I'm
not finding when they're either
so what I was wondering how this
would work if if there is a a
mass email sent out
is every person who sent an
email reported as someone who is
listed at or if there if you
just have an open donation link
on your website
and in a message asking for
contributions is anyone who who
has visited your website someone
needs to be reported as someone
who is listed at I just want to
help what a solicitation mean
here and and how would that
work.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and and I agree
you know coming in for this
committee is this like sort of
trying to defend a composition
you written in front of Mozart
yes I'm very afraid of miss
stepping on election of election
law but having reviewed the the
election preparation for this
hearing I do agree with that was
senator to explain Mr chairman
that to my understanding solicit
is not defined in the existing
statute which sets forward the
program the the prohibited
period right so this bill is
building upon the existing
statutory framework this bill
does not seek to offer a
definition of solicit that is
certainly something that I would
yield to the to the wisdom of
this committee of if this feels
that providing that guidance is
necessary I would share if in if
in my experience Mr Chairman
though in the absence of a
specific definition doesn't mean
we're sort of without sort of
guidance I think from out
statutory construction.
Steinborn if the term is not
specifically defined it's given
its ordinary and common meeting
which means that I think the
secretary of state ethics office
imports will just look to hi
there Webster's are blacks law
dictionary for that guidance
so I I'm sort of agnostic on on
taking a stricter position on to
finding out what solicitation
means that wasn't really my
concern but I certainly
understand the point and we'll
sort of leave that discussion of
of the committee thank you Mr
chairman and senator.
Thank you very much and I will
also inform senator Neville
centers doing it Candelaria that
solicit as used in this context
is actually defined what I miss.
Okay there we go.
And and Mr chair do you know
what that role as I would I
would just like to look at our
certainly let me ask if the
secretary of state's office
could provide that will for us
and we can go back if you like
at that point.
Thank you madam rule let us now
and use of the floor but while
we're waiting for that to we go
to center to speak.
Yes what senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
want to.
Question I am not will will
worsen the election because so I
I need to understand.
Whether it's just for.
So our current prohibition
during the blackout period
doesn't extend to anybody
running for federal or or
federal offices.
Mr chairman that it worked the
the issue is also flag for me we
could turn to ethics commission
issued an advisory opinion
particularly on this point and
they concluded and I agree with
their conclusion ultimately
though I thought it was an
important topic for the
legislature to have this
discussion right
but I do agree with their
conclusion that that the senator
you are correct that the current
lack of.
Prohibited period does not apply
when the candidates question is
running for federal office.
Course your your your bill has
Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria your bill as of an
emergency clause but it would we
don't need that emergency
clause.
Mr chairman I right I I think we
need to share I I think we do
from the perspective that we we
do currently have several
persons running for federal
office who no implication of
impropriety please understand me
but who are actively soliciting
contributions.
this.
Healthy from persons who have
business and from the
legislature so I I do think it
is an emergency and I just.
Well.
Mr chairman and senator Wirth
the the bill even as an
emergency clause wouldn't take
effect until it's signed by the
governor which.
It's we're just would probably
be the last week of the section.
There wouldn't be any
requirement for reporting.
So Mister chairman I think thank
you make a good point Mr
chairman I think there's there's
two certification popping up one
is I think I think that putting
this framework in place is
important for the future as you
know it's likely this will
happen again right in terms of
your point Mr chairman I would
be I Mr Senator while also Mr
chairman Mr chair I would be if
I would be fine with a
What is the word I'm looking for
including a specific clause
Representative retroactivity
clause
stating that upon signature the
requirements of this act we'll
go will become effective as of
the beginning of this period
that will require some
additional language because of
course if it's a retroactive
situation the filer and that
question will not have.
fact been able to comply with
the ten day to day reporting
schedule so we would simply I
think require one report to be
filed at the end or as soon as
practicable.
Okay Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria one last point that I
wanted to ask about.
The the the would be the actual
reception of the funds rather
than the solicitation that we
would be concerned about.
Mr chairman del you know when we
look at the prohibited period
the the the the intent and I
think the reason and purpose
behind the prohibited period is
to prohibit this the active
solicitation itself.
we can we can receive
contributions I asked people to
not send me money or
contributions during the session
because of the appearance but
the the restriction is not on us
from receiving money it's it's
not on us from depositing money
on this the precondition on us
is on the act us that is where
the legislature has identified I
think the risks for undue
influence to exist is in that
active solicitation.
Mr chairman and senator yeah I
understand that but.
We're not in any way restricting
that we're just asking that it
be reported.
And it would be the actual money
coming in this issue what if I
am going to be an ethics
violation it would be reflected
in money coming in.
And that would be the.
I mean I don't know how you're
going to actually report
solicitation if somebody really
wants to influence you know use
their position as a state
legislator to try to garner.
Favor with some.
By.
Bryce usually selling their vote
on a on a matter before the
legislature.
There are reports that.
Is that unethical in the first
place we just.
I mean how are you going to show
you how it ever be proven.
Mr chair.
I think that's an argument
against campaign reporting in
general which is of course the
the ethical people are going to
act ethically so why do we
require any campaign reporting
because there is value in
ensuring that information is
accessible to the public for
them to do that draw their own
conclusions and for them to have
the information I do not think
it's appropriate Mr chairman to
allow us sitting legislator who
is voting on matters to not to
be prohibited from soliciting
money campaign contributions for
state office for person a who
has business before them in
their capacity for their state
campaign but that same
legislator can solicit money
from that same person with
business before the legislature
for a federal office and if any
person a has interest about the
federal and state level which
most large special interests do
there in lies the problem I mean
it's sort of that tax policy re
here
you know and.
The only reason this gentleman
just in closing that it is a
reporting requirement is because
federal campaign finance law is
what it is.
Yeah and I understand Mister
chairman Senator Candelaria I
understand federal requirements
differ from the station we don't
for example report.
Solicitations we record.
Reception will report full who's
giving us money and that that's
that's using this this different
about what you're asking the
report to be done and and so I I
just raise that question because
it does seem.
Question
you identified a little patch of
I don't think we need emergency
clause I don't know if making it
right direction is going to be
of any use whatsoever this year
but I will certainly stand and
listen to the rest of the day
and I think you've got a good
idea here is we need to to build
on thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Very well let me go back to his.
Thank you Mr chairman so so I I
really like the intent of the of
this bill and I think it you
have definitely highlighted a
loophole that needs to be
addressed I I looked at the
definition of solicitation and
and then the C. R. one dash ten
dash thirteen.
But but it doesn't.
It doesn't actually solve my
concern so.
As legislators when we go into
it going are prohibited period
we all take down our active
links from our website because
that is it's considered to be a
solicitation if that is is there
and I think under our current
definition of solicitation
having that they're having up a
link would qualify under this
bill as well and I'm just
wondering how you.
How you effectively report that
because anyone who goes to the
website I think under under the
our our current system would be
considered as someone who was
solicited and so I.
I'm just wondering I don't know
if there would be a carve out
specifically for that or or what
how that could be addressed but
I think that is I think this is
something that's going to and
end up resulting in a bunch of
complaints otherwise this is yes
so Mister chairman I think you I
think I certainly appreciate the
senator's point on that
I think one one response would
be I think let me let me say
what I think would be necessary
I I think it could be
appropriate and I don't think it
be unfriendly to the legislation
or its intent that the that
solicitation for purposes of
this section would be qualified
in some way to prove to clarify
that it does not pertain to sort
of general access solicitation
that are you know posting a link
to a website tweeting a donation
link X. cetera I think what I'm
really with what I am truly
concerned about Mr Chairman here
is the phone call is picking up
the phone calling someone who
has interest in front of the
state and federal government and
saying Hey I can ask you for
money for my state office can
you give us you know five
thousand because I'm running for
Congress you know I think that
is substantively different so I
appreciate the senator's point
and I think that would also be
an appropriate area maybe to
delve into the the more the more
sort of cheeky answer.
But you know just sort of as an
observation is enough
theoretically that website could
produce its cookie log for you
know the entire period but I
think that would be kind of
absurd so I think the Senators
point is well taken and perhaps
some fine tuning of what this
active solicitation means within
the context of this reporting
requirement may be appropriate.
Thank you Mr chair Senator and
I'm and I apologize I.
I restarted my computer and so I
I felt I lost the.
Of backs it up on the screen
there I just want to check one
thing see if I have another
issue
No I don't
that's all I have Mister chair.
Well thank you very much
why are.
I don't see anybody else offhand
that seeking the floor right now
Senator I have
Mr chairman senator Morris is
trying to get your attention
well in that case I think we
should give it to a.
I was either trying to get his
attention or just run away way
to speed up around
And I apologize I got on a
little bit late senator
Candelaria Mr chair at with what
I saw this bill obviously we
know the issue with half
legislature currently running
for CD one but
is a my understanding and my
addresses are ready is that
because so speakers was able
without lawsuit last year
against
this will stop your store is
able transfer is federal money
to the state governor's race.
It.
That's what concerns me about
that if your state legislator
raised money and then you can
actually go ahead later on in
France that money back to your
state race not successful with
this bill addressed that issue
because you can raise it really
in the state anyone of us can
say we're going to run for
Congress what raise money right
now
Not really running campaign
Powdrell campaign account and
then transfer that back into our
State Council for a couple years
ago with that address that the
speaker Senator.
Mr chairman.
I think this is an opportune
time for me to announce that I
will be running for the first
congressional district.
What part of the spirit of
debate against you Senator I
love I love spirited debate now
Mr chairman in all serious not
your business now this this
legislation now in its current
format as as a reporting
scheme essentially would not
prohibit or seek to regulate in
any way the ability of a
candidates who either had six
consecutive or four successive.
Campaigns for federal and state
office from transferring the
federal balance to a state
account.
So right now it every all
everyone was on the soon to say
we're running for city one lives
are at stake considering
proceeding once the should not
report with the districts put up
our links on our websites
collect money
make sure order over five
thousand dollars or so we're
going to do the federal if
at the C. requirements and the
transfer that money into our
state accounts.
If you inclined Mr Chairman one
was so inclined as way as way I
understand the situation as you
explained it Senator I I I think
that's a possibility as as I
said I do not claim to be an
expert in election law so this
is based on my own understanding
and readings but I can be
corrected this thank you Mr
chair thank you senator and
artificially amounts by race for
CD one and you all my witnesses
thank you.
Thank you very much I also
Senator Candelaria I like the
concept of the of the bill I
think you could be a simpler
Bill okay and so if I may
suggest what might effectively
be a substitute this have you.
let me just put up on the screen
I think this is really all we
need right here.
R. is for every ten days of the
privative period as defined in
section one dash nineteen of
thirty four point one a person
serving an apple office our
report with secretary state
setting forth the persons from
whom campaign contributions were
received or pledged for the
federal office during the ten
day period of the amount donated
or pledged.
The reports published session be
filed within two days after the
end of the standing period now
this does check discussed take
out the solicit part of it but
but excludes pledged money so
that way somebody says well let
me give it to you after the
session.
What be included here.
And so
but I think and and and and by
and by keeping at the privative
period in one sentence to report
one answering replicable office
means then that we don't end up
with any conflict between
between which offices are
covered.
because for example of two years
ago I think we included a second
statement for their land
commissioner with included state
treasurer as people in private
appeared as well this way it
just it it is in a seamless
between the two R. what is your
thought all the price go to the
committee on this what is your
thought on on this your language
Mr chairman it is it is friendly
if they and I think this is a
better approach.
Very nice are there are there
are let me America's move make a
motion that we that we are.
Right the the the language of
the current bill
and that we that we insert in
lieu of four section one.
and we insert in lieu thereof
are what is up on the screen
section two would remain which
is the which is the.
Our emergency clause.
Are there any questions from the
committee.
Is there any objection by the
committee.
No objections this is now the
the amended substituting of
substitute a substitute it would
be appointed to as reported out
that we have before us.
This is before us is there any
further discussion by the
committee on this matter.
store.
Thank you Mr chairman so.
Could you put up the substitute
and show us what remains of
that.
Not yours.
It may be easier for me just to
tell you.
What remains of the substitutes
is the emergency calls.
And the title and any other
looking which can you just put
it back up so that we can do
where you're substituting.
Right M. A. out certainly out
ball will have missed Mr chair
with it so Senator Bach and
seven problems semesters are for
up to no problem he is he is now
in thank you for point out yeah
and actually we would have to on
line fourteen strike.
So let's of that or any be
received or pledged.
I'm gonna be during eight
prohibited period would be the
language online forty so we
would we would change will
change our.
Our.
Line fourteen to receive your
pledge during the prohibited
period.
Lad and we would also change our
line eleven and twelve in New
applicables Office.
In an applicant Office.
Receive your pledge during the
prohibited period.
Any other questions Mr chairman
Kate you scroll down and show us
the rest of the substitute so
you've replaced a and B. comply
with are you having C. remain
about I replaced a BMC okay and
then the so the emergency clause
remains Sir right thank you
you're very welcome.
Any other questions are
certificate.
Thank you Mr chairman just just
to be clear that
You're you're substituting
language includes the words
federal office somewhere in
there.
You know I don't remember
exactly how you had a word in
the.
I didn't remember that term
first running for federal
office.
That is.
Yes yes the on the screen now
that you pointed out that as I
was typing furiously I left the
most essential part.
Very good and and again was the
need for the emergency clause is
is crucial or.
I think put more seats clause is
applicables aux as of the
governor's signature and the
governor can decide at what
point you would like to sign it
depending upon when we get this
bill up to the governor.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
But I still don't see it.
Right.
Representative we.
Me after sharing my screen.
And who is a candidate for
federal office right there.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
And then I'm just simply putting
so given to the committee
secretary.
The the title and thank you
Senator Stewart you always
remember look at the title and I
always forget to look at the
title.
And so but but the the title
would be as as I as I indicated
to the committee is there any
Any further discussion on this
bill.
Very well saying no other
discussion let me just if you
made that way we know exactly
what we're voting on.
Without the amendment is with
that are.
And then what if you're ready
then I'll make the motion which
are ready Mr chair.
On what is the political office
would be that which is defined
in one dash nineteen to serve a
purpose.
Getting up.
R. and then and then again of
the diversity clause would
remain.
In less on screen display that's
there we go that we have the
updated title.
R. on the sub Department and
then that would be all of
section one is replaced with
these words right here and then
we have the but are.
I.
It's just we just adult
readopted since you changed it
certainly is is there any
objection to the amended
language that is on the screen
to be the main motion for us.
Saying that is the main motion
before us right well is there
anybody else who would like to
speak as to the as for the
motion before us this would be
so the motion Senator Moores
would be a do not pass on three
fifty nine and a do pass on the
Senate rules committee
substitute percent about three
fifty nine points to.
Mr chair what you set.
Well let's stated so we have.
a motion before us.
Several of us.
I just second the motion Mr
chairman very well see nobody
else seeking recognition Miss
Vigil please call the roll
back up.
Senator.
Yes Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Moores I'm not sure you
heard box we did say yes of
course yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator doing yes and senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am what was
about ten zero Sir very well
Senator Candelaria
congratulations on a vote of ten
to zero you have a do pass on
your revised Committee
substitute and by echoing the US
and
I thank you very much for coming
to the Senate rules committee
given the time and the fact that
we've caucus if it's okay we're
gonna go proceed now to Senate
bill forty eight that we will be
able to take
public comment as well thank you
senator Chandler for doing your
and and for the excellent
Committee here thank you.
Okay so are we now move them to
Senate bill forty eight.
And the
And it sells Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman bill.
This is a the updated substitute
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight are we did start this bill
the last.
committee meeting you had and we
have started discussion on it
there has been quite a better
discussion in between the two
places are I do have with me
today Ellen white as to be the
expert witness went with me and
Kerry thank you with the
secretary of state's office also
with me to explain our our to
the address some technical
changes I don't know that we
need to talk about a whole lot
of what I've already covered.
With the previous explanation so
with that due to the time
constraints I'm just happy to to
be heard today.
And present this bill to you and
stand for questions Mr Chairman.
Well so we have a number of
people signed up for public
comment on this bill let me
announce a couple of things
before going to public comment.
The first is the the Meister
oil and equipment each person
for public comment as we are
discuss as the previous person
is finishing their comments
about that as a previous
presentation or comments and
that way you will be connected
as you come in.
When you see your screen
activate please.
I found all the webcast there is
a doctor twenty six second delay
and if you don't but the signing
webcast and turn on the sound of
your soon we'll keep asking you
to speak and you will say
nothing at some point will roll
you over to go to somebody else
the other thing just given where
we are on time on that ask each
each person to speak for I want
to put in here where it's
talking about what you're still
on thank you.
Ask each person in our people
signed up to speak for about a
minute but if you go past ninety
seconds what the right now I
will the mute button at that
point so if you can be
respectful of others and given
the committee time to have this
discussion that would be helpful
for everybody on the committee
and so with that let us begin
with public comment and I
believe the first person we have
is Catherine sorry so please
proceed.
I thank you chairman my name's
Clark I'm the Santa Fe county
clerk I am in support of this
bill there was a lot of work
that went on between Senator was
the secretary of state and the
clerks affiliate I have
committed to doing same day
voter registration but with this
bill allows me to do is if there
is one precinct where I cannot
do saying go to registration due
to internet connectivity that
will be an all or nothing and
that's very important to me
because I have made a commitment
to do same day voter
registration but I know every
clerk may not have the
logistical ability to do so this
bill also allows for us to
protect private information of
voters which was an issue in the
background of this bill and I
like to say that there are some
things in this bill that I
really did ask for which is more
help
Of different kinds of coworkers
at polling places specifically
for our same day voter
registration so that way I can
utilize all the numbers of
people who want help and here
and workers coworkers on this
really sort of expands the
ability of the clerk to have a
lot of help and much needed help
especially during the pandemic
for running elections so I would
hope that the committee could
support this bill thank you so
much thank you very much
appreciate that presenters stay
within time next we move to a Mr
popcorn the staff or please
proceed.
The.
What.
Mr Chairman is having difficulty
with the pop are the ideal
The phone up there yes we can
hear you.
Very good thank you for time to
speak with you about this very
important issue the original
bill was like twenty one pages
and has ballooned to two hundred
and twenty one some odd pages I
find it shocking that amount of
new material was added to the
bill.
Reading through that I'm stunned
by the efforts to to drag a
local secrecy over the election
code I find it quite shocks in
place where we've already been
as as minority we've been
excluded from the process many
decision points and this is
about the confidence of the
election and at this particular
moment in time it is there's
serious questions about the
dominion machines and the
ability of their their ability
to be secure I I I certainly
think that this is a on efforts
by the majority to impose
tyranny.
Language but the position of
kicking us out of the process
the decisions are actually made
is a shocking and a continued
process of what's happened with
the election code since actually
since Dieter rams time frame and
and the first set of revisions
that came out during that time
frame I'm sure I'm close to my
to my minute minute and a half
thank you for your time thank
you very much miss Hawthorne
appreciate your participation
very much R. Mister Roberts
would we have next.
Mr chairman Joe galli and.
Joining meaning.
I joke Alliance options proceed.
Joe the long please hi thank you
chairman members of the
committee my name is Caroline
and the program director for
America votes New Mexico thank
you members of this committee
and the secretary of state's the
county clerk's working to
administering one of the best
and most secure elections in the
country right here in New
Mexico.
America votes understands the
need for election code
improvements for this year and
urging the committee to support
SB forty eight with amendments
to address some of the issues in
the committee substitute two
thousand twenty over one hundred
thousand voters voted by
absentee applications sent by
third party.
page thirty six line three of
the committee substitute FOR SB
forty as written would take away
this Avenue of voting.
Secondly the most confusion and
explaining the voting process to
the public stems from non
uniform rules in twenty twenty
one existing law states that New
Mexico of same day registration
at every election day voting
location Janet matter where you
live in downtown Albuquerque or
rural Travis county every
citizen should have equal access
to registration and voting
committee substitute would
instill non uniform rules for
same day registration and
America votes supports universal
same day registration despite
those two points many changes in
the bill would be solid
technical improvements the way
the state of New Mexico conducts
elections and I put my trust in
legislators of this committee to
make necessary changes to SB
forty eight and under those
conditions we urge you to pass
thank you so members the
committee thank you very much Mr
Mason please proceed.
Please I'm intercepted State.
Good morning chairman Ivy Soto
members the rules committee my
name is Dick Mason and I am sure
the action committee the league
of women voters of New Mexico I
want to thank the sponsor and
not on this legislation and the
secretary of state for their
work on amending SB forty eight
with this current members of the
government Representative Mexico
can support just letters
legislation urging to pass
given.
They would prefer.
That SB forty eight be further
amended to allow same day voter
registration at all though the
locations thank you.
Thank you very much for your
sickness Mr myself Mister
humanness.
Yes hello good morning Mister
chair members of the committee
although there are some
excellent pieces in this
committee so but we have some
concerns with that as we and our
concerns are with the roll back
of same day registration on
Monday the secretary of state
presented the number of New
Mexicans use a current same day
registration through the
Saturday before.
That number was over ten
thousand for the general
election and half of those New
Mexicans for first time
registrants those numbers show
that same day registration was a
good piece of legislation Madam
chair New Mexicans have the
ability to vote.
Rolling back same day
registration would
disenfranchise voters by
eliminating the ability to
register or correct their
registration without allowing
same day registration to move
forward in its it is unknown how
many New Mexicans this rollback
would impact New Mexico has been
a national leader in elections
and rolling back same day
registration does just the
opposite same day registration
needs to remain in place to
ensure not a single individuals
disfranchised we would continue
we should continue forging
forward with good voting
policies that have been leading
the country I urge the committee
to take a hard look at rolling
vaccine the registration and the
negative impact it would bring
prior to advancing this measure
thank you Sir.
Thank you very much mystery
menace are we now move to
Mysteron all please proceed.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Andreas on on of the executive
director of a lady and what we
support some sections of the
committee so presented bill
forty eight we oppose the
proposed a proposed changes to
same day voter registration as
their step backward in our
democracy not all voters are
counting the days until election
day and even fewer searching
there county clerk's website to
keep track of this year's
deadlines to add on which
locations are going to allow
same day and which date which
aren't is going to add another
barrier passage of same day
voter registration in twenty
nineteen open the door for so
many more New Mexicans to be
able to vote as Mister you
menace just commented before me
New Mexico is a leader in
innovative and modern elections
at the Georgia state legislature
has introduced forty different
bills aimed at voter suppression
New Mexico has the opportunity
to continue being a leader and
making voting as accessible as
possible universal same day
voter registration keeping the
rules the same for everyone
across the state is going to be
part of that innovative
accessibility and so we
respectfully request that the
sponsoring committee omit any
changes to same day voter
registration thank you so much
Mr chair thank you very much.
We next moved to JD Matthews
please proceeds are.
I Mr chairman committee my HAT
Matthews I'm with Mexico working
families party thank you for the
time and and the public comment
space we're here to oppose the
bill but we recognize that many
changes can happen before passes
and we totally support the work
on amending the committee sub I
want to make sure we thank the
secretary of state various
county clerks and and the
sponsor for working on
on improving this bill It is
much improved and I think it can
be improved a little bit more
before it passes one of the main
issues I want to bring up like
others have is the same day
voter registration piece we do
believe in universal voter
registration on election day we
do believe that it may be
confusing to voters if some
spaces allow it and some spaces
don't and so we urge the
committee to work on that I also
want to talk about the the third
party voter registration efforts
I do think
been outright ban on on allowing
organizations to send
applications can present
problems and can be confusing to
voters and so we are to the
committee to work on fixing that
too as well thank you for all
the time on this and appreciate
though the work on this.
Mr Mattis thank you very much
for your comments we Mexico to
Mr Rappaport.
Please omit yourselves are.
Okay I'm Josh Rappaport I'm with
indivisible Santa Fe and I'd
like to thank the secretary of
state's office and all the
senators for working on this Sen
bill very much like others have
said before me indivisible Santa
Fe is pleased with many aspects
of the bill would like to see
same day registration stay in
place in the state for all the
reasons that have been said
before.
But we also want to point out in
section six are concerned about
the consolidation of precincts
we feel that by consolidating
precincts into the voter
convenience centers this may
make it more difficult for
people to vote because people
are going to have to drive much
further in order to reach these
voter convenience centers and we
think it's best to keep the
precincts system as it is
finally I just want to say that
section forest election security
program is a great idea but
we're concerned about how this
is going to be paid for and
would like to see more details
on how that will happen thank
you very much for your time and
attention robustus
Representative appropriations
comments and then we can always
go to Carlisle coupon for.
I got that correct yes you did
Mr chair thank you so much Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Carl approval for and
I'm with the center for civic
policy you want to thank the
sponsor for the hard work on
this legislation unfortunately
we aren't able to support the
bit this bill at this time and
we respectfully stand in
opposition This bill contains
many good provisions for which
we commend the sponsor but we do
not support the sections around
same day voter registration we
believe that voting should be
accessible as accessible as
possible it is a key way to
ensure that was as of all the
orders are heard in to ensure
that same date but registration
is implemented statewide which
this bill does not we thank them
the chair and members of the
committee thank you so much
thank you so very much for all
for your comments on that next
and finally we go to.
Is that.
Mr chair we have on the shelf
Kantor calling as well.
We have one more I'm but I'm
looking for her name and I don't
is here.
Yes thank you very much for
calling thank you good morning
Mr chair members of the
committee Michelle cantor Mexico
and from fair election center
and I'm here to speak in
opposition to the changes to
same day registration section
nine informational barriers are
important reason the eligible
voters did not cast ballots
civic engagement groups as well
as election officials and the
media also real vital role in
educating voters on their
options regarding how to
register and vote it's vastly
less complicated to communicate
a simple message that when you
vote on election day you can
register at the polls this bill
makes the straight for message
impossible by making same day
registration locations vary by
county and with that County so
that summarizing its
availability would be next to
impossible I'm creating voter
education resources that will
help voters make a plan to vote
is much harder when that
information is not uniform and
so when communicators including
election officials but also
civic engagement groups create
materials if that information
isn't uniform a choice has to be
made you either have to
eliminate specifics making it
less helpful or you have to
streamline
you know to a lie allow for time
or where limits you know also
making it less helpful I'm so
the what's what's helpful to
voters is that straightforward
simple message
so in order to provide
actionable information people
can actually use to go to
register and vote under this
spell communicators would likely
have to find a link to a website
or some other source of
information which would create
another set for voters and make
it more complicated and more
costly to provide this
information and this would be
all for statewide thank you very
much.
Thank you very much Jim I just
want to say to all the people
who are provided public comment
today how much I appreciate that
each one of you provided I think
many for inflammation in a
concise manner and state within
the time frames requests and I'm
very much to appreciate that
it's been very helpful I think
for the committee to hear that
so let me go to questions and
comments from committee and I
believe I saw Senator Duhigg
hand up first but we will go to
her and then proceed to others
it's.
Thank you Mr chair
So.
There I think there's a real
balance to be struck here
between the some of the hurdles
that we're hearing from clerks
about adopting same day
registration on on election day
in a uniform way and and making
sure that we're still moving
toward that goal
so to that end I have an
amendment that I'd like to
propose which was sent to
committee this morning and
Mister chair I don't know if
you're able to bring that.
Share your screen and bring that
up I don't have that but if you
lost.
I will ask you the zoom Meister
to make sure that you have
sharing.
Religious.
And Mr chair just so you know
I'm having I keep on getting
that my internet is unstable
warning message so I'm not be if
someone else is able to share it
it might be more Mr chair
Senator Duhigg I have the
amendment up can you read that
number again.
With with the total number on
your amendment your point two
two zero one seven four point
one.
All right Senator Duhigg Mr
chair just one moment.
And and while that's coming up
all of just give kind of an
overview of what what this would
do.
and and and why we've done it
this or what why have I I've
done done in this way my
understanding is that there when
when same day it was originally
adopted in two thousand nineteen
the intent was that there would
be a process in place between
and the D. and the secretary of
state's office where I eligible
but unregistered voters would be
pre precinct that in a way that
clerks would not need to have
additional staff members there
in polling locations on election
day in order to to process folks
doing same day that and and and
I'm here from the clerks that
that that one of the big issues
with this is the need for
additional staffing and and
feeling like you don't have that
capability right now in addition
to to not having some of the
that the other technical
capability is there there right
now
and so what this would do would
it would create a fourth four
year timeline before we would go
to what what is inflation now
which would be going to to same
day.
And on a if I may I think you
have two things that you're
addressing an amendment if you
could address the one on the
screen first.
In an overview of real quickly
Mr chair and then I was going to
go through the specifics okay.
there is actually given the
clerk's for years in order to
make sure that we get everything
in place to so that you can do
this
both as far as as connectivity
goes and also as far as
developing this data sharing
process between the that the M.
D. D. and secretary of state's
office that you wouldn't need
that additional staff in there
it would also make it so that
that starting that process out
that would have to be done
within two years so that we
don't find ourselves in the
situation again four years from
now we would know that that
system is in place
so that so that that's not a
roadblock
so with that brief overview if
we go back up to the to the
first page.
So what this first change does
because within the the so so
during that time frame up and up
until on twenty twenty five the
clerks would be proceeding the
same way that that that that
that we see now in the committee
substitute for fourty Act so
would be discretionary
As far as doing same day but
what in this first change that
we make would make sure that
voters if they show up in a
voting location where same day
is not being offered that they
would get the information about
how to go do same day so they
would be this would require the
election board at that but
voting location to to tell them
that they can go do it at that
the county clerk's office or at
any other alternate voting
location where they are offering
same day registration.
We go down.
A budget.
What is.
I'm sorry Mr chair no I ask Miss
robbers to get going.
Okay.
So what this next change that as
is it it's the one dash four
dash five point seven it's in
there now but it's including
same day registration on
election day at although the
locations and it's receive the
the whole section so that when
we get to January first twenty
twenty five.
The existing language that we
see on the side will just be
automatically repealed and
replaced with us.
but what this would allow.
Is the the big differences
between what we see in the sub
in the section and what we have
now is if you look at subsection
B. Mister Roberts you'd go up of
that subsections are B. and C..
At that there yeah.
And and and so really looking at
the first sentence of see here
hi it's making clear that during
a statewide election a qualified
elector may vote register to
vote or update their existing
registration at any alternate
voting location I'm getting an
unstable message so if you all
can hear me someone way filter
off my camera any mobile
alternate body location and any
election day voting location.
And.
That said if you go down to
subsection ET.
Another one of the changes that
this is making is that in a
special election what if someone
goes and does same day
registration during a special it
would require if you look at the
the last after the the semi
colon there's basically the
last.
Subsection it would require that
someone be given the ballot
valley materials at that point
if they're doing same day
registration during special
because otherwise because the
specials are mail in elections
if you go in it.
Six thirty to the caterpillars
office on election day and do
same day registration there
would not be time for you to be
mailed a ballot such as making
sure that those voters are are
able to borrow at at that time.
And.
If Strawbridge if you scroll
down.
You're gonna miss Roberts.
The you'll see again there it's
is added and I a specific
reference to election day
S. T. R. and delivered and and
dealing with the question about
if if so if you don't have the
technical capability to to be
getting that data in real time
those folks to be it would get a
provisional ballot.
And.
Okay.
Asians are Center o'neill as
your question on the amendment.
Yes.
Thank you Mr Senator for
bringing this ammendment forward
I like it I have a question why
for years and why for years one
of two years one at three
Senator.
So Mr chair Senator all for a
couple of reasons one we we
don't we don't these changes
during a year one where we have
any general we want to do this
and then all the number here
where we're having a a local
election we're we're we're
having smaller.
and so so that would be either
twenty three or twenty five but
we also want to build in enough
time to make sure that the the
technical challenges that that
clerks are facing and setting up
of this I this data transfer
system between and median sos
that they have enough time to
get that done and and get it
done well so that we're not
facing the same situation we're
facing now if if we just delay
this to twenty three.
I don't know that all those
problems are going to be
resolved by the end so.
Required thank you very much.
Senator Moores let me go to you
and then and then we're gonna
have to.
I either to further serve out go
ahead yeah yeah I I know we're
at heart stops was really
quickly senator do X. and also
we do not Senator Woods those
friendly but center do it I can
see Bernalillo county this
working but I see this is really
driving up provisional ballots
in account rural counties that
opt out your dress that.
Mr chair Senator.
You know I I think I think when
we get to the point of this
would would be that by that time
by four years from now those
rural counties would have that
they can activity that they
would need to be relying on
those provisional ballots.
And and in the meantime while
they don't have that they're
using their discretion about
whether they're they're using
this or not so.
We go to Senator what's on out
that's from the since you
representative more rural area
but I do we do so right so
Senator what's is this probably
on from my.
It's it's highly speculative
that we're gonna have internet.
To all these precincts are
voting senators at that time
provisional balances the way
it's written today so you know
what.
And what time I'm gonna call it
un friending.
Mr Chairman are not.
Any other questions from
committee.
For a while so we're on a a
motion on the amendment from
senator doing is our second on
the amendment.
Second I see a second from
Senator stort.
Very well
so let's perceive them to vote
on the amendments and Miss Vigil
will you please call the roll
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Moores no.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator T. C. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do it yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Now when explain my so just by
way of explanation of this being
a bill that was generated by the
clerks of the secretary of
state's office I'm reticent to
approve amendments on the bills
that haven't gone at that that
they haven't at least that I'm
aware of having said that Sir
doing I appreciate very much
that you're respecting the will
and the wishes of the county
clerk's office the next four
years on this issue and our and
so in that regard I think I
think it is a well crafted a
minute just just one that I'm I
feel the need to align myself
what's and what's at this time
on that however having said that
on a vote of seven to three
your amendment passes so so we
are now on the
of the of the amendment our
products are right now the the
motion before us right now would
be a do not pass on circle forty
eight and a do pass on Senate
rules committee substitute
percent above forty eight point
three and the point three would
incorporate that amendments is
there any further discussion at
this time this bill will still
go through the Senate Judiciary
Committee senator Morris I yes I
am center Pat Woods I really do
appreciate what you're doing
here I did will go to us in a
Judiciary a marketable for right
now I think we're really close
to it so I just wanted to
encouraging you to to work with
all the groups that are there
I'm I know I think you get
beauty yes pretty quickly so we
can we can continue the
conversation before Judiciary
thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you very much Senator is there
is there somebody who would like
to make the motion
on a do not pass it to pass on
the point three Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I will not pass the
Senate bill forty eight and a do
pass on Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight point three version to
incorporate the last.
Thank you very much
is there a second there's a
second Center Lopes's very well
see nobody else requesting the
ability to speak I do want to
say by the way several people I
think this was addressed some of
the issues that came up in the
comments.
There were other things that
came up in the in the comments
that I think we will be looking
at and at the bill as it goes to
Judiciary that is part of the
committee process but having
said that thank you before we go
to vote center was did you want
to say two words if not we're
going about.
Mr chair real quickly.
There's been some comments made
on this to.
In the back channels that that I
think we do need to talk about
some and bring some amendments
to the judiciary but I thank you
for your the your act confidence
that the I will be able to work
toward a.
Some compromise to all parties
thank you Mr thank you very much
Senator once in awhile Miss
Vigil please call the roll
Senator.
I'm sorry Center back I didn't
catch it.
No.
Thank you Senator Lopez yes
Senator Moores.
No from.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator PC Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes.
Senator do it yes Senator Ivey
Soto yes ma'am on a seven to
three votes are Sir what's
congratulations you have a do
pass and good luck to you with
their colleagues when you got
your caucus meeting.
and so having
So that in and then this this up
but when I go to Judiciary thank
you all so much and with that
the Senate rules committee will
stand in recess at this time as
both caucuses are planning to
meet in ninety seconds thank you
all very much.
