And to local governments making
appropriation declaring an
emergency Senate bill one.
transportation committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one Senate bill two
introduced by senator Stefanics
and senator Candelaria and act
relating to alcoholic beverages
Senate Bill to having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
tax business transportation
Committee amendment Senate
finance committee Senate Bill to
business recovery act changing
the definitions of qualifying
small business and nonprofit
corporation pursuant to the
small business recovery act
extending the deadline to apply
for a small business recovery
business recovery loan to
refinance the loan subject to
the terms of this two thousand
twenty one actor increasing the
amount of the severance tax
permanent fund invested pursuant
Business and transportation
committee events Senate finance
committee Senate bill three
Senate bill four introduced by
Senator Ivy Soto.
the redistricting process
defining terms repealing laws
two thousand twenty chapter nine
section one declaring an
emergency Senate bill four.
introduced by senator Wirth and
act relating to driver's
licenses changing the penalties
for the suspension of a driver's
license Senate bill seven.
Senate bill seven having been
introduced by senator Wirth and
Senator Padilla and act making
appropriation for Special
Olympics Senate bill nine.
Senate bill nine having been
senator Wirth an act relating to
the environment amending the air
quality control act to allow the
promulgation of rules more
stringent than federal
regulations amending the
Senate bill eight having been
read twice by title is ordered
going to have a fiscal impact on
the state or at least
potentially have a fiscal impact
on the state.
I don't know if I am talking
Mr chair I I don't think the
fiscal impact is with respect to
school funding but it could have
a fiscal impact in terms of
so third referral I've no
problem that.
And then senator Wirth is a
sponsor of that bill seen no
objection.
Senate bill eight will refer to
the Senate conservation
and Senator Wirth an act
repealing sections thirty dash I
dash one through thirty dash
five dash three NMSA nineteen
seventy eight being laws
nineteen sixty nine chapter
and public affairs committee
then Senate judiciary Senate
bill ten.
Senate bill eleven.
Introduced by Senator Stewart
environmental improvement board
to promulgate rules to implement
the clean fuel standard act
implementing the assessment of
an annual registration fee
creating the clean fuel standard
then Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill eleven.
Senate bill twenty introduced by
Senate bill twenty having been
read.
Vice by title is ordered printed
and referred to the Senate tax
in the Senate tax business
And act relating to retiree
health care amending certain
definitions in the retiree
Health Care Act to conform to
the federal patient protection
and affordable Care Act.
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill twenty one
Senate bill twenty two
introduced by Senator Gonzales
yield sign defining terms
providing penalties Senate bill
twenty two.
Senate bill twenty two having
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
and act relating to health
coverage and acting sections of
the health care purchasing Act
The New Mexico insurance code
health maintenance organization
law and the nonprofit health
three having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
tax business transportation
committee Senate bill twenty
three Senate bill twenty four
industry and encourage a
broadband focused competitive
telecommunications market.
Prohibiting individual contracts
for telecommunication services
regulated telecommunications
services replacing the
application process for
individual service contracting
with a two year requirement to
retain such contract on file.
nineteen eighty five chapter two
forty two section two as amended
by laws two thousand chapter one
hundred section three and bye
laws two thousand chapter one oh
Senator by the Mr president
there's an actual bill included
with the title thank you.
Thank you Senator with that
Senate bill twenty four.
In order printed referred to the
And act relating to taxation
providing a temporary waiver of
penalties and interest on
certain gross receipts and
compensating tax liabilities do
during and after certain public
tax business and transportation
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill twenty
five Senate bill twenty six
introduced by Senator by the an
act relating to taxation
property Senate bill twenty six
Senate bill twenty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered president referred to
the Senate tax and.
Business transportation
Mexico housing trust fund act to
include the preservation of
housing permitting the
development of program
guidelines permitting certain
funds to be awarded based on
committee and then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
twenty seven Senate bill twenty
eight introduced by Senator
Rodriguez and Senator Pinto
endorsed by the mortgage finance
authority act oversight
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee and Senate
finance committee Senate bill
twenty eight Senate bill twenty
nine introduced by Senator
souls.
twenty nine.
Senate bill twenty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered pretty referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
eight institute.
Senate bill thirty.
Senate bill thirty having been
read twice by title is ordered
print and referred to the Senate
Education Committee then Senate
employ a minimum of one full
time school nurse providing
exceptions providing rulemaking
authority Senate bill thirty one
Senate bill thirty one having
been read twice by title is
wildlife and acting the wildlife
conservation and public safety
act providing for restrictions
on the use of traps snares and
poisons providing penalties
Senate bill thirty two Senate
bill thirty three introduced by
senator committees and act
making appropriation to the
department of health to provide
health care workers statewide
twice by title is ordered
printing refer to the Senate
health and public affairs
committee then Senate finance
Senate bill thirty three Senate
bill thirty four introduced by
Senate bill thirty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered print referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
school students Senate bill
thirty five.
Senate bill thirty five having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Senator Senator grant agency
pros on that last bill that's
going to have a.
Pretty service implication on
the school budgets and I'm
wondering if it should also go
minimum wage requirement for
second secondary school
students.
Not for you Mr president unless
there is in Los they're no
longer doing that is just
of the Sanchez telling me it's
not going to have a fiscal
impact on the state it's it
doesn't raise the minimum wage
you know on on.
Fast food chain employees.
and we'll discuss it.
Thank you senator Wirth.
Senate bill thirty seven
introduced by senator for the
and act relating to procurement
Senate bill thirty seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
Senate bill thirty eight
introduced by senator Tom in an
act relating to
telecommunications amending the
ordered for it referred to the
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill thirty eight Senate
bill thirty nine introduced by
inspection of public records act
declaring an emergency Senate
bill thirty nine Senate bill
thirty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
An act relating to public
education requiring case through
five plus an extended learning
time programs at all public
schools for the two thousand
twenty one two thousand twenty
Senate bill forty having been
read twice by title is printed
as order printed referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
finance eliminating local and
federal credits when determining
the state equalization guarantee
distribution.
Changing the face to formula
value calculation when
student outcomes from those uses
providing a contingent effective
date Senate bill forty one
Senate bill forty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
by Senator Stewart for the
legislative education study
committee and the investments
and pensions oversight committee
and act relating to educational
retirement increasing certain
statutory conflict Senate bill
forty two.
Senate bill forty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered Senate referred to the
Senate Education Committee then
This is thirty six.
An act relating to courts
allowing remote testimony in
certain circumstances Senate
bill thirty six Senate bill
thirty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
introduced by Senator souls an
act relating to public school
capital outlay allowing
allocations from the public
school capital outlay fund to
fully fund the demolition of
abandoned school district
Senate finance committee Senate
bill forty three.
Senate bill forty four
introduced by Senator souls an
act relating to higher education
creating a research grants
four having been read twice by
title is ordered printed
referred to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill forty four
Senate bill forty five
students to practice in
underserved communities Senate
bill forty five Senate bill
forty five having been read
twice by title is ordered print
relating to health care and
acting in new section of the
nursing practice act to
establish that registered nurses
and licensed practical nurses
employed by the opioid treatment
ordered printed referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill forty six
Senate bill forty seven
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act making
maintenance of indigent
individuals living with
disabilities Senate bill forty
seven Senate bill forty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printer referred to
the Senate health and public
directing the secretary of state
to provide county clerks with
funds in the business reply mail
account.
Eliminating election day voting
location voter registration
working hours for the absent
voter election board eliminating
third party agents for voter
registration and mail ballot
applications amending repealing
and enacting sections of the
Judiciary Committee and Senate
finance committee Senate bill
forty eight Senate bill forty
nine introduced by Senator woods
and Senator Stefanics for the
Senate bill forty nine Senate
bill forty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health of public affairs
committee then Senate.
fuel users permits for seed
cotton module transport
vehicles.
Senate bill fifty.
Senate bill fifty one introduced
by senator Cory him bill for the
legislative education study
committee an act relating to
charter schools providing an
enrollment preference for
Senate and Education Committee
then Senate health of public
affairs committee Senate bill
fifty one Senate bill fifty two
introduced by Senator o'neal an
been read twice by title is
ordered printer referred to the
Senate tax.
Business and transportation
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill fifty two
Senate bill fifty three
Retaining the resident veteran
business preference authorizing
procurements for exclusive
bidding by New Mexico businesses
or small businesses.
Revising chief procurement
officer registration
requirements clarifying
reporting requirements for in
state and out of state contracts
applying the procurement code to
purchases of sustainable and
recycled content goods
authorizing audits related to
sales under a contract defining
offerors for purposes of pro
Amending repealing and enacting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight Senate bill fifty
three.
Senate bill fifty three having
Senator souls and act relating
to public schools amending the
public school capital outlay act
changing the formula for
expenditures for court
administrative functions of the
the Senate Education Committee
then Senate finance committee
Senate bill fifty four Senate
bill fifty five introduced by
Senator souls an act relating to
state government requiring the
five Senate bill fifty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered print referred to the
Senate.
Indian.
Rural and cultural affairs
Adding a new personal income tax
bracket Senate bill fifty six
Senate bill fifty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate tax business
employees providing for a
program through which
participating state employees
have portions of their salaries
or wages deducted and disbursed
for the repayment of personal
committee Senate bill fifty
seven.
Senate bill fifty eight
introduced by Senator Tolman and
act relating to electric motor
vehicles creating the electric
vehicles providing that the
additional registration fees be
distributed to the state road
fund and the local governments
road Fund Senate bill fifty
eight.
fifty nine introduced by Senator
Stewart.
And act relating to reserve
funds increasing the amount of
money in excess of
appropriations that must be in
fund is transferred to each year
from the tax stabilization
reserve to the general fund
operating reserve Senate bill
fifty nine Senate bill fifty
nine having been read twice by
resolutions of support okay.
Senate bill sixty introduced by
Senator Korea Hemphill an act
relating to health care and
acting the physical therapy
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill sixty.
Senate resolution number one
safety during a declared public
health emergency Senate
resolution one Senate resolution
one and then read twice by title
is ordered.
a joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article twelve
section seven of the
constitution of New Mexico.
To provide a new annual
distribution of the permanent
school fund of the land grant
To the Senate rules committee
then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate joint resolution one
Senate joint resolution to
introduced by senator Candelaria
having troubles with my
microphone
Senate joint resolution one has
to do with the permanent fund of
that seems pretty financial to
proposing Senator ID number two
I'm sorry Mr president not
number one.
The permanent fund one that's
the one I'm talking about which
everyone known as the Senate
school fund the land grant
permanent funds for teacher
salaries and instruction
purposes.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr Mr
chair and I appreciate the flag
There's no objection for Senate
joint resolution one.
It'll be referred to the Senate
article four section twenty two
of the constitution of New
Mexico to provide that all bills
passed by the legislature and
not acted on by the governor
is ordered president referred to
the Senate rules committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate joint resolution to.
Senate joint resolution three
Mexico by adding a new section
of article two that provides the
people of the state with
environmental rights including
the right to a clean and healthy
environment and the right to the
twenty section twenty one Senate
joint resolution three Senate
joint resolution three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate rules committee and
direction so Mr president
potentially of this resolution
has gigantic financial impact on
the state potentially and I
Thank you Senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez you're the
sponsor.
This will all go to senator
Wirth first and then go to the
sponsor of the bill senator
and then we'll get it introduced
tonight so let's just pull it
pull it back
and that will hold it for
tonight and figure out exactly
if I could that there was one
bill that Senator Steinborn had
that we held overnight we've had
a chance to visit with center
Brandon I think that one's okay
As we read it in that Senate
health and public affairs
committee then Senate tax
business transportation
committee Senate bill thirty
five.
Committees.
met pursuant to the rules of the
Senate recommends that the
following list be the assignment
of senators million resident was
present Senator Wirth I just got
word that the internet
proceed.
Thank you senator Wirth we're
gonna get clarification before
we proceed to make sure that the
internet connection is in fact
working.
to it's a good moment just again
for the public to to know that
one of the key the.
Provisions in our rules is that
if we do have a technical issue
where the internet goes down
Mr president.
Senator Baca just for
clarification are we on the bill
introduction or announcements
miscellaneous at this point Mr
president I believe our
committee having met pursuant to
the rules of the Senate
recommends that the following
list be the assignment of
senators to the standing
committees of the Senate.
membership Senator Cervantes
Senator Hamblin senator Neville
Senator pope Senator souls and
Senator species.
Tax business and transportation
committee.
Senator Griggs Senator Hamblin
Senator Hickey Senator had a
meal senator Sanchez senator Tom
and and senator Wirth.
Education Committee.
Senator Kernan Senator Stewart a
and Senator Pinto.
Senate finance committee.
Chair Senator moon yo's vice
diamond Senator Gonzales Senator
Hemphill Senator Steinborn and
senator woods.
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee.
Judiciary Committee.
Chair senator separatists vice
chair Senator o'neill ranking
member Senator Pirtle.
Chair senator Ortiz Y. Pino vice
chair senator Tolman ranking
member senator committees.
Chair Senator Ivy Soto vice
chair senator do Hey ranking
members Senator Ingle.
Membership Senator Baca Senator
Chair Senator Stewart vice chair
senator Wirth.
Membership Senator Baca Senator
Brandt Senator sirventes Senator
This.
Move it up to the committee
report that is we have a motion
to adopt the committee report
because we are under COVID
different rules that we're we're
Si no objection the committee
report has been adopted.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
Soto Senator Ivey Soto thank you
Mr president was president the
the rules committee will be
meeting at four thirty this
afternoon in room three twenty
to accommodate some of the some
of the senators of they would
like to set distanced in the
room and just so the public
knows because we're dealing with
some internal rules matters of
the meeting thank you very much.
Thank you service auto further
announcement Senator Senator
Pirtle thank you Mr president
there was a bill ready an
earlier Senate bill thirty to
make a motion that we dropped
we've added a little bit of a
workload we've we've put rural
this is definitely a rural issue
if there ever was one and I I
feel like that's the appropriate
committee for to go thank you
no misdirection to the changing
of the committee reports.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president I do
think this is a it's an
handled this bill and I services
centers of annexes op but it
also all all a kind of animal
issues have gone through
conservation so again I I
certainly think Senator Gonzales
committee needs to keep this
bill and it's committee I
believe that there will be other
similar bills and it's important
for this group to study the
dedicated to rural affairs and
so I really think as a body if
we're gonna have a committee
with that their name and we're
gonna have things like this that
are really only affect the rural
The referral to Senate
conservation Senate bill thirty
to be dropped and we replace in
lieu thereof Indian rural and
cultural affairs at as for show
of hands.
made the motion has been made
for Senate bill thirty two to
drop the referral the Senate
conservation committee and
replace it with in general and
cultural affairs committee voted
Senate bill thirty two as it
stands with Senate conservation
than Senate Judiciary.
The clerk will call the roll.
could we just have the title of
the bill read one more time
thank you thank you so much
Senator that idea it's Senate
bill thirty to the title is
The clerk to call the roll
restrictions somehow negate the
process of a showing of hands
rather than in rural.
That's correct and the that what
into this general session
Senator Wirth.
Some Mister president so we
haven't officially adopted those
rules were about to go up and do
call vote the clerk will call
the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Munoz Senator Brent
Senator to run this Senator run
there's no Senator diamond
Senator diamond DS Senator do
Higgs.
Senator do know Senator guy a
goes.
Senator Griggs test centre
Hamlin.
Senator Hamlin knows Senator ham
hill no Senator him he'll know
Senator Hickey Senator Hickey
now Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan Senator Kernan
yes Senator Lopez no Senator
Lopez no center McKenna no
senator McCain and senator
Senator o'neill no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
for the.
Senator by the end no Senator
Pinto.
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez now
senator Sanchez senator Sanchez
yes Senators committees Senators
maybe CS Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Shendo no Senator souls
Senator souls no Senator ship
annex Senator Stepanek's no
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Wirth now.
Senator Wirth no Senator woods.
Senator would GS Senator
condylar the.
By a vote of fifteen in the
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
committee is done we'll come
back and debate the rule change
on the floor do some more work
on the introduction
I haven't checked in with the
bill introduction so one thing
for members they are coming in
cleaning up on our desks and
spraying so if you leave stuff
out sitting out in may get
take yours take your items back
to your office well we're not on
the floor so with that Mr
presidents unanimous consent we
stand in recess subject to the
Thank you for that Jim get with
you is that.
The gentle yeah.
