Are due by Sunday January thirty
first and need to be filed
electronically with the
secretary of state's office by
that date so just a reminder and
Mister president.
that's right yes everybody has
to do it once every calendar
year Bill financial report.
So so this one will apply to
everybody and and I'm just raise
that because last year some
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so what we're gonna do
is go back to introduction I am
going to check with the Senate
finance chair and ranking member
to see whether there's an
introduction unless Center when
yours do you want anything at
this point I'm I'm let me check
with the ranking member I I know
there was an issue with that one
step awful wait on that issue
but again I don't want to rush
that so you visit we're gonna
start with bill introduction
will introduce house bill one
first so we've got up there and
later they're they're cleaning
Senate finance right now so just
give us a few minutes to clean
up in between the committees and
and will stop and let you know
representatives Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed house
bill one and requests the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa and
Morty's McCutchen chief clerk of
legislation on that order
business introduction of
legislation the reader to read
house bill one introduced by
Representative Sheryl Williams
Stapleton.
legislative expenses including
the Legislative Council Service
the legislative finance
committee legislative education
study committee the Senate rules
committee the house chief clerks
office the Senate chief clerks
House bill one having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate finance committee
house bill one.
Sixty five seventy seven
percent.
For sixty one.
If you.
To
the rural primary care clinician
loan repayment act providing for
a loan repayment program to
assist rural primary care
organizations to recruit and
retain eligible clinicians.
In general and cultural affairs
committee then Senate finance
Senate bill sixty one Senate
bill sixty two introduced by
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino for the
Senate bill sixty two Senate
bill sixty two having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
