One of
the let me turn it over to the
vice chair I'm gonna go
presents.
Okay.
Good morning.
So we have.
Resolution to amend the rules.
For the any session of the fifty
fifth legislature of the twenty
twenty two.
And then just as a reminder
there's been some discussion at
least.
You have to I just want to be
interrupted from recession.
Okay.
Is that is that one of things
we're looking at doing and send
the.
we spend some time with
leadership on both sides is
looking at doing more of an in
depth.
Review the rules over the
interim.
but it was so in this one then
These are rules then that would
be effective throughout twenty
twenty two.
So we start off with the
senator.
Gets to make the decision for
the staff responsible to that
Senator as to whether they
operate from within the capital
for remote locations.
But it of course that if they're
required to isolate or
quarantine.
Then they do that.
The second rule is the center is
consider present in attendance
for purpose of establishing a
quorum during the during
business or voting.
If the members physically
present or participating by
simultaneous remote electronic
means from within the capital's
verified by the sergeant at arms
that's for four sessions.
Then we have the same sort of a
standard for committees.
Excuse me and then and I don't
so we wanna talk about that one
so we can go back to someone to
and then at seven one three
Senators who is required to
isolated questions directed by
federal CDC directed may not be
the right word.
can continue to participate from
outside the capital so that's
the one situation where someone
can participate from outside of
the capital along with those so
we do allow Senator with a
medical condition that
classifies the senators have a
high risk for mortality if they
would also get source code to.
if they find their leadership
with medical evidence that
they're in that category they
can also participate from
outside the state capitol some
distance from outside the
capital's excuse purposes
recall.
Right those are the only those
are the only categories of
people who are allowed to
participate for outside the
cafe.
Then.
We have seven nineteen.
which is the the that people
show where masses recommended
by.
the CDC when does the president
Senate chamber galleries lobby
Senate committee rooms connected
there with us.
And
and then to set it and then just
reminder there really that
senators have a have a choice if
you don't want to mess with on
the floor or in committee they
can they can always mask are
they can always participate for
their office.
Then we have seven twenty eight
which is make sure the two you
know people are.
visually present they're not
visually present then they're
not in the room.
And also we have this several
people brought this issue up
last time.
Which is.
You know if I'm in this room I'm
not in the next room and I need
to go to the next room I'm not
in this room.
So the so the electronic
equivalent of that is.
No legislative should be logged
in the Senate committee while
simultaneously logged in or
present in any other legislative
committee or floor session
Rochelle Center be seven days
logged into present on the
Senate floor in the Senate
committee we have people last
time when we are in the middle
of a hearing asking question
saying oh I'm sorry I wasn't
paying attention questions I'm
trying to monitor my the
committee and I'm about to you
know do something else.
And then this is just simply
ensuring nine five nine that
people can participate.
the public to participate
remotely.
as well as in person.
Twenty two three.
Courtesy memorials and
certificate shall not be read
aloud on the Senate floor.
So we can still do certificates
you can announce that I guess
during announces but we're not
going to read the whole
certificate and everything else
that kind of stuff Senator.
For them it's a packet but the
limits for any of the space is
provided Senate committees and
she can reassign the committees
and floor as necessary.
So that there is sufficient
social distancing.
in particular I'm thinking the
smaller committee rooms you
might try to look for other
options for their for their
meetings.
And
And then basically then we
adhere to the health guidelines
as outlined by the CDC we don't.
We're not gonna put the exact
headlines in rules because it's
a flexible situation but will
maintain it on the website for
the Senate in terms of of of the
latest and greatest in trying to
break it down.
And then just the two of the
things one is.
The dress code rules you have to
stay in business attire
regardless of whether members
participating in person or via
Senator tennis electronic means
and then finally we just have
with regard to the to the vice
chair and the ranking member and
the chair of the committees
just.
And there's no immediate use on
this but I will just say that.
it does provide some flexibility
in terms of vice chair other
than finance committee being
able to have another position.
And so we just figured we try
this out at this point.
If nobody had any objection to
it so that Madam that's what's
in the in the rules itself in
the new material that I passed
out to everybody.
this is a modified version of
what was presented on the floor
yesterday.
And in so and in both of these
starts off if the CDC recommends
masking in public places if they
stop recommending it then this
would no longer be necessary.
The first for the presiding
officer shall ensure the people
of his the present where massive
covers the mouth and nose
pursuant to the recommendation
by the CDC and not consume food
in Senate chambers second one is
fairly similar sergeant at arms
shown sure that'll folks around
does the president and the in
the Senate gallery committee
rooms actually Carol committee
rooms.
And the Senate hallways.
Where Mexico over the mouth and
nose percent the recommendation
by CDC and not consume put in
those areas I will note that
that the.
Phrasing of that person to the
recommendation by the CDC.
Is written so that it modifies
the manner in which the mask is
worn it does not modify.
The mask itself but it right so
this so that's madam chair
however you'd like to take it we
can start with the new material
or we can start with with what
we have here and then after this
go to the military.
Very good let's start with the
with the drafted parts and then
we'll go to the neutral
afterwards.
Is there anyone in the audience.
Is.
Public comment on this.
Mr chair isn't here wish to take
on I don't know if there's
anyone online who has come.
Noted for percent rules we just
pretty much keep it between
staff and committee and members
of the committee.
So and perhaps we can just take
it by rural so we're not going
back and forth all the time if
there's anything to for if
there's anything on seven one
one.
Sir
dole.
This page three on the second
seven one three on page three
line thirteen yourself our talk
about the call from for those
properties being remotely they
would still have to participate
in the gardens are that that if
there are literally at home they
can just turn off the computer
or not participate in the vote
in the debate
that so that we you're on the
start to participate we often
since all over their full
backing to house or whatever but
they do have to leave the
computer on and participate in
both.
This rule on a direction they do
a call Senator builder wants
want to vote on the use of the
computer off no I hear you thank
you.
Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair Senator
I'd already of.
Mark this up a little bit not
even used a red pen.
I think it makes it even more
valid but
With the changes in the event of
a call the Senate members
participating from outside the
capital shall be considered
present for the call.
Yes so actually we're right
along the same lines actually
The.
So here's what I have.
Okay Page three line.
Thirteen.
Right excused from the.
In certain Lujan there of.
Considered present for purposes
of a.
Considered present.
For purposes of Hey.
Then.
Page three line fourteen.
Before the period.
I'm gonna read this all first
and then I'll go back.
And if the call is satisfied.
The members participating
remotely shall participate in
the debate and vote on the issue
that is the subject of the call.
Okay so let me go through that
more slowly and if the call is
satisfied.
If the call was satisfied.
The members participating
remotely.
The members participating
remotely shall participate.
In the debate.
And vote shall participate in
the debate and vote.
On the issue.
That is.
The subject of the call.
I guess my one question is.
If somebody's on a respirator
they would we would normally
excuse them for all purposes
including calls do we need to
add unless the pin otherwise
excuse for.
Are we going with this.
Say that again madam chair.
Chairman sure.
I mean let's say let's say I
come down with with COVID.
And I end up on a respirator I'm
pretty sure that I would
otherwise be excuse for all
purposes.
I guess I would not be
participating remotely at that
point if we participate in it
would be presenting yeah okay
perfect in that case we don't
have taken thank you.
It's up to talk about syntax yes
so so the whole thing would
read.
That actually addresses
mentioned isn't able to do
anything anymore.
Yes of the whole sentence would
read in the event of a call of
the Senate members permitted to
participate remotely from
outside the capital should be
considered present.
For purposes of the call.
And if the call is satisfied the
members participating remotely
shall participate in the debate
and vote on the issue that is
the subject of the call.
Okay.
Chair Mister chair I I think
it's six of one half dozen of
the other you're excused from
the call the call satisfied if
you can excuse if you shall be
considered present for the call
the call center spike because
you shall be considered for the.
So that that that that goes to
whether not everybody else right
like at what point and then if
you're present this is excuse
then that's when you put the so
that you can expect.
Agencies you present your then
you can't just turn off your
computer after the call
districts are correct and so on
that there and so what happens
if you just excuses yeah I I I I
I I don't I just have trouble
with this language forcing
someone to participate in a
debate first of all that seems
weird to me I mean they have to
be present but they don't have
to participate the debate
someone could be really sick in
all the gonna do is vote and it
just feels to me that if okay
what we're talking about here's
the call and I like this land I
think Center for loan with you
guys to come up with present the
verses that call but then after
that I think what it says I mean
if somebody somebody could be
sick at that moment and unable
and then what we do we're gonna
stop and say well they have to
participate and vote they don't
have to vote I mean if if
someone's really sick they may
be able to vote sometimes and
other times not so I just I just
would recommend we just leave it
consider present the purposes of
the call.
And then and then implicit in
that is that if they're on and
they're able to vote they can
vote hi they can debate but if
if for whatever reason for the
vote or fifty if they're if
they're they're you know up
there but the cameras turned off
because there for whatever
reason Senator then it's like
when we go to a local someone
not the chair seems to me.
Our nation all the.
All.
Well I don't think we can put
something in I mean I've been we
are I think we go back to.
I mean if you're considered
present but I don't think you
can force them to have the ball
if there I think that could be
to me it's better to the excuse
McCall and go back where we
started because I think you
really could be a situation
someone's someone's in the
hospital and even participating
in all of a sudden in the middle
of a medical procedure and we're
not gonna stop and say well if
they have to vote.
If there is so I I and I I just
it's good to think this through
because the hypothetical so.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam chair why don't
we just excuse them.
As normally right excusing from
purposes of the call I still
remember Senator Fidel.
Be brought in.
He was very very sick and they
actually brought in in the
structure.
I mean I think this goes a
little too far if they're sick
they're verified that they have
a COVID issue I mean that's what
we're talking about right now
their excuse.
Don't go into more detail there
six.
we can I think it's something is
we're trying to be benevolent
there are members the let's just
say their excuse for the call
and we deal with the numbers we
have on the floor.
Instead of trying to NIT pick
and such because then to what
degree I just I just I'm a
little emotional that because I
I know what's happened to our
members before that was really
disrespectful.
Just excuse of the call.
Thank you sure.
That status issue this.
Maybe.
Help you know help out the only
people who are out of the
building have COVID four wheel
drive vehicle.
Thank you
for that.
This.
There.
Able to get to stay home of the
actually got a comment and then
the right now it's only for five
days.
I just five days five days it is
a you don't have to have a
negative test come back.
Your.
Thank you madam chair and and I
I think you know if we stick
with the current language they
shall be excused and so having
known quite a few people that
are had had been a symptomatic I
mean they were fully functional
reason they knew that COVID is
because they got tested weather
was for work or some other issue
so they would be able to
participate and want to
participate we might be
excluding people that really
want to have their vote counted
on some very serious issues
because usually when a coach a
call is on it's a very serious
issue that
arises that we think everybody
needs to be present for for
debate so I I I would have
concern in just a blanket you
know we talked about respect
yesterday I think this is a good
time to
maybe have that put out there
that in very serious situations
let's respect each other to the
point where if somebody can't
participate participate because
they are so bill you would
excuse in but remember if
somebody is is extremely sick
coughing and they don't wanna be
on video there is a way to do it
over the phone and they could
meet their phone and still
participate if they wanted to
and have their vote counted and
not have to be in front of the
screen in the definition so I
would have a lot of concern
excluding people that want to
participate by having a shall we
all know that the the district
shall and may and I think shell
just carries too much weight
here and would exclude senators
that wanted to participate in
the Mr chair on that point are
we saying that they're a member
who's excuse from the call can't
participate in the debate about.
Because I don't think that's the
case I mean if you're excused
from the call the call is done
and we don't count their excuse
and the next full market the
paper only talking about the
call itself and the and the
scenarios and I and I appreciate
that and more coming up or I
will tell you I've had.
Immediate family that fully
vaccinated that just getting
over.
Comment and it was nine ten days
of for the property.
so I think it's it's really hard
to know but then you just in our
you know a symptomatic but I
just think this is only dealing
with.
The motion for a call.
And then the call is on their
excuse I mean it's like.
And then I get and then the
question is I mean it is it
something they can't participate
if they are used in the because
I don't view this is the
education of all.
Their education the call itself
if the call on once the call was
satisfied we move forward with
the debate.
And those that are you know than
what we're good to go the call
gonna be satisfied before we
take a vote anyway.
Sure
That is.
All.
Mention.
All.
Sure.
Sure.
Issues.
All.
I understand.
All.
Yeah that's the question being
that.
Thanks
for.
Madam point of order I'm getting
texts that people cannot hear us
that we're not turning our mikes
on so people will ensure that
their Mike Sir on when they're
talking then the public might be
happier thank you thank you is
that sentence message and on
that point so if I may just real
quick just enter the discussion.
If we were to stick with this
language I think and I'll give
way to make sure that we also
take care of the concern that
Sir Senator of this product will
be on page thirteen line
thirteen.
After the work capital.
Just insert who have not been
excused.
So the inevitable call members
permitted to participate
remotely from outside the
capital have not been excuse
shall be considered present so
then.
Right if if you're in a position
where you're not able to
participate you're gonna inform
your weapons you'll get excused.
So then that's the excuse to
side.
If you're not excuse which means
you're not in the building but
you can participate.
Then you participate.
So I'm sorry but and madam chair
get to that I think you need to
use the the word participating
instead of permitted to
participate because we have an
excuse and then they do need to
be participating for for the
call to be considered present
But the the rest that language I
I don't really have an issue
with I was just gonna bring up
seven dash one maybe a more
appropriate area in the rules to
have this discussion and put it
seven one which I don't think we
have in this packet is of every
senator Shelby present within
the Senate chamber during the
sessions of the Senate less duly
excused or necessarily prevented
Senators prevented from being
present the Senate chamber
notify the respective leaders of
their whereabouts yeah I think
maybe some of this language with
the.
Better fit there as opposed to
where it's it's going now but
that's just the thought that I
had
but you know I think we got it
we have to be careful not to
exclude people that want to see
participating to ensure that
they are actually
gauging is important and then if
something prevents them we just
excuse them as we did other
members.
The just on that point so that
would mean that someone who.
Is that a home with COVID who
has not been excused if the bill
comes up and there's a call.
They're gonna get dragged back
no we're we're for economic what
what happens are they
automatically.
I'm what what it means is that
considered present so they're
not drag back Hey.
But when we get to the issue.
There they they can't just about
the camera when we get to the
issue at fall brawl.
We're all subject to being in
the room.
Right there's other than to be
on camera.
Which is to be a the reality of
the children of the virtual
reality of our normal reality
and Justin and just on that
point though so we have a call
the last for several days and
someone has goes into a serious
medical condition so they
started out.
Being part of it and then all of
a sudden there's just no way
they can participate.
Yeah we can excuse everybody
agrees but the problem is that
the generally will happen I mean
we're working on and I'm
actually borrowing the language
that was suggested yeah right
members of not been excused for
necessarily prevented from
participating show we consider
present.
Excuse me members of numbers
used for necessarily prevented
from participating.
That means somebody seventy.
So it's kind of the beginning
takes a downturn.
Yeah then then they're
necessarily prevented from
participating.
So therefore then they're not
considered present.
And that's the same language we
have.
In the course of the call will
anyway so so it just it just
bars for that it's actually more
relevant here than the American.
That's standard.
And so dismissed madam chair
Mister chair so.
I mean there's gonna be some
subjectivity.
Because of the cameras off.
You know we can't find that
person we can't get a hold of
them.
Is there assumption that there
are there's a sense of the
present so that and stop us from
doing things at a but then it's
back to the present.
When we get that issue or like
somebody's four we got to know
something that's and if they can
get a little.
Fact specific when we get to
that moment I think it's a
standard.
And madam chair.
It.
Since we are talking to the with
the technology we have just as
we were on the floor you know
you can Hey I need to take a
five minute break.
You could put BRB in the chat
box.
You know I think that would
suffice for a lot of this or at
the text message to the leader
saying Hey you know to make make
myself a burrito because I'm
really really hungry and I'll be
right back you know as long as
the communications there this is
a twenty there's you can tweet
it out you can send over faced
with no there's waste
communicated I think will with
that.
Mr so can you can you just re
read and of the entirety of.
Where we're at now is yes I can
just.
So what it would be is beginning
on page three line eleven.
In the event of a call of the
Senate.
Members.
Dissipating.
Remotely.
From outside the capital.
Who have not been excused.
For necessarily prevented from
participating.
Shall be considered present.
For purposes of the call.
If the call is satisfied.
The members participating
remotely.
So just for clarity the members
participating remotely.
Who are considered present.
Shop participate remotely let's
be clear about it in the debate
and vote.
On the issue that is the subject
to the call.
So that way it's clear we're not
going to drag him back.
Well I all that kind of
discussion.
Okay.
That only applies to those that
are considered present.
Madam did we have the lowest
language provided they are able
or.
Is that no longer in their those
who have not been excused or
necessarily prevented from
participating.
Yeah let me read it all one more
time.
In the event of a call the
Senate.
Members participating remotely
from outside the capital who
have not been excused for
necessarily prevented from
participating.
Should be considered present for
purposes of the call.
If the call is satisfied.
The members participating
remotely court considered
present.
Shop participate remotely in the
debate and vote on the issue
that is the subject to the call.
Mr chair who determines if
they're necessarily prevented
from well you know we've we've
had discussions about that and
The that's existing language
that we have we've never
actually implemented that
language we talked about and
funding it would never produced
an event of that language.
you know I think I think we've
agreed you know
informally on in some
conversations about when
somebody might be considered.
necessarily prevented from
participating.
But
I guess what I'm saying is.
We'll cross that bridge when we
come to a.
But it's existing language that
we have so it's an existing
standard that we have.
Madam chair.
that could be maybe an incidence
where maybe the way we haven't
excuse them as you know because
you know that the Texas or
census information but.
It could be that something may
have happened in between being
excuse you know god forbid Act
car accident or something that.
In necessitates that they can't
be there and they weren't on the
excuse list right I think this
supports and opportunities just
in case it's it's the we call it
an extra card that you carry
right just in case because that
can happen one of those you may
not want to provide to to to
closely frankly I mean but I
think that four you're crossing
the street to Connie's god
forbid.
So.
Right just I mean that's what I
would see this as for that the.
The.
Roger I would I would I would
move that amendment.
And and thank you much I just
want to make distinctions you
know to me what necessarily
Then it would be that you know
obviously take your family on
vacation to Disney land is not
necessarily prevented but
appendectomy would be.
Thank so I think that's just a
everybody has got process in
their in their online but that's
what I I think of when I think
of this if you have an
appendectomy while in Disneyland
that would be the happiest place
on earth anymore.
Well good.
Six.
Yeah so Madam I would I would I
would move that that amendment.
Senator.
I.
The.
Certainly so we're looking on
page three.
Line eleven.
And I'm just going to read what
it's going to sound like instead
of going through all the into
limitations.
In the event of a call of the
Senate.
Members participating remotely
from outside the capital.
Who have not been excused for
necessarily prevented from
participating.
Xabi consider present for
purposes of the call.
If the policy is I.
The members participating
remotely who are considered
present.
Shop participate remotely.
In the debate and vote on the
issue that is the subject of the
call.
Have a motion to adopt that
amendment is there any objection
to the motion.
It is yes.
I think I still of course.
Chair of the to mines down on
point six and I think this was
original language where we talk
about respirators because member
one comment for start all that
we're fine with that was members
showed central online sixty mask
for respirators I believe that
was back in beginning of COVID
when you have will point your
reserve read CDC long ago
recommended not using those all
rights arrest right out the
gates that relatives were here
in language we should strike or
respirators can be from.
Thanks for the.
That is the lesson is that
his recovery would be before I
get to to the the K. ninety five
the CDC's call in the K. nine.
These are respirators.
That's why there are no CDC was
calling okay ninety five so
respirators okay I stand
corrected.
That's news to me.
Where else all the.
Okay I'll drop that dun of page
for our.
One twenty one third of the
Willigis before we go on just as
a necessary protocols is to
Fleetwood is Legislative Council
services not advocate for or
against any suggested rule
change nor does he have to think
any of these are good idea but
he simply here to provide
technical assistance on these
pretty adamant on this last
home.
We the fine would occur to see
memorial isn't and why frankly
you know my feelings of from our
personal conversations morals in
general
but here we are.
We're doing these rules because
people are scared of the
pandemic
I would hope there were some
some.
Restraint therefore so scared to
be in this building that we're
not doing all these silly
memorials
and introducing a bunch of stuff
yes occupying our time we should
be in here doing business
serious business and getting the
hell out of this building report
this scared about comment so can
we talk about what a courtesy
Memorial is and if it's a
currency should be doing it
quite frankly madam chair what
what madam chair and serve our
we used the word memorial and
the and the designation of a
moral for a couple different
purposes one of them is to all.
Well as as will probably do
later this session a memorial.
All all set memorial that the
rules committee should over the
interim.
All review the rules of the
Senate mmhm and and come back
with recommendations.
All so that is not a courtesy
moral that is for lack of better
term I guess a functional more.
Of the the new memorial us the
the department of health to work
with the American cancer society
to figure out what kind of paid
people should use when they
The bicycles and that and that
would be opposition memorial
perhaps write us and I've
external agency to to do
something and that's where I
think that I think we we should
have some restraint that we're
not wasting our time and I have
a signal right then the currency
memorials was.
You know that all that little of
Marco mortis been and and the
Espanola in the eighth grade
that I got a seventy three and
is math tests and so we'd like
to really congratulate him.
All and and and and and the
current medical more to stay in
the of the states that that's a
principal.
So that's what we're talking
about that's what I hope we
we're if we're gonna be in this
building the subject ourselves
to pandemic let's cut that stuff
out yes and likewise you know we
get all this tickets and if we
want to renounces the state had
to participate for this great
but let's not spend the next
eight minutes.
Meeting the certificate on the
floor.
Thank you the manager.
This mean I can't do a more
congratulating myself on my rank
at the institute when I was
there.
The center of that opportunity.
Might we might suspend the rules
for the we got a special table
for that one.
On that so we would be able to
do a memorial for the the
national champion in in my.
Widget Broncos it's a pretty big
deal.
Representative chair so I think
if you certainly can do the
memorial I mean it they can be
introduced a report on the
president's table you can do a
certificate not going to get
read I think the last session
last session what we did is for
the and we just did one we moved
the ball is and I mean I've been
passed in one motion not
debating a mall nothing prevents
you from standing up and saying
you know I've done the
certificate this is an important
day and then I really felt we're
trying to get folks to do
certificates instead of
memorials because then you'll
have to go through the whole
fall you just have to
certificate there you don't get
a read on the floor but you can
acknowledge the fact that this
is a big day in the hands of
specific it's not to them on the
floor but you can present it to
them so again I think the point
is we're not reading these
things I again
you can't tell someone they
can't introduce at and so all I
do think.
I agree completely the element
in the need to really limit.
The house and we're not gonna be
reading
what someone they stand up on a
on and say this is this is an
important accomplishment I have
is a typical prepared I just
want to publicly recognize that
individual center I'm sure we
can tell not to do a bus role in
our eyes and scoff and Adam
wealth manager we tried that
before.
I will designate you on your
side of the aisle Senator Moores
for through the memorials and
will work on our side and you
know another way to force or
morals is that the ones that get
assigned to the rules committee
and that are strictly partisan
nature.
Yes.
Members of the committee.
About madam chair if I if I
could just just one other little
changed this brought to my
attention page two line twenty
two.
We have the verbal directive
there.
Senator who is required isolated
quarantine as directed by the
federal CDC prevention
at.
Okay Page two line twenty two.
I'm pretty sure that that
they're not going to get a phone
call from.
Well Jim self saying Hey you
need to isolate.
so although he's been doing
everything else maybe has been
this evening's calling people
but at a rate differences to the
were directed hi.
I think it's a so there's two
one twenty two I would strike
that were directed.
And insert a Lou provided in the
guidance.
Provided in the guidance would
be a senator who is required to
isolate or quarantine as
provided in the guidance by the
federal cities.
There any objection to the
motion.
Passes.
And
Mr chair on that same page
looking at seven one one seven
one two.
It appears that for committees
appearing via telephone is
explicitly considered for the
floor is not.
Is that intentional because I I
know that there are some members
who don't have great internet
access and might need to if they
need to apparently appear via
telephone rather than.
Fastenal TVS electronic means.
You know I'm actually noticing
thank you madam chair I'm
actually noticing.
A couple of a more substantive
differences between these two
paragraphs
so I'm actually glad that you
brought.
Attention to that floor session
Senate committee.
Physically presidents.
On that point five million seven
one one you're in the capitol
right.
And Madam chair on that point as
well we may need to that in some
of that fun language that we
spent thirty minutes talking
about the somebody is in their
office but within the capital
either they've been exposed but
don't have COVID and we don't
necessarily want to bring
someone that we know has been in
close contact with a
participating office down to the
floor with everybody but I think
that is it that that addresses
with the capital the concerns
with the internet but then I
think we do need to have that
same language that we.
Eloquently put together as a
team.
And I.
If I may just ask.
Where have.
Warehouse.
Is that it Mr chair is that
makes sense yeah exactly.
Well okay so first of HB and if
I could if I could go back to
the center from this moment.
H. two line nineteen.
Yeah I think that's what really
ought to be we we should strike
whether or not the member is.
And insert from.
The working system both of them
were from within the capital.
So we operate from within the
capitalist unless you that
COVID or four yield I figure
COVID.
For our positions are filled.
So.
CSO strike whether or not the
member is insert from.
This to committee meetings that
may require we.
We were not at least last
session requiring folks to
remotely at the if they're gonna
remotely attend committee
meetings to do so from within
the capital so I don't know
there was also the at the end of
your time we're in the first
half of the session we were
spacing out when we would have a
four session that we go like
five six days without a floor
session so people could go home.
That.
Representative Hey this on that
point though I have had a number
of members on both sides of the
aisle bring out.
The format that we use where we
could limit some floor session
so you know for example on now
today we're not gonna force us
on Friday if the committee.
Decides to me.
That would mean that someone
basically you can't go home and
participate from home in the
committee process they've got to
stay in Santa Fe how to do that
if we change this language so I
do think
you know of that's the scenario
for those.
For those that that may go home
if we don't have four sessions
everyday because we cannot do
the memorial for gonna find.
So it just if someone's
traveling over the weekend with
on your Friday or Monday but
this committee meeting
committees are meeting.
I would be if you change that
language it's it's going to mean
you're gonna have to be in the
building.
for the committee meeting were
otherwise you could travel you
know Senator I think.
You certainly I know what I
don't want to call you out on it
but during that during that
during the last session of the
were times and again for the
biggest breaks a lot of us you
know that work went home from
home for the committee process
and came back so I just they
won't be as it will be will be
because it's only a thirty day
session I think realistically I
the first two weeks where there
may be a little flexibility with
that and we're gonna be here but
I just I want to point that out
as an example of a time when it
for the just to be there Senator
Pirtle already sick about is
children for the rest of the.
Session is on venture Senator
were less you find as a calendar
of when you were going to do
that could you do that for the
first two weeks or so that we
could plan just don't know what
the thirty day because last year
that worked really well because
we actually plan we have the
account until the last one to
two weeks.
I think we did miss madam chair
I think it's pretty much the
last thirty days we were here we
did without front and we really
limited I can certainly look at
that I think if it's a lot
harder the things I think are
going to move much quicker and I
and again we're gonna need to be
on the the differences we kind
of need to be you have to move
committee reports along and do
bill introduction it's just it's
not as easy to have a firm
calendar but I do know yes.
just but this Friday for example
word and I'll try and I try and
certainly let folks know but
again this Friday is a perfect
example we won't be here.
I I just in New.
Realistically it's not it's not
just as easy to do given how
tight everything is
so I just I just wanted to use
that as an example of of when I
think the point etcetera do it
makes is.
Is valid and could result in a
situation where for example this
Friday of Senate judiciary
decides to meet in the
afternoon.
You know then they all have to
be here search under this
language.
Whereas if if the if the
language status out of the
change of the state as it is
members participate from
wherever in the state and I
think some of the concern is on
the of the flip side is that you
have members and who will.
Our.
Go home I mean I'm gonna go to
the their hotel room percent
hotel room in the morning just
log in the meeting.
As a committee and then so for
the floor.
And they go somewhere else maybe
in a restaurant or someplace and
you know like.
I mean part of the deal as
response we had meeting with
each other.
Unless we can't.
Properties.
Right to provide for but the
other part of the bills are
supposed to be here meeting with
each other.
So I just want to point them out
here I I I know we have several
individuals who want to really
minimize the risk and so if
you're gonna be sitting in their
office
I guess I don't necessarily see
a difference between sitting in
your office is in your hotel
room when you get right down to
you put up the Senate screen
behind you and quite frankly
would even know.
And if you're gonna do that for.
Because they really do have
someone at home on their their
commuting and I've got someone
home with high risk for taking
care of our.
I just.
To just throw that out there to
think think through I understand
and I think and I I I'm
comfortable with and I think
we've come up with a good plan
in the Senate I feel good about
it because again it's a really I
think the majority of us will be
present in the committee rooms I
appreciate what you're saying
but I do know the for our
members that have those concerns
and self.
You know whether they're here
for in.
Hotel room yeah maybe your
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Senator you know and
again I guess it's like personal
but you know there's there's if
cherish is expose and comes down
with COVID of course you can't
go to school.
So there's those other thoughts
that also have to come into this
too I'm it I'm an honored member
of this chamber to it should be
able to participate in some
venues and we also.
So but I can't drive to
Albuquerque I mean to Santa Fe
with her either just to
participate at the capitol.
And there's some considerations
that I would hope that we take
in my.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chair you.
Hey maybe that motion and I'm
I'm not maybe the motion of
somebody else's I'd more maps
for the but I just want to bring
it up and I particularly from
most of the.
I don't know you know exactly
how I will ever work this way
it'll satisfy everybody but I
think the Senate is a polite
enough for musicians to look at
the circumstances of every
individual here if they have
something in their family to
gauge their hobby the their
probability to be here then I
think they should be allowed to
use the internet or however we
have a four K. to vote and there
shouldn't be any question on
there's no definition of how we
do it.
It's we're in the circumstance
here that you know I don't know
that you can ever figure out
exactly what's going to work but
I think a common courtesy here
is all we need to do next in
the.
elected here Representative
people that you serving you have
a right to vote under the
circumstances however it's
easier to do.
I don't know how you ever can
figure out how they should tell
the language will ever actually
create every circumstance but
let's not worry about it this
just go ahead and let people
with their.
Keep track of the schedule and
how they can get here on there
internet than they have right to
be in the committee and do
whatever they need to do to
Representative folks Senator
thank you.
Thanks.
Further discussion
This document that you're
looking at all.
So for clarity their name is no
you're striking your proposed
amendment or there is no
amendment two seven one two that
there's there was no moment
someone to.
All right.
Center for the.
Thank you madam chair I do have
a question was the department of
health asked to be I mean we're
making some pretty big decisions
on on health
I know I have I have an expert
here with me on the Republican
side doctor of that operates
your nose and throat specialist
but I was just curious where
they invited did they declined
to come because we are making a
lot of decisions and I think it
would have been
Good if we could of asked
questions of the department of
health being the deliberative
body and that the school branch
of government so just curious if
they were invited.
Mr chair.
So I have gotten input from the
department of health my
understanding is that executive
agencies have been asked not to
be in the building cells slide
it's not asked them to appear
for this.
And and madam chair Senator you
know I I I find that quite odd
because we heard from the
governor yesterday and she was
not in the building as well
you know I think we were talking
we've been the word I think of
the session is going to be
respect and and so the the
executive branch doesn't even
respect the legislative branch
enough to come before us to give
us their input which I think is
troubling we're making really
big decisions on how we request
members to be here in the
present and yet they're not here
to to help us through this so I
can only defer to the experts
that we have in the room on
these types of of question the
rest of the body does to but I
was just like I said one one
earlier so I got confused at
that we're on seven one one when
I made the mention of the
amendment that we adopted
earlier where it's talking about
members participating from their
office or from within the
capital that we're gonna need
that same language in there
because if they've been exposed
but don't have COVID they're
gonna participate from their
office we don't want to pull
people who have been exposed
down to the floor in a call
we want to allow them to
participate from their office so
I think we'll need to add that
page in there as well.
Well I see I see with.
Mr chair if we're going by CDC
guidelines Miner saying is like
if you're if you're fully
vaccinated New Mexico is you
don't need to quarantine ones
wearing a respirator facemask
you know correct.
Practice so I.
So I don't know that it would
just be an automatic that if
someone was exposed they would
be participate in from the
office I'm I'm just wondering I
wonder if the CDC language that
we have in here will essentially
already cover that concern when
it says CDC is two shots not
opposed or so we've already got
away from that as a as a falsely
and and madam chair we've we
respect each member's decision
on to whether they want to be on
the floor in their office so
this would just extend that same
respect to them that if for
whatever reason the think that
their health is at risk for they
could be putting other people's
health at risk they haven't
tested positive but maybe a
family member that tested
positive that we show allow them
to stay in their office if they
so choose because I think that's
kind of what we're talking
that's that's a personal choice
that they've made that you know
regards forget the CDC forget
the department of health let
people make decisions for their
for their own health and if that
staying in their office that's
what we should respect.
Thank you senator and and Mr I I
guess perhaps I'm confused
because I thought I thought we
already had language that the
lab for that is that not correct
that was for people who are
paticipate from outside the
building all of.
Services for.
Okay.
So what I have is page two line
ten.
Before the close answered if a
call satisfied.
Members within the capital.
Shell participate from the floor
for the members capitol office
in the debate and vote on the
issue that is the subject of the
call.
So you've you've always got your
you too can be there in your
office or you could be on the
floor that matter which we don't
restrict it to where you started
at the beginning of the call.
Enough madam chairman I'm I'm
I'm not sure where you're.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure where
you're you're proposing to put
that because seven one one
already says.
The members should be considered
president here in the office yes
four on the floor in the we've
already covered that having we
are what what are we adding with
your.
This is just the the language
ensuring that that whether
you're on the floor or in your
office.
During the eight digit be the
place to call and this verifies
you can be the place during all
this have anything to do with
the call no it has to is
participating on the floor and
whether you are in your office.
For M. four on the floor.
At the end I missing something
really crucial I guess it says
already says a Senator still be
considered to be present
and in attendance.
For purposes of establishing a
quorum doing business or voting
during the floor session if the
members physically present for
participating by simultaneous
remote electronic means from
within the capital so what are
we adding with this thing that
says it's a call because we deal
with the call in another section
when we were just at the.
No doubt you walk me through
that way I think you're right.
The madam chair the distinction
is the paragraph that we just
fixed is only for people who are
high risk for have COVID.
This paragraph is for people
that are participating remotely
from their office by choice mmhm
and so we need to add the words
the call because it's not
included because what could
potentially happen is say my
wife goes home and then she test
positive for COVID while I was
in close contact with her I yes
negative but in order to keep
everybody safe almost a.
The light came back on.
Yes.
Yeah the ten thousand from the
Mr chair I I think rather than
adding that additional funds
just on page two line six after
business comma satisfying to
call in and then for voting or
to four sessions
etcetera etcetera.
Discussion on that.
I'm fine with that I still do
like the fact though that that
additional sentence.
It's clear though that that.
any member may participate.
With if there's a call from the
floor or their office and
specific to the office so I
actually think both are helpful
to have.
I think it's a bit redundant I
but not in the system do any
harm the anymore discussion on
that.
Do I understand every state what
the full for Senator should be
considered we present and and
and attendance for the purposes
of establishing a quorum doing
business.
Satisfying whole more voting
during the floor session if the
members physically present or
participating by simultaneous
remote electronic means from
within the capital's verified by
the surgeon arms.
If the call is satisfied members
within the capital show
participate from the floor or
the members capitol office.
During debate and vote on the
issue that is the subject of the
call.
Senator and madam chair is that
at all times or every time.
It is.
Is there any any opposition to
that amendment.
Same amendment passes that.
And Mr chair about before we
move on to the the new material
Similar to some of the concerns
that senator Morris is raising
about someone just jumping off
to avoid a vote on a
controversial issue our.
If someone is participating in
the floor remotely
it should they get to filibuster
from the comfort of their own
homes where they can take
bathroom breaks and Eaton said
comfortably and get up as much
time as they like should there
not be some protective language.
Addressing that.
So we we just we had discussions
about that and ultimately chose
not to go that direction
If somebody is.
Are at home we're hoping that
they don't have enough energy to
really do that.
If they take a bathroom break
that may create an issue because
they're going to have to keep
their camera on.
If they have the floor.
For you are there yeah we did in
New Mexico.
Yes.
There's certain people that on
certain evenings you want to
bring them up seventy two on
string.
and so yeah so this so so hi.
Not I mean it's it's it looked
like we even discussed.
Should we.
We would discuss.
If you're in your office or home
should you have to stand when
you're debating.
Right or should you have to
something another or should we
have a limit as to how long it
took you can debate on an issue
if you're remote and we
ultimately decided that
That would not be something
included in here but of course
it's ultimately up to the to the
committee but but I will tell
you that that that some of those
discussions were bantered about
and ultimately the.
The harm of the restrictions.
Seem to be greater than the
protection to the body.
Representative for their special
on that one and move to the
material first so we got the
four one one here.
if the CDC M. P. recommends
masking.
Then the prize of the in public
places down the presiding
officers on sure that everybody
was there physically present
wears a mask on the mouth and
nose pursuant the recommendation
by the CDC and not consume food
in the Senate chambers.
Six one one.
Is the same a similar sort of a
of a phrasing the sergeant arm
shall ensure that all members
staff and guests who are
physically present in the
gallery Senate committee rooms
within us and the Senate
hallways.
Wear a mask that covers the
masking as percent
recommendation by CDC and not
consume food and those are.
So Senator Pirtle thank you
madam chair
you know I kind of like.
Whenever we made the rule of
business attire permanent and
set of it because this is all
going to expire it is are going
to be temporary.
Is there a way we could add the
food portion of this to the same
where you can't read the
newspaper.
I think you know the the eating
of food on the Senate floor I
mean we have the Senate lounge
the house lounge to.
To do that would be appropriate
to make that a permanent rule to
mean that you can read the
newspaper on the floor four
eight.
just permanently no eating on
the floor.
That's.
Mr concept.
Well I mean at this point yes I
think that's something at the
during the interim we could.
We could discuss is looking for
two things.
Yeah I just certainly I do think
if we're going to deal with that
we would have would have to have
the some this as if the CDC does
not recommend masking public
places.
Members who eat on the floor
shall keep their mouth closed.
While chewing.
They'll just just I think I
think this this is one we should
discuss mmhm over the interim
because there are times when we
are working round the clock
eighteen hours and food is
brought into us yes so that we
can continue our work and again
if it's you know if it's safe.
I do think it's important to
have.
Again some discretion in how you
do that but I again I I think
that this works for now I would
just think we talk about that
during the interim.
Take so it was I would so this
so I would not move that we add
these subject to any with that
with an S. at the end of the
executive rooms
to the to the resolution that
measures is this an amendment
are we going to a committee so
order we think ultimately want
to vote on individually and then
to a committee so over one point
all madam chair I would suggest
is that the vote on this as an
amendment to the resolution.
And then what we vote out
The acting thing started on okay
good yeah.
Sort of the committee order.
Yes the staff of the figurative
but.
Can I just say that that I think
there's a good reason when we
look at rules that we have the
differential level about two
thirds of it goes straight to
the floor and a major to go
through committee because I mean
frankly a lot of these are these
are these are proper changes and
this is where having a
conversation and this committee
really makes a difference for
the terms of what we have
changed and what we have a text
on the public.
So you know it really does that.
Yes I do I move for one one and
six one this.
Any opposition madam chair it's
got a Wirth so what is the
current CDC recommendations for
masking and public places it is
the current CDC guidelines I
believe is if you're gonna have
five or more unrelated people
usually mast and the mask used
to cover the nose and the more
than.
Yes some will then madam
chairman and and Senator Ivy
Soto the then what's the point
of saying if the state because
they do because they may at some
point change in state you don't
need to anymore.
As they did gracefully during
this session.
That I do it during the session
work we come back for special
session this is for all twenty
twenty two so we come back for
special session.
All in September then that we
may be in a different situation
Madam chair Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino remember back in last
summer COVID was over the CDC
recommended that you don't need
that mask anymore so they to
change those guidelines and
circumstances can that I I just
thought of the fifties you're
pointing out that there could be
another session later in the
year and this would apply then
we would all hope there will be
but yes there could be okay.
This is just one thing to be
aware I I know the CDC at
various times as recommended by
different standards for those
vaccinated and unvaccinated yeah
I that I want to point out that
I just I don't want her to be an
issue where.
You know the city state she's
saying her fully vaccinated only
to wear a mask if you're on that
committee do we need to wear a
mask I can see that causing.
A bit of discussion.
So just be aware of that verses
and I agree you know again I
prefer Senate committee said is
if there's a rule follow the
rules and again I I just want I
don't want to get into it
because again out of out of we
have that discussion and and
there's not been a requirement
of any kind of vaccine and yet
the CDC is putting a vaccine is
a threshold the differentiate so
I think it's we're putting out
on the table as we put this
definition in here and that's
and that would be part of all of
following their guidance correct
that differential.
If if if they were to go back to
that because the fact that's
what they did this last summer
what they this last summer was
if you're vaccinated you don't
have to mask those of you not
fascinated to do it the mask and
we're just not gonna check.
I would not know those just
implementation but the guidance
was.
Right and so and so yeah I mean
it does it does I mean that's
that's potential.
In and madam chair the the way I
read it you know you one could
argue that that the centers for
disease control prevention
recommends masking in public
places for unvaccinated the very
excellences insure that all
members staff and employees and
guests who are physically
present so even if somewhere
allowed or not Matt Paul would
still have to wear a mask
regardless of vaccination status
I'm here I appreciate I
appreciate that and I think
that's an important point
because again I just I just
don't want to get into the.
You know and I don't think it's
appropriate you know us
who's vaccinating on the
activated I mean that that's a.
It's it's it's it's certainly
something someone can ask but I
don't think someone has to
answer and and we talked about
that in terms of.
Of respect well it's part of
that and so I just think it's
worth.
Putting this out there are not
that's that interpretation
certainly would address this
issue so we don't get into that
situation in.
Our fiscal the quarterback or
the Green Bay team that you're
just that an opulent.
Representative.
Immunized for that will be used
thank Senator spiritual
inoculation the thing that.
But I think a good because then
with the
What if there's an objection the
value motion is there any
objection to the document with
the just added rooms.
Saying that that's about the
case manager for the order of
this time except for the debate
I would move a do not pass on
two two one nine eight three
point one had to pass on the
rules committee substitute point
to incorporate in the changes
that we made here today any
opposition thank you for Madam I
think I still have the floor
from way back and somehow it
left but I came up with another
observation you know I think
what what we have to be careful
and I'm looking at on page four
twenty three dash fourteen there
were in some of the executive
orders and mandates put in where
when we were limiting space in
some areas we actually created
extremely unsafe
situations in the one I'm
thinking of is when the
limit the amount of people in
grocery stores that the governor
and and the secretary of health
put in and you could drive by
and see the bread lines of
people standing outside in the
cold during flu season you know
crammed up together so the one
although it was the intention to
keep people safe actually made
and put people in situations
that we're we're not safe so we
see here where the president pro
tempore may said occupancy
limits for any of the space
occupied by Senate committees.
Well if we put a limit of five
in here and there's a real hot
button topic in the whole on the
agenda and we'll let I in and we
have forty standing shoulder to
shoulder in the hallway I mean
basically we've made it safe for
the five people in here but
we've created an unsafe
situation in the hallway and so
I think learning from the
mistakes of the governor and and
her administration we need to be
smarter about it and not create
unsafe situations by trying to
make this room safe we need to
think of the others waiting in
line as well.
For.
Yes I think we're on the motion
to pass the committee solve.
Any objection.
Remember we are delighted to a
roll call vote.
Yes.
This is final passage yes you'll
Senator Baca.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator Ingle
yes.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores yes my mobile.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes
Representative.
For more Senator Moores I'm
sorry yes.
I just want I just want to say
that by working together we made
this better.
And I think I want to emphasize
that when you guys work with us
we can make things better and
you can actually get our votes
instead of just trying to do
what you've been doing lately so
thank you for sitting down with
us and working with us thank
you.
You have a.
Senator river finished because
UNESCO to be doing about the
confirmations of the government
yes certainly does but we have a
couple announcements
confirmations we are
finalizing paperwork on the
bears come for me our country's
so in order to be able to get
the hearings done some paperwork
had not been finalized on some
of the folks will just make sure
everything is finalized working
through that process and then
we'll bring them back for up for
a
a recommendation and we will
announce on the agenda which
boards will be voting on on
which days
we made I mean I'll be a
majority of them right but like.
We'll put that on the agenda so
that if there is any public
comment before the vote.
we can we see that public
comment
and then and then we will of
movies on the floor we will do
this next week you think
probably next week yes I'm yes
but I don't anticipate us having
of the meeting this week.
to the extent that were able to
get a.
of Bill introduced later this
week I would plan for us to have
a Monday meeting.
on that bill the if people have
the time necessary with that
dealing with some election
ministration issues.
And otherwise that one will be
on Wednesday and then we will
proceed with other business
after that.
Thank you thank you madam.
Are you have a list available
what we've.
Looking at a total of
Miss Vigil can provide that to.
I was kind of ones and one of
the managers are we going to the
cabinet secretaries have been
allowed in the building.
So we're gonna have to us to see
where where that is and and
we'll check in on the comfort
level of of of the entire
committee on that process.
In terms of how we manage.
There was cabinet secretaries
I'm sure want to come testify
from of us.
Yes and so we'll we'll have that
comes in.
The
madam chair just to clarify for
all the boards and commissions
we did last week
are you Senator be additional
public comment on those because
that if we did have public
comment during the hearings last
week I'm just curious I I think
there should be an I don't want
create an expectation or or or
folks to feel like they need to
centering in.
All the folks in support of the
ones that we've already done
that so thank you for that
Senator Wirth.
The so I mean we did have
somebody showed up we love
public comment but but frankly
throughout the entire week we
never went to the internet for
public comment.
And and so
this is
I don't think the the committee
would find it necessary for each
conferee to.
Go find their third grade
teacher to let us know how
wonderful they were back then
but I do want to make sure that
if anybody has any concerns.
Well about a border for a
particular country that there is
an opportunity before we take a
vote for that public comments
take place.
Questions on.
Madam chair I appreciate that
clarification just so you know
the the folks at all showed up
and did the hearings and got ask
questions yes don't need to
bring in a whole troupe of both
in support of Representative
them
so again that's a good
clarification thank you no thank
you very much for asking that
yeah.
R. and so and then I guess just
one last thing is
this is I guess to some of the
organizational meeting.
As well and so I if we what do
you guys want to do all the
purpose organizational stuff at
the next meeting we could I
think there's another meeting
coming up.
The ability to prepare for.
Richard committees bills so
madam chair.
I'm I think I'm happy to do it
now but I think I I would cure
it's going to go draft this I
want to make sure that we have
this committee held up because
it'll be the first thing on the
floor yes
so I wanna make sure that gets
done but I think
then brought him here committees
eleven thirty.
Yes the committee committee
committees committee meets at
eleven thirty in room three
twenty six so we've got a little
bit of time.
You know what I would do it at
the beginning next time.
We have enough time to the so.
So it was yes some so that that
would be all the business before
the committee today.
