This is the modernization
English I'll just proceed in
English then they can translate
in Spanish.
is the transition working.
And we got that are somewhere.
We have here the rules committee
today are the considered Senate
Bill number one Congress
redistricting from Senator
Montez and Representative Lewis.
Senator eight as as well as this
morning Representative Lewis is
that in the house business
today.
the.
And me see.
You guys just want to make a
motion about right now or do one
of the things that.
Close call.
Is it.
I think.
so
Senator sirventes if you'd go
ahead and start with a
presentation with just a couple
other quick announcements.
The before we begin we will
after the presentation this
morning.
and and we are joined by
ms Britney poss from research
and polling of those providing
technical assistance on this she
is not here advocating in favor
or against any map nor does she
think any map is particularly
good idea she's just simply
providing the the details on the
map and so that we can see what
it is
that is that is being broadcast
funding.
The
For those of you who are
watching online.
if if you would like to look at
the maps in detail and not have
to.
trying to square on your screen
for what is being projected.
the the map is can be found on
the legislative website if you
go to and then Legisla- dot gov
that is W. W. W. dot and M.
legis back
and then just do a search for.
Senate bill one.
In the second.
Senator session.
Of twenty twenty one.
that will bring up the map and
there are various PDF there so
look at details of places where
there are intersections thank.
Yes yes if you just look at the
availability on the actual
executive.
Okay.
Excavated.
We can work on that the other
thing is I'm being told there's
a nasty from the back coming
through the audio the broadcast.
And so.
Did that take care of us
feedback.
That not together that's in the
back.
I just changed microphones and
basis my phone that I was using.
As if that helps all of that.
On that.
As it from somebody that is
taken care of.
By people.
Given to them but they can't
really hear.
But I don't let's not make okay
I'm not that next in the
background with.
Get into the home is affected
everybody check to see if their
microphones.
Is.
That's all.
It has a red light in front of
you.
And the.
Yes yep it's gone.
Fact.
We'll see if that fixes the and
I do apologize to the public for
the technical issues.
for that but we also do want to
make sure that we take the
appropriate amount of time to.
For people to be able to have a.
Many people experience.
That are not.
Okay.
That's a finally okay very good.
So with that then we've when it
comes to.
Our public comment.
what we'll do is is will we'll
go ahead and receive the
presentation from Senator serve
on tests.
will then go to public comment
for public comments.
the intent is to
To take public comment in the
following order.
And that would be state senators
who are not members of the rules
committee.
than any house members who would
like to speak.
Any former legislators who would
like to chime in.
and then any members are anybody
who's press present in the room
today.
Would like to provide public
comment and then we'll go to the
zoom for public comment.
So I just the people understand
ordered with will do public
comment and then after that we
will have discussion amongst the
committee
and ask questions of the sponsor
and take any motions that may
come at that time.
and then the other thing is just
let everybody know I've
conferred with the vice chair of
the rules committee I have
something I needed time to at
ten o'clock so the vice chair
will be Cherry for period of
time at that time and and then I
will I will return so and I
appreciate that very much
Senator thank you.
So that Senator mantas if unless
there any questions from
anybody.
Others not just please proceed
with a presentation on Senate
bill number one morning good
morning the committee Mr
chairman all of you will were
introduced previously but let me
re introduce you to miss PTA's
who is here with the research
and polling I trust that she'll
be the star of the show today
because of should be able to
zero in on specific areas of the
map demographic information and
so forth and she assures me
she's got all her fingertips so
I appreciate that very much
we're here today to address the
changes to the congressional
districts following the last
decade of population changes in
the state most most of us and
the Legislature very familiar
with the of growth of population
predominately in southern New
Mexico southeastern New Mexico
and and the lack of a
corresponding growth in
population in in the Albuquerque
Bernalillo county area in
northern New Mexico in and the
the goal here is to make an
adjustment from from some of
those population numbers we're
also here today to of course
fulfill our responsibilities to
to do so under the law and and
to appreciate the work of the
redistrict Commission
and and the work related around
the state that the information
they took and
the maps of the drill based on
that information so course we
want to thank them and recognize
that by the fact that we began
by by taking a look starting at
those maps and we had their
presentation during the interim
to to the legislature as well
too so starting starting with
that background we also
yesterday many of you all
participated in a hearing we had
in the Senate Judiciary
Committee we had a very good
presentation by lawyers with
decades of experience on
redistricting litigation laws of
the voting rights act recent
Supreme Court cases of center to
give us an understanding of what
we must do from the standpoint
of.
Of of complying with with
federal law and state law in the
redistricting process and so we
began to do that as well to.
Our report to you that the the
Senate bill one that you have in
front of you takes some of the
work much of the work of the
redistricting commission the CRC
but in some respects improves on
that and so I will tell you that
right now the population
deviation for example that we
are yes it is important
requirement the absence of
deviation almost is to appoint
zero is a requirement of the
federal I'll tell you right now
that the the population
different difference between
some of these districts is a
difference of one or five or
seven people.
been and we've done that without
splitting any precincts or taken
any unusual steps to to get that
population not that's an
improvement for example just one
area of improvement on the very
good work of the CRC veterinary
want to get even tighter also
we've got three proposed
districts for consideration by
the legislature the from the
presentation yesterday I don't
think the committee question
that that we're looking at
districts that meet the criteria
that were laid out for us these
these districts are clearly
compact there clearly contiguous
the deviation is about as close
to zero is I think could
possibly be accomplished.
We've also tried to keep
communities of interest of
online and I'm sure we'll have a
great deal of discussion about
that today we've also tried to
recognize that the voting rights
act cautions us about
disenfranchised voters based on
racial or ethnic and other.
As such criteria and this map I
tried to accomplish and and and
keep that in mind as well to.
Although this committee for some
of my colleagues have been
around a lot while and a look at
some of them and smile but many
of you know this is something
that I've been trying to
accomplish for quite some time
now a couple of decades really.
Which is to to recognize that
Southern New Mexico is not.
As as popular thought of in the
media the press particularly in
the Albuquerque media press a
conservative a part of the
state.
Of Southern New Mexico the I was
elected almost consistently
conservative Republicans largely
because of the where the lines
were drawn and I'll tell you
when I first came here.
this is my third raise when I
first came here instruction I
was given is a very new
legislators is the north belongs
to the Democrats in Albuquerque
is in play and this up along to
the Republicans and that was the
day talk that was the that was
the agreement and and on the
almost on written agreement.
And and I've always rejected the
thinking that anyone party
should have
that turf laid out for them so
so for quite some time I've been
trying to find a way that that
makes the southern New Mexico
District more reflective of what
I think that districts really
includes.
Most important I think about
this map we do one thing that
but I want to emphasize that
hoping to discuss we will do so
which is like my own Senate
district this map brings
together rural and urban
communities in each of the
districts.
The Senate district that I
represent includes about a fifth
of the city of Los crucis but
that represents half of my
district the other half my
district includes someone part
eccentricity committees maybe
all know very well and taking
time to come familiarize
yourself with.
That that is a very rewarding
District made represent because
of the mix of farming urban on
and rural.
Parts of the valley and colonias
and their needs with the city of
Los crucis and again very
different needs and so one of
the goals of this map is to do
that is to look to people who
would represent us in Congress
who would have to be able to
reach out to both rural and
urban communities of interest.
And and to do so without saying
well we have that we have in
Albuquerque Representative or
such.
And and I think this map very
effectively does that.
There has been at times this
discussion or interest in
talking about keeping together
on what is sometimes referred to
as the oil patch through the
eastern part of the state
this this map does something
which I think is important which
it does bring together a lot of
the oil and gas producing parts
of our state by going up in the
San Juan area.
and bring in that around I think
that's a unifying a community of
interest that's Representative
well as map and then this last
tell you that having spent most
of my lifetime living and so New
Mexico I think this map
represents a good understanding
of what so the New Mexico
generally is like as a community
of interest the folks in.
House bad Alamogordo Los crucis
so we're sitting Luna and have
have a unity and it and it does
extend up and through the the
recorder much like this does
this this map would take the
second congressional district up
into the south valley Bernalillo
county in the west side.
Of the those communities and
very familiar with I think most
of us are are very much like my
district.
farming rural
municipalities sometimes very
longstanding families who who of
the pen as part of their local
economy and and their day to day
lives on on a farming in rural
existence in that I think that's
very very much like
the the parts of the state that
I live in a representative.
And so Mister chairman with that
a general understanding I look
forward to comments and
questions from the committee and
comments and input from.
This the public at large I'm
excited by this map I think we
should all be excited by this
map.
I think we we have the potential
to be representing in Congress
in Washington DC by why Congress
people including our incumbents
who of.
Who will rise to the challenge
of representing a complicated
state with a lot of great many
of diverse interests and a great
deal of geographic territory.
To to take into consideration
here today so with that Mr
Chairman will we'll take your
questions and all that again
this process do all the hard
work.
Well thank you very much miss
pasta you on a is there anything
on this map that you want to
just walk us through real quick
before the public comment thank
you Mr chair happy to do that
good morning Senators so we can
start in a congressional
district to you can see that it
keeps essentially the southern
corner of the district we start
here in southern Hobbes and all
of the southern counties comes
up to what is the current
boundary at Cibola and the
northern half of duty is in
district three and the southern
half of those any pueblo is in
district two
under this proposal district to
also included Letta Pueblo.
I'm in rational District one
you know this is really still an
Albuquerque Rio Rancho district
I you know Rio Rancho and and
sort of the the core of
Albuquerque downtown and of the
east side
but it also includes places like
Bernalillo proceed just all of
the east mountain communities
like Moriarty in Edgewood that
goes up into the southern part
of Santa Fe County and includes
Eldorado places like Lemme of
glorious Rios and then District
one comes down through Torrance
and take the entirety of Lincoln
County and the northern half of
Mescalero.
And then a district three also
sort of retain the core of the
Northern District
you know including Santa Fe the
Farmington area McKinley County
again holding the line at C.
eleven northern half of Zuni and
then comes down south along the
east side of the state taking in
Roswell and of parts of Hobbs
and as the Sanchez said you know
the way I see this map really is
the under the current planned
of Albuquerque really is our CD
one really is an urban district
with Albuquerque and Rio Rancho
New and now this gives all three
congressional district
districting again rural
population.
With that Mr chair I think that
was a quick and dirty synopsis
of what's happening okay.
Very well thank you very much
in that case let us go to public
comment and when we do public
comment we're gonna ask the
people.
use the microphone and and
actually if I could.
ask our sponsor under the
circumstances to props move over
to a chair so that people who
would like to yes I may may come
up to that seat.
Right there
and and yes I.
particularly as it relates to
legislators over legislators.
I appreciate that very much and
and so with that let me I do see
two current senators who are
with us today in the room
etcetera again program followed
by Senator David Davis Senator
Kernan.
This.
Have a seat and when we get I
and I will also just say that
when we get to the public.
Will will ask people not to go
longer than about two minutes or
so
but membership does have its
privileges that that will not
apply to
current or former legislators so
please be safe thank you very
much Mr chair members of the
committee.
I come before you this morning
to object to the proposed
congressional map the place is a
portion of my community of
Hobson my County fully in the
third congressional district.
As stated in today's journal the
proposed map would amplify the
voices of historically
underrepresented Hispanic voters
in southeastern New Mexico.
And I believe this is an
incorrect narrative.
Information found on the
secretary of state's website
current population growth in
Senate district forty two which
is my district in house district
sixty two which includes the
proposed area that will be swept
into the third congressional
district reflects a twenty five
percent increase in population
many of which are Hispanic.
The Hispanic voting population
has also increased in that area
in the county and the city.
With the continued growth in
Hispanic population in Lake
County.
My area remains and continues to
rank in the top seventy percent.
From our office ratings and so I
have a very high arbitrating in
that particular area.
This is an indication that many
Hispanic voters support the
values of the Republican Party
including the oil and gas
industry.
The oil and gas industry in my
county is critical to small
business including many Hispanic
owners.
The industry provides high
paying jobs to all workers
regardless of ethnicity.
In the map being proposed here
taking away from this community
the ability to be represented by
Congress woman who is very
supportive of the industry that
drives the economic engine of
this community and shifting
representation to wanted just
determined to replace fossil
fuel industry.
Which is not reflective of the
community including our Hispanic
voters.
I guess our community was
forewarned last year.
When a member of the
legislature.
Indicated that they would be
making major changes to city to.
And now that is currently
happening in the Senate I think
it's an injustice to my
community and to the industry
that has provided so much to the
state.
And also caution you to be very
careful about what you ask for
is there has been incredible
growth in my district and
particularly in the area that
you're proposing to move into CD
three.
And I'm not just talking about
Lea County but Eddy County in
genesis well.
Almost all the growth is
occurring in the area over just
the last two years and I
anticipate that it could
potentially double again very
same as permanent housing is
exploding and that portion of
Lake County.
The voting population in the
house district has increased by
fifteen thousand people and if
it should double I believe the
eleven percent democratic
vantage could shrink
substantially.
You have certainly got the
attention of the people in my
area and I anticipate that going
forward that voters will be.
Absolutely inclined to vote.
The precinct from my area that
you're including is the highest
performing precinct in my
district.
But at the end of the day using
the Hispanic population in Lake
County as an excuse to move this
into CD three I believe is
disingenuous and wrong and I
just that you do not adopt
Senate bill one thank you very
much.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Senator Gallegos.
In committee present I'm also
coming in opposition to this
Matt and I just want to give you
a few reasons I like the
presentation that Senator Kernan
again in I was wondering and it
Mr frisbee okay this couple
questions one of them is in the.
How the C. R. C. did the
resolution one of the sponsored
stated Mr that it improves on
the C. R. suit recommendations
there maps.
As one and I have clarity on.
So normally we don't we don't do
questions during public comment
however because it is a member
of the legislature.
I will allow the questions to to
be posed at the end of at the
end if if if you don't mind at
the end of public comment you
can we we you can come back and
and and ask those questions
thank you for that all we're
gonna go through one of my
concerns or Mr chair is the
communities of interest so for
instance Mr chairman and I have
the New South Hobbs but I also
go up into the Lovington area in
isn't permitted.
Resented there's Representative
differences in the areas of
interest for instance I don't
understand how Senate Bill house
would have similar.
All thoughts Las Vegas Lovington
Roswell rat tone and I thought
that part of what the
State University was doing was
trying to make sure that we have
balance I don't look at this map
is having balancing just
interest groups my other concern
was on what it's doing to the
Hispanic vote
in our area as Sierra stated we
have a large increase in voters
and that is primarily Hispanic
males just wondering if there's
a dilution paste in this as we
would move that.
Anything from
Clovis on down into this the CD
three in so those are type
questions I was going to ask but
I do have concerns just you know
for instance.
If we did use a C. R. C..
I don't see that in this map
while we would have a taxpayer
funded
so study and for the commission
not to be totally heard or
ignored because I don't see
employed I understood the CRC
was doing to be displayed in
this map and those are my
concern and all yield to the end
of the meeting thank you and and
that actually Senator guys
before you leave because of your
questions were demographic in
nature let me see if miss paas
can answer the demographic
questions.
I in terms of what the Hispanic
population is of the of the
current districts and what this
pandemic population would be of
of these districts yes thank you
Mr chair Senator gave us thank
you so the current districts
using twenty twenty census data
using our most recent data with
the current districts the
Hispanic voting age population
of congressional district one is
forty five point one percent
district two is fifty point
eight percent district three is
thirty seven point one percent.
Under these proposed districts
using the same data the adult
Hispanic population district one
is thirty seven point three
district two is fifty six point
one and district three is forty
even.
Forty point zero.
If.
And
have you may proceed with
comments if you want Mr thank
you for that and and I was so
sorry you look to see the one
that forty five one to thirty
seven three.
and then CD two fifty point
eight to fifty six point one I'm
not trying to understand the
rationale of how we're moving
population around I thought
we're trying to protect the
minority interests and I see
that there's movement there and
I was just part of my concern
okay.
What will you.
Thank you very much appreciate
that.
so.
This I don't see any a former
legislators or the house members
in the room at the moment.
So we'll go to other people who
are in the.
Audience if if one of them do it
does come in will we'll go ahead
and let them yes I suppose they
got here.
so is there anybody in the
audience would like to testify.
with regard to this map or the
congressional process.
Additional process.
Yes please.
Please come up and have a state.
Good morning chairman and
senators Representative I thank
you for having us here this
morning my name is what do on us
of us I'm the CEO of the center
for civic policy and it's
In my honor and pleasure to work
with advocacy groups across the
state and the redistricting
process this year primarily
through the C. R. C. process and
I'm here just to support to
voice my support for this
congressional map it is not the
people's map that was submitted
to the C. R. C. process however
it does the US state true to the
spirit of the people from up in
that city to is a majority
Hispanic district with a
majority Hispanic voting age
population
and it also.
According to the testimony that
we heard from a lot of our
leaders in southeastern New
Mexico it increases
congressional representation to
two congressional districts as
opposed to just one which we
heard from
compare members in that part of
the state but with extremely
important to them to have more
representation so yes we stand
in support of this congressional
map and thank you for the
opportunity for and the
testimony for the the the lived
experiences of our many members
and New Mexico who showed up at
during the C. R. C. process to
ensure fair struggle their
vision for what a fair
representation in New Mexico
would look like over the next
ten years so yes thank you for
the opportunity to support the
fact.
Thank you very much and I miss
some of the the map that you're
referring to is that concept H.
yes conflict thank you.
well is there anybody else in
the room would like to provide
testimony.
Please come up.
Good morning chair members of
committee my name is Andrés that
I know I'm the executive
director of a lab.
I members also participated in
the C. R. C. process this summer
we here in support of SB one
feeling that it captures a lot
of the spirit of the people's
map over two hundred eighty
three different public comments
over the summer in this process
this new process public
citizen's redistricting
committee shows that this is a
map that really belongs to the
people of our state people who
don't typically
get involved with the resist
redistricting process and so we
feel that this map captures that
and that the people's map it has
been the north star for this
process and so we appreciate
that it was a transparent
process that people could
participate in that it was a
something that you know there
was translation for so
communities who don't speak
English were also able to
participate and that is a
statewide process and so we
heard very voices from across
the state I'm also a resident of
the south valley and so
redistricting into CD to
directly affects me but it also
affects our members at all that
many of whom live on the west
side the south valley brought us
on our that and so to feel like
they are being represented
because Albuquerque is not a
monolith it's not just one solid
city with we're going to have
the same needs but it's it's
diverse just like the rest of
our state and so this map
captures so much more of the
needs of our state and our
members and so we do stand today
in support thank you.
Thank you very much I do see
a former state senator Tim
Jennings here
Sir if you'd like to come yes I
and
R. and Miss positive you if
you'll put the map as a whole
up.
and then
Mr Jennings just just such you
know the
for rescue members of the public
to to keep their yes wanted
about two minutes or so but that
is we're not applying that to
members or former members of the
legislature so so you are free
to go ahead and provide
testimony as you would like.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee
Yes it.
Being done gone through.
Three at least three of these
are redistricting committees I
know exactly.
I know how they work and I know.
The issues that are there in
When looking at the different
plans I I would.
Respectfully ask that.
You in in considering this
The the is up and first.
that people work are extremely
important and
They're they're like
commonalities and.
And even and.
My time in the legislature I
was.
For a great deal of that time I
was the only Democrat.
From a from my County and
And even and as it got worse I
was the only Democrat left from
southeastern New Mexico.
And
I'm.
I know like to be a moment in
the majority and I know what
it's like to be in the minority
we know both ways.
And I've had kids that went.
And Russell that went to the.
To the so called.
Probably the upper crust High
School Rausing Navid children
and went to the.
lower.
Economic level high school
across me I know what it's like
I know what it's like to be with
the children.
who are.
Discriminated against because of
that and and I am I must tell
you and in my.
Thirty eight years in public
service I can tell you I've seen
a remarkable change.
Doctor who and what we are in
New Mexico.
And
I've seen things that are quite.
Quite different.
And.
in today's time the majority of
children.
And basically almost in all
southeastern New Mexico.
The moon in Ross who were sixty
the kids in our school respect
sixty seven percent or something
like that experiment.
And I just you know the.
When you look at the children
and you did the older people
discriminated.
And when they pass the Civil
Rights that didn't that didn't
change some things but it didn't
pop the people who want to
didn't discriminate but those
people are dead and gone we
don't have that as much anymore.
So I guess what I'm probably
doing more than anything else is
playing with you.
To to look at the areas of
interest.
That are that are there that are
already established in in there
and not.
And
That.
Other areas together we're.
You don't have representation in
a lot of times what happens when
you go there.
Thank you don't look at their
areas of interest
You can design it to where
legislators are elected
officials don't even come and
visit and area hardly at all.
And so you need to be careful
with that but if you keep.
Areas of interest.
That.
Are truly congruent with each
other.
Then people tend to work
together and.
I know when they come.
This all might seem crazy to you
all but it but it's so true.
In in just in sports.
In wrongful.
It's very difficult to have
anyone from Albuquerque ever
even come to Roswell to play a
game.
And now that's that seems.
Different but we all grew up
there played all their
tournaments and they just re
alligned the districts again.
And so you know what they did
this time instead of having
somebody come from Albuquerque
two hundred miles away.
They put in may have made field
into the rock hall artesian a
powerhouse.
We put in may feel.
It's two hundred miles away to.
But Albuquerque could come down
they don't want to come.
They don't want to come here and
if I don't know if it's because
of on in the the weather
involved but they don't want to
come.
And.
I don't I'm sure it's not your
schools are big enough that they
I mean there there be even match
but it it's just it's just
different.
And you can take.
When you look at this area I
mean.
Just the activities association
we have a down to one eleven out
of thirteen state championships
at eight thirteen years she
coached she won the state golf
tournament championship she's
not even in the hall of fame the
act association now wait a
minute.
There was a man playing
football.
You know if you want me to be in
there.
Eleven out of thirteen.
And so when you look at these
maps put now kirke in with
southeastern New Mexico and
divide and Eddy County and and
you know.
I mean that that's tough.
That is real tough Laughlin
artesian have more in common
than artesian Carlsbad that's
the only good thing about it.
But when you look at it.
There are.
About the whole area of interest
you could go up.
And probably get into Baca
County and in Lincoln and come
across and if you want to do it
in New.
Create an area of interest that
is
All the way across the state
that is pretty much.
Would all together but when you
you start putting in Albuquerque
we're just different.
And it doesn't matter what color
you are you were just different
one of those when you look at
One of those the maps.
And just I don't know I.
It almost looks like well and
we're it almost looks like
somebody has a finger pointing
up.
In one of those maps.
And and I'm not I don't I don't
mean to be.
Cruel is a yes.
We're farmers and we're farmers
and ranchers and agricultural
people in Roosevelt curry into
Baca County and even Lincoln.
And that's what we are and you
throw in oil and gas and we all
tend to get along.
In but for now gritty and you're
just putting seventy or eighty
thousand people down there that
that.
Probably won't see their
Representative very often.
And and and that's just it's
just the way it's been an for
those of people who are on in a
small rural community it's
tough.
And I know our holy side of the
state is small and rural and and
we have a lot of
A lot of issues with that
And I
The other thing it is when you
look our oil and gas entry
industry is very important it's
a very important for us in jobs
and I want to tell you there's
there's two industries that if
you want to start talking about
causing problems for a minority
group.
You know if you mess with
agriculture and and oil and gas.
You're gonna call create a huge
problem because when you go to
those rigs rigs and wellsite
when you go to those red you
have.
You have to speak Spanish.
Everybody Alamos rage that's the
jobs they take when you go to a
very.
You have to be you have to be
bilingual.
And I I mean that's true but I'm
just telling.
Those are the jobs that are
taking those people and and and
they're working and they're
there all the time and you can't
fill those jobs.
If people you know without.
Minority a lot of young kids
won't go to work on time you
have to milk cows long time.
And when you have a oil and gas
rig you know that stuff you're
doing.
Please.
Multi million dollar fraction
all that work everybody safety
is dependent on each other.
And and so they you have to have
the communication levels that
are there and now it's it's a.
When you look at those are the
highest paying jobs we have in
our area.
In a.
You know when when you look at
you combine Albuquerque course I
guess now we're on to indigent
number so it doesn't matter what
you know even in a Albuquerque.
Is not even in the same area
code.
That would probably be something
nice if we could be in a you
maybe you could keep all the
five seven times in the final
fives together.
Since you know it it's a we just
went to ten digit calling so I
guess that's a little bit it is
not as important anymore but
You know.
It's really it's really
important to do that but to
divide.
Eddie and and Travis county and
Lake County up.
It is almost sacrilegious and
when you put if you put Lincoln
County away from Travis county I
mean.
That whole in southeastern New
Mexico lots of people have
houses in Lake in read those
there there and in Cloudcroft in
Otero county and but so there's
a lot of areas of interest all
the way across from you come you
can guard from.
Could County tobacco Roosevelt
chairs all that across the state
is renters that are that are
common and if you you know even
Torrance I'm I'm not sure that
Torrance County is a more
agricultural than.
The ex with the exception of
probably Moriarity is not to
maybe up there but
The rest of it I mean we were
all thank Nico food based in and
extractive industries based in
so I would hope that you would
not the type that up
and I know there.
Things about.
All this stuff but I I think.
In my heart of hearts I would
tell you that I also believe
that if you if you try to single
out.
And and say that one race or the
other.
Needs to have their own C. I
think we do a solid and Justice.
I don't I don't believe our
children look at it that way
anymore.
And and and I'm located in our
district you know.
so she tors did a great job.
In it when she was a congressman
in you know it was there that
districts has went back and
forth two or three times and and
it all depends about who gets
out of work so hard to support.
And
You you know I I think if we
can.
If we can just put them on the
basis of their urgent interest
building on economics areas more
than anything else I would ask
that you the to do that because
it that is going to be.
primary it I think the way that
brings people together in our
state and and makes every
religiously every congressional
district has to be concerned
with everything we have here.
And they have to be concerned
with the oil and gas they have
to be concerned with the call we
have up north old although maybe
it's going away
we have to be with concern with
what Intel does.
And it we all together in and if
you look at our state even bill
in the in the northeast up there
we have a real problem with
economic development regardless
of who you are.
And and I hope that we would sit
there and do that and I I didn't
I guess.
I would just plead with you
please to when you do these
maps.
Please keep areas of economic
interest out there the kids
working in among the people
working on now
Some of them operative on most
the highest economic people in
our state our our.
Are probably still angles prime
I understand that.
But the people in the kids out
there have changed in the whole
system is changed.
And now you know I think if we
if we had a real injustice that
was ever done in the state.
It's when we came in came in
here and and we can cut out.
The Navajo coal mine in my
opinion when we cut that out and
close that the coldest those are
probably the the best jobs we've
ever had in the Navajo Nation.
And no one cared about it be in
all I know we went green.
But no one cared about all those
jobs in those six hundred jobs
and sixty five thousand year
we're probably the best jobs in
the Navajo Nation were there no
telling how many people the fed.
And we we don't have any by any
means to really to recoup that.
So when we look at that I hope
we would look all the way around
and but the economic area is the
most important thing to look at
and right I would just hope that
you would look the really strong
before you bring Albuquerque now
and and and and divide.
Counties
Like they're doing the it's just
not just.
It's too hard to take it because
it it it makes everything any
decisions that are made are
going to come out of there are
going to be from now on the
building probably claim to be
racial and it.
And now.
Yeah we just had a court case in
Texas weather for Texas is going
to court on on how they were.
through their land and I hope we
don't ever have to do that again
we've done that here before too
I know.
But it's a I would just ask that
you please.
Look at the areas of interest
income across there and either
come across curry and
if you go up to five forty.
See what you can do on that to
to make a series of interest
that are economic and not.
So blatantly.
Just on the basis of race our
kids don't do that I don't you
know I don't I don't see that up
here when I was here for all
those years you know I've had
I've had experiences just as
some of you have had a up here
there were very nice.
But you know it's not to.
It's not something that I saw
practiced here.
By all the members here all the
time feuded.
Posted.
And I think we're in good shape
and I do
You know I I just.
I was gonna tell you that.
When I look at that one and I
saw that one with the figures as
have held or leave that one out
but I he just almost looks at it
and that's just my sense of
humor but
I would hope that you all would
look.
Look at that and and but please
let's not.
Let's not split up whole
counties in those who absolutely
have to split up any county in
putting more teeth Gen one and
Carlsbad another you got an
island down there that don't
ever see people.
And and it it just doesn't work
I just hope you would do that
and
Next that's all I have family
questions I'll be glad and
gentleman about.
Anything and I I do appreciate
the accommodation allowing me to
be here and
And I will I would like to say
thank you and it's nice to see
you all.
Again.
I disagree violently with the
going through a metal detector.
But that's all right.
Somebody else call those shots
and that's alright that's where
the system more.
But thank you all.
And thank you Senator Ingle for.
For being over here to but he
Senator Ingle can Terry about
when it's up there in the lines
right there on the line between.
about you know areas of interest
so.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator thanks Jim and
I and I will let you know that
your your comments are in line
with what Senator Kernan and
senator guy of us testified to
while you were in line going
through the metal detector
And
The after four thirty to be
here.
thank you no we we do very much
appreciate you coming and and
providing your experience and
your knowledge of these areas
and and the impact that it has
thank you because.
what do we have others in the
room would like yes I before we
go to the zoom.
Please.
Your honor.
Hi everybody
good morning chair and committee
members my name is fat Lana and
today I Representative The New
Mexico Dream Team as well as
part of the our people's powers
people's maps campaign and as
well as the communities of color
and the south valley I just
recently moved to the west side
of Albuquerque but for the
majority of my life I lived in
the south valley with my family
of my hand that lives in the
south valley
the south valley has been
classified as the tenth largest
town in New Mexico.
H. is the people's map there has
been a total of two hundred and
eighty three engage testimonies
across the state for this exact
map I urge you all to listen to
our communities and make this
the map that accurately
represents them.
It's time for my people to have
a Hispanic majority district and
to be able to exercise their
power.
I thank you chair at the circle
and the Senate rules committee
for hearing my testimony today I
trust that all of you will make
the commitment to listen to our
communities they have already
done their part their work and
now it's your time to ensure
that equitable and
Representative maps are drawn
and presented at this
legislator.
Thank you.
Is on the thank you very much.
But this.
Two three from you guys here
okay good morning chair
committee members on my name is
Dustin Bennett out and I am an
organizer with the New Mexico
Dream Team.
As well as part of the our
people's power and people's map
coalition I want to start by
saying thank you all today for
your time and effort.
My community and I I want to map
that reflects on our culture and
values because we do not see
ourselves there right now
concept map H. was designed and
drawn by communities of interest
across New Mexico that wanted
better and a fairer
representation across the state
we all did our part in this and
now my communities of color need
to have their fair shot and I
for what is our political
representation.
Winning maps a reflect on our
diversity in every corner of our
state I want to really thank all
of you senators for using this
year C. vetted people's map as a
foundation for this concept map
I support this mac because I
know it will ensure a bright
future for all communities in
New Mexico and most importantly
because in my up on elected
thank you.
Thank you very much.
We have other people in the yes
please go ahead.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is for the but
this on the call director of New
Mexico Dream Team and also part
of the people's power people's
not camping
as an immigrant I have learned
that is necessary sometimes to
fight for a fair representation
to all of our communities
I see that for representation
and the proposed map
I don't express my gratitude to
the members of this year's the
comedy for taking the time to
listening to more than two
hundred testimonies from
communities across the state to
come up with the idea of the
people's not
I'm also grateful for the
Sanchez the came up with this
concept that it not poll those
principles that the people's not
created
I know the we're in the is still
in the process of deciding that
districts
and I hope that for the
remainder of the process you all
as well
hold really close to your
decisions the testimonies of all
of the community members that
are gonna be coming to the
capital and also testify in
person.
You.
Thank you very much.
We have anybody else before we
go to the.
well saying nobody else arm that
we can.
see who is in the zoom that
would like to speak
Right.
Okay more in.
This call our school budget.
Range Cameron.
Range I'm missing first
off I want to point out that
this map is not compact.
To school has been commonly used
by for maps issue.
Tax Court in the polls be popped
in from zero to one of one being
the most compact these are this
is where our team on the other
maps approved by seizing
District.
I also like to see this map does
not respect communities of
interest.
K. great and seeking one
stretches from San Juan County
all the way down to a trio.
North west of Albuquerque in
suburban area this one combining
district try dialing in Carlsbad
It's been great places insurance
that my community is a city in
the metro area of Albuquerque.
Thank you just got off.
Richard Mason.
Mister Mason be there.
Yes.
Decisions
I'm trying.
Election.
As.
And.
S.
S..
Those.
And transaction from the.
Apps.
Exploration of grant transfers
maps.
Not just
Expedition.
Was changed from.
That's what the this is based on
sound and.
And and that's.
Thank you very much Mr Mason
none of this.
Mr chair and committee members
might have been it be this.
Organizer in grant and Hidalgo
counties on behalf with X. ray.
Instead like to to.
The process for offering a
rigorous and transparent
process.
Out for the end of constituents
all over the state including two
the public yes.
This.
In strong support of just being
run.
What we look like or what part
of New Mexico have from when it
comes to having a doctor who
represents us most of us once.
This.
Red or blue issue this is about
the fact that we are.
Representative communities
remain pro and we all have equal
opportunities and.
S. represents the most of the
people.
This map represents the true
graphics of our communities.
Increases the Hispanic voting
age population of CD to.
Fifty six percent and I'm sure
is that all come question on
districts are majority minority.
With the current demographics
using the census data.
Changes for a future and that
time is now just give us the
ability to do so our opposition
have said let's not make this
about race because of this
change.
Yes yes and two people of color.
Incorporates the map map H. the
people's map and I believe it
should carry on with the slogan
of the people's.
By the people.
Keep that in mind as you wrote
thank you for your time.
All the various thank you very
much there's been this not mom
and also please.
Yes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee hi I am the
amendment is I am a member of
Santo reservations I am here to
favor.
This map my family and I have
lived for years and the family
and it's very different from
other areas of Albuquerque we
don't all have the same
resources as other areas my
family and I work
for the center for.
Sure sure that our Hispanic
community not excluded from the
twenty twenty census.
Because
of thousands of households to
participate in the census with a
special focus.
And minority communities.
Our communities are here to
ensure that our maps.
The congressional district Rep
districts represent our
communities.
Representative
and madam chair Hispanic federal
preparation service.
Representative what comes from
our communities thank you.
Thank you very much miss been
thus far and also for the
audience when someone is yes
fine and Spanish through the
zoom we will hear the
simultaneous translation.
So so she was testifying and
then that was the translator
that came through the audio.
maybe not let's kind of.
Maybe not Lazcano.
When.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee
Just because a member of the
center.
Insurance.
Central.
Has a membership.
Which.
Most members are in the south
valley.
Until we work hand in hand with
our communities to ensure that
our New Mexico families can
prosper.
We can do this.
The state released from the maps
and our communities.
To see that Representative for
our community it's this is a
time to strengthen
districts of the majority
minority.
Compressional district will
money.
Minority majority district of
Hispanic voting population thank
you for adopting many of our
priorities and.
Sen principles of the papers
map.
Thank you.
Thank you very much is let's
cuddle also.
With the last couple of yeah I'm
all members of.
The good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee I.
run in the Senate and I am
member of the center.
Senator has a membership of more
than five thousand of which most
of us live in the south valley.
We're very proud good morning
members of the community
throughout the state.
From the sounds and testified
and shared our experiences.
And promotion of the purpose map
return the building to.
Yes yes I'm turning to democracy
actual paper of the ruling
pro.
Drafted.
Of these principles my family
and I live in the south family
will for more than twenty years.
Representative for and now that
I have a grandchild.
The responsible has harmed.
As a family.
The importance of participating
in the census and in the process
of redistricting.
I would like to assure myself
that our maps the first
representative of the community.
Thank you for the first time but
we have a map.
H. Hispanic voters consolidated.
To reflect the updated and
Hispanic.
Preparation each district which
comforts minority into a voting
majority so that somebody from
our own community elected we
need to ensure that our
communities prosper during the
next ten years.
And the the following
generations including my
grandson and so that our
families can prosper thank you.
Thank you very much management
also a.
closely check.
Intend to speak to at Mr chair
members of the committee.
On behalf of no need to go to.
That storm.
Respect.
The special western Mexico.
Mexico Apache tribe.
I would just like to clarify.
Does not speak on behalf of the
tribes and the group had
listened carefully to the
tribe's consent.
References and.
Last six months.
The course of this process.
That is an issue of the use of
maps to the.
Thank you very much.
Okay very well that concludes
the the comments.
and I do want to thank everybody
who testified by zoom for
staying within time.
that is very much appreciated it
allowed us to to get through
everybody and not have to cut
anybody off so thank you very
very much for that
and I would just
I do know that we've had a
couple of other senators come
and I want to make sure nobody
else is wanting to testify at
this time very well
Senator Montez if you will
please join us back up here at
the witness table.
And we will now go to questions
from committee and and also as
are doing questions real
committee said regardless if you
want just couple questions
you're free to do so as well.
is there any.
Senator.
I thank everybody for their.
Discussion today you know it's
definitely here Senator Jenny
funding clear.
Thing is here's my here's my
deal I feel strongly that that
the problem facing us as both in
our state and nationally is
urban versus rural you know we
can just accept that but we've
got to America is you know I
seven five versus five of you
know I just I don't buy that and
I'm not saying that this is
going to solve this urban rural
divide it's very deep and very
complicated but I love this back
because it directly addresses
that stereotype the north is
Democrat it's been at the south
this conservative Republican so
I just personally I just find
this.
very exciting and I know look we
can't take the politics out of
redistricting you just can't but
I I really like how this map
addresses the urban rural thing
and I guess I would just
conclude.
You know.
That Bruce Hornsby song and I
can't sing.
but.
You know thank you for trying.
But you know that's just the way
it is some things will never
change in the so anyway thank
you for presenting this map.
Contracted.
Yes so.
As we go through each each of
these apps may develop a theme
song.
Senator Ortiz beat up and then
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you senator for bringing
this forward is great to see
senator Jennings here.
I realized halfway through his
this presentation just how much
we miss his.
The particular style of of
debating an issue that.
That that manages to range far
and wide and and and always be
entertaining and it was good to
see it to.
I I just wanted to make a few
points of about the map I I
actually started out being very
skeptical about both the
people's Matt and about your
attempt to base
read a portion meant a lot of
people's map start.
But the more I look at it.
Especially looking at the
demographics on the back of the
last page of the maps we were
given this morning I think
you've done a really nice job of
coming up with three districts
that age are very much like New
Mexico as a whole.
with with you know rural urban.
Republican Democrat they are all
very similar profiles the
Republican democratic
registration is very similar in
all three the the his the ethnic
make up of all three districts
very similar.
at at I really think that that
what we what you've created here
if we adopted.
The compressional.
Reapportionment the reflects the
state of New Mexico as a whole
we don't have.
I mean that was the reason I ask
that question initiative of Mr
Olson.
To what extent does communities
of interest.
Factor in should the should
factor into our decision making
because in New Mexico we only
have three districts.
How can you take fifty five
hundred communities of interest.
And give them up so that each
one feels like they're totally
in one district you can't in
fact we had some pueblos us
don't put us into one district
make sure we're in two districts
because at it amplifies the
number of congressional votes
that that that might support us.
The the the when the park it's
divided up we make it two bites
at that particular piece of
bacon so.
You know I and I understand it
that it does seem strange have
Albuquerque divided.
Just like it probably seems
strange to have Hobbs divided
meant it the division line item
that you created in
Albuquerque's right through the
middle of my district.
Right through the middle of but
Ellis now becomes part of
district to.
Part of my district the
remaining part of my
also to school also becomes part
of the district to the rest of
it stays in district one.
you there are a million
different approaches to divvying
up a state like New Mexico.
Into three district you've come
up with one that at least is
fair all three of those
districts look very similar to
each other.
and I just wanted to make one
comment about the Hispanic
population on the back.
And and Jim alluded to that when
he said.
Mr chairman that the that the
number of kids the the
percentage of kids in the
schools is much more right the
Hispanic reflection more
Hispanic identity than does the
population as a whole these
numbers on the back adult
Hispanic.
I think that the reality is that
in every one of these three
districts the actual Hispanic
population is going to be much
heavier because we have a much
younger Hispanic population and
I think that that means in the
future the trend is going to be
for all three of these districts
to become more as bank I was
going to protest it district one
where I live now if this is
adopted
would only be thirty seven point
three percent adult Hispanic.
It would be the smallest
percentage and yet knowing my
district I know that that that
that the kids in the schools are
like seventy percent Hispanic
they are going to be much more
likely to be the ones at the
start the new families and and
and and by the new homes in that
district so I I really think
you've come up with the with the
pretty good approach my only
question for you is
It's not really question but you
said something that the just
immediately I turned to the
senator Wirth and sent that's
not right you said that the
growth is been in southeast New
Mexico not in Albuquerque and
and and and the north but in
fact you you may be talking
about percentage growth but in
terms of run numbers isn't it
true and L. as in two minutes
plus that.
Alfa Bernalillo county Sandoval
County Santa Fe County in doing
Ana County have all grown more
people.
David Lee County or Eddy County.
Mr chairman I noticed to speak
to speak Senator Wirth when I
said that because I think maybe
misspoke and four I may have
said it in the wrong way what I
intended to say was this among
the existing three congressional
districts as they exist here
today our Albuquerque is under
the the as I understand the and
all have missed pause confirm
this but my understanding is
that and the the first district
is under the target population
we're as see the two in CD three
are are over the targeted
population that that's what I
meant to communicate with you
and I'll have her confirm that
that's my understanding where
we're at today in other words it
I I I'm not you're right it
probably so that in a way that
suggested the where the growth
is or isn't happening what I
meant to say is among the
relative three districts this is
where the the greater growth is
happening or not having among
the three hundred three district
yes but but I'll have her
confirm that with me but I think
that's the and that's what I
meant to say Senator and I just
saw your site so you can get
that right I but I probably said
it wrong but that's what I was
trying to communicate hope
that's more clear.
You
chair and sponsor and and
Senator TV Pino at that's
correct so under the current
districts district one of the
only one with the negative
deviation from that ideal
population of about seven
hundred five thousand district
two and district three were over
a district three very slightly
district to about one point two
percent.
Okay thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman that's I
appreciate the help me correct
that.
Thank you senator Pete out
Senator Ingle.
The the discounted for your
program.
The thing about it is is it's a
now we've made this even more
isolated area with this map as
far as.
Basically.
have we've had representation
representation we have doesn't
come down to those counties and
because such as to where it is
don't they don't.
Don't have enough influence on
the election and
I I worry about this but you
know it's so I've been in this
in this here a few years and
this is my fourth redistricting
and politics is is redistricting
that's all of that stretch what
it is we have parameters and
stuff we go by by the same token
it sure it's whichever party can
figure out how to make in our
case three congressional
Democrats each and that's what
this map does and I do think
that the
Senator Jennings sisters pre
accurate on the common common
areas that we have in common and
that there's there's not a lot
there and I wish we could we
could do a little bit better
there but anyway it's it's this
mattress what it is and there
are worse after.
But it's thank you.
The.
You know as a little expression
goes but I've got to be some
place.
the redistricting is is.
Very difficult a difficult
proposition for anybody and it
says it's done hopefully with
with as much common sense and
and care for people as we can
but I do think this is a.
This.
This is not not if you're math
which we could grow thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle I still
in person.
Senator portal.
Senator Pirtle and then
And and and then Senator before
I begin let just that I do want
to make sure that we are able to
get back to Senator thank us.
At some point and I do know that
Senator Moores also wants to
speak.
then the other thing is I've
been notified that there are
there are some people on the
zoom who'd who intended to speak
and I get a chance to speak.
And we're already and discussion
in committee normally we would
not go back to that but this is
a once in a decade.
Process and my sense is that we
should allow whatever public
comment people have at this time
and so
anyways so so center portal go
ahead and then and then we'll
see if Senator Moores and sensor
guy goes and then we'll see if
we can yeah right rotate some of
them okay thank you Senator
thank you Mr chair you know I
really have nowhere else to be
so I can make this take as long
to
my afternoons pretty pretty
empty so but I do as fast as I
can here you know I've I've
heard a few things sitting here
and it's pretty disingenuous to
say that you know we tried to
keep communities of interest
together.
I mean you look at this map and
see that's that's just not the
case
You look at just right smack dab
in the middle this blue map
you can drive through the Honda
valley.
Stop in at any of those ranches
and many of of the people that
ranch in in that area are
Hispanics that their families
been there.
For hundreds of years and tell
me that that they have anything.
Anything in common.
With people in the northern part
of that district.
How can we sit here and claim
that we're putting communities
of interest together.
When you can go into a ranching
community like capitation.
And drive north into Santa Fe
County and say these are
communities of interest.
That they look alike or they
think alike the have similar
economies and things like that
regardless of skin color.
Regardless of it what community
of interest what does that mean
to you to me it's values I don't
care what somebody's colors
other skin is what kind of
person are you very good person.
Are you somebody I can trust for
you somebody that I can count
on.
I think we get lost in that we
use that as something that we
can draw a map that basically
you know to use we're
disenfranchises my rural
communities.
Again regardless of skin color.
Because it's not about that it's
not about Republican and
Democrat it is about urban and
rural.
You put enough urban in each one
of these districts that it's
very possible that within about
fifty square miles all three
Congress people could live.
And I think that should give
everyone concerned.
Because this state is huge.
I look at this and we say.
We want to do communities of
interest so we pull in San Juan
County because our oil and gas.
So I'm not really sure it's been
a while since I took fifth grade
social studies how how long it
is or how far it is from one
corner to the next corner around
the map.
But I'm gonna guess at somewhere
around twelve hundred miles.
We go twelve hundred miles from
hops up to send to San Juan
County to get a community of
interest when we could drive
across the street in senator
Cornyn's District and have
community of interest.
So I don't think that when we
say in use that term that.
We're being quite truthful
because you can look at it you
know this is three colors I
believe could of went to
Applebee's going to Bourbon
street state can oreo shake with
my five year old son and it
comes with three pre all those
in a piece of paper we might've
been able to do this.
I do.
The reality is we have
Republicans in the state we have
a conservative voice.
And to me.
Drawing three districts because
that's what it's about you can
look and see the performance.
That's what this is about.
You know we should have at least
one Republican Congress person
from the state of New Mexico
early so conservative
congressperson.
And and I understand you know if
if the Republicans were in power
they would probably be attempts
to do some of the the the rest
but I wouldn't agree with that
because I don't think that's the
right thing to do.
Because.
Out.
Turn off the.
Well not much optimism but make
sure that it's that muted.
We have our unmuted to make a
comment is not appreciated.
Just and if if we're to go back
to have comment from people on
the zoom it needs to continue to
be respectful and appropriate
and not to interrupt other
people.
And the.
Although I'm I'm very familiar
with the substance that was
stated.
being a dairy farmer from Travis
county
we will carry on now.
Senator Pirtle about apologize
to that that have.
I thank you Mr chair I know you
have no control over that that's
the beauty of of zoom in
unfortunately it's the result of
such a polarized
State polarized country that we
live in I think that right
there's a perfect example of
what this map is going to do.
It is going to polarize more and
more the state of New Mexico
beyond what it is now.
The people in Roswell.
Artesia Hobbs.
Feeling as if they don't have a
voice.
Because we swing up and we pull
in Santa Fe.
You know I live in Roswell I can
tell you it's a whole lot of
different.
Appear.
You can simply go into these
communities in right now see a
difference.
So I think the polarization the
distrust of government.
especially with in New Mexico
for New Mexico government and
this body I think is going to
become elevated because of map
such as this I think
With a little bit consideration
we could have created you could
have created to districts that
will always and forever be
Democrat seats in strongly make
a Republican see.
But this is this is what I'm
sure is going to passed through
that's what happens when you're
fifteen members out of forty two
members.
and elections have consequences
and I understand that fully more
now than ever.
But I am going to propose a map
as drawn I think
You know it is very disingenuous
to say that that the intent was.
Communities of interest because
you can look at the back back of
this packet.
And right there it's all about
performance.
And nothing else.
And that's a sad day because the
CRC.
Their goal was to create that.
And.
This is what we've ended up with
and it's unfortunate and I I
really appreciate Senator Kernan
CSE words those were
probably some of the best of us
really excited to hear.
Because it really hits on it.
But.
I I just think we need to quit
using the words communities of
interest and just call it like
it is but thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Pirtle
serve up to do on a yes I okay
of
Can we are Senator do you mind
if if they're gonna go sits in
your seat for enrollment.
Our state more nearby so you can
use the yes.
That yes of.
I think senator Morris requested
that may be soon be completed or
concluded prior to further
questions from himself at least
but if so I just wanted to
remind you that I I appreciate
that thank you yes hello so what
we'll do then Senator Gallegos
will go back to them and they
will go to senator Morris thank
thank you center market Mr
Chairman.
May I appreciate this I just
want to go back to my questions
and looking at.
Of the staff and the difference
between the people's map which
is concept H. I noticed that
this the finger down from in
port Townsend is wider and my
concern with that is in the new
numbers of CD one.
There's a difference in the
change of seven point eight.
For Hispanics I'm wondering why
you made that no no
Representative to give and take
but the people all of the CDC
took a lot of time in presenting
that map and I'm wondering for
the change because in and see
one there's seven point eight CD
to the five point three in the
Hispanic numbers and I'm
wondering why that thank you for
that because that part of his
wider what what did that
accomplish.
So Senator it would be
impossible for me to go through.
Resync by precinct or or every
part of this map to identify why
a specific or what a purpose was
to include or not include any
given increasing this are I
think the best I can do for use
by address in broad terms
although you're referring to a
finger thank you for years and
you're talking about in Hobbs so
we we can zoom in there so I can
understand what you mean by
finger I don't know if that's
the same thing that senator
Jennings was referring to but
but
you know all of our Senate maps
all of our congressional maps
have.
Something other than perfect
rectangular features because of
course they follow precinct
lines and so forth so so our
interview we we can identify
what you're talking about in
terms of a finger here.
We.
Some of this money is inclusion
of small power of portability
Chavis to Baca Guadalupe it is
different the hand of the map
page.
So Senator you're you're
referring to map H. I've heard
some of the presentation here to
be the people's mapper plan I've
heard some people recognize that
that that even the conservation
this is not the people's plans
or this tell you that we started
the process with the C. R. C.
mapping and then we made some
broad efforts to to try and
modify that in part as I said to
to get the deviation down you
asked earlier the question about
it was one of your questions
earlier about deviation and I
have made the statement this
improves on the CRC by deviation
I can ask Miss pause to give you
the specifics of that but we we
did improve on I think two of
the three CRC plans by taking
the deviation effectively zero
of state statistically zero she
can she can confirm those
numbers for me from whatever the
CRC plans are but you'll see
right there the deviation that's
the that's is that the C. R. C.
that's concept dates that we
look at the deviation there
you're going to see and the
third column a difference of
thirty three sixty three thirty
one and the three different
districts and if you can do that
for this the Senate bill one you
know you're down to a we're
we're not a household difference
between the three different
congressional districts so
that's what I meant to say we
improved on the mediation and
that's what I said to you
earlier that was a question I
think well as an Mr and Senator
project that address more
thought was the taxpayers put so
much money in the C. R. C. I
just wonder why we had looked at
this for the right during the
process any additional really
bothered me this on CD one at
seven point eight is going to be
I think a problem in the future
but well I thank you for the
elegant also stand up in
opposition to this thank you.
I thank you a survey was lets up
return back to zoom if we could
and my understanding is we have
actually a C. R. C.
member Kress some Senator who
was also for a time the chair of
the American Bar Association
committee on election law who is
in the zoom.
And if we could elevate Mr
subset of and then and then
we'll go through other people
who may be there Mr says hello
please proceed.
Well good morning that would
not.
But it's also.
Lattice also never mind okay.
Very well.
Please this is a different one
but please proceed nonetheless.
The federal percent are you the
one minute.
My name's Senator I'm seventeen
years I've been living in house
with seventeen years I have
three children and my husband.
Thanks in just an audio I want
to some most excellent part of
submission but when a bill we
support.
What the centers are presenting
as being run a concept H.
because it follows that the
model established by other
people's maps we are a Pacific.
Cause us and essential workers
in Southeast New Mexico are
finally being listened to to
this map people snap two point
oh.
Hops and I met with people.
From other places that were
coming to work in my community
so I ask you how is that
possible.
Legislative
community of interest then thank
you.
I thank you very much do we
have.
Other people.
Okay I'm being told we don't
have anybody else on the zoom at
this time miss us other thank
you very much.
if if mistress also does log in
the we will go to him and but in
the meantime.
senator Morris please proceed.
Thank you.
It's about this and I think
Senator Ingle is right there are
worse maps
first of all when I want to
touch about the C. R. C. as the
sponsor with senator Ortiz C. P.
you know and Center o'neill was
a champion for independent
redistricting for many many
years why you said this was
approved but why didn't you just
introduce one of the C. R. C.
maps that the they spent
diligently months traveling the
state taking public testimony
putting together an affair on
that but these maps together for
us to choose but I don't see any
of those being considered we're
not debating that we're debating
something that was created
according to a host Senate
former centers current Senator
formerly known as a Democrat
during his speech on the floor
said this this map have been
shared with the caucus and is
expresses concerns that system
franchise and Hispanics on the
west side so it seems like this
map has been notice or been
shared with a small group of
people and the rest of us are
seeing a right now so why are we
ignoring the the public
transparent the work that the
CRC did for many months and then
a map was developed by a small
group of folks behind closed
doors.
so Mister and respect where
would I would challenge the
premise of the question
noted that there are expected to
and I'm sure I'm sure you would
understand why.
we do I think our office
respect and appreciate and and I
said so earlier today the work
of the CRC it was important work
the the suggestion that that
this map was
cooked up by a small group
people in secret behind closed
doors again I I reject strongly
just like any other legislation
center you and I worked on
legislation before it doesn't
begin with the entire Senate in
the room it be it I was working
on new legislation yesterday I'm
sure many of you are getting
ready for the coming session
begins with a small group of
people and grows the the map
you're saying in front of you
was not completed until.
Monday morning I believe I I
think we were taking input
meaningful input and it and it
was last changed I believe
Monday evening I'm sorry US
maybe Sunday evening or Monday
morning and it was introduced on
Tuesday.
So of the notion that this was
I've never met with the center
for civic policy I've never been
to any of of the meetings that
we're challenge perhaps on the
floor yesterday or the manner in
which those were done
I have not met with the the the
the people's map proponents of
I've done these things
deliberately very candidly they
probably think I'm an accessible
to them but I I want to be able
to tell you that that that this
was not
somebody's somebody's dream put
together and and all I can tell
you is what I said earlier I've
been trying this for twenty
years.
and and I think you'll
understand why when you think
about the representation the
communities of interest
disingenuous Hispanic population
all the things that have been
presented today I hope you
appreciate what it means to be
from Dona Ana County though the
largest populated county of the
district as a Hispanic myself
you referred to Senator
Candelaria as comments to be
from that part of the state into
it and look at the history of
the people who Representative us
in that community.
As the only Hispanic majority
congressional history have right
now is that second congressional
district in its belly it's
within one percentage point I
think of a Hispanic majority and
and and the it's hard to suggest
that that that the
representation of from that
congressional district reflects
reflects those interests and
that and those communities so I
I know I went off a little bit
further than your question but
but I I again I am repeating I
reject the premise of this was
done somehow cooked up and and
up in secret we we we're working
on it and there was drop not
very long after we completed
thank you senator appreciate
that answer is always right and
always enjoy our conversations I
will bring up a very good point
that but the representation of
this that that that was very
disingenuous of some of the
public comments that that was
current the congressional
district which is getting a lot
of the attention this
conversation is currently
represented by a native American
female
the previous representative was
a Hispanic female quite frankly
if a certain Senator sitting in
front of me had continued to run
in that race ten years masa
minutes ago it would probably
still to this day be represented
by Hispanic male that's what I I
think you'd probably still be
punished and Siberian watched in
a few it stated that race you
know I had a conversation so
that this work has currently
and.
Representative been represented
by a very diverse population I
probably would have been if a
certain candidate had stayed in
that raced a couple years ago
also I do find that that public
testimony disingenuous that the
that a their voices are not
heard because of being heard and
have been heard and in the past
and the future will continue to
be heard
In a year you know I really
applaud you go off and take in
the deviation down from thirty
people down to seven people
that's a that's a huge prop
programs is it's a wrestling are
the rest the maps that we're
gonna be doing for the house and
the Senate going to be zero
deviation also if if we have
more thirty deviation on our
other Masser doing are gonna
throw those out and make sure we
get down to zero deviation on
the map since that's obviously
such a priority.
Mister chairman Senator we have
a Sanchez if you work very hard
in the Senate mapping and I I
think I would be best to defer
to that hearing and when that
map is presented to address that
time I think we get ourselves
off in the weeds we start
beginning to talk about the
Senate map where that's going to
go I I hear what you're saying
which is you're looking for some
level of consistency and let me
just tell you that that the now
in my third redistricting
session it's always been
impressed on me the importance
of having effectively is zero
percent deviation of course
there's some statistical room in
there but but the federal
requirements of under the
federal law do not allow for of
much more than zero deviation
between the three congressional
districts in fact there's even
talk in some instances of
splitting precincts between
congressional districts to
assure that deviation there are
there is not such a tight
requirement with regard to state
really disturbing I think you're
probably aware of this and so to
answer your questions I do not
expected zero deviation to be
seen in the Senate mapping but
I've not been working to achieve
that or try to achieve as a goal
in this case that was a goal and
one that we one of when I told
you we're still working on this
Monday morning I think I'm going
back on his Monday morning that
we met with the purpose of the
meeting Monday morning was to
make changes to get to a
deviation of zero
and so we were still moving
precincts around trying to get
that and and that was the
principal and I think.
If I'm I'm thinking back I think
that was almost the entirety
tired of the changes we were so
making Monday the day before we
introduce the bill was to
achieve a zero deviation.
I hope that's the case and the
other map some tells me that the
other maps will be zero
deviation we work hard towards
that because Senator McKenna
notes were different talk about
a different bill but I I just
this and sent a message to other
folks not to issue and I'm gonna
Mr chairman of Acura please
remember to it's it it's
relatively easy for me to
achieve a zero deviation with
the go to help of of experts
because only then with three
districts you know becomes a lot
more complicated when you're
dealing with forty two districts
and and I'm sure the task is
much greater so I I would I
would even try to compare the
the the fact that it's easy for
me to achieve zero deviation
with again help of the experts
in really doing with three of
three districts and and plenty
of precincts along the edges and
boundaries which is what we're
doing we were swapping out
precincts back and forth the
center that is actually what do
you have a finger here with why
is the finger wider in well for
the not those lines those edges
occurred because we're moving
precincts in and out of the
district to get this through the
VA.
Appreciate that the C. Garcia as
I mentioned earlier that part
part of their process was to
send their maps to next for the
games in North Carolina South
Carolina I don't think there's
anyone from the C. R. C. here
the Polish side professor to
determine and analyze some that
they hadn't been gerrymandered
for political gain
And all three of the maps
including age which I think was
probably the closest to being
politically gerrymandered was
dean is not politically
gerrymandered but this quote
unquote improvements have they
been evaluated and condescending
process to see if these have
been this map that's been
present right now has been
politically gerrymandered and if
not I mean we pay this this
consultant to do just that why
not.
Senator this map is not been
assessed by any expert to my
knowledge about ask for an
expert to assess it
I have enough self confidence in
in my assessment that frankly I
wouldn't delegate to that
question to anybody else I can
look at this map and I'll give
you an assurance right now and
all state crime reputation on it
that this is not going to be
considered in in lawfully
gerrymandered map as a.
You can paint expert we get it
for me for free.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you Mr chair the in a lot
of the conversations also about
the community of interests and
and and I know the comments was
made that the some of the
important to an oil patch and
the.
So these part of the state oil
patch are similar
community of interest but it's
notable on the map that the the
community inches in the
southeast part of the state is
divided right in half with Lee
and Eddy County which is some of
the largest producers of the oil
and gas our oil in our state is
excluded from that community of
interests outside of political
gerrymandering why didn't this
map this finger as it's been
called run the entire length
down the the side of state to
include that community of
interest of oil and gas that was
claimed that this map was trying
to do
keep together
who could easily have been done
cap some of the community of
interest in Albuquerque a lot of
of the paradise hills and west
side subdivisions which are not
farming agricultural areas are
kept and the second
congressional district so why
are we dividing that particular
community ventures and half of
the not for political reasons so
your your question included the
promise that this is a
politically gerrymandered map
and and again I want to reject
the the promise again with all
respect you and I appreciate the
most comments earlier I think
they were intended to be nice to
me I of the nearly always nice
to well the the the suggestion
that point since the suggestion
that I would still be in
Congress of a run is is a lot of
supposition but but the but the
the first of all let me take
that off the table for you
that's not an objective here at
all of course and the and the
why the map does not come down
along the entire eastern border
is answered by by the process so
you're very familiar with which
is if you come down and pick up
those populations you've got to
shed population someplace else
in the district and economic and
the where or or I guess if
you're you're losing it in the
second district by putting it
into the third then the second.
Has to pick up population we're
going to go you gonna go more in
Albuquerque right than you are
now or or gold then up into
McKinley and San Juan which
defeats the whole point the
purpose of doing that so it's a
as you well know center this is
a balance and you you adhere
you're required to take
someplace else of the to answer
your questions quite simply that
it's a it's an effort to balance
on the populations it's an
effort to try and recognize
where again people living where
they transact of Business and
and how they operate in in my
experience it's very common for
people in Otero county home road
of Los crucis becomes their
their hobby if you will I think
that's generally true for people
from Carlsbad having a lot of
folks and calls would come into
el Paso in Los crucis as part of
their their daily lives and so
forth once you start getting up
in the Chavez county
that that relationship I think
begins to.
To diminish someone and I I know
a lot of folks that's the then
Chavez Ronson's over they they
do their business they do their
flights they do their travel out
of Albuquerque on because the
distance is about probably
pretty pretty similar so that in
that in that that's the best way
I can answer your questions
where those divisions to a place
and and.
Once again I I hate to sound
repetitive but but if you really
look at what this map look like
ten years ago we're trying to do
its again that's that
recognition that.
Lawrenceburg Silver City Deming
may come in the Los crucis
Carlsbad home go to the
committee Los crucis.
Once you start getting up on the
Senator but they're going to
Albuquerque.
Thank you I appreciate those
answers
the work.
I appreciate those answers
I think this is a why I've been
for last ten years and I joined
senator Neil many years ago and
she's in a constitutional
amendment to do independent
redistricting I hope those are
still here ten years from now
and hopefully Center Neil will
lost up up for the independent
redistricting process is that a
political lotus is my good
friend a Senator Ortiz the Pino
not co sponsor this bill last
year to take this out of
politicians hands because this
is what happens with us we spend
a lot of money to get a C. R. C.
process I don't like the maps of
some of the maps C. or C.
developed but I think the we
need to get this other
politicians hands and that our
wish that we had respected the
CRC process will but more that
we were voting on one of their
bills are the maps up and down
and if we we couldn't come to
consensus on one of those three
maps then we could have started
amending them but we never even
introduced on I have to I'm
trying to introduce one but
course Council services running
has got it the priority on my
map even though it's already
been drawn up
the so we can at least have a up
vote on what to see Garcia did I
think that's why hopefully in
the next ten years we can get
this out of our hands as
politicians on the CRC should
process should have been
followed weeks we spent a lot of
time ten years center in New
York that you've been work you
work on that issue Center TCP on
I sat through a lot of hearings
over the summer with the chair
US justice Chavis advocacy
groups try to couple up with a
little bit bit fair process and
more transparent process and it
seems very quickly have the
grass into the typical political
process that this building is
quite frankly our buildings
across the country do this and I
think that's why I think we need
to move to a constitutional
amendment for the C. R. C. so
that we this is independently
done so we don't have these
fights in this
process not only for our.
Cease but the gross receipts and
education department we need to
move forward this is a perfect
example of why we need for us
our floor leader here once
sponsored independent
redistricting legislation when
he was in the lower house so
hope of having a look across the
aisle here other through my
colleagues who who advocated for
that process but we stand up for
that process and I wish we would
have had a vote up or down on
those maps and if we can come to
a consensus that we could of us
started amended as opposed to
Right out the gate coming up
with a map that would have been
drawn
but some are smaller groups of
people as both a very open
transparent system that we have
set up for the CRC so I I have I
appeal for those who are gonna
be around for next ten years to
work on a constitutional
amendment ceremonial sponsor
that with you again center to
see Pino senator Wirth that we
cannot dust off your old a
constitutional amendment and get
that passed so we get a live up
to those ideals that the the
that you guys wanted to make
government better more
transparent and better for the
people and so this political
process thank you thank you
Germans of artistic chairman RT
supino hello forty do you work
with my colleagues across the
aisle to come with a better
system ten years from now.
Senator Moores Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair I have a
question I've heard the term
throughout this process the
people's map can can you tell me
where that originated from what
is that.
Mister chairman Senator
I don't know the origin of the
expression the term for the
title to any given map these
maps are all identified for
example the.
The map that we looked out over
the earlier from the CRC Center
Morris was referring to those of
those referred to I think this
concept page I think is the one
that is probably the closest to
Senate bill one but
why has the designation as the
people's map is I think a very
quick creative rhetoric
rhetorical device probably in
the and and they're they're I
don't know what more to say
about the origin of that term
for that description for that
map thank you Mr chair thank you
senator you sound as perplexed
as I do with that in the I guess
the reason I bring that up is
because I simply as you stated I
think Senate bill one closely
reflects the people's map and so
it's been curious to me
throughout the whole time what
people are we talking about Mr
chair we talking about Democrats
or Republicans Mr chair we
talking about brown people or
white people are we talking
about farmers are city people.
These are the questions that
come into play Mr chair when we
make a label such as that and
when we try to create districts
for representation based on race
and things like that Mr chair
the fact is this status forty
seven percent Hispanic Mr chair.
So if you're Hispanic out there
we're being Representative
minutes Mr chair.
All we have to do is low we
cannot be ignored Mr chair.
Forty seven percent of the
population in the state cannot
be swung to the side.
So Mister chair we just need to
get out of all you want
representation let's get out of
and let's get to these maps Mr
chair as they should be drawn.
Where people are having a
likeness in their lifestyle in
what the experience day to day
we've seen some of the examples
here today the Senator Kernan Mr
chair so clearly and
articulated.
Her issues were in the southeast
I can go over here to central
Valencia County my own district
Mr chair and I can articulate
exactly the same issue where we
use a division of the river in
Senate district twenty nine
which is my district.
To cut Valencia County exactly
in half.
Except of course for real
communities for some reason
which shops on the other side of
the river lives on the other
side of the river that is now in
in congressional district to in
this map versus compressional
District one.
Mr chair so.
You know I have cousins that
live across the river I assure
you we grew up together we have
the same life experiences Mr
chair we live the same lives day
today I see them on a weekly and
even daily basis Mr chair.
The vote in congressional
district one.
Although in congressional
district to.
But somehow.
Everyone in the state has a
relation to a lifestyle
Albuquerque which I don't of
look down upon or anything I was
a resident Albuquerque myself
for many years Mr chair so I can
appreciate.
What that is but to think Mr
chair.
That.
Albuquerque has anything to do.
With a life until then Mr chair
or life in Hobbs were a life in
Roswell or
even in San Juan in Farmington
Mr chair is really ludicrous I
would think.
I would think that you go to the
let you County and we we have a
month on so there and your my
quite neighbor Mr chair.
You'll know exactly where you're
at and what you're doing you'll
probably be cooking food next to
me.
But if you're from another part
of the state.
Mr chair and you share my same
skin tone.
You may know nothing about that.
That's what this is about.
This is about lifestyles Mr
chair.
And how we live and likenesses
that's the true communities of
interest and similar communities
that I think we should seek to
put together to represent their
own interests because issues
arrive Mr chair when we.
Get into these maps and we start
giving about based on race.
And of course the end the end it
what I believe is a political
means no at the end the the
chief mental political games and
that was articulated clearly by
a member of the house early on.
We want to see to.
This gives CD to.
I I'm not much of a believer in
coincidence and so and I I know
I don't I don't want to you no
disrespect to the chairman of
judiciary here I I know his
intentions are are a.
Your and I I see what he's
trying to do here Mister chair
but I just I think that in
general the approach is flawed
and that if we continue on this
course will continue to make
maps such as this Mr chair that
that will promote the division
within the state on political on
political boundaries and so I I
that's that's really all I have
to say about this Mr chair of
course I will be opposing this
map I do appreciate the Sanchez
hard working at
and look forward to a further
debate on it hopefully on the
floor thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Baca.
Thing no one else speaking the
floor at this moment.
I have a few comments to make
myself and the so Senator
Senator about us for I want to
thank you very much for
bringing.
Senate bill one forward to us.
And and I know there's an issue
that you worked on for many
years this is your third
redistricting
that you've gone through and the
legislature
this is I know that you have
opined.
In the past to to an empty room
about about some of the changes
you would like to use that.
And you're finding yourself now
in a position to be able to
respond to the bill and the and
the US craft.
a map of the way that that you
see
the proper and fed for what for
the for for what you've been
working on now so.
We should very much the
perspective that you share to
somebody from Dona Ana County.
and and what representation
means to you I will tell you
that I.
I struggle with the spent quite
a bit I'd be perfectly candid I
think what Senator Kernan said I
think what senator Jennings.
was talking about in terms of of
splitting of hops.
some of that sensitivity may
come from having been
of for a while a member of a
family.
that that was based in hops for
awhile is is a.
A real appreciation for the for
the what I found to be the
cohesiveness of that community.
the the the comments of
Senator
centers pirtle and I just about
the the the economic.
Communities that exist in this
area.
our.
Are are ones that that duly be
struggling.
I do find it interesting
etcetera etcetera
Parnell's comment that you could
have.
Three members of Congress that
live within fifty miles of each
other that very well could be.
Chavis Lincoln and Otero
county's.
the weather map is is is drawn.
But you know it is
This is a this is Market
departure from what we've had in
the past and and and and I like
I said I've I'm I'm looking at.
And how different parts of of
these communities to come
together.
I do think the eastern side of
the state does.
very much so and I and I do
agree that that the Dona ana
county area much of the area
that you Representative that is
farming community
It's quite a bit in common with
the farming communities.
in in the south valley of
Albuquerque New you know it is.
I think part of the problem is.
How do you divide the state of
New Mexico through its.
How to divide the state might
the state of New Mexico three
ways and.
And maintain communities when as
senator Ortiz Y. Pino commented
we are so many communities.
in this state and in the end I
think it is Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Who ultimately
has convinced me on this map
By his comment that that this
actually results in.
Three and and some some three
many New Mexico's.
as this map is drawn we have
three districts.
Each with a population base each
with a.
with the with the rural nature
to it.
each with the agricultural
interests.
each with
rural interests and and each
with with with an urban help.
and and and certainly we have we
have two of them.
That are that are
That share very much the oil
patch.
And
with a population that that is
not going to be able to be
ignored I don't think in the oil
patch.
and total even though it will
not be speaking with one voice.
it is a it is a map that.
That that will
will require.
Whatever the district two in
what was a district three to.
to have to pay attention to to
some areas some matters of the
of the economic engine of the
state as we currently are
configured.
That doesn't change the fact
that that I also understand that
this map as well as as drawn.
Is going to leave a lot of
people feeling.
like something has been done to
the.
And and I and I hope that we can
we can have a conversation
about.
About that I hope we can have
conversations not about doing
things to communities.
but doing things with the state.
As a whole.
And and doing things.
in terms of how it is that we
are able to come together as a
state.
so that we don't end up in a
perpetual urban rural divide.
More perpetual Rio Grande four
door outside the Rio Grande
Porter divide.
I don't think any of those
divisions.
Benefits the state one of the
things that I.
Going to something that Senator
Jennings commented about.
as as someone who lives in and
Travis county I discovered.
several years back I as some I'm
somebody lives in Albuquerque
and for many years most meetings
I've been I've done to that are
statewide in nature.
Have been in Albuquerque in
people travel there and and I
went to a to a meeting in Travis
county and I discovered that I
was it was exactly as far for me
to drive to Roswell as it was
for people from Roswell to drive
to me.
that was quite the revelation
that I had and
you know it is.
As we are the fifth largest
state of the union bye bye area.
and yet we are one of the
smaller states by population.
Our our state ends up.
Having districts that are larger
them each of these districts is
probably larger than two or
three states.
And and and that's just the
reality of living in New Mexico.
And so.
I will tell you this is this is
probably not the map that I
would have picked.
Had I had other maps to pick
from.
But I don't have the maps to
pick from and and I will be
perfectly candid Senator serve
on tests I tried to spend a
little bit of time.
Working with Mr Covey address
where it worked with this
process from researching
following on on a couple
different concepts myself and
what I discovered was it's very
difficult to to split New Mexico
evenly by population in three
ways
without.
Without creating a map that
people look at and say well wait
a second why are you doing it
that way.
and you know I had at one point
a map.
That that divided the state east
and west.
with the district building
incorporated Albuquerque
incorporated Rio Rancho.
And and when people look at that
map.
You know there are concerns
about dividing up in seconds.
there were concerns about.
About
creating an institutionalized
urban rural divide.
That that may be more may not be
healthy for the for the culture
of the state of New Mexico.
And and so and so in the end.
I I myself both dissatisfied
with this map and yet realizing
that.
Of all the of all the
as I think someone as I think
senator Morris a little too
early of all the all the bad
options is probably best that
option out there.
of how to split the state three
ways.
in a way in a way that we don't
allow any member of Congress to
ignore the realities of the
entire state.
in a way that we.
That that whoever is
representing us in any district
from any district in Congress.
has to recognize.
the agricultural the economic.
The world government that we
have in the state of New Mexico.
And and in the end I think that
is.
The best thing that we can do
for ourselves as a state.
And and so and so in the midst
of my dissatisfaction Senator
serve on to someone thank you
very much for the work that
you've done.
and and
And realise also that that when
I vote although although the
vote is it is is either a
straight yes or just right now.
it is one that is done with some
consternation recognizing that
to some degree we're gonna have
to live with this map for a
while to get used to it.
And and we're gonna have to live
through this and and and we're
gonna have to see.
what this map develops for us.
as the state.
and and and and as as as a
people who who really need to
work on our cohesiveness and not
in our divisions.
And and I think in the end this
map will help us to get there
so.
says renters we're we're about
to go to a to a motion on this
map.
I would invite you to provided
some comments before we go to
that motion and vote on this map
today.
Thank you Mr chairman I I
appreciate that that opportunity
all try to be brief Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino has outed my
hidden agenda and I should have
it because I have so much
affection and respect for all
get you a bit more honest he's
right I have been trying to get
brought us into the of Southern
District Court for twenty years
and this this map does that so
well you're you're out of me
Senator but I had to do so you
know Senator Ivy Soto I
appreciate your dissatisfaction
and consternation in the words
of others let me just tell you
that ten years ago the
legislature to not pass a
congressional map at all.
because we reached the same
issues in these impasses and we
could not resolve them.
For many of you who are not here
I was of very strongly leading
with a number of Southern New
Mexico legislators who were
unhappy with what was being done
at the time which was to create
a permanent Republican district
in the south.
And we were told that was the
way it was going to be that that
was a Republican seat and that
was the that was the agreement
that was the deal.
And we were so opposed to that
the very frankly those of us
from that part of the state
sited not by design but we ended
up siding with the Republican
colleagues at the time who
didn't like the mat for any
other different reasons and and
we couldn't get a majority of
the house of representatives so
there was no map that.
We left the session and throw to
the courts internally had a
judge decided.
That's no way to do it.
we may we have concerns about
what why we didn't follow the
CRC and introduced one other
maps are plans or so forth
this is tough.
And it's been so tough before
that we sometimes we've we've
reached a complete impasse so
I'm Mr chairman I I appreciate
your your consternation I would
like to encourage you in the
committee to maybe more adopt
the the comments that senator
o'neill and Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and I'm and I'm confident.
I'm confident that the six seven
eight years now there there
comments will be will be the
prevailing thinking which is
this is an exciting opportunity
this map is an exciting
opportunity to have
congresspersons who I think will
better reflect New Mexico
candidly.
There was a some of my
colleagues here today decried
the partisanship of of of this
map for this approach.
My god colleagues look at the
Congress person who represents
me today.
And tell me that we don't have
partisanship and extreme.
Representative Southern New
Mexico right now.
And it's not a reflection of the
early part of Dona ana county
Las Cruces and I know we're with
the I'm trying to say we
partisanship here but but but
let's not let's not kid
ourselves Senator when we
suggested that this is it is in
January MapReduce and general
presentation come on.
To suggest that we don't have
partisanship in place now for
that we have a representation
now that really reflects the
district.
The voters have spoken that and
that congressperson
representative representative
our districts so Mr Chairman I
thought it was important to just
remind all of us that the the
that we've in the past not even
able to get very far beyond
this.
And I'm I'm excited by the
possibility that we will that
this time of that will adopt a
map that the legislature and the
governor will support and and
the question was who gave this
or any other map the people's
map and it occurred to me when
that question was being asked in
the end if we pass something.
That will be the people's now.
That's the way our process works
the the map that gets adopted by
the house and the Senate and
hopefully signed by the governor
will be the people's map that
will be a map that represents
the will of the voters who
elected us to do this job and
that will be the people's maps
under.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you very much Senator
Montez is there a motion.
Senator a direct.
That
option up some info on well I do
pass recommendation Senate bill
one from Senate doing Senate
seconded by Senator Lopez.
are there any other motions.
Is there any other.
Sure.
very well
we have a.
We're going to process that
The motion after.
Our.
I want to make sure that we have
every opportunity
Surround a motion tabled
so yes what table no would this
turned on the motion table and
it would be back on
the two of Lopez motion for the
past
Agency of the hell if you call
the roll Senator Baca.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Lopez hello Senator
Moores.
Senator o'neill.
Senator TCP nope nope.
Senator for all.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth.
Senator doing now and senator
result of no ma'am.
Very well on a vote of four to
seven the most the table did not
prevail that means we are back
now on the do pass motion for
Senate bill one
please call the roll Senator
Baca.
Senator Ingle
Senator Lopez yes Senator Wirth
no.
Senator o'neill.
Senator TCP not yes Senator
Pirtle no Senator Stewart yes
Senator Wirth.
Senator do it yes and so the yes
ma'am and I surprise more image
vote
on a vote of seven to four
Senator Cervantes
congratulations you have a two
passed from this committee this
will be reported up let me I I
I'm sorry Mr chair you make your
your adjourned if I may of this
bill presuming that it goes to
the floor as reported on by this
committee and then of adopt the
committee reports adopted the
bill will next be heard Senate
Judiciary Committee I want to
just because there are so many
people here gathered who are
insured this bill are listening
today to let them know the
Senate judicial here this most
likely tomorrow morning at nine
o'clock so want to welcome and
encouraged further discussion
debate we had here today and
also to let you know that will
will probably procedures will
probably little different
Judiciary because we knew
because you've been very
gracious to give full
opportunity for for public
comment in this committee and
because there are almost
identical members in the Senate
Judiciary Committee will
probably limit the public input
somewhat in in that proceeding
Mr chairman so thank you for the
announcement opportunity also I
do want to just put everybody on
notice of a potential amendments
to the bill it does not deal
with the maps portion of it.
But if you and will look on page
four.
And I.
We have subsection B. of section
three of the bill.
dealing with precincts and and
the direction boards county
commissions not this but certain
precincts and and if they do.
the the votes cast.
it says shall be invalid shall
not be counted canvassed
I'd consider doing and I've been
conferring on this and we think
there may be a better way to
deal with this that does not
result in the disenfranchisement
of people's votes if there's an
issue with that and and so we're
gonna be talking about about the
the the second part of that
subsection B.
I don't I didn't want to do it
on the fly but will probably be
bringing something and to Senate
judiciary in terms of that I
that's one letter but no case
anybody have any thoughts about
it please feel free to to come
to talk with us about that Mr
and hope you'll work with our
our staff you know we have a
good team of lawyers and
Judiciary look that is because I
I wondered about that languages
rather I wonder whether you can
even lawfully do that can you
can do to disenfranchise voters
because of the split precinct
alone these days I gotta tell
you you know what I feel that
heads nodding when we there
these days with what's going on
the US Supreme Court in this
last election I haven't the
foggiest idea with the
playground looks like in terms
of all of the lawsuits that were
filed afterwards and what the
federal courts had to say about
those lawsuits over so it's a
good question you're raising we
should look at it but Senator
Baca pointed out you know people
people need to vote participate
in the process and that's how to
make the change and if they make
that effort we should not
because of something about a
kind of commission that say
we're not going to count we
should we should know this is
existing law now right with the
exception of this proposed
changes pursuant to the
congressional elections as well
as the existing collections are
already subject to this this
provision loss of right correct
so with that Senator Wirth will
be on the floor what a question.
So we'll be on the floor at one
o'clock Senator Jennings.
What in the state he's put the
Navajo Nation and and.
Yes we did and at the request
thank you very much yes I know
right regulations on the use of
our.
Thank you.
