Enforcement Academy board and so
let us begin right now with the
spaceport Authority and and so
we're joined by
three the conferees.
For that or do we also have
Secretary keys with us and
That secretary we may ask you to
kind of give us an orientation
as to the what's going on right
now and but with regard to each
of the members.
the the conferees that are here
with us today what will ask you
to do is to introduce yourself
to us tells a little about your
background what brings you to
the board how long you been
serving on the board and then
finally also some information
about kind of what what you've
been working on
or on the border I feel of
course been functioning and I
and I know we got some
underlying issues discussed with
the spaceport Authority at some
point.
But so we'll start with Mr
Schendel.
If you please proceed.
Thank you Mr chair
my name is direction rules and
IAD was formally the prior to my
retirement.
Of a deputy director for strike
systems and aerospace
technologies at Sandia national
laboratories.
And I have I have extensive
background in the in aerospace
systems and and it's like
systems and have.
Was in charge of many of.
many missile launches in my
career.
And the IAD and that I'm let's
see I've been on the board of
the.
Yes a year and a half now.
And
I I came to the attention of
Secretary fees the the a
colleague of mine actually he
used to work for me.
but apparently knew that the
board was looking for another
candidate and the and that's a
that's how I got involved.
Thank thank you very much
Mr Epstein.
I stand from Albuquerque New
Mexico was in the army went to
west point and in Mali Law
school after that tax lawyer.
most of the transfer tax credit
space New Mexico's most of
greenspace.
Been doing that for about
fifteen years but senior law
firms for that present bomb of
would be the on the Upper West
wanted joy that duty from
fourteen to sixteen and I was
elected as secretary you are
would be this is really made for
New Mexico for five years and
that service expired on
seventeen that service really
got me interested in one to the
spaceport that business because
I think it's a tremendous
opportunity for New Mexico and
of course continues twice as
much range which nasco a lot of
time at as soon as so
I want to give a thanks center
work for.
As long service and friendship
and supporting in this
appointment.
Outstanding and yes senator
Wirth is actually spoke at each
of us about you in advance
hearing Mr ruby.
Hi to works better when I and
you.
Hi margraviate lived down here
in Las Cruces New Mexico I've
been in the launch and brown
processing for launch industry
for over forty years
my background is as an engineer
Most recent set of histories of
science of the director of
external tank and solid rocket
booster processing on the space
shuttle opportunities for the
center of.
The two big pieces around and
there was an argument going
after that the rand NASA's white
sands test facility as project
manager.
then to
ATK E. four has director of
safety risk insurance Sen G. and
then after that chief operating
officer of the last year space
corporation and the Kodiak
Launch Complex up in Alaska tell
course semi retired in twenty
seventeen I still keep my
fingers and with clients all
around the US and overseas.
so that's my background why the
board.
My wife and I love New Mexico
got to that place in the career
where it's very.
Appropriate to give back to the
community I am a.
Such as close as you will ever
find.
a spaceport expert I worked on
studies and still working on a
study for the FAA about speech
boards.
and the the board of directors
is I think very important to
help spaceport America progress
for not only the space for for
the state of New Mexico how you
do things can be very important
to its success.
Things I've been working on it
is I've only been.
Work since of late summer.
And this getting my fingers and
understanding the working for
that I'm very satisfied.
Processes decisions in the
waiver.
Right now there's always.
Rudiments at a spaceport anyone
here ever go to the that's what
I hope to be working on in the
future.
Fantastic thank you very much
and the securities approval to
activate your camera or not but
if you give us a little bit of
a.
Orientations to kind of where
are we right now with the
spaceport Authority.
the redirect.
Wonderful thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee and
also to our proposed board
members thank you for being here
I think that you all see that
the gentleman right here R.
Holik's highly qualified what we
wanted to do you in you can hear
for members was to bring people
with a very experienced
especially within the art space
world with regards to business
development also so I really
stand in support of all three of
these ten minutes
they've been great for members
so far and we look forward to
really growing in the future so
recently most recently within
the past year on the board has
drawn up and agreed on a set of
bylaws which did not exist prior
to now and we are in the process
of problem getting those in
addition to one of the things
that were most excited about at
this stage for is we are putting
together a master plan for the
spaceport and a strategic plan
that will guide us for the next
five to ten years for the space
for as you all know virgin
galactic had a successful launch
we have any plans out there by
the name that's been launched
they also had a very successful
launch just recently we will be
highly focused on business
development and the coming
future and making sure that we
are not only just servicing
virgin galactic there but also
other companies that wants to go
into lower earth orbit.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much questions
from committee.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr chair
I just the start by thanking
each of the.
Nominees for agreeing to step up
and for serving during the time
that you've been serving up to
this point I did Mr chair wanna
specifically
mention my work over the years
with Mr Epstein
here the legislature I first met
him in two thousand and seven
and we work together on an
extension and expansion of the
land conservation tax credit
that was quite a journey to get
that bill through and make a
transferable
and certainly you know he brings
a legal background it's
important but also and credible
military.
Background as well from west
point and then working for the
secretary of the army and I just
again know him well and
appreciate the governor's
appointment of.
Into this commission and I do
thank Mr chair you indicated
that so the secretary mean
there's there's been transitions
and we may get into some of
those and so I think it's really
important to have.
Solid board members that can
provide that oversight and I
know that Mr Epstein will be one
of those I don't know the other
two individuals but they seem
like very good appointments so
Senator congratulations on the
nomination and all of you for
stepping up and serving thank
you Mr chair.
Senator Wirth other members of
the committee center how to me
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for all the to do with the
spaceport Authority not the one
question I do have is what's the
relationship between the
spaceport Authority and white
sands missile range.
Mr chair if I may members of the
committee the space point is a
client of white sands missile
range we have a very good
working relationship with them I
do not interact with white sands
on a daily basis like our
director of Scott does but I do
notice that your mobile actors
in the space for is on the line
yeah well did you want to add
anything to that.
You're on your mouth.
Yes that that is highly
contagious thank you Secretary
Mr chairman members of the
committee yes we do have an
agreement a memorandum of
understanding with that with the
the range our relationship as a
secretary has indicated it is
sent is very strong
we eight are in contact with
them almost daily
to coordinate our schedules with
them
the obviously charge fees for
the use of their air space on
their support and resources
those fees are typically passed
on to our customers the bottom
line is that we are in need to
very very at alligned in that in
that service and our customer
some of course respecting the
the very valuable work as that
that the range of us for the
department of defense.
Very good thank you so much no
further questions Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
want to thank you again for
being willing to help with this.
very important work of the
spaceport the.
All of you have
been involved with other space
point to assume or other other
aspects beyond the The New
Mexico spaceport.
Could you give us your feeling
about where we stand in relation
to the others I know we were the
first ones organized but there's
something like a dozen others
are more and are we are we
staying competitive or or we are
we kind of stripping behind.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm going to ask mark
gravy to answer that person then
Eric if you wouldn't mind
following up with your expertise
mark.
I.
The thank you Mr chairman thank
you Secretary keys for
introducing me
Extremely hard concept to put in
place with the of space point
between the different charters
structures funding.
of the spaceport it it's not a
real wages so you're headed.
Do you always wish you had more
business absolutely and I think
of between Secretary keys Scott
the executive director of
spaceport America I think they
are doing an outstanding job of
revitalizing Care.
As of gaining new customers and
defining what those customer
base you should be of.
Many of the things that are for
example we are not.
a competitor to space for a
who's on the coast and goes
directly to orbit
or to Alaska aerospace through
Wallace state and independent is
a completely different corporate
and funding structure so
It's not even apples to oranges
apples for turtles and it's very
hard to compare
so I look forward to working
with New Mexico spaceport in the
sense that it does have some
very real opportunities to grow
forward is.
And I've seen Justin more short
time involved.
Before I actually was officially
involved of the.
Beginning of what I would
consider a very promising past
you have and.
Much more business in the
future.
Business your turn.
Thank you.
Did you want anything else.
Sure and
Let me just stay at the outset I
agree with mark the comparisons
are very difficult.
and and this The New Mexico
spaceport spaceport America is a
does have
a certain limitations because
it's in in the lan port as
opposed to one it's on the
ocean.
I have been involved with
running various facilities like
this in the.
In my career at Sandia national
laboratories in fact I also was
a client of of marks the vote
Alaska at one point.
And
I I recalled way back when this
was first being considered about
you know spaceport in New Mexico
that was heavily relying on the
advancement of of single stage
to orbit technology.
which was difficult at best to
to see come to fruition anytime
in the near future.
But of one of the a lot of the
facilities that I've dealt with
have the.
Including the colitis facility
which is a government facility
out in Hawaii that Cindy runs.
There is a huge business base
that runs so border very similar
to white sands.
And
I I think there's a rather
bright future for various types
yes and no and I am very
encouraged at the Scott has been
going after activities that are
not necessarily driven to how
can I get toward it but
development of technologies and.
Of things like rocket test
stands the AeroVironment hi out
to to the electric electrically
propelled the of.
managerial vehicles.
And there there's a lot.
There's a lot to cultivate.
That is not necessarily we're
putting somebody into orbit from
from
from spaceport America.
So that's what I have for now.
This represents.
Stop.
It's all right secretary keys if
I can just come a couple when it
comes I think that's exactly the
right question that.
I guess a little bit different
one of you I understand it's
hard to make comparisons with
establishing a comparative.
analysis is the way to you know
establish your competitive
advantage my mic so that's
exactly the right question in my
view I think there are things
that we can do to outdo
competition now I think we're
leading in this industry I think
it's one thing in the long term
and so
things like bearing power lines
and and doing the necessary are
yes our archaeological work
right now and and as you know
building roads and creating
buffers I mean we learned was a
white sands question.
Earlier and I think one major
lessons of life stands is in the
sense the intrusion with
essentially penetrates
the agency or agent as your
laminated low level fast tested
except for I Mullery area it's
very recessed plan.
And so there are things we can
learn from our neighbors and
there are things we can do right
now to
you augment our current efforts
to get tenants I mean to me
that is one of the things that
I'm really focused on on working
with secretary keys on the on
the business committee and work
work work close revenue
neutrality you know and we need
to get that we will get those
people I think there's about two
Tenants will not be wrong on
that but lets you know there's a
lot of things we can do and and
and and to establish you as a
competitive advantage the first
being establish revenue
neutrality I know the
legislature's very action that
concept as we are thank you.
Very good those those are very
helpful answers and Mr chairman
I.
I I I know we've we've seen a
lot of negative press lately on.
On the spaceport authority in
some of its administrative
problems.
But I'm I'm very encouraged by
the caliber of people serving on
the authority.
And look forward to seeing us
reach even greater heights of
success in the next few years
I've had a chance to to have
long conversations with Dale
decker
of and and I'm just really
impressed with the with the
opportunities that that this
industry affords for New Mexico
is a way of diversifying our
economy I know everybody just
thinks about
Virgin galactic and the space
tourism aspect but there's so
much more there that the the the
the.
Within our grasp if we can if we
can just find the right
combination so thank you very
much for being willing to serve
you all thank you Secretary keys
for your guidance in this thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator video members of the
committee I have a few questions
I'd like to ask and I want to
start with the issues of
governance.
I think it's it's it's
secretary keys I appreciate you
being here but but the fact is
but we got the cabinet secretary
here because we don't have a
director right now.
And and governance's has been a
little bit of a mass with the
with the spaceport Authority and
so I I guess I'd like.
A sense from three conferees.
Of of of of what is it that the
that the authority members are
doing in order to increase
oversight.
And and and governance of the
spaceport Authority staff.
You don't mind if I jump in here
and members of the committee we
actually.
Madam secretary with with
respect my question was to the
member with the conferees I'd
like to hear from them about
governance issues.
if if I might go I'm happy to go
first I mean I I think you're
referring to you know the
departure building heights
there's a lot of.
Just on that Daniel Hicks is a
personal friend of mine is very
sad moment for me on a personal
level although I think that was
the exactly the right choice
student decision the NMAA
Of course central to the
government's issue.
I think there's a good team at
the spaceport and I think
leadership is important I think
Matthew managing being to staff
for example whites as Mr range
which is with our passage act
directors primary experience the
leadership style employed in
military context I think is my
and I have experienced it's much
different
in the civilian side
of course we've got some some
morale issues going on with some
other public events the lawsuit
cetera that are gonna be on the
scope of your question but I'm
not giving you specifics outside
of the leadership does Maez
matter and surely we are the
transition Scott's trying to
pick up those rains and yeah I'm
open to to to you know
discussing and good ideas and in
that regard.
Thank you Sir.
One of the other two Mr
surrender Mr really.
So you end up okay thank you Mr
chair of the.
And I'm not sure who it does
tell us to speak speaking or ask
questions so.
I have personally going out in.
Met with
Scott McLaughlin Secretary keys
I want going out to the site on
my own without the and I'm
terrorized to do rounds as
that's my background as an
engineer I want to go kick iron
and director.
Be done things with my ranch
yes there are things we can and
should be doing that on the
government side I am very
satisfied with Secretary keys
are chair of the board Scott as
the executive director we just
in the first time have we always
agree on everything absolutely
not know what I expect to nor do
I want to also yes something's
going wrong
but I hope they feel as board
members that have been
addressed fairly the path
reaching vote of.
Open their books
the Dearman I.
We'll try it we.
Growling at each other are
needing a open their doors to me
and that let me see what they're
saying so I am very happy and
very hopeful for the future are
we perfect are we where we want
to be absolutely not I agree
with the Mr Epshteyn is that
correct fine.
Okay Representative Steve that
we actually are our biggest
challenge is getting customers
the N. L..
And I absolutely also agreed
that we as part of our.
Long range plans need to go
dissect are trying to meet
customers from using customers
of like the other space point to
understand art and what could be
our competitive advantages and I
do not think we have done that
as well as we could have in the
past but the
hi even before I got here some
of them working towards that
pass and hope to work on that
page.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
Fuhrman will.
Yes.
I think I just got a note my
internet connection is a little
unstable so very happy if you
can hear me.
That's a that's a nice try to
get out of the question but we
could hear just
that's right yeah that was that
that was my move but of from so
what I brought to the table of
four you know with respect to of
you know things like that
governments question you're
asking is was really tied to my
experience at Sandia shoring as
part of the incentives
department of energy laboratory
so why keep and I was used to
government the type activities
but keeping everything above
board.
And things like the when we did
this so I I I I headed up the
selection committee.
Of an interview committee for
the new director of Scott
McLaughlin but we have quite a
few candidates and and how to
conduct that and sharing that
the it was a a fair process not
a priority selected of comparing
the of something like the
working up the candidate
requirements matrix for you know
comparing all individuals
against required attributes and
the.
And desired attributes.
Those are the kinds of things
that are I I believe are
important in in in executing
proper governance of the.
Of the spaceport I haven't been
involved with some of the.
the yes of the.
The we.
Some of these issues that have
been going back and forth
between the spaceport of the
State regarding some of these
other problems have been
cropping up.
But
but I do believe that
The you know the the above board
is the is the top priority in
the even if it's.
Not exactly getting you the
results you want.
Well but we need to be realistic
about what's happening and
And we need to have a.
Yeah we need to have a.
A fair sense of where we are and
confidence and and and how the.
Spaceport is being administered
you know Mr mistrusting you you.
Commented before that we're
getting close to revenue
neutrality I would and and.
You know but.
and I think and I think that is
that is something that is to be
to have a goal towards doing but
I also recognize that.
I think any company would like
to be at.
neutrality if they don't have to
count the the the up three
million dollars that already got
invested on behalf of other
taxpayers in advance.
And and so yeah please Sir I'm
sorry to Representative you
excuse me
but I just thought it a couple
things we have done I mean it
with the departure of Dan Hicks
I mean we we have established
pilots right I mean I think
that's fundamental to the
governance of the organisation
Attorney General is approved
review them as well provide
input so I think you know that's
one of the very helpful with
things like problems with no not
on board input was a complaint
and I think we fix that in
several ways knowledge bylaws
but we're having you know
regular quarterly meeting it's
for example which did not occur
it in the past and so and and
again it's already mention that
we did actually select an
executive director on and Eric
was here on that so I just want
to point out Sir that there are
things that we have worked on to
try to improve governance at
spaceport have done
thank you.
No I appreciate that but
probably you know the the the
point I'm making is that.
Is that you guys are taking the
reins and as you look at at at
at where we are what success
looks like at the spaceport.
Part of it that that needs to be
remembered is that is that
there's over quarter of a
billion dollar investment that
taxpayers made.
Up in the spaceport.
And so if you look at that of
fiscal year as to whether not.
The books are balancing that's
great but but.
But that doesn't account for the
sunk cost that we've already
invested in the in the spaceport
as we're looking for whether or
not it's a viable entity.
and you know and so I think I
think that's that's something
that that that needs to be
remembered.
As your as you're trying to
figure out what the profit
metrics are of success.
with reguards spaceport
You know the the the other thing
I guess that I that I.
I would like to get a sense from
into the conferees.
Is.
That.
When we started to face
spaceport one of the big
advantages.
Is is that we sit right next to
white sands.
And so that is restricted
airspace up next to us which
makes having a space port.
that makes it increases the
asset for the spaceport because
we don't have to always check in
with the FAA had a clear route
their space and and and what not
on the other hand.
we seem to be limited to
suborbital.
because if we want to if we want
to actually get.
Get something lifted up into
space.
usually we have to drop out of
some of fuel container long the
way.
And and people product some
people are concerned that we
might.
Head Texas that's not a concern
for me I want to say but
you know but that's but but my
understanding is is that that
creates a bit of a challenge
because we can't get past taxes
to be able to drop that into the
into the Gulf of Mexico and so
you know one of my one of my big
frustrations is without rocket
lab's that is you know it's
based.
A thousand miles from here.
and and and yet they are blasted
off from New Zealand.
And you know high grade you know
what seven amid the comment
about you know it's right
haven't haven't virgin galactic
or or you know something sexy
about taking people up in the
space but the fact of the matter
is its freight the pays the
bills.
you know you look at you look at
that what's what pays the you
know what what comes closest
paying the bills in terms of in
terms of railroads freight.
In terms of shipping of sprite
and frankly in terms of every
flight its flight that's not
people.
And and and so we got keeps
that's going up rocket lab's
planned to go up when they're
fully deployed about a weekly
basis.
And and yet they're not they're
not using spaceport America.
To do that instead there they
got a whole bank of of of of of
three D. printing press to save
money.
three printing as many of the
rocket parts as possible so they
save on shipping costs and
taking kids out so they're
making in the United States
taken all the way down in New
Zealand blasted into space.
I'm wondering what is we're not
use the space for.
And and so
So yes Mr grieving and then that
Mr affect.
Mr chair and through you to the
speaker
As as I think Eric center
we are physics is still says we
do not have single stage to
orbit and we're not ready to.
Make lunches where we are not
talking stage and it's not just
us or state rules it's the FAA's
rules about risking exposure
that would prevent us from
dropping stages on land within
the sort of area workers
Colorado Arizona Texas whatever
so with that limitation and Eric
you provided earlier there are
markets we can be and and just
like you said Senator earlier we
need to understand and go after
those markets and and keep our
eyes on the potential for things
like single stage to orbit of
the.
Sign up virgin galactic like
virgin orbit that takes it up
and doesn't necessarily drop the
stage so but for those we would
have to compete with California
and Texas which is bigger than
just the spaceport it would take
the state being involved so yes
there are real markets I'm
involved because I believe
spaceport America can be not
just the.
Revenue neutral but are
profitable for one of the things
are for my background is up in
Alaska we cut all funding from
the state in twenty fourteen
because the state that was one
oil drop from a hundred over a
hundred dollars a barrel its
biggest source of revenue for
the state in Alaska to under
fifty dollars managing cutting
your budget by half well we saw
way forward they give us more
flexibility and again it may not
work here because of the way
that charter business is set up
but we have a we want after
customers that takes the time to
identify bill is even if you
have a launch customer that says
to date I want to launch from
you two years.
The so many of the opportunities
you were talking about putting a
small section to orbit that
she's not licensable here at a
federal level right now.
that's not to say we can't work
with on teachers who are
developing and during subscale
testing and potentially getting
to where we can do single stage
to orbit or some other way of
reducing risk of widespread
recoverable stages that are
reliable enough that the FAA or
federal level sept.
That sort of course so thank you
if you have any questions I can
go on for hours on starcraft I'm
a I'm a deep.
M. and I'm and I'm a bit of a
nerd myself and even though this
in my area that so that I can
engage for several hours on to
but will still spend everybody
else.
in the hearing on this right now
those some point at some point
you and I may want to get
together to have for the
conversation about this it does
it does concern me that were
fifteen years and and and now
we're starting to look at this
mistrust I Sir I I just I we
need to get into that space
million all states which we know
prohibitions you want my think
one of my personal favorite is
not version lactic and mean it's
been launching it's it's
essentially a huge cylinder
that's like a sling shot and it
goes around to fund our
for it to get a payload to about
Mach six images stick it on the
end of the state and at a
particular time it spits it out
I think it's beyond the
gravitational pull the earth and
then you has more travel
solutions C. of course that's
that's not fit for human
transportation right it's two
two powerful force but I see
your point that is you know.
Other staff I apologize for.
Let's let's let's get another
industry that's example of
that efforts that is already
participating thank.
Yeah maybe I may have a couple
of nominations of people who
could go through that sling shot
anyway the.
You know I am I'm and I am
interested in and and how that
works and and it does it does
seem to me that that's that's
that's kind of thing that.
I'm and this is gonna be
calibrated exactly right and and
and the.
In order to be able to to launch
stuff up that way it is it is I
mean it's I I guess it's it is
kind of interesting what it
would look like on the rise and
have a what looks like a huge
Ferris wheel up there.
From throwing stuff up to make
sure the Santa gets outside of
the gravitational pull of the
earth but
Mr Mr from both.
I do want to come in just
please.
Yeah I actually you know I I've
I've heard.
What people are saying about the
operating.
Of.
Balance sheet the you know
annually you know are we revenue
neutral are are we actually
making a profit but it was my
understanding that a lot of what
was intended for the spaceport
will was to bring economic
development.
That is not really part of the
balanced book for the spaceport
itself and had to do with the
economic impacts that bill.
Well beyond what what the
spaceport you know operating of
authority and capability is.
And
I know those are hard to
measure.
But they are real.
And and I I would say that.
In trying to balance your your
quarter I think you said it was
a quarter billion dollar
investment.
Of that piece needs to be fed
into it of as well as whether
we're operating in a tracking
customers and bringing new
technologies and I don't know
what another one of more greedy
they've been alluding to was
things like hypersonics flying
out of the out of the you know
the the space port which can get
you out of this problem of
having to drop the you know
pieces along the way of you know
it's those
Where we're always on the look
out for those kinds of things
but as as mark said physics is
physics and until that really
becomes real.
I I think we have to balance
the.
The perceived benefit of the
space for.
Not just in terms of its
operating but in the larger
context of the of how it
economically affects the area.
Absolutely and and that's the
reason why we're doing it based
on a on a kind of gross receipts
tax that three of the four
counties that were about to
participate approved
But but that and that works if
we if we do have greater
economic activity going on as
opposed to people fly and stuff
and then flying back out.
And and that's you know that's
that's part of what we need to
to to try to find some way to
bring it to fruition.
in terms of spaceport and and
so.
You know I guess the the point
that I'm trying to make up with
all of you is that.
Is that I appreciate along with
everybody else on this panel.
the talents that you all have
and what you are willing to
share with state of New Mexico
and to.
And to serve on this on the
story.
It is vitally important.
but that does not exist in
isolation of the rest of the
state.
And and it is something that
exists because of the
investment.
Five people.
Primarily in the southern part
of the state but also dropped
state.
in order to make that happen and
and and so the fiduciary
responsibility upon you all.
it's fairly hot.
And and so I just I'm no you all
take the position that you're in
very seriously I just want to
add a little more weight to your
shoulders.
as as you go through this
confirmation process and also
that that we need realistic
feedback in the legislature
about where we are.
Physics is physics.
And if we got something that's
viable.
And that could be it a regional
economic driver that's fantastic
we can figure out how to make it
work.
But at the end of the day.
If we don't.
At some point we need to be
honest with each other about
that too.
And and so and and and and
candidly that's been I think
part of what's been missing.
A lot of the conversation is is
rose right around the corner.
We're always just about to get
there.
and and and at some point and I
think this is a good point of
the transition that Schaller
Macon in terms of of of
executive staff and and and and
the for the transition the all
American in terms of of the
board for the authority.
To to take a good hard
assessment.
and and to give us in the
legislature.
Who authorized all this
an honest assessment about what
are the announcements.
And what are not the assets.
In terms of spaceport America.
I'm as optimistic as the next
person.
But at the end of the day
physics is physics.
So
anyways
it sounds from the committee
with regard to this path.
I want to thank you all for
engage in this conversation.
And and for for being here with
us Secretary keys thank you for
your leadership with spaceport
America and and for everything
that you're doing with the
economic development department
because at the end of the day if
we don't have a good economy.
Then we don't have any ways to
raise revenue to do much else of
the state.
So you are truly one of the
pivotal cabinet positions that
we have in the state and the and
so but to the freeze thank you
so much for the service that you
have been willing to share and
your expertise that you bring to
these positions I'm looking
forward to up to a to a healthy
and successful confirmation
process through during the
thirty day session for you all
when the session gets together
and after we have
all the paperwork finalized for
each of you that will will be
taking a vote on you all in the
in the rules committee and then
at some point will be scheduling
a vote on the floor to the
extent that were able to predict
when it will be we will make
sure that that you all get word
of it you are certainly welcome
to come to the Senate and sat on
the dais there on the floor of
the Senate when we consider your
confirmations
that is not a requirement but is
certainly an invitation on our
part to you all and
and in the meantime I do wish
you well that I and I hope that
that up the partnership that we
have that is great spaceport
America
becomes a truly successful
endeavors as a science
and technology catches up to the
dream.
So thank you all very much.
Thank you.
Mr chair yes secretary.
Thank you Mr chair.
The front up okay we are going
now to the technology research
collaborative so we will do a
change of.
Brady bunch on the screen.
And I'm gonna ask the vice chair
to preside over this next part.
Of the of the of the hearing
we're as we invite
I give real Muncie
mark Popovic and John Clark.
To come in for this next panel
my goodness and you all to the
three of you at least have
really nice backgrounds.
So center how do you if you
would please.
And then we also have Alex
Grinberg with us I think as the
director of the technology
research collaborative.
Good afternoon and so thank you
once again for joining us this
afternoon what I'm gonna do is
I'm gonna go in order of the
names on the agenda if you can
give us a brief a brief
background about yourself how
long you've served on the
committee
anything you want to add about
to our service on to the
committee and with that I want
to start with the Gabriel
monthly.
Thank you madam my last middling
mounts just like the word bounce
but within and
correction.
No worries
yeah I've been with the tier C.
since two thousand nineteen I am
a federal civil servant with the
department of the Air Force as
you know the department
enforcement compasses the US Air
Force and the US space force I
work for the Air Force research
lab in New Mexico
I've been with the our airforce
as a service for about twenty
two years but with the standard
but the space force I am and
newly minted space force civil
servant has about two months ago
in my role for the of our
research lab I work in our
technology engagement outreach
office which houses or tech
transfer operation and see that
I run a number of programs where
I have essentially leading the
commercialization and economic
development elements of what the
Air Force research lab does on
behalf of the Air Force and
space force and how we interact
with the commercial sector and
trend transferring and
transitioning technologies that
means transferring technology at
a research lab and to the
commercial sector and then
transitioning capability and
innovation that we're finding
and industry sector into the
federal government.
Because of that role because of
the programs I run for the
research lab at of New Mexico.
At the national level I am now
recently been appointed as the
deputy director of the space
forces new innovation office
that we call space works a
quarter out of Los Angeles but
with nodes in Colorado springs
and here in Albuquerque
including the note that we
operating cost base in downtown
Albuquerque called the Q.
station I'm also a reserves that
the US Air Force and the colonel
and reserves where I support the
combined space operations center
that happens that does its
operation of satellite control
operation out of Vandenberg
space for space and California.
Thank you so much next I want to
go to market Popovich.
Thank you Committee my name's my
name's mark shaped the present
CEO of up three glass solutions
located in Albuquerque New
Mexico.
Three glasses a late stage start
up company
of in the gross aspect of it
some major.
I have probably twenty five plus
years of experience in the
semiconductor industry
with varying roles
I did a start up in the late
nineties so that was quite
successful the one IPO I lived
in Asia for ten years this as
president Asia Pacific for
semiconductor large
semiconductor companies
and the I have a lot of
experience and and and bringing
technology to economic fruition
in the startup environment from
from for those technologies
coming from university or coming
from a home grown talent
of venture financing you know
gross so dollar should set track
In New Mexico I have been in New
Mexico this time since two
thousand seventeen iced I was in
New Mexico I'm not a native New
Mexican united from Pennsylvania
I was in New Mexico about thirty
something years ago working for
Motorola as young engineer
literal it's gone it became CTS
microelectronics I left one
around the world and I was
surprised actually Justice find
myself back in New Mexico I'm
very passionate about New Mexico
I like the growth aspects here I
think it's a great place to to
to start a technology company
and and and grow technology
company and the EDD asked me at
the EDD group asked me to to be
involved with this type of
Committee initiative based on
that that experiences the
passion about the the local
community and growing.
Our technology opportunities for
the for the state.
Thank you so much market and
next I'm gonna go to John Clark.
Thank you very much Mr chair
committee members it's good to
see you again albeit remotely I
have a very background that all
in some way relates to the work
done by the technology research
collaborative in addition to
being W. secretary I was also
appointed to this board in mid
twenty nineteen and before I
came on board with the Economic
Development Department I was a
fiscal analyst and then chief
economist for the legislative
finance committee for a little
over seven years before that I
worked recruit companies to the
state through the New Mexico
partnership for about five and
half years before that I did
contract work for both Los
Alamos and Sandia to help of the
laboratory spin off technologies
so the work done by the
technology research
collaborative and work that I
think we can do really that hits
close to hard for me.
Thank you so much and now with
final comments Alex Greenberg is
joining us if you would like to
add anything now it's your
chance.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I appreciate the
opportunity to speak today
looking forward to the next
fiscal year in terms of what the
opportunities are the technology
research collaborative we were
called out in the statewide plan
for some of the work we need to
do going forward and really
excited to recalibrate our
mission vision and make sure
that we contribute in a positive
way towards technology transfer
and economic impact New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you so much Alex I'm
listening to go to questions
from the committee and I'm gonna
start with senator Ortiz the
people thank you Mr chairman and
and thank you all I guess.
We're searching madly here
through our.
Compendium of all state boards
and commissions and so on I have
to admit I'm not at all clear
about what you will.
Where your house doing what you
do and and what the mission is
if you could if you could share
that with this that would be
really helpful.
Mr chair Senator all all Startin
and anyone else wants to join in
and and that that would be
great.
We know that we need to make
some statutory changes to the
commission.
Technically under statute as it
sits now the technology research
collaborative is really assigned
to be housed over it New Mexico
tech but
that was put in place nearly a
decade ago and it didn't really
work New Mexico tech reached an
agreement with EDD that everyone
thought it would be better house
that the economic development
department so we've been housing
and running it since then but
they're really it needs to be a
really think of what the
technology research
collaborative does and
the division will get what we
need to change the statute for
example one thing is certain
statute is that the technology
research collaborative shall
have its own exempt staff we
don't have that we don't have
funding for in fact there is
zero funding actually created by
the legislature directly to the
technology research
collaborative EDD make some
funding available each year as
part of its budget for the
technology research
collaborative to award through
grants to small start up
businesses but that really at
this point is the only thing
that the tier C. has been doing
and I think we can do so much
more specially with incredible
expertise that we have available
you Mr you already heard the
great expertise that I give
Allison
benchmark officers have we also
have representation from of both
Sandia and Los Alamos national
laboratories we have additional
private sector representation
and we have representation from
each of the state's research
universities so I think this
really can be something
significant that helps direct
all of the efforts of the
state's entrepreneurial
environment and what we need to
do is four a as the tier C. is
very certain get together and
decide what do we want to do
what we want this to look like
going forward so that we're
doing.
I'm more than just guiding very
small scale in requests to start
up businesses in the state and
then figure out from there what
legislative changes we might
need so I would expect next
sixty day session we would come
back to you with a plan for what
legislative changes would be
involved with that but I'd be
happy to turn it over to either
again or mark for any additional
thoughts.
Yes thank you W. secretary Clark
if you don't mind a quick
comment for me is that
you know what those of us on the
board especially those asking
the federal sector the
representative the national labs
and my kind of federal land and
the the research institutions
that are really at the state
level the one thing about the
research committee here is that
we all know each other we're
pretty tight click on
understanding how we're
developing technology within our
federal circles within these
research angles and how we get
that then into the economy how
do we get that into the
commercial sector in the state
and so I think that's part of
what.
We we're trying to get after and
maybe a gross aspect especially
considering the conversation
from the last session how do we
continue to grow economies from
the way we do our research and
insight state and so we've been
doing a great job so far I think
because we have the matching
capability for companies are the
state close money to for
matching funds for the federal
sector funding my outfit
controls now the space force
budget that goes to small
businesses to the small business
innovative research
opportunities so I think one of
the things that dresses how more
can we help that out and in my
particular focus on strategies
for the states have to do with
growing what I consider to be a
growing space sector which is
less and less common springs and
Albuquerque New Mexico was a
gigantic market coming down the
pipeline one of my main
preaching points as I want to
figure out how to position those
notes where we exist at the
federal sector to take advantage
of that growth and grow those
ecosystems so that we can then
create really great capabilities
for the nation.
Good good.
And Mr Chairman
there's a whole group of the.
Technology start ups that are
focused primarily on on the on
the bioscience the
representative on the on the
sick of collaborative as well.
You mean that question the
answer is yes.
Right.
I just had one last question
that I personally choose a look
forward John to to seeing with
the department proposes in the
way of of strengthening and and
beefing up the the framework in
which the collaborative
functions and and the you know
we've got money this year we
probably will still have some
next year.
But if there are ways in which
those funds could could be
supportive we'd love to hear
those ideas.
I just had one idle curiosity
question in in Mr months is.
Curriculum vita.
He mentions his work in the
March and April of two thousand
six.
On the festive expensive simple
tiny comic.
What's that all about.
So I've got twenty two years now
in mainly the Air Force
secretary of of what we call
acquisitions that has to do with
how the federal sector choirs
and develops the systems that
feels at and so within that
construct it most of you know
the the bureaucracy and the
federal government level is
quite robust at times and so
there's a lot of us to have been
trying to get after how do we
how do we feel systems faster
and a lot of colleagues who are
thought leaders in this area
we're putting out artifacts to
try to drive values within our
our service at and that Madam
was one of those how do we drive
values for fast inexpensive
simple and tiny to enable us to
do work in and get the systems
that we really badly need for
the field.
And it was an actual comic.
Indeed it was an actual comic it
was written that it was an
illustrator at the defense
acquisition university that this
journal is published under and
we decided to use that medium to
help get the message out.
Great that that actually is a
very good way to reach
legislators to so you might.
Senator.
You know bringing proposals to
the legislation to the
legislature in comic book format
thank you so much for your
willingness to serve all of you
Mr chairman thank you thank you
so much Senator any other
questions.
With no other questions
gentleman what will happen is
where a subcommittee today we'll
take the vote during the first
week of the session and then
work with full confirmation of
the Senate leader within the
thirty day session and so with
that you'd be able to come to
the capital if you wish you
would need to speak here Senate
sponsor would do the speaking on
your behalf or you could also
join yes thank you again for all
that you do and for joining us
this afternoon and we're next
going to move on to the
appointments to the tourism
commission thank you thank you.
Thank you so much for joining us
we're now going to be speaking
to those who are seeking
appointment to the tourism
commission I want to go in order
of your names that are on my
agenda if you can give us a
brief background of yourself how
long you've served on the
commission and any briefing
you'd like to give us in regards
to the commission and with that
I want to start off with that Mr
David Norman.
Thank you so much for having me.
My name is David Norton I'm the
CEO of cascade valley.
I am new to the commission I've
extended one meeting so far
looking forward to being a much
greater part of it four.
I move to New Mexico.
That I'm this my six winter
season here that's how I measure
the years are when does that
that that's what we're here I
merrily but moved here this my
six winter season.
And at I've been in the industry
the outdoor recreation industry
my entire career I started in
Japan of all places and.
Building the scary and and built
one and Correa.
Work down in South America for
some time worked and lived in
aspen working with instead of
our money and that would my wife
and I are here inTaos we're
really excited we're undergoing
to incredible revitalization.
And.
Also have become the the world's
first certified B. corporation
as a ski resort and that B.
corporations of those entities
slight that Ben Jerry's in
Patagonia that.
That really are assessed on
their environmental social
responsibilities we think that
piece very seriously as part of
the those of this resort.
I'm really excited to be a part
of the commission in working
with
commissioners rare for several
years now and
it incredibly impressed with
what the state has done on the
tourism fund over these past
four five years the Madam growth
you madam energy of the economy
that's been built over around it
one other aspect of our business
is introducing there like quest
called house there and that is
no flying from Dallas Austin.
Carlsbad California and and LA
for the past three or four years
and it's really.
Demonstrated that were opening
of markets to those locations so
very excited to be considered
and thank you so much for your
time thank you so much David
congratulations on what you've
been doing I've your neighbor in
the Espanola valley so thank you
so much it's good to see a
fellow northern New Mexicans I'm
not gonna move on to Benjamin of
Rosen.
Yeah I'm I'm been result and
my early career I was a army
infantry officer and later a FBI
special agent and as I moved
into my thirties I came back
home to New Mexico I am a native
and went to work at Sandia peak
ski area and later Santa Fe ski
area and now the tram where I am
vice president the tram and
general manager of ski Santa Fe
I'm new to the commission as
well and have been involved with
skiing Mexico which has worked
with the state on the New Mexico
true over the last decade and
very
Excited to see the progress
we've made in the state with
tourism over the last decade and
I think on all fronts all
seasons there's a lot of
progress that still to be made
recovering from last year in the
pandemic
is I think tourism is a vital
Avenue to get the economy moving
in New Mexico and excited to see
what we can do.
Thank you so much Benjamin now
also joining us today is add to
that the heal and to not good to
see you if you want a few words
before I go to some questions
from senators.
You.
Thank you
good afternoon members of the
committee and Mr chair and the
opportunity to of course to
recommended some of these
candidates for the tourism
commission positions
our tourism commission meets
quarterly and it it is advisory
but over all just hearing
experience and our other tourism
commissions that are also on a
board
you know aligns really with the
mission of the tourism
department to grow that tourism
economy for New Mexico which is
a really integral part for a lot
of our rural areas as well
the agency is is also the
steward of New Mexico magazine
and all the New Mexico true
brands and those visual assets
that we see out there.
to promote the state as the
premier destination for the
venturesome traveler so
currently our agency is focused
on driving demand and stabilize
and industry of course through
some program and evidence based
programs this includes expanding
the cooperative marketing
program that has been a standard
in the staple of this agency for
quite some time expanding our
national flag market advertising
campaign to all four seasons
instead of just to and adding an
online market place for our New
Mexico true certified program
which are are.
Local arts crafts some says just
those wonderful products that
are small businesses in New
Mexico up put out on a normal
basis and and have some
opportunities to export those
and of course
in order to grow the economy you
definitely have to make an
investment and Services strategy
for improving our products so
tourism development
infrastructure is also critical
focus for for us this year so to
have these individuals join our
tourism commission collectively
not only with their executive
leadership their civic service
their ability and willingness to
spend some time with us and
volunteer their time we we
really look forward to to there
joining and respond were
strictly request your approval
to to to move that forward to
the full Senate thank you so
much miss me feel I'm gonna go
to questions now from senators
and I'm gonna start off with
Senator Stewart.
At thank you Mr chairman and
thank you for being willing to
step up like this to both of you
I'm I have a comment for Mr
Norton.
the it is amazing what you have
done in the tell ski valley all
the development to have made and
in fact.
we had a meeting of the
legislative finance committee up
there this summer and it was so
well attended actually they ran
out of rooms in the Blake
because you know they were on a
a shorter staff a smaller staff
for the summer but that was just
an amazing experience to be up
there in those beautiful
mountains talking about the
budget for New Mexico so I just
I really appreciate what you've
done that tent was very good to
hold our committees in you
should be getting even more
committees up there and I'm sure
it's it will be really great for
other folks that want to have a
conferences so so you've done
really an amazing job and we
also heard that you're actually
building housing for the staff
up there that is really smart
because you know and nobody
wants to go home in two feet of
snow on the roads and so I think
that will just be tremendous so
I just very impressed with
everything you've done up there
and you're having this ski
patrol you're having what is it
that you're doing there's
there's a special.
I'm not a skier my partner is he
can't wait to go out there this
year so please tell us what
you're doing in the future with
the contest that you're having
up there and how much snow
you've got right now.
Thanks for the kind words it was
really exciting have the and let
provided the join us.
I see that meeting.
Dr requests from the state to
come up with some big ideas.
And we just and recently
introduced a concept called the
clean energy transportation and
recreation part or in its part
of the state right now to have
zero emission buses to and from
past past the valley of working
with the economic development.
Department on the designated the
real on the river as a
as standing water on the Federal
Register level.
And really trying to do
everything we can to get all of
our power on the hundred percent
daytime solar with with the
partnership with our so
yes thanks for being here thanks
for getting our juices flowing.
with respect control of one
really interesting program we
have coming up is later this
month in January thirtieth we're
gonna have.
I think thirty girls join us.
In a program called she jumps
and she jumped is an idea to
introduce young women to the
sport of skiing having them join
women's ski instructors we we
have a we're we're really
working on our diversity right
now we have actually greater
gender diversity of the patrol
now than we've ever had in the
past.
And we're gonna have these young
girls ski and be around the
women of our patrol so they can
get introduced the outdoors and
ideally see a career opportunity
going forward that there if
there is opportunity for women
on our patrol so.
That's one of the programs we
have is right around the corner
it's just at the end of the
month.
Well Mr chairman thank you for
that that's that's great so how
much snow do you have that there
and sorry about that I probably
would do that because we don't
have enough.
And what happens is sometimes it
all ends up in bands a budget
battle that some thought that
ends up here we are low I'm not
and we're doing everything we
can to.
Catch up and make it we're we're
a little bit of below average we
started very very slow we picked
up about four or five feet of
snow between December twentieth
January first of right now we're
seeing well most amount is open
but it's never enough in this
business it it really it's
Michael the more you have the
more the more people visit so
right now we're holding well but
we're definitely ready for the
next on so send it our way
please
Little bit below average but
nothing on the rise yet.
Right well Mr chairman thank you
for that I if only we could
change the weather we would let
me tell you at the so and thank
you for letting us know about
that project that just sounds
great to get young girls
interested in that sport that's
just a great idea and but I and
I also love the buses the
emission free buses so we are
putting a fair amount of money
into the environment we did that
in the special session and we're
going to continue to do that in
the regular sessions so that we
help create these great outdoor
recreation spaces like you have
done in the tell ski valets so I
like the idea of that quarter
and you know our our our tourism
department is just one of our
tools because it's really you
know it's one of our best
economic development of drivers
is our tourism so I appreciate
you all very much and and thank
you also to you Mr approved so
for serving at thank you Mr
chair thank you so much Senator
I'm Mexico to go to Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and
My first question is is the
first of the three thank you
both Mr Norton and Mr of reserve
for.
Or before tackling this with
this really great but I wanted
to just get the secretary.
this is the a seven member
commission are all the positions
filled noted or do we still have
some vacancies.
Mr chair members of the
committee are we have one
vacancy.
Okay and and
I mean I.
Expound on that if I may a
little bit we we did have a full
three
we we unfortunately we see the
resignation of one just a couple
weeks ago due to some
operational and in changes with
regard to has
full time paid job
he really didn't feel that he
would have the capacity or the
time to serve appropriately and
to the levels if you wanted to
and so we have now are have a
vacancy.
Good.
Once again I'm I'm very
impressed with the with the
caliber of the of the governor's
nominations
right I wanted to bring up
something that I heard about
this last week and the one of my
constituents is Arturo
Sunderland.
With the organization that he
calls the southwest center for.
So culture and history I think
or something like that and he's
he's.
Nope of promoting.
I agree tourism.
However cultural tourism and
there there.
I think building on models that
are present in Italy and France
and Spain and.
Where you'd you would actually
go to a farm.
And and and there be a residents
on the farm that you would stay
up but if you could do a
tribute visit around the
neighborhood but you could also
work on the farm if you wanted
to or you could be you know to
have a hand in you know for
grinding corn or making Chico's
or whatever was going on at that
time is that something that the
the the tourism department is is
is behind in is there much of a
possibility for that.
Mr chair members of the
committee and this was actually
a topic in our leadership
discussion yesterday
it's not that it hasn't been
in the bucket of a lot of things
for tourism it's
We are aware of those recent
conversations and are looking to
Edgell some conversations with
appropriate people to two one
understand if
Product for sure
and also if there's any
challenges facing the industry.
Good and I'll be following it
with the with keen interest it
is just struck me that this is a
way to help rural communities
benefit from the tourism
industry.
Without sacrificing necessarily
their way of life.
On to a big resort or or you
know what the chain motel or
something they they they could
they could potentially.
Make a living support help
support themselves and and
reinforce the community and
still provide a wonderful
tourism service he was also
talking about you know having in
the evenings.
performances by musicians or
dancers or cultural groups
stories by historians
storyteller is a whole range of
things it sounded pretty much
like.
Right idea for you know extended
summer camp for adults I was
ready to sign up but is it is
not quite ready yet.
but I'm glad that the department
is looking at this in the
commission and I'll be I'll be
watching eagerly to see what you
all come up with thank you thank
you Mr chairman that's.
Thank you so much and I also
don't have questions I just want
to thank you for helping to grow
the tourism economy the work
that you put into this committee
I know that you do this as
volunteers and I know that you
do it well and I want to thank
you for your hard work and the
time and energy you put into it
and so just the right as a
reminder we will not be voting
today we're working as a
subcommittee and will be voting
next week and then going to a
full Senate confirmation during
the thirty day session we could
join us on the Senate floor
where you won't need to speak
your Senate sponsor will speak
on your behalf or you can join
us yes so once again I want to
thank you for your hard work and
all that you're doing for
tourism in New Mexico I think
all of us can say we're
definitely New Mexico truth
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and to R.
Sanchez thank you.
Thank you.
During the time you want okay
you can get yourself.
Yeah the other three people.
Dr Bobby green.
For the future.
We've we've got the Roybal me of
and grueling.
If you got a packet for.
In and that's what we're asking
about not on the list.
Linda yes we have three packets
and then the gentleman in the
light at the end of it is not
yet is no longer on okay.
But noted Dr I because.
Okay can we get some money for.
good.
All these.
Yeah we are.
What we're.
Yes this will be the next.
For me to get on if you're
thank.
Yeah.
Good afternoon we're next going
to move on with the conferees
for the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy board I want
to thank you for joining us
today I'm gonna start off Mr Roy
ball if you can turn your camera
on if not I understand I'm gonna
go in the order of how you're
listed on our agenda if you can
give us the brief background
about yourself how many years
you've served on this committee
at any information you'd like to
provide in regards to the
committee and I'm gonna start
off with summer made up on.
Good morning Mr chairman
everyone good afternoon sorry my
name is summer ball I'm the
chief of police for Taos Pueblo
department of public safety I
became the chief of police in
may of last year
I was put on to the board in
August I've served on two
meetings so far I've enjoyed it
very much and I appreciate the
consideration thank you.
Thank you so much of next I want
to move on to Mr Benny Roybal.
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Betty Roy ball I live in
Espanola born and raised in
Espanola
I thought.
Attended New Mexico State
University at and for two years
when and to the table and to the
navy and returned and finished
off by education at the college
of Santa Fe with a degree in
business on the GI bill
I also spent the twenty eight
and a half years as worked in
the New Mexico department of
transportation my last of
eight years were of division
director of operations and then
W. secretary of for the DOT
I thought.
I've also been involved with the
with the associated contractors
in New Mexico service chairman
of that organization and
continue to work very closely
with the association of because
of my business I have a business
consulting business that I work
with the highways and bridges
and again
it's a pleasure to be here for
you and you certainly consider.
But ask for your consideration
thank you thank you so much Mr
apology Senator if you don't
mind I'm the Senate sponsor for
Mr right ball I'd like to say a
few words on his behalf at this
time before I head over to the
other speakers so Mister Roy
ball is a native son of the
beautiful Espanola valley and a
well respected community leader
in the valley as a lifelong
resident of Espanola he's built
strong working relationships
with law enforcement agencies
elected officials community left
leaders and members of our
community this is the key
Aspect of having mystery ball
appointed to the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy this will
serve him well his working
relationships he's built with so
many people throughout our
valley Mr Roy balik you Senator
degree in accounting from New
Mexico State University the
local I'm not going to hold that
against you Mr Abbas and
servicing those in front passed.
he has worked as an accountant
and a consultant you've been
deputy cabinet secretary and
field operations director for
the state highway department so
the my pleasure and pride that I
nominate Mr Benny road for a Roy
ball to the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy board thank
you senators for letting me
speak on his behalf and thank
you Mr Roy ball for allowing me
to sponsor you to this committee
I'm not going to move on to
tally of the Honda are you there
to offer a few words.
I am I would get on muted thank
you thank you.
Yes I am fully in support of Mr
white ball as a nominee for
appointment as well he hit the
ground running and that has
already initiated several
meetings with me to help
identify some of the issues
we've been dealing with and out
what his role could be as well
as with other board members to
help us get moving on some of
those issues so I would be very
excited to have been a member of
the board and look forward to
working with and.
Thank you so much Kelly I'm not
going to go to members of the
Senate if there's any questions.
Question from senator Ortiz the
people.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you both for for being
willing to serve I I noticed the
miss more of all our chief more
about you
graduated from the was it the
Indian Law Enforcement Academy.
Yes where is that located.
Within our deal with one of
those federal federal facility
thank so yes.
I had.
Is that background you the year
training in a different Academy
from the one you'll be of
overseeing of of of on the Law
Enforcement Academy board has
that been helpful it did you
bring up a perspective that that
otherwise might be missing and
other big differences in the
curriculum and in the approach
the to the two of the two
academies.
Yes I believe so and just
recently I attended the start by
waiver to get my state
certification and during the
course we had a lot of good
conversations about how federal
tribal and state laws you know
how we can start working
together in that aspect so I
thought you they was it was
really good to hear everybody in
the classes you know opinions on
state and then also talking with
other
counties that had tribal
jurisdictions in their area and
what not so yeah I think kind of
ties together a lot and I know
there's a lot of things I know I
spoke with Elliott good then
about doing as far as how we can
work together at state and
federally on missing murdered
indigenous women and things like
that so yes I think it they they
collaborate well.
Good and and I'm not I'm not
sure if there'd been that
perspective on the board
previously but it's great that
you can bring that the
particular experience you had a
being trained at the federal
academy to the board do either
of you have anything that you're
particularly concerned that
legislators should know about
the the the the entire situation
with law enforcement in New
Mexico this is would be a chance
for you to to apprise us of some
concerns it that you think we
ought to be aware of.
Mr chairman of of.
Mr of.
I'm sorry Mr be no is it right
yes yes I'm sorry this.
Up the only thing I'd like to
say is you know I I'm as of the
Mr chairman and those were very
kind words Mr chairman I
appreciate that but you know in
in Rio Arriba county we've had a
couple of sheriff's that we've
had some issues both are serving
time in prison I think the
public has lost a lot of trust
and respect in our in our
officers and I think that
working with the law enforcement
of board and the academy I think
we we could we sure need a lot
of help in in order to turn
things around and I I think of
our director could probably
answer a few more of those or
answered that question in more
detail but I believe that you
know we're basically shorthanded
at the academy of there's a lot
of positions that haven't been
filled there so I think budget
wise up we have some issues as
well so those are kind of things
that I I think that need to be
addressed so that we can move
forward as a state and our
country and so with that I would
turn it over to Kelly if she's
got anything to add.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr rebel.
The cells are.
Yes.
Committee members are I concur
we do we we have some issues
that have been readily
identified over the last year to
the term that I've been here and
we're working very closely with
our GPS on one side who were
administratively attached to but
also the board members on the
other side took to working
cooperatively with each other in
the areas that where their
strengths are.
come together and identify those
issues budgetary relief
the board does get to request
its own budgets and but DPS does
some of the heavy lifting
because they're the ones who
actually present the budget and
the ones that have to articulate
the needs so.
A large portion of it is working
very closely together to
identify and address the needs
so I I can Kerr and
I'd like to in case I missed
that I would also like to speak
up on behalf of.
Marable as well.
Express my support for Mister
white ball and my supporters
Justice strong chief.
You're more I think she does
bring a fresh perspective
we have had other
representatives from tribal
entities that's the slot that
she feels as the tribal chief
position but every new one and
who who is familiar with new
issues has had attended a
training more recently between
the federal academy in in our
own state academy certainly
brings a fresh perspective
to to the board and everybody
that's involved so I'm just as
excited as working to work with
her as well.
Right and that that before we we
go to the chief more about for
comments did you it did you have
several vacancies that that that
are that you're having trouble
filling.
Yes we do have a six vacancies
who we have a total of nineteen
staff members what what's
hitting us hard is that the
vacancies are our instructor
level so what it you can see it
would be very difficult
to me with no instructors
thankfully we've had tremendous
support from agency statewide so
we we do have
a training deputy director we
have an instructor on board and
we had tremendous support from
agencies of providing and you
don't cert training instructors
to come up and help us during
this time we are addressing and
have been working on it's not
just one single issue that is is
causing those vacancies of
course the the circumstances
that have occurred over the last
year year and a half not only
nationally on the law
enforcement team but with COVID
with the difference statewide at
the different levels of para
retirement so officers are has a
tenant there with one agency and
they look at coming to the
academy and it's in a different
region Ireland system they look
at having to work five extra
years we look at the issues the
pay disparity between what the
agencies are paying them as
officers on the street
in comparison to what the state
pay scale as per instructors
here so so we can have a perfect
storm of of things that are
making it difficult for us to
hire instructors but
with our new cabinet secretary
and deputy secretary
I think we're gonna have a lot
of support is working outside
with the entities that can help
us improve
those obstacles.
So the I didn't realize is Mr
chairman that the academy staff.
Oriented are at a different.
retirement plan from the from
the state police.
With different the eligibility
in different eligibility for
retirement in different
retirement benefits.
Yes Sir that's correct and.
Can they work at the academy at
the retired from of the another
police department.
Thank you they do they have to
put their retirement on hold and
I think I understand that
submission to kind of statewide
with we lose a lot of experience
to people who retire and welcome
back but but they're not allowed
to draw that past retirement may
have to give one of them up all
that work and that has been
mentioned as a as a distraction
detractors well.
I guess Mr chairman I can
understand that if you retire
from the Espanola police
department you know you
shouldn't be able to just come
back again neglect to retirement
keep working for the Espanola
police department but this is a
totally different.
Organization within state
government so I I.
The that may be an issue that we
want to keep in mind to at least
look at the possibility of
because I can see it is making
it difficult for them to get.
Experience qualified instructors
if they have to give up their
their retirement in order to do
that.
Miss miss the chief the mayor of
all did you want to add anything
to the issues that we ought to
be aware of.
The only thing I'd like to just
address just coming from the law
enforcement side of things is
it's hard to be in law
enforcement nowadays and it's
really hard to recruit people
and it's really hard to recruit
good people and that's what we
want and
I'm really excited for the board
to have a to help with those
ideas as far as recruiting and
recruiting women that's a big
thing that I'd like to focus on
to
but it's hard to be a law
enforcement officer right now so
that's one thing that it's an
issue and like Mr Roybal said
you know we want good police
officers and sheriffs and
it's it's hard to find people
right now and I hope that we can
work together and find a better
recruiting.
you know a better way to recruit
people and whatnot so yeah that
that's it Sir thank you very
good well thank you all thank
you both for being willing to to
tackle this you have other.
The demands on your time your
family and your business is in
your work.
But you're willing to do this
and we really appreciated so
thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator any
other questions.
Now the one thing I can say is
the theme we have seen is
staffing has been an issue
across the board no matter where
you are we've heard that the
last three days that staffing
has been the constant theme on
finding good people and people
to fill vacancies I just have
one simple question I know that
there's the central New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy does not
become accredited by you.
We actually have the main New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
and we have nine additional
academies that our satellite
academies and central New Mexico
is one of those nine and is
there one in northern New
Mexico.
San Juan County criminal justice
training authority runs an
academy up there we have
Albuquerque police department
are the ones Center totally
located here Bernalillo county
has their academy here and the
New Mexico state police has an
academy in this area as well
thank you Kelly thank you for
that so we won't be voting today
we're working as a subcommittee
will be doing the vote as the
Senate rules committee the first
week of the session and then
after that will be going on for
full confirmation with the
Senate sometime during the
thirty day session and so you're
more than welcome to come on the
Senate floor where you won't
speak your Senate sponsor will
speak on your behalf or you can
join yes is the answer the
that's the nature of the way we
run things now it seems like
zoom and seeing everybody
through a screen is the new
normal I want to thank all of
you for your hard work and your
willingness to serve on this
committee that concludes our
conferees for this afternoon we
will resume tomorrow at nine
thirty AM where will be
listening from appointees are
conferees from occupational
health and this and safety
commission the border Authority
you the border Authority excuse
me New Mexico mortgage finance
authority and the regional
spaceport Tax district so with
that I'm going to adjourn this
meeting thank you again for
