Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator by the.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator songes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Please stand for the invocation
to be given this morning by
reference yeah I thought I just
pastor seventh day Adventist
church of Santa Fe.
this morning by Senator souls.
And the salute to the New Mexico
flag by senator Neville.
Water mountains it's people
children the elderly.
The time that we live in the
present in the future.
In that process the sharing
decision making.
Maybe they remember that we are
inheritance the sick the poor
and the needy that rely on their
leadership.
Therefore.
pray in the name of Jesus amen.
I thank you.
would then I assume on the else
the B. C. Blake on the right
path the who's the C. up out of
told us.
Good morning everyone Senator
Peter Wirth the latest off thank
you madam president good morning
unanimous consent we go to that
our business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Faster our rice for his words
this morning again as I always
say it's good to just take a
moment to pause and we thank him
for the invocation.
The junior bill Senate bill
three seventy seven
appropriations recommendations
which need to get to Senate
finance by five o'clock
tomorrow.
just ask that on our side center
when you all's will reiterate
those and Senator share can also
make sure that members
understand we're doing a little
differently than we have before
of announcements up front madam
president would deal to Senator
Baca.
Senator Baca for president I
wanted to address a the action
designate Smith the Calder and I
apologize to the secretary
designate Smith and she was very
gracious and we had a good
conversation and I wanted to
repeat that here on the floor
Services under her direction I
supported her nomination in
rules I will certainly supported
here thank you for yielding.
Any other announcements Senator
Brandt madam president I would
ask that Senator Ingle B. excuse
except for the purpose of the
call.
chambers except for purposes of
a call.
yes senator Candelaria also my
apologies yes Senator Candelaria
Senator Steinborn and Senator
Madam president Senator Shendo
will be leaving shortly thank
you for that seeing no objection
it is so ordered.
bill but I want to make sure
this this is a new process for
everybody and and while you're
learning we're learning and
everybody's got a say in the
as early as you can so if we
have problems or glitches that
we can help you get that
resolved make sure to stay
within the agency's in house
Thank you a further announcement
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president the chairman of a
Senate finance would deal for
just a question or two please.
Mr present thing I have the but
Senators contribution need to be
a minimum of fifty thousand
dollars or can it be a combined
fifty thousand dollars with
another member of the chamber.
The individual member needs to
that however but the minimum is
fifty thousand.
Thank you madam president that's
what to buy into the game for
thank you.
Madam president I just want to
give a shout out to all the
people in eastern New Mexico
that are in the southwest part
pool that reaches all the way to
the Canadian border they are
And most of the time these a
rolling black outs are lasting
an hour at a time.
And it's a pretty difficult
time.
emergency partial madam
president we have great hopes
that.
No one dies during this time of
the very frigid cold there.
Thank you Senator Woods any
other announcements Senators the
funding madam president
To follow up on Senator Woods
comments I'd like to let you
offs and the print reasons for
that from Doug how from the
western grid and then next week
on Thursday we are planning to
hear from all of the utilities
very much.
And thank you for that good
information any other
announcements.
US singer and singer Peter Wirth
interesting are the grid lay out
on the fact that over on the
side of the state there to in a
different power pool and so
that's another piece that that
ask unanimous consent that we
remove Senate memorial eleven
from the president's table this
is the Senator white memorial in
place that on today's calendar.
little later we're not gonna
have any legislation on third
reading today we had talked
about doing.
Are the local economic
I think we'll have built red in
a number of bills put on the
calendar so we will do third
reading of legislation tomorrow
and most likely on Friday so
just to give everyone a heads
up.
We are on that order of Business
messages from the house the
reader will read.
Message from the house of
representatives.
Mr president I am directed to
inform the Senate that the house
house and house bill five as
amended by the house with
emergency clause and requests
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
has passed house bill ninety as
amended by the house and house
bill one hundred thirteen as
amended by the house and
requests the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
house bill sixty six as amended
by the house.
House bill twenty one house bill
thirty five house bill thirty
four as amended by the house and
house bill one hundred eighty
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house Education
Committee substitute for house
joint resolution one.
The total so the message from
the house has been received and
madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house Judiciary
five with emergency clause house
bill twenty five house bill
twenty eight.
House bill fifty one as amended
by the house and house bill
The turtle show the message from
the house has been received
that's all members.
conservation committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
eighty two has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
re to be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the general reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
Senate bill one thirty eight do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill one forty nine do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one eighty five do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill two hundred fourteen
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee.
do pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Stefanics chairman.
Senator Stefanics madam
committee report.
Seeing none the committee report
has been adopted.
Madam president your Education
Committee to home has been
referred Senate bill two ten has
Senator pulp.
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
bought on them with one motion
Senate bill two thirty four do
pass as amended and then to
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill two thirty six do
committee.
Senate bill two forty eight do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two sixty three do
referred to the health and
public affairs committee.
And Senate bill three oh three
is reported without
recommendation and that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
Education Committee report is
there objection to the adoption.
Seeing none the committee report
has been adopt.
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
madam president ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
ordered Senate bill one hundred
fifty do pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill one seventy eight do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Committee Senate bill one eighty
seven do pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill one eighty eight do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill one ninety two is
reported without recommendation
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one ninety four do
Senate Bill to thirteen do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee Senate Bill
to fifteen do pass and that's
referred to the finance
pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
madam president I move the
committee report.
Seeing none the committee report
has been adopted.
Madam president your Indian
rural and cultural affairs
committee to home has been
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Shannon Pinto chair
Senator Pinto I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
Senator Pinto that was the only
one so I think you need to move
adoption I move the adoption of
the committee report.
Madam president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate bill four has
had it under consideration.
And to a report same with
Senator Servan tests for a
committee report.
The members ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports from the
here do you owe money on I I'm
never gonna live that one down
madam president you know what
that is so egregious I'm gonna
do it all over again madam
president ask unanimous consent
No problem the seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
Senate bill seventy four as
amended do pass.
as amended.
Senate bill one hundred to do
pass.
Senate bill one fourteen do
pass.
Senate bill one hundred twenty
Senate bill two sixty seven do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
And Senate bill two eighty six
madam chair we're on the Dobson
of a committee report from the
Judiciary Committee is there any
objection to adoption that
committee report seeing none it
is so ordered.
respectfully submitted senator
George Munoz chairman.
Sorry about that madam chair
Senator yes I asked Maez consent
that the Senate of the Senate
the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and the
Senate bill one hundred thirty
one do pass.
Senate bill one thirty seven do
pass and Senate bill one forty
four do pass respectfully
finance committee is there any
objection to adoption.
Saying none the committee report
is adopted.
Madam president your rules
Sonya Smith as secretary of the
Veterans Services Department for
a term commencing on October one
two thousand twenty to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm
consent so the reader the allied
with all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion that drove reflect that
they were act upon individual.
If there's no objection it is so
ordered Senator executive letter
to be served at the pleasure of
the governor.
The committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment.
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee.
And the following certificates
certificates of condolence
numbers one two and three.
three four five six and seven
and directs the chief clerk to
prepare suitable documents to
express the recognition of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Senator Daniel A. Ivey Soto
report seeing none there the
committee report is adopt.
Madam president your tax
business and transportation
committee to home has been
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman Senator Padilla.
Thank you madam president you
look terrific up there by the
way I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty nine do not pass.
But that Senate tax business and
transportation committee
Senate bill seventy two do pass
as amended and it's referred to
the finance committee Senate
bill seventy three do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill one twenty nine do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill one thirty do pass
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
junior chairman Senator Padilla
I thank you madam president move
adoption of the committee report
we are on adoption of committee
the committee report seeing none
the committee report is about.
That's all.
Sir Peter Wirth.
Thank you very much madam
president madam president here
by some of the credentials of
Sonya Smith has been appointed
secretary of the department of
pursuant to amended Senate
executive message number one
dated February eighth twenty
twenty one I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
Members of the Senate madam
president of we had the hearing
on the Sonya Smith the
Talent the police.
And the expertise of Sonya Smith
background as a health.
Quality assurance expert she's
worked for hospitals for clinics
During the COVID pandemic she
was hired specifically to work
on some aspects of that is it is
it affects nursing homes.
And she's been at the.
improving the caliber of the
services available to the
veterans in our state.
She has a a a background as a
And is a is a
Experienced health quality of
professional she works with the
planning.
I think the the the background
of this woman her sensitivity to
the needs of the people whose.
it just communicated itself to
us this is a challenge she was
eager to undertake and with that
I will stand and and let other
members of the of the US Senate
make comments about her
Thank you madam president I
stress I stand here today in
strong support of the
confirmation of this secretary
the same time Mr president madam
president her on the landed me
on the C. we're probably just a
few miles apart we share of many
were issued by each of our our
services I look forward to her
kindness and in hard to I got to
got to know and she just has the
I did it's it's an item that's
near and dear to my heart I
being the minority veteran
myself care deeply about the
working with her in every facet
possible to help her succeed in
her job as the new secretary and
bring comfort and care to our
secretary Smith designates mess
and.
You know what just reiterate
something that former chair
Lopez always says to all the
confirmation thanking them for
she said something that really
resonated with me cut her model
kind every day is veterans day
and and we really need to thank
appreciate tremendously her
willingness to serve and.
Look forward to working with her
and want her to know the the
door's always open once we get
Thank you next I Senator Brandt
thank you madam president I
stand also in support of the
secretary designate Smith you
state does a great job for
veterans it actually is a very
veteran friendly state and I
appreciate that her leadership
in that going forward to keep
the one thing I would ask the
secretary to do is to really
help work to to with the federal
government to fix that system I
have to live in that system and
and you know as as someone who's
who suffers with chronic pain.
I can't get in to see my doctor.
just it's a mess it's still a
mess we keep being promised by
every administration it's going
to be fixed and it never gets
fixed so so I rise in support of
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam.
I want to stand up and
congratulate her on all of her
accomplishments and her
grace and poise.
In addition to our distinguished
military service as a medical
technician during the Gulf War
organizational skills for
medical background is a perfect
background in these times of the
pandemic and in these at for the
specific issues that veterans
administration and the veterans
hospital to deal with the many
issues that veterans face I have
many family members who have
you'll utilize the services and
fantastic appointment I am proud
to stand in support of this
nomination nomination thank you.
Thank you next we'll have
senator Linda Lopez.
I had an opportunity to chat
with her.
and she was making the rounds to
a chat with members of the
Senate rules committee in in our
C. and how that also needs to
have some attention given
because of of you know that the
importance and of Hirscher see
the support that I think the
of issues and concerns also I
also madam president members of
the Senate chatted with her with
regards to the homeless there
are many of our veterans who are
care of oversight that she has
had to during her time here in
our state she knows of the
concerns and she is going to
work on them but of course as I
mentioned working with local
support and also thanked the
governor for nominating a strong
woman to sit in the seat just as
we had prior to a a very strong
president I'm gonna present two
things one is I just need to
disclose to the Senate that the
conferee
US has served on the board of
directors of the African
I don't believe it it creates
conflict of interest but I did
want to make that disclosure
because we are the registered
agent for the for the African
American chamber of commerce
half of this position and and
one of the things
that I don't think a lot of
attention to Senator Baca as are
questioning of her what is the
have a a conferee who who not
only has military experience but
specifically has wartime
the variety of issues before
veterans as she's working on
these issues on behalf of the
state of New Mexico and I I
really do celebrate the governor
thank you.
Thank you and for further debate
we have Senator Herrell pope.
Thank you madam president I I
just want to thank the governor
I want to thank the rules
I I've known her for a few years
I know she's passionate about
veterans.
The department does a great job
in the state.
But she recognizes the fact that
we can do more.
And she's always willing to be
held accountable for the
positions that she's held so I
think that's very important so I
just want to thank.
Thank you senator any other
debate on the confirmation
seeing none Senator Ortiz Y.
record show the role has been
cold.
And all those present voted in
the affirmative.
Except by those so we just to
We are voting on the
confirmation of Sonya Smith to
the secretary of Veterans
Services Department our clerk
will call the roll.
Brandt yes senator Byrd senator
Byrd yes Senator Campos Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator huh I'm here
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
yes senator one yours.
Senator Munoz.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator of the yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Penn Bill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart DS
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Senator Gallegos yes.
Thirty.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative none in the negative
the appointment of Sonya Smith
as secretary of the Veterans
Has been duly confirmed by the
Senate.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
confirmation.
hereby submit the credentials of
Mister John Salazar who's been
appointed secretary of
information technology and I now
yield to Senator Padilla to
present this country.
Senator Padilla.
Salazar and secretary of
information technology.
Senator Padilla to explain the
confirmation thank you very much
that sorry that secretary of
information technology we have a
phenomenal individual madam
president that is agreed to take
on this role and it's been in
this role for almost a year now
we're just shy of a year and
providing hands on management of
large scale information
technology modernization
projects and board we need that
madam president I just proven
experience guiding business and
technical areas to complete
meet these organizational
requirements when I was looking
at his resume madam president
and as I've gotten to know him
over the past year some words
really stuck out that I want to
let the body know about has
operate a lot of them in silos
he's able to work very hard to
bring all that together so that
we have a clear view across the
enterprise across the state
government he has a
collaborative background he's
he's and and he and can support
organizational business
requirements we'll balancing
people's needs within the
department.
And he's modernize legacy
with what he's going to be
managing now and he is a PMP
which is a project management
professional his background has
educational background madam
comments about the secretary
designates also.
Is there debate on the
confirmation Center K. Kernan
thank you madam president I
responsive when he receives a
call from any any of us as
legislators is very quick to
respond and I appreciate that
about him that's very important
Thank you Sir other debate on
our confirmation.
Seeing no debate Senator Padilla
made some tremendous impacts
he's been the contract manager
for a private industry C. S. W.
he's been the chief information
officer for the department of
workforce solutions it's been a
taxation and revenue department
has worked in personal income
tax services unit as the I. team
manager and he's been the
department director for a
management information systems
for and his daughter Jennifer
selesai told us the story of how
hard working he is on and off
the clock and how he just works
twenty four seven there were
about twenty plus or minus
individuals that spoke on behalf
of the secretary designate some
secretary of information
technology and I ask for a
a roll call vote thank you madam
president thank you first we'll
go to Senator Lopez thank you
ordered us.
We are voting on the
confirmation of John Salazar the
secretary shall call the roll.
Campos yes senator Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
Toronto's yes Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond DS Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator to subpoena.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Pinto.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart DS
Senator Tallman.
information technology for a
term commencing on March second
twenty twenty and then serving
at the pleasure of the governor
has been duly confirmed by the
Senate.
of for this week also madam
president I may some people have
expressed concerned about I'm
asking policy although it is
camouflage I do have a mask on.
order business announcements and
miscellaneous.
We're on that order
announcements and miscellaneous
are there any nonsense center
Peter Wirth thank you madam
president and now being eleven
This will come to order.
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that their journal has been
read in full and approved it
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee.
just for the members we are
going to
go to third reading for the
memorial for Senator white I
believe that Senator Baca is
going to present that it's
for Senate memorial number
eleven.
If there's no section Senator
Baca to explain the memorial
thank you madam president Mr Mr
if there's no objection Senator
Baca to explain the memorial.
The reader will right.
service to New Mexico.
Where is James P. James P. Jim
quite who served as a Republican
senator for district nineteen
from two thousand sixteen to two
we're as senator white caddied
at the Oak Park Country Club in
suburban Chicago throughout high
school earning an Evans
scholarship foundation golf
caddie scholarship.
whites flight training school in
Texas to begin a long adventure
together in the United States
Air Force.
And residentially flooding
Boeing KC one thirty five
nicknamed the jolly green giant.
And we're Senator white serve
more than thirteen tours of duty
flu search and rescue in Vietnam
years of service having earned
numerous awards that include the
Air Force legion of merit and
the Distinguished Flying Cross.
And we're Senator why then begin
career and to have the time to
enjoy his family.
And resin two thousand nine
senator right sense of duty
compelled him to answer the call
to join the New Mexico
legislature.
thousand nine to two thousand
fourteen.
And we're as senator whites
quiet introspective and calm
demeanor earned him the respect
of members of both parties.
always ready to celebrate the
news of a wedding graduation
promotion or new family member
and whereas and avid lifelong
golfer Senator whites
appreciation for the game
And where's he often teed off
before sunrise walk the course
with a bag over his shoulder and
finish the eighteenth hole in
time for breakfast.
And we're Senator white never
An illegal you turn in south
Korea's royal palace.
Passport debacle in Malaysia
dancing with the Maasai Mara in
Kenya hiking the Grand Canyon
one with a healthy dose of humor
while touching a great many
lives with his love kindness and
compassion.
And we're Senator white quietly
supported his family friends
community and country with his
And we're Senator white was
preceded in death by his beloved
wife of forty nine years Jeff
WHEELAND and his brother Stanley
we're his sister's choice
bouquet and Cairnryan zero.
His brother in law William
static in J. and his
grandchildren Mitchell Jesse del
Be honored for his many years of
public service and dedication to
the residents of New Mexico.
And for his commitment to the
many people whose lives he
touched.
Senator Bob.
Madam president I move the
center memorial B. eleven B. put
on its final passage subject to
I'm proud today to.
To celebrate
My fellow veteran a James White
and the service that he gave
he's a very educated man he's
here to a bachelor of science in
math and economics and a master
of science as well and he was in
the credit river airport
executive and
with all those credentials to
talk to him if you could talk to
him as if he was just another
brother of yours just a neighbor
And that the intent was that we
stood serve honorably if we
stand and do our best and if we
play our talents we have.
conduct a state business and
support legislation to that
would enhance the well for
growth and prosperity and
quality of life of all New
Mexicans I want to tell you
With that madam president I
opened a centre more eleven to
debate from the rest of the
body.
Thank you senator about the
first have Senator Padilla.
everything that's been said
about and it's just true I
didn't on that long I knew him
for the time he was in the
Senate I did not know when madam
president.
As well when he was in the house
and and I had an opportunity to
passion about every single thing
he did but you really almost
wouldn't know it because I think
you might have said the fewest
amount of words on the Senate
floor but when he did speak he
really meant to business and he
personally expressed to me that
he didn't seem like the type
that would express maybe
something like this but I think
it was pretty hard when he lost
his sweetheart and I think that
when he decided
for his family and I was just
really proud to know him
because whenever I had an
opportunity to talk to me was
very kind to me as the west all
president Jim was Jim is one of
those guys that it was a true
gentleman in every sense of that
word.
medium one is a kind of guys a
true gentleman a match and he
was a leader in this chamber
quietly I had the joy of sitting
exigent where there were Senator
on Steinborn is so sitting right
sat down with him he had a very
wry sense of humor required
wasn't bombastic like me how but
he would he would say things
that just got me laughing so
in death and he he was once
again answer the call service to
New Mexico by running for the
state Senate and served in this
body he has career was just
absolutely outstanding and will
madam president thank you for
the SLO me make these comments.
Thank you senator Morris next
will have Senator Stefanics.
and in particular we held a town
hall meeting for our of two
diverse districts and did a lot
of publicity and got there on a
especially those areas that were
very close together and I
appreciate very much the work
that he did on our guardianship
laws and taking care of the
Thank you madam pro tem madam
president
I tell you what.
Each one of us brings a
particular thing to this
chamber.
about his military career in in
course I'm sure the only thing
he told me was the fun part.
say hardly anything in and
convictions everything he would
just really nice nice man that
And I was so sad and when I hear
that he was no longer with us
and.
He is the you know as a state
the the angels rejoiced in
heaven.
Thank you Senator Woods Texel
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much Madam for
temporary.
each and everyone of us would
want to be remembered.
The way a Senator white is
remembered.
With this passion his
discipline.
His ability to articulate.
Continues to rain within our
hearts and the reason it does.
Is because senator Morris right
regardless of where US weather
is an LESC meeting and we sit
globally so within all of those
things he brought to mind.
It was reasonable what was
commonsensical and most
importantly what was practical
forward the key that he leaves
for us again is what would all
want to be remembered for and
that is the way we treat each
Thank you Senator Campos next
will have Senator gate current.
Thank you madam president and I
stand here today to.
Monday before he passed away and
and so I was very saddened when
I heard that he he had he had
passed.
I sat next to jam on the in
listen to him a lot and learned
a lot from him and he was
probably one of the finest
gentleman to sit in this body
and I will always remember his
Thank you Senator Kernan next
will have Senator Sedillo pets.
Thank you madam chair.
And we worked with senator Gail
I mean with Representative Gail
Armstrong whose district was
also affected by it.
He was such a joy to work with
We also co sponsored a bill
dealing with electric charging
stations to help with to help
with the transition
Once he advised me and I I wish
she was here to give me this
advice again sometimes he said
you don't have to just jump up
every time you think nothing
needs to be corrected think
about what is important.
He did it has been said he did
his work in quiet ways was
influential because of his grace
and his intelligence and his
earth thank you madam president.
Thank you senator next we'll
hear from senator Byrd.
not only to this body but also
as a friend.
Of.
I think many of you know that I
do a lot of work with veterans
issues as well as active duty
military.
critical to the defense of this
nation
I would always go to Jim for his
expertise in that he works
he knew exactly what to deal
with not only in bigger force
but certainly in the state of
New Mexico it was a tremendous
missions of the bases in the
state of New Mexico but also.
To make sure that the economy of
New Mexico and the environment
of New Mexico were also
addressed in all of those bills.
to do is because of of his input
into
the the legislation that we
really truly work on together
although.
He would dig and just some of
the most thought provoking
questions on that committee
that actually surprise I think a
lot of people on the committee
so again I I just.
We I just pray for rate his
family and and for the best
wishes to for them to continue
on he is a it was a wonderful
New Mexico and certainly by the
United States Air Force thank
you madam.
Thank you senator Byrd next we
will go to Senator Ivey Soto.
I heard the news of
Senator white's passing.
Senator white and I had the
been through so much who have
been so traumatized and Senator
white had this amazing patients
listening to them.
And working with them and and
Senate judiciary I was I was
volunteered by the chairman of
judiciary to to help craft
work with senator Wyden Health
craft.
conscience and principle.
And it was such an amazing
privilege to work with him.
On that bill.
And the thing is after that bill
we continue to work on that
issue.
Really I think of to the day
died.
And so for him it wasn't what he
worked on in this building
lives any state involved with
that projects that he worked on.
And maybe New Mexico a much
better place thank you.
you know for someone who's had
such an extraordinary.
Life of public service it's
important to.
Just stop and thank his family
did and we're incredibly
appreciative of the willingness
to share him with us and just.
You know for our Levin new
members who didn't get a chance
and who was asking every
question it's being able to
listen and then when you do
speak to make sure your words
are heard and they will be heard
his family into him for an
amazing life thank you.
Thank you senator Wirth next one
of Senator Brandt.
just you as a Representative and
you know just a great man
treated you with the utmost
respect even when you were
staff.
and Senator white did that well
Representative light at the time
with me and it meant the world
to me and then when he came over
to the Senate I got to work with
storm but we would talk about
our service and and our
experiences in the Air Force and
just about what we experienced
in our life experiences and and
them messes was done in New we
will miss his statesmanlike
behavior in the Senate thank
you.
Thank you Senator Brandt now go
finance in he was very quiet and
very thoughtful in this process
I think a lot of people have
said his.
He didn't say anything in the C.
really needed to say it and then
airplanes.
And that's why pilots are there
and they're very relaxed there
Coleman situations and and
nothing gets them excited and so
have a target Gallup in he was
very shocked and he was going
golfing and invited me nice and
you don't really want me to play
golf because I get too
frustrated after the first nine.
And we have a relationship with
family members and we talk about
others have people's kids and
know what they did in the
touch base with them.
And I think they appreciate that
and and senator white was that
way so I I really will
appreciate him and he did.
Teach me a few lessons.
and we will miss him thank you.
Thank you senator next will have
Senator Griggs.
I do need to serve on committees
within but I did get to interact
on the floor and at the Energy
council and outstanding
all of us on maybe how we could
disagree but not be disagreeable
Jim white was a.
Hopefully we all can we all can
do that and I I think we'll all
have Jim white to think if we
just remember back on some of
would like to make a comment.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you madam president thank
for noting the contribution
Senator flight maybe with the
guardianship issue.
He wasn't he wasn't on the
interim committee that it looked
constituents who had this need
and he dug in and really help
formulate some good legislation
on that and the that was the
And of always my guests
commented afterward what a
wonderful man your neighbor is.
But a courteous gentleman your
friend is.
touched by just tell how caring
and civil a person he was and we
we may have disagreed on bills
in this body.
I certainly miss in and I want
to thank Senator Brandt Senator
Baca as I said for bringing this
Seeing Senator Gonzales.
Thank you.
I got to know one Representative
and senator white very well we
Worked many years together and
the.
Just one thing that on.
being no now for a few years the
sign that has for emergency
vehicles to pull over and stop
of both of us worked on that
legislation.
everywhere and every time I see
them you know I always of think
of both of us of all.
How we worked in the
transportation committee and you
know how long we brought this
forward the.
You know
family wise and similarly true
stories of his profession you
know and also how much he
enjoyed.
To be able to take care of his
family.
And the you know he did that and
then he came back.
So you know he has some.
Senator flight with us so thank
you madam chair thank you
members.
Thank you senator there any is
there anyone else who would like
I want to thank the body for all
the words in articulating as I
never could on my own.
an airport madam president the
mid valley airport in Los Chavis
and we had a mutual friend there
and so I informed the that
friend of his of his passing and
hope we all will be a friend to
our constituents just the body
rice with one last time in
memory.
In silence of James White.
Thank you madam president.
I move the Senate memorial
leavened do now pass I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
The record show.
So we are on final passage of
Senate memorial lesson.
And.
The.
about our business introduction
of legislation.
There's no objection it is so
ordered.
An act relating to water.
Providing that a lease of water
under water right and subsequent
use of that water shall not take
effect until after the
Senate bill sixteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
conservation committee intends
establishing requirements for
hospital billing and acting in
new section of the unfair
practices act providing for
forfeitures and penalties Senate
bill three eighty two.
Senate bill three eighty three
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to
anesthesiologists assistance
requiring the New Mexico the New
thousand fifteen chapter fifty
two section three Senate bill
three eighty three.
Senate bill three eighty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate health and public
authority to close a public
school under certain conditions
allowing preferences for student
enrollment Senate bill three
eighty four.
Senator Woods and Senator
McKenna an act relating to
animals providing protections
requirements and procedures to
be followed for the capture or
wild horses and other animals
from the definition of livestock
amending definitions in the
livestock code specifically
including wild horses in the
cruelty to animals statute
two hundred sixteen section one
Senate bill three eighty five
Senate bill three eighty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the.
Griggs an act relating to
taxation and acting the
recordation tax act.
Enacting the food gross receipts
tax act distributing a portion
of the revenue from the food
gross receipts tax to
tax repealing the hold harmless
distributions to municipalities
and counties that offset the
food and health care
practitioner deductions from
gross receipts Senate bill three
finance Senate bill three eighty
seven introduced by senator
Wirth and act relating to
campaign finance amending the
campaign reporting act requiring
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
intends to Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill three
eighty eight introduced by
Senate bill three eighty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee infants to
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
redistricting act becoming law
Senate bill three eighty nine
Senate bill three eighty nine
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the rules committee intends to
return to work provisions Senate
bill three ninety Senate bill
three ninety having read twice
by title Sir printed and
referred to the Senate Education
Committee intense to Senate
finance committee Senate bill
with the Human Services
Department.
Senate bill three ninety one.
Senate bill three ninety one
have you read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
Indian rural and cultural
above trend revenue in the
general fund to the college
affordability endowment fund
teacher preparation
affordability scholarship fund
early childhood education and
or printed and referred to the
tax business transportation
committee infants to Senate
finance committee Senate bill
three ninety three introduced by
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
Senate bill three ninety three
having a read twice by title
order printed and referred to
the health Public Affairs
Committee incense to Senate
finance committee Senate bill
three ninety four introduced by
three ninety four Senate bill
three ninety four have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the tax
business transportation
committee intends to Senate
finance Senate bill three ninety
department establishing
procedures maintaining
confidentiality Senate bill
three ninety five Senate bill
three ninety five have been read
twice by title is ordered print
actually the two crimes adding
wild land to the crimes of our.
Arson negligent arson and
aggravated arson.
Adding prior arson convictions
and use of fire xcelerated
referred to the health public
Affairs Committee Senate
Judiciary Committee is and
Senate finance Senate bill three
ninety seven introduced by
receipts tax rate and local
option gross receipts tax rates
imposed within the exterior
boundaries of those tribes
Senate bill three ninety seven
Senate bill three ninety eight
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
and act making appropriation to
the Human Services Department
for programs that deploy mobile
three ninety eight have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the in
the rules cultural affairs
sentenced to Senate finance
Senate bill three ninety nine
and equip a public safety
complex in the two Hatchie
chapter of the Navajo Nation in
McKinley county declaring an
emergency Senate bill three
Senate Bill number four hundred
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
and act making appropriation for
construction of a game fence in
the Pueblo of house Senate bill
four hundred.
Senate finance Senate bill four
oh one introduced by Senator
Padilla and potentially leading
to public education.
Defining the duties of the
Public Education Commission
printed referred to the Senate
Education Committee fence to
Senate health public affairs
committee Senate bill four oh
two introduced by Senator Hickey
calendar year amending the
definition of qualified business
Senate bill for to Senate bill
for to have more twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the tax business
employee retirement including
emergency dispatchers as police
members under the public
employees retirement act
providing for elections
pertaining to the adoption of
the health of public affairs
committee intends to Senate
finance.
Senate bill four hundred four
introduced by senator guy Aigles
appropriation Senate bill four
oh four.
Senate bill four hundred and
four having been read twice by
title Sir printed referred to
resolution proposing to amend
article nine section fourteen of
the constitution of New Mexico
to permit under certain
conditions the state or any
county or municipality to
Senate joint resolution twenty
four.
Senate joint resolution twenty
four having been read twice by
title is or printed and referred
and consumers to support
charitable giving by offering a
donating to charity checkout
programs Senate memorial
eighteen.
nineteen introduced by Senator
Gallegos a memorial urging the
president of the United States
The New Mexico congressional
delegation and all other members
been read twice by title Sir
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee infants
to health and public affairs
committee.
Senate memorial twenty
introduced by Senator Gallegos a
Senate memorial twenty.
Senator Morial twenty have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the rules
committee infants to the
Judiciary Committee.
repealing cancellation of voting
registration after for felony
conviction amending repealing
and enacting sections of law
house bill seventy four.
Representative Doreen Y.
Gallegos for the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee and the Indian Affairs
Committee and act relating to
Education Committee infants to
help and public affairs
committee house bill twenty nine
introduced by Representative
Stapleton an act relating to
school code in the Human Rights
Act house bill twenty nine house
bill twenty nine have been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Education Committee
facility economic districts
providing for the appointment of
additional authority members
House Bill five House Bill five
having been read twice by title
is referred to the tax business
relating to taxation amending
provisions for submitting an
application for a tax credit
providing that evading or
defeating attacks with sales
and appeals of orders by county
valuation protests board house
bill ninety house bill ninety
having been read twice by title
is referred to tax business and
transportation committee since
on military or veteran status
house bill one thirteen house
bill one thirteen having been
read twice by title is referred
to the health of public affairs
committee since to Senate
commercial code to the official
text making conforming
amendments repealing section
fifty five dash one dash one
hundred ten NMSA nineteen
seventy eight being laws two
transportation committee since
two Judiciary Committee house
bill twenty one introduced by
Representative Garrett and
potentially leading to public
works requiring contributions to
read twice by title is referred
to the tax business and
transportation committee since
two health and public affairs
committee.
House bill thirty five
registered nurse anesthetists
house bill thirty five.
House bill thirty five has been
read twice by title is referred
to health and public affairs
coverage establishing limits on
cost sharing for podia Ettrick
Services house bill thirty four.
House bill thirty four have been
read twice by title is referred
An act relating to courts
allowing persons seventy five
years of age or older to be
exempted from jury service
without requiring an affidavit.
House bill one eighty five house
substitute for house joint
resolution one a joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to article twelve
section seven of the
constitution of New Mexico to
services how's Education
Committee substitute for House
joint resolution one how's
Education Committee substitute
for House joint resolution
number one having been read
Figueroa for the legislative
education study committee and
act relating to public education
creating the bilingual
multicultural Education Advisory
referred to the Senate Education
Committee and fence to Indian
rural and cultural affairs house
bill eighty nine introduced by
Representative Chatfield.
house bill eighty nine house
bill eighty nine have been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate conservation
committee sense to tax business
and transportation committee
definition of cramming house
bill twenty eight House Bill
twenty what twenty eight have
been read twice by title is
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee fence
education providing for the
legislative education study
committee to study issues
pertaining to public schools and
public post secondary education
in New Mexico House Bill twenty
five introduced by
Representative Georgene Louis
and act relating to public
utilities clarifying that a grid
modernization project may
two forty five house bill two
forty five hundred having been
read twice by title is referred
to Senate conservation sense to
tax business and transportation
malpractice act house bill
seventy five House Bill seventy
five have been read twice by
title is referred to the tax
business transportation
On the on the house bill seventy
five can you can you just tell
us where that's going on.
Share.
House bill fifty one introduced
by Representative Chasey.
An act relating to state
government enacting the
environmental database act
providing duties house bill
fifty one.
House bill fifty one having been
read twice by title three for
two Senate conservation
committee incidents to Senate
adding regulation licensing
department duties revising board
of barbers and cosmetologists
duties revising licensing
requirements house bill fifty
four.
substitute for House Bill for.
And actually leading to civil
rights and acting the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act permitting an
individual to bring a claim
to the bill of rights of the
constitution of New Mexico.
Prohibiting the use of defense
of qualified immunity mandating
attorney fees limiting recovery
by title is referred to the
health of public affairs
committee and since you did
share madam president.
Over here hiding.
have a fiscal impact even though
it doesn't say in their making
appropriation it certainly could
influence the finances of the
settlement present center Peter
Wirth thank you madam president
I'll explain why I'm sending it
we're I referred that I want you
all to Senator vontade who will
be the Senate sponsor on that
on argument can be made one way
an argument can be made the
other way I think a this bill
getting the two referrals that
it did make sense and I don't
Senator von yes thank you madam
president members of I could ask
Senator share to yield to help
me to understand a bit more
about his argument it would be
able to a question to.
Senator sure I I believe I
familiarized myself very much
with the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill for someone make sure you
and I are looking at the same
thing that Judiciary Committee
would I think you said the word
could have off of pimple to
Mexico finances the do you
happen to know what section I be
looking at that might.
Relate to any issues for the
finance committee.
is held liable for conduct of
its employees okay all of that
can happen today in in federal
court.
But public bodies covered by the
act include state local boards
leads is really to the cost of
insurance for any city County
Board public.
How are they going to pay for
somebody's going to pay for this
And source cities and counties
in any other board.
And I think that all of that
then roll over into what the
taxpayers are going to deal with
just one year we had at least
take a look at it and see how it
would affect house bill two
maybe it's minor.
Maybe it's major.
in the bill you you I think
accurately pointed out
rightfully so all and anything
in this bill can be done now
already I believe you said that
and I think that's that's
constitution in New Mexico state
court as opposed to now when New
Mexico constitutional claims
happy brought in federal court
so that's that's one
consideration and I'm and I
would see it that way I don't
fund no additional expense and
and I'll just a ask the body and
and then Senator with your
concern up to recognize all the
just the to tell your story Dona
ana county years ago had a
our former governor was the DA
at the time he was forgotten
about for over two years after a
trial for constitution claims in
federal court.
Out of its out of its general
fund resources.
The bill with the bill that
we're looking at here house bill
verdict to contend with it would
have been capped at two million
dollars I just I I've I've been
practicing law thirty years a
lot of his insurance related
work lot of its the civil cases
litigating the case comes off
that cap.
So the expense of the litigation
is money that ultimately does
not go to your client in the
costs of the litigation itself
that that they haven't study the
the substitute version over from
the house which there's nothing
in this bill at all that would
implicate additional costs to
you on my experience and and
your may be very different from
other a governmental agencies
but I've got to tell you in the
bill itself what what we have
there's nothing in here there's
nothing here other than that I
there's nothing that a hearing
in finance is going to do to
other than continue to gas what
the what any of the pending
outcome might be so I think the
everything in here relates to a
legal issues cause of action
constitutional qualified
immunity attorney's fees and
other said that of course this
to come up with this
recommendations of I would ask a
senator that you keep the
referrals we have and and ask
So madam president what I was
looking for earlier here is in
section five we're
there are mandatory attorney
But there is if there is an
impact or potential impact in
settlement present I would argue
if all of the things you're
saying that that no one is is
negatively affected in fact
feel good that this is not a
negative so that we can all go
back to our cities and counties
and school boards and so no no
no we studied this and we know
from a from a fiscal perspective
there's nothing to worry about.
that is one important step that
we're not taking and one that
may in fact help the bill along
the way especially when we're
trying to present it to our
Understand it and feel better
about it madam chair and I would
like to yield to senator Munoz
as the chair of finance.
yesterday with our our public
safety department and they were
gravely concerned about this
bill and effects upon their
police force and and what it
other bills that didn't come to
Senate finance and and have got
shuffled around
that have fiscal impacts out in
the future.
Mr certainly so madam president
so couple things all to address
your question but but first of
that that you have had the
opportunity or those who
expresses concerns have seen the
bill that came out of the house
itself the Judiciary Committee
associate because very frankly
the bill that came out of the
beat or be individually liable
the bill that came out a house
expressly precludes that which
frankly is a better position for
those people those law
enforcement officers in their
precludes lawsuits against the
individual officer but expressly
says that if there is a lawsuit
against an individual for which
an individual level the
governmental agency will be
question is how many these
lawsuits are brought now Senator
I don't know the answer to that
I'm sure that it is in excess of
many dozen lawsuits every year
that are brought in federal
all find out the research to the
best way I can but right now the
eight lawsuits are very
frequently brought.
in the area of corrections and
detention facilities a law
category of cases that are
brought under civil rights
violations in federal court.
In some and present center just
one or two more questions so so
in this piece of legislation
that I'm trying to determine I
haven't read it I I.
Trust in the DPS secretary to
give me the best advice you can
hold of GST and see what our
path was annually in in Hamburg
those costs down numbers and we
may need to we probably do want
to have at some point make sure
you and I have a strong
yet but I I'm gonna work to
having forty by the time we get
around to this in committee on
on the floor but what I can't as
I read the paper
and I read the paper about
lawsuits are settled on behalf
do we've seen the lawsuits
against our our corrections are
detention facilities against law
enforcement officers for a
abuse it and excessive use of
force and of course that's where
this last week the issues in the
City of Albuquerque department
of justice continue to concern
all the all those doing the
oversight to the point where
there's now even suggestions
The the images awards are in the
millions and millions of dollars
and yes they include attorney's
fees.
Senator expressed concern with
section five of the bill that
party gets their legal fees and
costs of this bill does nothing
that federal law does not
already do.
So to the concerned that this is
going to cost cities or counties
And madam chair at I want to
tell you about a case in Gallup.
Where a Navajo gentleman was put
in a chokehold and died.
And we send it to the attorney
general's office
begging for help and I think
it's kind of this process but
it's a year and a half later.
depend on which cases the
lawyers try to pick up and which
ones they try to grab a hold at
I'm willing to listen to a
little bit more debate before I
ask if you see a fiscal
implement implication when that
does happen I will want to look
at and finance.
Madam president you have my
than just the gassing or
speculation and then I'll be
certain to discuss that with you
in the other leadership of what
were you what are on the same
page Center unity talked about
but the goal here is to make
sure that that in that
circumstance an individual who's
constantly New Mexico
constitutional rights that's
that's important of this bill
now brought in the federal court
system.
And madam president just just
one legal question what is
demonstrable.
I'm not Center sapien.
That's right I forgot you know
what what will pull on addiction
together and every now and then
law school classmate so
someone's always those were like
Maserati practicing that for a
long time that were to get it
right.
So madam chair ended this month
Of makes judgments all the time
about what bills have a what I
would use a demonstrable fiscal
impact or not it's hard for me
everything we do here has a
fiscal impact but clearly you
you and your committee do not
become
engage in every I will choose
the Senate finance committee I'm
certain of that.
Well I am I agree on that but we
also need to make sure that
we're watching the taxpayers
them so I'll listen to Senator
yes more debate and and Senator
on this.
So madam chair just as a
use means teeny weeny so there
we go did I get that right
center.
So I don't think think that but
I don't think a big believe
would be found in the Webster's
but but you know all all I'm I'm
willing to be persuaded
otherwise let me a Senator let
me just make the point to
senator Munoz you know the goal
here is that there are none of
these lawsuits.
public education we're not of
these lawsuits are brought
that's the goal.
And as a lawyer I'll just tell
you that.
Years ago.
dying with rollovers their
vehicles the tires with
would puncture or exploding part
people the kids nowadays you
have a sensor on your tires it
tells you when your pressure's
The lawsuits have brought an end
to the need.
For the lawsuits.
That's my goal in in sponsoring
this legislation this chamber.
of the the company that
manufactured old fashioned gas
cans was sued out of business
and now the only gas can you
complies one that you can't use
unless you take the top off and
what we do is no what everyone
in this body knows specially
people that have served in this
county commissioners are mayors
or city councilors a school
board members.
money on insurance that's money
that they don't get to spend on
roads or on the sewer system or
on anything else.
right thing here in protecting
New Mexico Civil New Mexican
civil rights I'm not opposed to
that I think that's great.
But what's the balance in here
if we spend all of our money.
I think that in this case and so
many of us have been contacted
about this from our cities from
our counties for more school
boards.
It it's simply prudent.
Expeditiously.
And and off we would go I don't
see how this harms anything but
it certainly gives us a chance
for all of these folks that are
just let's take a look at it if
it doesn't have all those
concerns.
Off it goes down come here in
in a way we are to protect
people Civil Rights.
that's why I think what a movie
at a press.
Thank you for your comments
Senator share I didn't hear
motion so we're going to move on
We have a motion on the floor to
lotus no means it remains where
it is a vote of yes and then we
will talk about it senator Wirth
then just to clarify I think
so the secretary will call the
roll on a an additional
referral.
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator problems no Senator from
the Mahdia.
Senator serve on this Senators
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle passes Senator
Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto passes Senator
Hermio.
now Senator Moores Senator
Moores yes senator one else.
Senator Munoz passes senator
Neville.
Senator o'neill is not here
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
for the.
Senator probably know Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez now senator
Sanchez Senator songes yes
Senators committees.
Senator sure.
Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator souls.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman now senator
Wirth no Senator Wirth now
Senator Woods.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto no senator
Munoz.
By a vote of fifteen in the
affirmative and twenty five in
All right senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you madam president
unanimous that we know that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
There's no objection is so
ordered.
make sure to get an email to our
chief clerk by five o'clock
today to let them know that the
list of projects is approved.
Madam president what I like to
announcement we're gonna have a
democratic caucus V. is assumed
so after we adjourn here please
go to your offices we are going
to try to finish it within
thirty minutes thank you.
The details go ahead Sir then
present you know you make sure
we get a copy of that zoom link
for us sent out.
Yeah I will send that right over
and public affairs committee
will meet let's uh let's be
optimistic and state will meet
at three o'clock on our usual
zoom.
And and I think we have a an
having a meeting on Friday we
have an amended agenda I'll just
let everybody know we're we've
got two more confirmations that
we're doing secretaries of
intent is that Friday we'll have
a discussion on the bill.
but that then we will revisit
the but but but without a vote
and then on Monday at the rules
president on your conservation
committee tomorrow morning will
meet at eight thirty to eleven
fifteen we will continue our
hearing Senate bill one fifty
will start hearing Senate bill
three twelve which is changing
the department of game and fish
and next Thursday we will have
the utilities come in to speak
thank you very much madam
I want to talk to the members
just real quickly about your
junior bill money make sure it's
in if you need help let us know
in finance we have the staff
available to help you
to you about the federal
stimulus for just one minute and
how it's proceeding in Congress
and what it looks like for New
Mexico.
And so roughly we think we're
The school districts throughout
the state are going to get
another billion dollars.
And spread throughout the state
just for schools
It's going to be really good to
to have this but I also want
everybody to be aware you know
when you're funding projects
that you're cities and counties
counting and I'll use my County
McKinley who got sixteen million
in the last care package it's
going to be pretty close to what
they got in this package so when
that they have the money to
finish the projects that you
want in your capital bill with
the cares money they just need
to use in the correct way
we're gonna hear new revenue
trading at sixty today we based
our budget previously at thirty
eight.
we know we have an issue with
the federal permitting and I
issue is.
cent moving natural gas gets is
about ten million dollars into
our budget.
So that's a resource that
because of the federal
permitting and upstream and the
midstream so that we're not
so those are some things that
are happening finance again
please get your during your
money in it's a learning process
for us it's a learning process
numbers and we do have House
Bill Levin back on the schedule
and so we'll get that out so
thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator Senator on
so let's hope the caucus is done
by them at three thirty should
be conservative and safe we have
a four bills all here a Senate
bill two twelve Senator Wirth
first because we passed that
Senator Duhigg on patient that
last members on Friday we have a
I think what may be an
interesting presentation to
those who are not to serve on
judiciary which is we're gonna
you all been to redistricting
before some of us have been
through a couple of them there's
a lot of law involved there's a
lot of law that is intended to
ensure that of our native
American brothers and sisters
diverse populations are well
represented in all of our
legislative seats in
congressional districts so
advised everyone to join us on
Friday Richard to learn a little
bit about the law from the
Senator Shendo for an
announcement.
Thank you madam president the
you are.
get through and then also just
sort of members so you know we
are going to meet this Saturday
from nine to of one PM we got a
lot of bills that have a initial
have several others Senator
Wirth have you talked about
tomorrow.
Floor session so madam chair
I'll certainly do that we will
have a floor session tomorrow
will roll the clock in here that
tomorrow along with some other
items and then we'll be on the
floor again on Friday but not on
Saturday.
Senator Pinto.
out by that thank you thank you
Dennis anyone Sir Padilla did
you have an announcement.
I didn't have an announcement
but it was a follow up to the
chairman of finance on that
Senate finance just appreciated
the checklist that was provided
to us on Senate bill three
seventy seven just a quick
question if if you'd be willing
this be outside of that process
Madam presence Senator no it
doesn't have to have a bill to
match here are with the working
present I ask because I know we
have eleven new members that may
be interested in that and it was
kind of confusing my first time
around and then the other
question ahead and present so
does the university would like
the UNM is simple does that
president I saw on the checklist
it was a little bit confusing me
thank you madam president.
Any other announcements.
We'll be back at eleven thirty
and just for the members of the
public the one bill that won't
be on the calendar because will
read in assuming it passes
The Senate is in recess until
eleven thirty tomorrow thank you
so much.
