here to please.
Okay those who've been watching
online please forgive us for a
moment as we organize here.
the members of the citizens
redistricting Committee.
who have come to join us this
morning or this afternoon
I think those those proper rose
they could just use those
microphones there and when you
speak into the microphone you
need to hold down the button
otherwise are automatically
turned off.
if you would be so kind as to
kick us off with an introduction
and then leave a teacher your
two colleagues to also introduce
himself thank you.
my name is that Chavis I and
shared the citizen redistricting
committee retired from the
Supreme Court almost four years
ago.
Allow senator Curtis to
introduce herself.
Not allow.
Divider.
Good afternoon everybody I'm
with the public where I would
start with I am the mother of
four grand mother of three I
have been almost a thirty year
trial lawyers Representative
see all of you again.
Read again.
Thank you just thank you Mr
chair members of the Senate I'm
I'm Robert Rattigan one of the
appointed members and citizens
it's been an honor to to serve
on this committee and hear from
people throughout New Mexico
I've been involved with the
state's census effort going back
to about two thousand fifteen
Grisham to serve on the
statewide complete count
commission and I see the
redistricting process is the
final step in this decennial
of time this is a new process
that we've been
pursuing.
This.
Through this to setting a census
you got there.
and so what I'd like to do is go
ahead and invites.
Of the CRC to go ahead and
At the state Senate maps and
open up for questions and so the
I nothing anybody seeking
was followed because I think
that's probably.
As important as the maps and
ultimately were adopted and
presented to you for
recommendation.
meeting or we adopt the rules
that govern our procedure.
You had wanted us to get public
input.
During the course of two
The all the four regions and one
on tribal lands and the second
group of meetings would be the
same idea the committee decided
on its own that it would have
state the first round of
meetings and gather information
about communities of interest.
And also to.
Get the boundaries of people
believed Representative their
of that we understood that.
not all the public can attend
our meetings but if we gave them
an Avenue to comment about their
website for us and that's NM
redistricting dot org and if you
go to that now you can look at
the maps that we're about to
show you and you'll be able to
follow the the details.
interest or the loan districts
and submit them to us with
comments as we begin to process
the you might remember that the
U. S. Census bureau was delayed.
interest and districts that the
people have drawn for us during
the first round of meetings
we're based on ten year old
data.
That would have to be updated by
us.
and there we started around the
state and what we heard from
people was the communities of
interest that they wanted to
districts that they wanted and
then according to the law we
archived all of the meetings
that were videotaped and you can
find them also at and I'm
redistricting dot org you'll see
in line you to.
you are interested in the
subject matter then you could
simply go to that date and and
move the move the bar so to
speak to the location where that
consideration as we decided to
propose maps.
After that first round of
meetings we that worked with
research and polling each member
of the committee was at liberty
polling then drafted what we
called concepts.
We published all of those
concepts for the public to then
comment on to see if in fact we
people would not have to travel
hundreds of miles to get to the
venue that we had selected.
During the second round of
meetings we heard from people of
arrive at a consensus not only
for the House maps and Cinemax
but also congressional maps and
the at least they were able.
part of our state.
Once we received all of that
information again we summarized
it for you you're able to again
and adjusted the mapped concepts
that we had circulated.
And then we held meetings to
formally adopt maps that would
member of the committee to make
a motion the motion was seconded
that we discussed the map and
ultimately voted I have a we've
provided for you in our report
for Congress state house state
Senate and the Public Education
Commission.
In those maps were then
published.
We had responsibility then to
preserve communities of
interest.
And to other more important
areas is how we complied with
the voting rights act and did
not dilute the voting strength
fairness that evaluation came in
it's part of our report and what
the individual concluded was
that the maps were fair based on
the six different points of
The only thing I would like to
quickly point out is just how
collegial and professional and
respectful the seven members of
the partisanship and victory all
and personal attacks and threats
to members of the committee was
something that gave me a great
deal of pause before I agreed to
maps were not along strict
partisan lines that is
exceptional in in this country
for a state level redistricting
effort.
determined by the people and
because in the past and
especially last redistricting
effort a judge was making the
decision about what our
The report is intended to
address all legal issues that
would be involved with the of
voting rights act and in with
people in place so that the
courts are in fact making the
decision again.
Thank you.
Excuse me just real quick just
them members of the media
certainly can take pictures
during the during this occurred
a committee hearing thank you.
consideration partisan data well
we were thinking about maps or
join them we have to wait until
after we actually adopted maps
at data was really to avoid a
partisan gerrymander of but we
didn't look at any data and and
I guess the the experiment
proved to be true second thing
we realize who have been paired
things of that nature so that
that was also an important part
of the process you told us that
principles in an effort to on
and comments but it was
considered to be a low priority
That is that map is being pulled
up by the what also recognize
and thank the folks from
research and polling who are
working now with the legislature
but took a break from that in
slides is the members of the
committee go through thank you.
Describing this back for you
gather population from other
districts to to make it whole to
comply with the one person one
vote.
The constitutional principle.
quo but it kept Torrance County
with Bernalillo county seat us
New Mexico congressional
district one we put Cibola
County and recommendation
splits only four cities and four
counties but it really is just a
a status quo map and that the
that nap was approved on a four
to three vote I was the chair
something that you wanted to
adhere to and this what I think
recently Representative with the
status quo map would look like.
When we did get a lot of
instead of the way it is now and
basically a northern and
southern district we did have a
lot of maps of the proposed
along those lines and then
about this map that is really.
Not status quo necessarily is
Zuni pueblo as I recall.
particular map so that would be
a.
Somewhat of a change from the
status quo but otherwise it's
it's pretty pretty close you can
see the.
That's McKinley County right
Mr chairman and Justice Chavis
no you did a great job I'd say
that when we were eastern New
as the chairman said for
Congress the equal population
provisions are much more
stringent and all these maps the
so in under this plan also a
poor Tallas was able to stay
home and
and and therefore we're not
providing any side community.
people from the acequia
association that they thought
quite loopy had more in common
to the acequia is with the north
and and this plan accomplish
that.
Can we actually can we go ahead
what I'd like to suggest is when
we go ahead and hear from the
doctor the other two maps and
then we can open up for
questions.
Okay Brian concept H..
the.
Those of us here have Phyllis's
got that page number.
civic policy the stated goal of
the goal of the coalition was
really fair representation in
the communities.
The core of a congressional
district three in northern New
and congressional district to
that expresses the wishes of
tribal nations.
The congressional lines in the
northwest quadrant are
Four precincts.
The facility.
Of remaining congressional
district to and they also have
representation out of
congressional district three.
Mescalero down at the bottom
half of the the Mescalero Apache
is is
In district one and district to.
old map between congressional
district two and three go
entirely into congressional
district three.
Lea County will be and
congressional district to and
congressional district three so
ago and I think that's a
probably enough on that one it's
played seven cities and nine
counties so as I told you of the
that are cities and counties are
split.
Do you have the robber because
for some reason my laptops not
working.
Yeah.
No I'm sorry the report only
reports the numbers that are
split.
Yeah but I don't think it has
approved with regard to our
Congress.
The concept the that was
revised.
don't remember if we know number
eighty one I think my Committee
members just to tease the refer
to it as the justice Chavis plan
it's a plan that was based on
little bit more than nine zero
percent of his my recollection
this map also splits Mescalero
Apache because that's what they
had wanted.
testimony primarily it during
the west messa meeting for
people indicated that they had
more in common with rural New
Mexico than what they do with
valley into congressional
district to.
In Albuquerque Rio Rancho are
are in congressional district
one and this map.
the north except you can see
that it goes down all the way to
capture the we'll also and New
Mexico letto area.
The only thing I would say about
After some precincts have would
add some voting strength to to
Zuni you could do that actually
by taking to the precincts of
from the south of McKinley
County.
A three and you could do that by
going to the the.
I would I would not go to the
side you can do by going the
west side and there's three
precincts you could think you
Into yes there were various
options you're considering
including McKinley.
You could take that
That's that's the only
difference from the other status
quo that we talked about.
counties if you did what I
suggested not you'd have to add
to other two additional counties
that would be split.
concept a a Albuquerque Rio
Rancho Bernalillo in Edgewood
are split in concept H. it's
Hobbs Rio Rancho Bernalillo
Edgewood Sapporo Rio communities
And what was the vote on this
last one.
Was six to one.
And concept the revised was six
to one.
Okay very good thank you and and
So New Mexico had one member of
Congress until nineteen sixty.
In nineteen sixty after the
nineteen sixty census we got a
And so from nineteen sixty to
nineteen sixty two to nineteen
seventy two we have to members
of Congress that were that both
Representative yes it.
And so the New Mexico is
required to go to districting so
in nineteen seventy two with our
two districts we went to
almost from the big guy go north
on I. twenty five and go out
east on I forty.
And and that was just that was
one district.
In that big well that was
created when we have to
districts.
Then N. are we in nineteen and
And in nineteen ninety two we're
still under the voting rights
act in New Mexico.
And so then the question became
how do we configure the seats.
interested in the southern state
being made available to David
king.
And and so so the the north
south.
A number one that's the and
but the but that is that is how.
Those were configured in
nineteen ninety.
And they've been relatively
In twenty twenty to census and
Brian's gonna help me out here
on some of this the twenty
twenty to census.
document.
Right legislative maps were.
Right.
Okay but in twenty ten the
two thousand two than twenty
twelve.
There is a there was no map that
was adopted by the legislature
and so then that was a quarter
And and so and now we're in
twenty twenty two cycle period
so so that's just just real
quick that's kind of kind of the
only to members of the rules
committee but also to other
members of the Senate or
president of would like to ask
questions about any of these
congressional maps and senator
quick questions do any of your
maps incorporate what we've come
to hear a of as the Indian
tribal agreement.
That one is more status quo and
it includes
Was operating under a set of
criteria that differs from our
for our own analyses how each of
these maps.
Reflect political performance
that would be that would be
congressional maps.
Senator Ingle.
Brian R. there's.
Is Roosevelt County hold on any
of these maps orders for
Callaspo at.
All of them it's kind of hard to
tell.
Hold on that one.
If you were speaking to the
county.
I know that the county split
renewable one button for the
city of per calluses split now
she's encouraging is this is
Okay.
At some point I'd just like to
see a kind of a.
Hey Hey Hey is not split for
tell us.
H..
Does not split parts Alice.
Our concept the revised does
split for Thomas.
But there's only one where the
whole county is hold right that
was the last one concept.
Whatever that last that that one
right there yes H. okay.
get the end result County in
order to get the numbers
balanced.
Between the districts no.
Tell.
Other questions on the
congressional maps.
Members Senator Sedillo office.
the so that's what's Bernalillo
county.
And I guess my question is
what's the difference between
the unincorporated areas of the
Senator well here we see.
Basically the areas in the south
valley south of bridge.
Westgate is which is within the
city limits of Albuquerque
states in CD one and the south
no but the
C. R. C. decided also to take
into account.
Affect this and minimize voter
just let a is led a is partially
in Bernalillo county and
partially in Valencia County so
Senator Sedillo Lopez we heard a
lot of testimony from people in
the unincorporated area of the
south valley that they fell to
to and in numerous hearings that
was requested from the city
center of that area and that had
a lot to do with why you see
this particular of
configuration.
of the hearings over the
internet and I was so incredibly
impressed with the work that
this commission did and all of
the voices that were heard it
Other questions Senator Moores
thank you senator from Mr chair
of the of the COVID was just
maybe that there's water
submitted map H..
That is the one that is drawn by
the center for civic policy.
Mr chair Senator Moores yes I
was called is toward the end of
our second round of meetings and
I was told that that was the
allegation nobody's ever
established for me that in fact
that came from citizens in all
parts of New Mexico there was a
lot of passion in the testimony
I don't believe that they were I
don't care if you give them a
Estimate and consistent.
Thank you Mr chair I suggested
that this committee or this
organization come file in the
don't know how to be perfectly
honest with you I'm not sure are
you suggesting they needed a
file that with us Mr chair but
for someone just wanted they
filed with secretary state or
ever provided any accounting to
the people of New Mexico of what
they were spending the money on
how much they spent so pretty
much taints a lot of the
testimony that could be provided
important process to pay people
Mr chair to show up and testify
on the map that they themselves
legislators are here to try to
make this decision.
We require lobbyists to make
reporting reports the secretary
of state's office even if they
up to testify we have no
accounting of what they spent
the money on it who Mr chair
again on that money that taints
this process Mr chair and that's
because that testimony that was
referred to is tainted unless we
know who paid for that yes
morning Mr chair thank you.
influence one a decision related
to any matter to be considered
or being considered by the
legislative branch of state
government or a legislative
committee.
Of the fact that that we put in
the the bill.
That there are of
recommendations would be treated
in the same manner as an interim
if somebody spent money on that
they would have to.
Of report through the secretary
of state's office if it's over
certain thresholds.
hi.
What I hear from justice Travis
is that people may have earned
our that by the by the
enthusiasm of the fast funny.
of reimburses type or not.
But in the last you know
certainly though there is
depending upon what the spent
what the amount overall amount
of expenditure was.
legislation of this bill
Committee forming this committee
and I'm proud of the work that
justice chosen Senator Ortiz and
Pino and many many others we
worked on developing us and it
they spent their money to
influence this very critical
constitutional duty we have it
was an oversight Beyonce Mr
chair US justice that would not
it for going take that testimony
that was just a.
Mention of a that they're
passionate well everyone has a
encourage them to stand up and
disclose who came the money and
alley spent it and I'd be really
surprised if they actually do
that at this process Mr chair
but I think it taints this
constitutional this very
Thank you Mr chairman and and my
question no wonder Senator
Moores would yield I I was not
aware of those allegations
having appeared in the media
which medium carried those
elder journal are reported on
that's were first time I saw it
I believe was in Albuquerque
journal article and sensors no
disclosure we don't know we
don't know Mr chair Senator
actual the the true media
journalistic on folks that this
was reported on and we don't
know we don't know who's trying
to influence this process we
don't know who's trying to
influence our this committee
that the journal it carried a
story on that I I guess I missed
it if they had a story
I would like to follow up on
that so if you give me the
citation that would be really
and the festival scores I catch
every date the political columns
in frequently so if you could
fill me in I would be glad to to
follow up on the thank you and
stipend if you'd be interested
I'll be happy we'll email that
Mr chairman I mean emails is one
thing I mean I send emails out.
The that I've received from
somebody and I have no way of
verifying if they're not true
accountable for that if it turns
out that they were.
Doing what I do every day and
that is repeating interesting
stories that I've heard so that
that would be I think a little
It may have been that it was a
column is that we've heard
rumors that this is going on
which is again good color is a
the next that for us
instructions.
so.
we really care about which is
the state Senate maps.
With.
lines for three districts here
yet you have to figure out forty
two.
A little more complex.
Correct with the with the Senate
number of different people.
We also encourage the.
The whole nation pueblos and
tribes to try to reach a
basically we voted on Lujan all
of these as well in the first
map that we adopted.
We'll send a concept a one.
Paletta Brian.
It was based on the original
Senate concept a.
but during this process to we
had first the census bureau data
that comes in late comes in the
taking place precincts are being
adjusted in certain counties.
And so what this map alternately
does is it it's revise to
reflect a new pricing data is.
Hispanic districts in
southeastern New Mexico and we
heard a lot of testimony about
trying to keep those of
locations intact which we were
courts had always maintained
three Senate districts for the
native American population in
the northwest quadrant of the
The quartet also used an
influence district which.
Give them some influence but it
doesn't quite reach the fifty
percent.
population about the
circumstances that have made it
difficult for them to vote we
made sure that the complied with
To re districting cycles but it
does not have the.
Influence district.
We also Senate district thirty
nine.
County all the way down to
really is also.
We've.
This is more compact it doesn't
go all the way down I was also a
stays within the Santa Fe county
Intel's was Alamos's remains
with the Rio Arriba district
which is the way it was ten
years ago this was really based
very south of New Mexico and and
it's included in the district
along with Anthony rather than
with Carlsbad in Alamogordo in
the whole reason for that again
the the river is used as a hard
boundary separating the north
valley from the west side the
international district we heard
a lot of testimony about the
international district wanting
And this map is more compact
than the maps that were approved
ten years ago.
It's displayed for cities that
told you about the northwestern
what quadrant.
In in.
Has in excess of sixty percent
native American voting age
threshold of fifty five percent
of for those districts one has
fifty nine percent and the other
one fifty five percent the fifty
five percent in Senate district
population there will be a
difference the county for
example based on twenty nineteen
data about thirty percent of of
the Hispanic population are non
in that area we did have in
common parents hi and this one.
One well to Democrats.
Joshua Sanchez and burned Griggs
as a second one.
And then a Democrat versus
Republican district twenty eight
and thirty five Hemphill and
diamond.
one and forty two just are
swapped in terms of their label
with this defect the statistics
are right in the book but the
it's just a labeling issue and I
wanted to point that out and I
I'm I just wanted I just want to
add and make one comment this
confirmatory of what justice
Chavis was stating earlier.
the lack of representation that
they felt in that area of the
state.
And that the majority and Brian
can help me with this but the
of representation was an
important aspect to the
testimony that we heard.
The also it is important for
this committee in for the
together in the most organized
and professional way to help us
in this process.
There was a a coalition.
signed by the elders in every
one of those tribes supporting
the the coalition maps in so
the level of working
organization done by these
groups were just unbelievable.
Mr chairman justice Chavez if I
the native American coalition on
the Senate side.
Did come to a consensus.
region the native American
consensus plan because on the
Senate they came to consensus on
the house they didn't so what
you're looking at here is the
Farmington mostly in one and
district to Aztec Bloomfield
plot of this the.
So in the native American
consensus plan if we zoom into
reservation to to have J. and up
to Shiprock.
Districts for also has some of
Gallup continues of the the the
west into the reservation like
population that used to go up to
Malone but now it went into
Gallup.
And then district thirty as
justice Thomas was saying is the
district thirty the good to act
a.
This led to.
Alamo.
Adopts the native American plan
concept C. which is also passed
by the committee is basically
concept C. one with the native
through them and then what was
the vote on that first map.
Six one six one okay very well
useful if we had zeroed in maps
for the Albuquerque area I mean
it these all three look like
just to.
Blob and and and and if you have
Mr chairman justice yeah they're
all of the New Mexico
redistricting website where you
can zoom right into to the
precinct level just click on the
I keep getting these big numbers
over it so I can't read anything
it.
We have a limiting those numbers
at Mr chair and and senator were
New Mexico redistricting dot
org.
And on that site you can turn on
or off the the number labels
okay very good.
Guests a grand child somewhere.
Very good okay I justice Chavez
was the next one we're looking
at the Senate concept C. act.
it is not incorporate the a
native American map this one was
voted on by a vote of four to
three.
The deviations in this map are
look like without incorporating
the consensus of the native
American population in keeping
it within plus or minus five
percent of chaparral Anthony
park does going to lost crucis
in this map Los Alamos as the
status quo remains split.
with Rio Arriba County and why
rock with northern Santa Fe
boundaries maintains two major
is banning districts Hobbs based
at fifty five point four percent
in Roswell based at sixty point
seven percent artesian Hobbes
districts that take on a north
and south configuration that
Brian can show you if you're
interested in this map is more
Of the we did have fewer.
Parents here but we still paired
not intentionally but that's the
with maps ended up doing in
one will be easier.
Okay well.
So then and what was the vote on
The deviations were higher
negative deviation the highest
was negative six point nine
percent up in the northwestern
part of the state this map does
virtually the same as S. C..
Except for the northwest
quadrant.
this one has three Republican
parents Senator bahkan Sanchez
Senator burden Griggs and
Senator Gallegos and Kernan and
Senator Joseph Thomas and
Senator Greg Baca that's within
the native American consensus
plan that was something that
those the boundary between
twenty nine and thirty was a
boundary that was suggested by
the mid America consensus plan
happened to include the
precincts where Senator Joseph
closer that way it was because
of the way Valencia County was
handled so district thirty goes
into Valencia County in the way
that native Americans did in the
lives and and therefore of the
partial Sanchez Senator gestuurd
sorry.
Okay thank you very much
ahead and open it up to members
of the Senate.
And we'll start with the Senator
Pinto and go to center doing.
Where they have a twin lakes in
Taichi and the request which map
are you looking at we've got
on the Senate Senate concept a
you identify which which might
be looking at the top there is I
understand we're not allowed to
be split as far as their
precincts.
saying Senator Pinto so we were
very we waited for the San Juan
County to figure out what their
precincts were until the very
very and this is Mr center of
County didn't do that and so we
simply a doctored what ever the
native American coalition came
up with is far as where they
wanted those external boundaries
boundaries ultimately we just
followed exactly with the a
Navajo and all Indian of public
council came up with.
in which you have several
chapters grouped together in
which they come together to do
economic development plans.
districts within the chapters
that are grouped together and if
those are not considered it does
not seem that we're following
the lines of the community
consensus that are grouped
the community as far as
representation.
If they are in agreement to have
that representation split apart
eastern agency
Like forty finance is grouped
with the other separate a group
of chapters.
one particular chapter if the
representative in in the
minority instead of having that
whole group represented by one
Representative and we see that
chapters in that sense from a
hundred and ten down to twenty
five twenty seven council
delegates and it did cause a lot
of
Under representation in that
can get an overlay of some of
those.
Chapterhouse districts area this
would be helpful for us to make
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Jess's and members of the
committee.
I've I want to really thank you
all for the incredible work that
you've put into developing these
on this once the best decade
task
I understand just just what you
were saying earlier that you all
were provided with incumbent
other other principles of
redistricting.
In your opinion justice would
any of the traditional
redistricting principles B. R.
Mr chair Senator Duhigg I think
I would have to actually study
that a lot closer before
answering that question if I'm
not mistaken the boundaries that
we chose and it which is a
Would have to study that a lot
closer and frankly I thought
about it since the keeping in
mind that this time frame is
pairings of the easy approach
what I would recommend to the
listening in legislature if you
had the same language that we
have in the act as I would say
boundaries what do we do with
political subdivisions of
governmental boundaries or
natural boundaries such as
rivers highways things of that
nature of.
I would go through the much more
detail process and I would
expect.
I would like to make that as a
recommendation to the listening
and redistricting committee.
having the the the C. R. C.
into ten years from now and I
guess I would.
Perhaps I and your answers might
be the same but to the other
members of the committee who are
here.
do either of you for off the top
of their heads here as you see
here today feel that any of
those traditional redistricting
While
Chairman Chavis didn't look at
those things the.
Mr center off in particular is
that
while we were not focused on
incumbency if in fact there were
two incumbents that were paired
because I can tell you the maps
respected the will of the people
that voted everyone in the
office and that we were not
pairing unless we couldn't find
if that was something that that
we could do still keeping into
account all the things that we
were supposed to be following
because that's the way I read
I did look pretty hard at that
all right to try to find a way
out if because I think that I
thought that that was part of
the job that that I needed to do
My impression from working with
Mr Sandra families saying to all
of the input that we got from
the people that came to talk to
us is we're really minimizing
was a lease commented on of the
Senate maps of any I mean we had
a tremendous amount of testimony
on the house maps with a
tremendous amount of testimony
do about that the one focuses.
The is our chairman was stating
was that we were very very
conscious of the native American
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Duhigg.
There is in fact to a hierarchy
incumbents is subordinate to
several other principles
if there was an attempt to on
Karia and incumbent in any of
our concepts
potentially have a voting rights
act violation I don't believe
that would be the case it I I
believe you Representative the
west side of of Albuquerque I
don't believe that would be a
voting rights issue there so
that unless we went in and and
and try to and pair those two
districts but we could also have
we could also be violating the
principle of keeping communities
and and Justice Chavez said we
did make some attempts to and
parent comments when we drew our
maps.
other principals in the case for
the the parents that remain in
these maps it wasn't quite as
simple doesn't mean it can't be
done but it just it wasn't as
simple.
Mr Mr Adam thank you.
What and I I'm I'm look was I'm
on the the public input portal
and I'm doing word searches to
to see if I can answer this
valley in the west side what was
the public input that you got
that that led you to to make
that choice.
testimony and there that was
presented the urging us to
follow that boundary.
The the river boundary.
consideration political and
geographic boundaries and and as
a geographer and a demographer
the Rio Grande river I would I
would classify as a geographic.
on the lot about using that as a
boundary hi.
Am I correct in assuming that
there was a desire for more
representation on the west side
public comment about
representation for the west side
again Senator doing I want to be
very clear that because.
A lot of the committee we got
house district okay so but it
was pervasive in the discussions
regarding the west side all
right so while the people that
just answer your question I mean
we really cared a lot the
committee I believe I can say
this for all our members about
the communities of interest that
came to speak to us.
or item is member Rattigan said
that that community might not
exist is just we didn't hear
from them.
Mr chair Senator thank you
that that would meet some of the
concerns that you heard and in
public comment.
Mr chair justice at I I I I
think there's there's various
ways to to approach it by it by
any any solution that the
increases Senate representation
Because it's one Senator for so
many people.
so I guess I'm having I'm
struggling trying to figure out
what you're saying adding maybe
Mr chair members thank you so
much.
And the I personally or whatever
else take the lack of comments
about the Senate maps as a sign
of.
Thank you Mr chair I think
that's a perfect transition to
another provincial discussion
about Senate district thirty
nine and Senator twenty five
is committee and travel the
state and did some of that I
think it's such an important
thing and it really does provide
something that you really
focused on for a quote fixing
our ten years ago the whole
There was a whole bunch of
and kind of very vehement desire
not to be included in Senate
district thirty nine so I'm just
curious all three of these maps
move.
was part of a change that was
made to help again make Senate
thirty nine a more compact
district in far less counties
you can see the finger down
there.
On on the current thirty nine
yeah that the just down below
there yep right there whenever
district thirty nine and then
whether or not.
You know there was specific
testimony that resulted in
changes that move the Eldorado
here's.
Here's what my recollection of
testimony about Eldorado is
wanting to and and frankly I
will tell you that.
In Santa Fe and in fact as a
result of that testimony I do a
congressional map myself.
Actually had Albuquerque went
all the way Torrance County
honest was based on the
congressional testimony I cannot
cedar and tell you that I recall
specifically.
The discussion about the Senate
districts I remember very
the first meeting the Santa Fe
meeting and and spoke about that
district so my apologies that I
can't answer your question
specifically.
anymore in Eldorado that was
that was not the discussion
there was a lot of discussion
about the crazy a configuration
of thirty nine the of the
believe that the the way that
thirty nine is constructed and
all three of those maps was an
attempt to make it more compact
that occurred Hey it is far as a
population the compactness is
concerned I know Michael worked
on this a lot more than
Mister chairman Senator.
Yes everything I did we just
heard was correct
goes to although it really does
so and into Lincoln County now
it was possible to use Lincoln
County more in its neck of the
Eldorado.
Is.
The the more urban part of Santa
a north side of Santa Fe to suki
Pueblo as they requested east
side of Santa Fe district there
was enough population to
accommodate it.
pieces so take us Eldorado very
concerned about mountains rivers
Water wilderness areas and then
the rest of the rural parts of
and frankly Eldorado can have a
great influence with their
voting patterns and having a say
in representation now and in
this area.
just understand that things are
changing and part of that is the
the current senator and Senate
district thirty nine centers to
panic to someone was county
commissioner Eldorado so she'll
Rancho VA whole is another
subdivision that's just right
next door that was in centers of
annex district but I just wanted
to use this opportunity
to get again let the
that was very different for us
in Santa Fe this year versus ten
years ago ten years ago I was
down I think ten percent in
Santa Fe so I had to pick up a
move twenty five around and and
lose an area like this is
possible just because of the
changes that have happened in
terms of the growth in this area
constituents know that things
are changing and there's reasons
they're changing it may not all
be you know the reason that you
think
but again I just.
are gonna shine throughout the
work that's done during the
session and be built in again
it's it's there there will be
changes there's no question
about that but again it's
Wirth and Center static center
if you wanted to comment on this
is talk about your district in
the and the
many parts of the state that
you've traveled through.
parts of it I'd like to thank
the redistricting commission and
I did speak on behalf of Lincoln
County of the county commission
Fe but regardless of all of that
my entire district which is
primarily rural lost ten
thousand people.
And had to be adjusted.
expected lines to be redrawn and
as it happens if I do end up
with the part of Eldorado
Senator Wirth and I will work
together I did Representative
Senator so I thank the
commission for their work and
there are no easy answers as we
go forward thank you so much.
look at any one district
isolation it's pretty easy when
you start considering the
implication on other parts other
adjoining districts and then all
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I'd like to say thank you to
each of you and the other
members who are not here for the
work that this entailed and as
and endurance in all sincerity
I'm listening to the people in
the communities to hear that the
nays the good the bad and the
other right
dialogue as we move forward on
an end result that will happen
hopefully soon we'll see but I
just want to say Mr chairman
you know more than anybody else
what it takes to to lead this
effort around the state and go
to all these different hearings
so for sure.
I know that many of us been
following the commission's work
online.
As you've been doing your your
This is truly remarkable of the
the investment that you all have
have done on our behalf and it
is tremendously appreciated.
anyone else asking any questions
I do I I will tell you all that
would be very interested also up
to opine on that now in front of
all of us or or to meet up with
with a few of us later in order
willing to listen to the
feedback of what could've worked
better or what challenges you
have that we might be able to
and corporate for the next time
a big difference we did not have
that luxury this time and effect
we almost did not have this bill
and I want to thank Senator
McKenna
invited the speaker and and
senator Morris and and senator
Pete out
among others and and that ended
willingness to to support that
and
and to help us enable this
process that we've gone through
Senator McKenna go ahead please.
all the S. R. C. members and
everybody who participated in at
least the twenty three meetings
that happen around the state I
have tremendous respect for all
of you and I thank you most
and several other people for
sending me links to the article
in The New Mexico and.
Which is obviously much more
factually based and anything
that would appear in the
journal.
the people's campaign forget
exactly what is what is titled.
but it but it points out that
what they were doing was
offering stipends if anybody
needed them.
nobody asked for one and so the
people that appear there
testifying we're not rate in a
sense.
And of course as we all know
expenses through a stipend but
that's quite different so I
think it was an above board
prices this year I I any doubts
that we might have had
I think should be laid to rest
think we have any concerns about
the ethics involved thank you.
Thank you senator.
Data points are Moores.
may or may not have done it
during the process when their
hands will cost of sending that
email out we don't know we don't
know if they're paid out we
don't know what the rate we
don't know who's funding the
offered to pay and they were
haven't been forthcoming and
telling us in opening up their
books like every other lobbyist
advocacy group has to do when
they try to influence our
process they did not do it and
that's very problematic and
should concern everyone in this
we've seen in and and some other
states an open ten years ago is
is the way that some of the maps
were and were introduced into
the the citizen commissions that
who are here in terms of the of
the work that they did in the
and the fact that they still
went through and did a vetting
to make sure that
that it matched the the
principles that they were
At this time for the for the
CRC.
I very much want to thank the
members of the citizens
Members ranking Leo C. Lisa
Curtis walking Sanchez Michael
Sanchez Robert read again and
Christopher subset of the.
the American bar association's
committee on election laws and
in New Mexico so.
I mean we we certainly I've had
people on this committee who
well I think I think that was a
just a tremendous bonus in terms
of a skill set to have in the
membership of the committee and
so Mister Rattigan thank you so
ahead and recess at as the rules
committee will be the rules
committee will be recommitting
and room three twenty two
tomorrow morning at nine thirty
of the work of the special
session.
after that and so Justice Travis
Senator Curtis Mr Ratigan thank
you very much for being here
way that that not only have
we've been following your work
for that we also receive your
work and and are able to do that
in this setting here today and
as you see the tremendous amount
very much for the work that
you've done and I would like to
invite the members of the
senator here to to express their
appreciation to the members of
the CRC at this time for plus.
Thank you very much and with
that we're in recess.
