Are starting off in the
subcommittee but given one of
the bills that we are
considering this morning I
thought it might be worthwhile
to spend a little bit of time
of the for a while we're waiting
for the full quorum all rights
for us to be able to go through
a few things are and I'll be
able to started discussion and
this does not preclude going
back through a few things out
once we have a full court this
morning.
So among the bills that and we
will be considering this morning
by the way
The when Representative Lewis is
able to log in she is presenting
an of the committee we will move
to a consideration of the of the
amendment to house bill two
thirty one.
Also so as we get quorum we were
on a do pass motion on how
straight resolution three and so
we will go ahead and take up
that felt.
and and so we will once.
And then and then we'll see
where we are because there's
also a Judiciary Committee
meeting this morning as well.
The committee was sent out this
morning and I do apologize that
didn't get you sooner that you
guys got it within about ten
minutes of it coming out of
drafting.
Of the Senate rules committee
substitute for the Senate rules
committee substitute for federal
for fifty more.
R. and I'd like to go over so
this is the the foundation of
this is Senate bill forty eight
that we've already considered.
So while it looks W. secretary
and daunting.
We've already considered a
hundred twenty other pages that
are before us.
And so I brought like to do is
to go through the changes that
are contained in this Committee
substitute for the committee
substitute.
And in going through the changes
then we can have a conversation
as needed on some of the
provisions that are in there in
terms of some of the changes
well for those of you who have
the
The rules committee substitute
up if you go to the first
change.
Is that I'm just going and page
order would be on page ten
there's a new section seven
section seven was not part of
Senate bill forty eight and this
is new material and this is
going places on native American
lands so there are three
sections in this bill that will
also be.
Comprise the amendment the house
bill two thirty one.
That way how this house bill two
thirty one proceeds the same
language will proceed in this
bill as a way of helping to
ensure that the protections for
native American lands are
maintained.
and so and so this section here
in fact actually I see that
Representative Lewis has
arrived.
So
What we do this in terms of
these three sections is what we
consider a black sheet
Representative low flows were
still in a sub committee at the
moment so as we get to if you
bear with us a few minutes I'm
just going through some of the
changes in for fifty four but
the first couple of those
changes are in fact what is
going to be and the amendment
for up to thirty one.
And and it also public Miss
Vigil if if I you do not get a
chance to send a copy of that
amendment to Representative
Lewis presented to her right now
on a house bill two thirty one
so she can follow along it was
so this language on section
seven provides that if if there
is
in in an area that includes
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
lands.
if they are if there's a
declaration of an emergency or
Marci powers of invokes.
R. that these are these are
affected Lee the the protections
that we've had in Senate bill
four as well as the protections
we did earlier this year in the
first congressional district
of Bill with the change that
that because of this is going is
permanent law in subsection B.
and subsections the we're
actually providing time frames.
Not during which in and then and
extended words and see
there can be a
R. O. additional polling places
can be added.
and and the time frames provide
one set time frames what can be
done simply by by a request of
the our action notice of the
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
which should then shall be
accommodated and then a
different time frame as we get
closer where it requires in
order of a district judge that
is consistent with but with the
framework that we have for other
things although this is a more
compressed time frame.
We also have them in section
eight.
Is not some publication on page
twelve there's language online
census reporting about that just
simply ensuring that polling
place located on Indian nation
tribe or pueblo lands will not
be eliminated consolidated
without the written agreement of
the Indian nation tribe or
pueblo.
And then our.
There will be one more section
coming up but as we go through
in numerical order of the pages
I will also bring your attention
because this is an issue and our
committee your page fifteen of
the bill not on page fifteen of
the bill you will see the
amendment Senator Duhigg that
are when this bill was
considered for those of us world
one Judiciary in Judiciary
Committee regarding of the the
more nuanced cancellation of
registration provisions and that
languages I'm changed from what
was reported out from the Senate
Judiciary Committee.
On page nineteen I'm sorry page
seventeen of the bill.
This is the same day
registration provision.
There was a.
Our.
Concern that was raised and
actually to be honest I'd
because I wasn't that involved
in Senate bill forty eight I did
not catch this and and so on and
that is
Beginning on
Line seven through fifteen of
pay seventeen.
This is language that was not
in Senator forty eight.
Yes if someone is there for the
next four years and this
provisions is different for
years and then it repeals is
that if there is a
Part of the standard register on
election day in the county
clerk's office.
What I find is that the cultural
issue the voter a ballot to be
marked in person and the voter
shall insert the voted ballots
into the tabulator program for
early voting at that location.
And if it is in a county with
fewer than ten thousand voters
instead of inserting the ballot
into a tabulator the clerk may
with an option find the voter
with a provisional ballot
envelopes in which to place the
ballot and such ballot shall be
counted absent the imposition of
a challenge so the smaller
counties they won't have to have
an extra voting machine in the
larger counties they will act
actually in in any kind of that
has and additional alter Vogel
occasion of the clerk's office
they already have voting there
anyway this will not apply those
those Middletown is though we
need to have a machine available
and it could be one of the
machines that was already
program for early voting at that
location.
Now we look forward to page
forty two of the bills.
Page forty two of the bills.
This is the third provision
dealing with native Americans
are voting rights.
And that is on section one dash
six dash five point eight and
the change is on page forty
three.
Where what we have is that in
order to have a
early voting location.
on the American land guaranteed
of the nation tribe or pueblo
add to make the request in
November of the top number here
and conversation with
Representative Lewis you let me
know that that was not a time
frame that works well with many
of the problems because they
have a change of government as a
general one.
And so what we did is that we
change that date to between the
second Tuesday March and the
second Tuesday in April of each
odd numbered year.
That allows the maximum amount
of time to plan how and where to
do the early voting sites as the
next election coming up will be
the regular local election in
most cases in November of that
year and then the primary and
then the general and so it
allows that to happen in the
most orderly fashion and gives a
month for the for the individual
present problems to make the
request which also ensures that
there will be the maximum amount
of opportunity for the nation
because of public for interested
in participating in this
program.
The next change is on page fifty
seven.
This thirty seven.
Actually it begins at the bottom
of the page the the very last
line of subsection C. and it
goes on to page fifty eight and
this deal with the
with the opportunity that
happens for
Where we now that we've moved
we're moving in this to greater
security on the mailed ballots
we have there what the clerk
does the initial review.
This is the exact same language
that we approved in this
committee.
And those of us were on
Judiciary approved in Judiciary.
Or the special congressional
district race it is unchanged
from the language that was
unanimously approved on the
floor of the state of the state
Senate and that last night was
unanimously approved on the
floor of the state house action
at the tournament one or two
dissenting votes but more than
that.
So then we move there are no
changes.
Until we get paid one hundred
and thirty.
And what we get to page one
hundred and thirty.
This is no longer the election
code we're in special districts.
We have a provision we have we
have three sections sixty one
sixty two and sixty three that
deal with the Pecos valley
artesian Conservancy district.
And this is agreed upon language
what is valley artisan
Conservancy district as they are
subject to the local election
act and they had not however
been they're they're authorizing
language still about we missed
it when we did the the the the
local action act a few years ago
and so so I worked with them and
we've we've made that change.
so that would be
I guess that section sixty one
sixty two sixty three.
Them on page.
One thirty five.
We begin.
One thirty five.
yes one thirty five.
We have our Conservancy district
reorganization this is a
provision that applies to the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district.
And also applies to the
are currently Conservancy
district that allows them to re
organize the board of directors
this is a necessary for them
before they enter the
Before they under the the
regular local election that's
what gives them the opportunity
to do an internal reorganization
and they filed a cert what the
secretary state no later than
December thirty one twenty
twenty one.
As to what their organization
will be and we will here in just
a moment from the.
Lobbyist for the middle ground a
Conservancy district who will
let you all know that that is
language that has been worked on
together.
Beginning on page sixteen R. one
thirty seven section sixty five.
We have a temporary provision.
Creating a voter education
adolescents task force and this
is language that the secretary
of state's office has worked on
with Representative Rehm and
Representative brown.
And and so this language
and it is unchanged from their
bill and and and so that is
included in this in this bill as
well
and then after that we have a
recompilation of a provision
that should not have them under
It should not have been under
the legislative branch dealing
with the legislative caucus
committees is recompiled to the
campaign reporting act.
and we also have then in that
and the repeals.
We do repeal on the first
section of Senate bill four from
the first special session.
That's known as the second
amendment of that language
remains in the bill but but we
repeal at all as a sign of good
faith to the house of
representatives
who were concerned about the
fact that we were doing
permanent law in the special
session in the bill that was
intended as a temporary
provision.
And
And so anyways that is I'm and
I'm and I and I do apologize.
There's one other change that
deals with the board of
registration that should be in
this bill which there was an
idiosyncrasy from house bill
four oh seven where are the
board of registration was change
from five members to three
members for most of the counties
with forty five members when we
just simply fix that issue.
So those are those are the
changes otherwise the rest of
this has been already voted upon
by this committee.
and so
Right we are continue to wait to
see if we get a sixth member of
the committee.
Joining us this morning that
will be necessary in order to
move forward Representative
Lewis is bill as well as for us
to to finish voting on
Representative welcomes bill.
and then also to proceed on
Senate bill four fifty four
while we're waiting however I
think this would be a good
opportunity we can take some
public comment and we can then
also Arab begin a discussion
within the committee on up on
this bill and so let me begin by
inviting the secretary of state
was present
well as the state election
director to opined and then also
I'm gonna invite John Thompson
actually a John your years of
the quicker if you will activate
your camera.
On the portion that deals with
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district Mr Thompson
please proceed and if you
activate your camera that be
great if not the president this
Mr Chairman good morning I
apologize for not wearing a suit
this morning I I I was I have a
student in my picture Mr
chairman so what we'll assume
that counts thank you for the
time Mr chairman members of the
committee as far as the
amendment on Senate bill four
fifty four I I would like to
first and foremost thank the
good senator and and this is
been not an understatement when
I say years of work and and I
want to thank him for his
integrity and for his honesty
and his willingness to listen to
our concerns and help us
formulate
an amendment that that works
very well for us and allows us
to continue the operations of
our very unique district I guess
I should state that I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district and with that I will I
will cease my comment again
thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate it and we look
forward to moving this forward
thank you very much appreciate
that Mr Thompson
and let me coming over now to
the secretary state let me also
just mention there was there was
one of the section that I did
send out that got left out by
the
of the Dracula said the the
drafters just an amazing job
putting this together under less
than desirable situation and
circumstances there was a
section deal with watershed
districts moving there are there
boards to being an appointed
board they are created by small
water conservation district so
this fall water conservation
district that creates them will
appoint their board and given
maintenance increases watershed
districts that that actually
makes a lot of sense and
provides greater accountability
of the activities of the
district and it ensures that one
of the members of the board of
directors of the watershed
district is a supervisor of the
so water conservation district
that created waivers I will I'll
be making a motion to move that
into the substitute you all have
that language in your email
madam secretary.
Thank you for the opportunity
I'm actually going to defer to
a president who's our
legislative affairs director and
she I know she's been working
sort of closely on coordinating
all these multiple pieces thank
you so much Mr chairman thank
you very much.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thanks for the
opportunity to come before you
today as our secretary said my
name is Kerry frescoes and the
director of legislative and and
and executive affairs with the
secretary of state's office I I
appreciate that the bill sponsor
pulling all of these pieces
together and and look forward to
I'm reading through that that
the bill leader this morning but
definitely
the provisions in the original
SB forty eight we stand in
strong support of
that the protections regarding
that absentee voting with the
last for
that of the signature of the
social and the signature on the
return ballot we we appreciate
that the security in the
processing mechanisms that that
provides
a lot of the modernisations
inefficiencies that were in SB
for that were used for the
twenty twenty general election
we we really think it's
important that those move
forward and become permanent law
the
The at addition of the voter
Education and elections Task
Force from H. B. two ninety is
that is a great addition as well
so I'm happy to hang out with
you all this morning participate
in the discussion and and and
answer any questions for you
thank you very much.
How much
mistrust is assertive.
Mr chairman and obviously a lot
of work has gone into this I
just am concerned then we we.
We're in the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district
reorganization with what is
essentially an election bill and
in doing so really act from
being discussed openly in the
public arena and and the Asian
of this this little provision
provided through if we vote on
this as it is and I'm not at all
clear about what the
ramifications of it are I know
Mister Thompson so they've been
working on for years.
We didn't see a separate piece
of legislation about it and I
just thank you this this release
a opens up the possibility that
we would be criticized and
rightfully so we're trying to
slip something past I wonder if
you could respond to that white
is that belong in what's
essentially an election bill.
Absolutely I'll be happy to
respond to that so if you pull
out your election code.
Thank you look at one dash
twenty two dash one.
You will state that are in
section one dash twenty two dash
one.
The definition of a local public
body.
Changes as of July one twenty
twenty two.
And so a local public body
until.
twenty twenty two.
Excludes the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district and the R.
Charlie Conservancy district.
July one twenty twenty two.
The definition of local public
body or or of a local government
includes we'll refund a
Conservancy district and they
are Charlie Conservancy district
those two are very unique public
bodies.
And we've already adopted.
There is a no we've already
adopted into law a policy that
is going to radically change
their elections.
We have been delighted that
policy because of the uniqueness
of both the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district and the
uniqueness of the arch Hurley
Conservancy to.
But in order for both are surely
and introducing the to be able
to function within the regular
local election where every
single qualified electoral build
about.
But part time in our hundred
years in the the lections where
there will be disclosure.
For the first time in a hundred
years and their elections where
they will not be running their
own auction for the first time
in a hundred years.
They they need to reorganize.
Their board of directors in
order to be able to accommodate
that.
They're also going to be doing a
redistricting.
For the first time in a hundred
years there districting of of.
Senator bill is you know they're
distracting up until now has
been a county based district.
And and so for the first time
they're going to be district
that they've already engaged
with research and policy and
they're gonna be districts it as
any other public body.
That is based on policies we've
already adopt that are already
able with I'm down clock that is
taking place this is enabling
legislation to ensure that that
happens and orderly fashion.
Well it certainly sounds Mr
chairman like like it's a good
thing that we're doing I just I
mean it just seems like you
deserves its own vehicle rather
than to be attached as a.
As a little closer to hundred
forty page bill that won't get
much attention unless somebody
really shines a light on in and
of.
I mean I.
It is you know a few years ago I
tried to abolish the only real
grand Conservancy district as a
president mechanism because
with a million it was so keeping
with with what we usually think
of as governments
it sounds like the changes
you're proposing are good ones
they're proposing or is
proposing and.
I'm just I I guess I would refer
to it in a separate bill where
we were going to be examined and
and and commented on by the
public we don't get any comment
about it now we really won't.
Now the other question I had and
and this is back a to move away
from the more G. CD for a second
what what forty eight is now
second finances of course then
along.
That part is so that when
legislation system goes through
that that is correct and and
I spoke to Senator Woods before
preparing this committee
substitute and did so with his
blessing.
And and and I will just say just
just one less in terms of the
Maria Randy Conservancy district
you know part of the reason for
your bill was in fact the fact
that they have their own
anachronistic elections yeah and
that's that's something that's
been a that's been a project
that has been worked on
me for our in terms of the local
election act that has been
worked on for the last three and
a half years and it's been
continuing conversations with
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district about how
to make that transition but
that's why that's why the clock
was put into the election code
in two thousand and eighteen.
It was put into action co we
voted on this in two thousand
eighteen.
For what happened the elements
that we did that everybody was
in one of these massive bills
that you know slide right past
most of us but I think it's good
I I still I mean the whole
notion in Rio Grande Conservancy
districts still bothers me every
apartment dweller and or or
home owner in downtown
Albuquerque is paying money to
subsidize we basically is in
agricultural entity in the rural
areas of that district in New
York if you live on the.
Your tend lots is downtown
you're not paying that because
you are considered to be in the
in the flood plain or whatever
but it is it's an extra tax and
a lot of people in rural and
urban areas are you are are
paying and and probably you know
there is appropriate reason why
they do it.
For what amounts to a.
A subsidy for the for the
agricultural areas and and are
counties which are actually
diminishing and in Bernalillo
county lease or fewer and fewer
of them any of I think it is
better you have to write about
that and think about the fact
that the apartment dwellers.
That number had a boat in the
mill rate running Conservancy
district.
As of one twenty twenty two.
That's structurally changes
based upon language we've
already adopted.
That's what.
Yeah that's that's happening
that's the.
I think that's a very positive
change because to limit it to
those who are property owners.
We all pay and somehow one way
or the other end of so thank you
thank you for that.
Thank you very much our.
I wonder I wonder what we're
well we're waiting around to
reform need others
Representative Lewis my comment
on this and whether we we
maintain data integrity her
bills can be adopted into this
this committees of.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Ortiz Y. Pino so in
talking with the
the chairman and looking at his
amendments you know what we're
really wanting to concentrate is
concentrate on is to ensure that
it have a lower tribe or nation
has
any kind of diplomatic
declaration of emergency that
that wouldn't hinder polling
places on tribal lands so
generally because.
The polling location must be
open to the public this was an
issue and the pandemic occurred
so that seems to be intact I
think the other thing we were
looking at was to ensure that
the notification was made to the
county clerk's by the tribes
that they would have a
sufficient time to include the
resources needed it people and
financial to ensure that staff
was able to be at tribal
locations for the polling places
so
I know we used a different.
Phil and I know that the Germans
desire is to have some
consistency so and and looking
at everything I think those two
items that I just briefly
explained would be impacted and
I I know the other reason for
changing the one month period at
which actually extends the time
frame for a longer portion would
be helpful to the extent that a
lot of tribes change yearly
leadership and that having the
elections freshen their money I
think after the
Even numbered years knowing at
that whether or not their
candidate of choice succeeded or
not that then they have to take
action within that month time
frame to ensure that they're
prepared which means including
ensuring that there's a polling
location on the tribal land and
then also you know efforts to
get out the vote and in those
instances so I am fine with this
and I think we need to
I mean I I I am hopeful and I
pray that we won't have
declarations of emergency but
really this is just to ensure
that if something were to occur
again and tribes would be able
to offer the police locations on
their lands even if borders were
closed to the public.
And and and I will also note
that there is a continuing
conversation that will be
happening with the tribal
governments and
Alexion ministrations to figure
out how to continue to improve
that process let me suggest
we've got ten minutes until we
have to go to the Senate
Judiciary Committee we were
before we get to Representative
Lewis is bill what I'd like to
do is finish the vote on how
straight resolution three this
is a bill that we discussed in
this committee representative
I'll come in the presentation we
were on a two passed when we
lost quorum Miss Vigil if you
will please call the roll on how
straight resolution three just
as a reminder this was from the
militant of military affairs at
interim committee and it's
simply updates B. the dollar
amounts in the constitution for
the military and veterans
deductions Miss Vigil please
follow.
Senator o'neill.
Yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
There Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do it yes and Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am when we say
Representative although the
latter Nokia's do pass
recommendation from this
committee on that bill we now
move to a house bill two thirty
one AM the amendments that were
sent out for house bill two
thirty one of those should be in
everybody's email box of Miss
Vigil sent those out this
morning and it contains what it
does is it tracks the current
provisions of house bill two
thirty one and replaces it with
the three provisions that we
went over when we were
discussing of four fifty four so
that language will reside in
both two thirty one AM for fifty
four.
Just as there any further
discussion on the provisions of
the other part is there any
objection to adopt in the
amendment.
Very one.
Same objection that amendment is
adopted.
Is there any further discussion
on
house bill two thirty one.
Thank you Mr help please call
the roll.
Senator o'neill yes.
Your TD Pino.
Yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do it yes and Senator
Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am so on a six to nothing
vote congratulations Center
Lewis you have a do pass
recommendation from this
committee on the amended to
thirty one it is.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members and and she has a
promotion as well.
The motion.
Served in both.
Thank you thank you
Representative okay we now move
to four fifty four and the first
thing is be amendment on the
watershed districts is there
that was emailed out to
everybody this was inadvertently
left out by the bill director is
there is there any objection to
adding the provision on the
watershed districts as the
amendment to the committee so as
of this point one.
Seeing no objection
Mysteel please note everyone
present voting in the
affirmative on the amendment is
there any are there and and and
let me just say I understand
with a big bill like this people
need to take time to read and
digest of the one of the reasons
why this bill and I let me just
tell everybody the time frame on
this is is so that we can report
this bill out on the floor this
morning what that will have the
effect of doing is putting the
committee sob on the website so
that the public can see it's.
The public will be able to give
feedback on it as well before
this is considered on the Senate
floor.
And I also want to make sure
that all committee members know
that to the extent that anybody
read something has any questions
on it please come to me let's
have a conversation about it
before it gets consider on the
Senate floor so we can get it
over to the house and get this
up to the governor's desk the.
and so is there any further
discussion at this time on
Senate rules committee
substitute percent rules
committee substitute of set of
bills for fifty four yes Mr
chair one thing procedurally so
I the amendment will get wrapped
up into the sub to the sub that
comes out just to be clear what
is correct they'll be appointed
to and in that regard correct
yes so so the appropriate motion
make at this time would be a I
do not pass on Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
bill four fifty four and a two
passed on the Senate rules
committee substitute for the
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill for
fifty four point two.
I will second your motion thank
you very much see nobody else
taking the chair of seeking
other stress tension at this
time.
As we help please call the roll
Senator o'neill.
Yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Senator Stewart no.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do it.
Yes and explain my vote.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am
Senator director explained
about.
So I I want to move this bill
forward so that it does go up on
the website in the public has a
chance to look at it because I
haven't had a chance to actually
read this bill
I'm I'm looking forward to being
able to do that and and address
anything that that that needs to
be addressed in a collaborative
way with the chair before This
Is her on the floor.
So and that's appropriate thank
you very much on a five to one
vote this bill has a do pass
recommendation from the Senate
rules committee thank you all
very much we are are at nine
fifty five and we do have a
special meeting of the Senate
Judiciary Committee at ten
o'clock and so unfortunate will
not be able to get to the last
two things that are on our
agenda this morning
that'll give people an
opportunity to take a quick
break before the Senate
Judiciary Committee begins thank
you all very much for being at
the special meeting we will have
a regularly scheduled meeting
tomorrow at nine AM well we will
continue with confirmation.
The rules committee has no
increase.
