Surface mining commission.
At the exact same time of the
appointments of the mining
commission if you don't mind.
Now we're going to do today is
really hear from all of the
appointees but I wanted to know
everybody who's listening in in
the appointees that we're
functioning as a subcommittee
today and we won't be taking a
vote but we plan on coming back
the first week of session and
voting on all the appointees and
then the second week going on to
the Senate floor we will then
get a full Senate confirmation
so we're you can come in person
you don't need to come in person
there won't be any comments made
your Senate sponsor will will
speak on your behalf but you can
also join yes zoom and so those
are two options that can take
place know what's gonna happen
today is I want to go in order
of the names of the appointees
that are on my agenda if you can
give me a brief background how
many years you've served on the
commission and the I'm gonna
start off with Roderick been
touring.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Roderick enter at I am an
attorney by trade I am currently
employed with the U. S.
department of interior as an
Indian probate judge I've been
with the commission since two
thousand thirteen I started off
as an environmental alternate
my background is environmental
law used to work for the New
Mexico environmental law center
in the early two thousands
dealing with all the hard rock
mining basis so I've worked on
permitting issues in regards to
the cover minds in Grant County
also we had requested money up
north and I've worked with the
but the victories in regards to
acquisition of their my combined
before I got on the mining
commission.
that's the background that I've
had that got me on to the money
commission in the first place
since I've been on the mining
commission I've heard a number
of rulemaking hearings I also
heard I think one did you get
your hearing some of the more
notable rulemaking here is is we
dealt with the issue of the
release of financial assurance
and the timing of that and how
often one can do that in a
particular year also the
definition of the redefinition
of minimal impact mining in
regards to a minimal impact
mines and so that is basically
my background and I look forward
to continuing working on the
money commission thank you very
good thank you have not we're
going to go to Iraq our.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee hello
my name is Eric Bauer and I
appreciate the opportunity today
the appointment from a governor
Lujan Grisham and look forward
to serving on the Planning
Commission I have been part of
the commission since twenty
eighteen as the industry
alternate but this recent
appointment would make me the
industry Representative my
family and I reside in Tyrone
New Mexico Ryan president and
general manager of Tyrone mining
LLC one of two copper mines in
New Mexico owned and operated by
Freeport mac Moran a leading
international mining company my
background is in civil and
environmental engineering.
And I have been in the mining
industry for twenty five years
of the first eighteen years are
up in Colorado with the
molybdenum operations the
company owns in the last seven
down here in New Mexico I also
currently serve as president of
the board for the New Mexico
mining association thank you.
Thank you well Mexico to
Kathleen Funchess.
Good afternoon
I come forward and as an
alternate former.
Rodrick Ventura.
And the mining commission I am a
community educator I am more of
a community member here and
Issues that relate to
either tribal or.
This is a common citizen in the
issues I've worked on.
Mainly
was almost national laboratory
issues with contaminations of
land air water.
And I've been on the.
As an alternate.
For the mining commission.
Environmental position for since
nineteen since twenty nineteen.
Or so.
And and I guess honored and
proud to be considered now.
And continue with the mining
commission thank you.
Thank you Kathleen just spell
Gil.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee have.
A little bit of background about
myself I I live in Carlsbad New
Mexico and I've been in New
Mexico for five years I'm
actually the general manager of
some will say alright ask money.
And my wife and I live in call
spent prior to that I've been
with most state kind of for
twenty seven years prior to that
so total of thirty two yes and
those twenty seven yes what
insist catch from Canada with
the part of mining operation.
And the.
Senator appointment though and
the mining commission as part of
native to the industry that
attic vote.
just a little bit about mostly
we we have one of the largest.
What street importation produce
search and
We have a very mobile mission of
helping the will grow to forgive
me start by mining the crop
nutrients so thirty two plus
years in mining and I'm
passionate about mining and I'm
looking forward to the
opportunity to be dollar to make
member on the New Mexico miming
Commission.
Thank you thank you Senator is
we're not going to hear from the
two appointees on the coal
surface mining commission we're
gonna start off with Erich
Bauer.
All right well I will go ahead
and repeat everything that that
you just heard but again
the general I am the general
manager and president of Tyrone
mining LLC a large copper mining
company down here in southwest
New Mexico and again twenty five
years in the industry and so I
bring a lot of years to the to
the to the mining commission and
the service call mining
commission and and I will echo
what Mr gill said bring a lot of
passion for this industry that
is very critical for the quality
of life that we all enjoy I'll
leave my comments at that Mr
chair thank you thank you and
we've heard from the second
appointee as well and Kathleen
if you want to say anything else
in regards to the coal surface
mining commission.
Yes thank you
I have
then a community organizer in
starting the gathering from
other and we have a real deep
passion to make sure that as a
community people we are informed
and knowledgeable about things
that are pertinent to
maintaining our health and the
health of Mother Earth so thank
you.
Thank you so much will now go to
Jerry Scheff American can offer
comments on both commissions.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Jareth seven
rounds director the money
minerals division we welcome all
the applicants we hope that they
have a favorable
receive a favorable turnout once
these it's a Senate floor and
they are confirmed and we can
move on with our business under
the mining act thank you very
much thank you and we do have
public comment at TJ Trujillo
who's here to speak on behalf of
two of our point is if you want
to come up to the table.
R. for your comments.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for letting
me speak I do want to offer if
you don't mind I would offer
also like to offer on the third
point development tour as well
absolutely
let me start with one of my
bosses and power I will tell you
and I'll keep my comments brief
so the committee can get on with
the with the stop of our
has the answer mention work for
Freeport mac Moran here in New
Mexico I can tell you I've had
the privilege of working with
Eric for several years now
fundamentally he believes in
responsible mining in New Mexico
and the he is an active member
of the community dining grant
County both with his family is
children and he's a but I will
call model New Mexicans very
privileged to have only believes
in scientific based policy
making and I think that's going
to be a benefit to the money
commission.
I would also like to offer
comments also with respect to
Paul gill Paul gill I have also
worked in the money commission
as part of the mining
association of Paul is an
excellent steward of a mining is
technology expertise is
absolutely amazing what we can
bring to the commission and I
would encourage the committee to
endorse
Mr gill also for appointment
finally Mr chairman I would like
to offer COVID somehow for robin
torana work together for a
number of years sometimes on
opposite sides sometimes on the
same side I would tell you that
is one of the most fair
individuals I know he listens to
it in the he really is one of
those people take scientific
evidence based policymaking
seriously and I appreciate his
service for many years to the
state of New Mexico he's serving
on the money commission for
several years and I greatly
appreciate his service to the
state of New Mexico thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you TJ and the
other members of the public who
would like to offer COVID okay
at this time yes we enquire
Mister chair if there's anybody
else he might have passed in the
hall at some point could like
to.
Brought up.
And the endorsements.
No other comments without able
to move on to the committee for
questions and the senators have
questions for the appointees.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr Chairman just a
quick question for I guess for
the two of you who are on who
have been nominated for both the
mining commission in the coal
surface mining commission do we
really need a second commission
are distinct from the mining
commission just for coal.
If each of you could respond I I
would appreciate that.
US Archie Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
hi.
I would tell you that in my time
I served on the mining
commission it's been very active
and I've or should fairly active
in its and have been a part of
several hearings but my first
hearing on the surface coal
mining commission took place
actually this morning so I'm not
sure I can offer a whole lot
more background on that because
I just don't have a lot of
experience with that committee
that commission.
Thank you thank you Mr are you
ms Sanchez.
Would say from a community
perspective the coal surface
mining is moored on the earth
activities with her.
For me to use our regular people
that are doing
hobby like things with digging
around others and then also the
higher levels of the
Exploratory
Diggings I guess they're doing
at a higher scale and so I think
this is more relevant and out in
a way.
that is where committee
involvement at the local area
where things are happening are
very critical to be informed
about so yes I think we do need
that coal surface mining
commission as well as the money
commission.
Is Mr chairman I wonder if Mr
Shatner might address that.
Sure
Mister chairman Senator or keeps
building on we do have both
commissions as you know the
mining commission is probably a
lot more active and the coal
commission based on production
and reducing over time with them
call throughout the United
states throughout the world but
is still very important to have
both by statute were required to
have them they oversee some of
our more important issues like
appeals from the public bills
from industries but also looking
at regulation changes over time
all have to go through both
commission so that's a very
important role that you play.
Thank you so so does the mining
Mr Chairman and Mr ship owner
does the.
Mining commission.
Exclude consideration of coal
mining permits were.
Mr chair
Senator Ortiz you know that is
correct.
Okay so the mining commission
oversees hard rock mining and
coal commission oversees non
hard rock or or cold cold
related mining.
Okay one of one of the question
Mr chairman it during the this
last summer the.
we have a committed interim
committee called the Land Grant
Committee.
We met in unto and Chico.
I think in September I I forget
September August and an issue
came up we we've since received
a letter from I believe from you
Mr Shatner's somebody at the at
the department to.
The issue is there's a lot of
under a currently unregulated.
Rock quarrying going on there
for landscape materials but also
for
Flagstone that the and and and
huge slabs in huge amounts and
apparently there is little or
nothing that can be done to
regulate this people are coming
in from all over the state and
and on the common lands of the
land of the land grant the
Merced.
They are just holding off large
amounts of rock
is there's do we need to change
the law it to give you all the
authority to deal with that kind
of money.
Mr chair Senator yes we do not
have authority within the
statute or regulations to
regulate that type of activity
so we would need a rule changes
that to change in order to give
us that authority what we can do
and what we have done is reached
out to NMED because there might
be some and full impacts to
groundwater or surface water
impacts if there are some we can
jointly in these go out and look
at the site verify for sure that
is not a mining operation that
falls under the definition in
the statute or the regulations
and if so at least try and look
at some local ordinances there
might be some county rules that
regulate this type of activity
but as far as the mining act you
are correct you would have to be
revised in order to grant
authority to the
agency in order to regulate that
that activity.
Okay well thank you very much
for your answers and thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto any
other questions from members of
the committee.
Our team the pandemic sorry and
we're cousins.
It's the afternoon of the chili
stayed on Mr.
Any other senators willing to
ask questions or have any
questions for the appointees.
Senator Ivey Soto the
opportunities been.
Thank you very much I appreciate
it no actually of the so the
members of the of the
I guess I'm I'm and I understand
there's there's I want a proper
what senator Pete was in because
I understand that there's a
different amount of activity
going on between the two
commissions but I guess I'm I'm
a little bit I'm clear.
About why we have.
Two different commissions.
in terms of coal surface versus
mining.
Because it does seem to me that
the issues that are involved in
cold surface coal service.
Might be able to be.
At some point native and a coal
mine in the in the mining
commission.
R. as or do you guys perceive
that that's not the case which
which educators on that please.
If I could let me try to make a
response and maybe Mr secretary
could give a better more
thorough response not to not to
be glad but it's already been
mentioned that they're different
statutes that are involved here
I can only speak from the mining
commission point of you I can't
speak from the coal mining
twenty I'm not I'm not I'm not
commission but the mining
commission is the regulatory and
administrative body that stands
out of the nineteen ninety three
mining at and when the nineteen
ninety three mining act was
created it was specifically only
for hard rock mining which
specifically excluded coal so
that's.
Very simple basic statutory
reason why they're different
commission this is different
statutes yet not not on that but
as it turns out we actually get
to amend the statutes.
Yes yes that is exactly true and
we don't so that's that that's
just want to point out and.
I I don't know if Mister chip
new might want to add on to that
if there may be different
receive news in regards to the
different laws that might apply
and environmental concerns that
might apply between the hard
rock mining and the coal mining
which would make you'd have to
we formulate the different
statutes completely so I'm gonna
turn it over to Mr Shatner if he
if he has a better answer than
that.
Mr chair Senator thank you yes I
think that Mr mantra answered it
very well the only thing that I
would add to that is under the
cold program there are federal
regulations spectra which
dictates how coal mining occurs
and how reclamation is completed
whereas on the mining the mining
act does not have federal
regulations that have state
regulations New Mexico money act
they are very different
regulations that both statutes
oversee but you do have a good
point would there be a
possibility of having a single
commission look at both that
would be a possibility there
might be some legal
ramifications to that that I
won't be able to address today
but it would be something worth
looking into.
At that and
And then and then the other the
other question I have which I
guess is is up
I got a couple.
Call it related questionable
other mining related questions
so on on on coal.
given where.
power generation is headed these
days what is what is the the
longer term viability.
Of of continued coal mining in
New Mexico at this time how do
you all see that.
Mr chair Senator.
Based on projections that we
have right now contracts that
current mine operations New
Mexico have with utilities
anywhere from twenty twenty two
to twenty twenty seven appears
to be the last time they'll be
any type of mining activity
that's when contracts with some
of power companies in Arizona
specifically will expire and
it's not likely that they will
be renewed.
So when when when was this two
second twenty twenty seventh at
the outside no that's not that
far away.
Correct.
okay.
And
And then and then as to as to
other mining in New Mexico right
so we've is there still any more
molybdenum mining going on in
New Mexico.
Mr chair Senator there is not
any Molly currently being mined
in New Mexico once quest to shut
down several years ago that has
moved out of state there some in
Colorado but not in New Mexico
at this point.
We don't expect that to come
back.
We do not and then up we've done
we've had uranium mining in New
Mexico what's the status of
uranium.
Right now Mr chair Senator was
was was closed out in the in the
in the Cibola County area about
where we are.
That is correct Mr chair Senator
so the last real production was
like the late nineteen eighties
there also have been some
applications mostly for
exploration we do have a roll
call Honda application for an
actual money that has been going
through the process for many
years part of that is on federal
land so they are going through
the need for process with the
federal government so to delay
things quite a budget it's on
and off because of the price
keeps going up and down but we
have no current uranium
production in New Mexico but we
do have the robot of money was
it which is an application for
actual mining and we do have
every so often and application
for exploration.
And if I may where we had
lithium right now.
Mr chair Senator Woods listening
this again we do not have any
applications for any money
appropriations but we do have at
least one application for
exploratory drilling program
done Lordsburg area and that one
we're not sure what the status
of that is right now we did
issue the minimal impact
exploration permit on back in
the fall of this past year but
they have not completed the work
at and then if I just could one
other mining happens in New
Mexico.
Mr chair Senator the majority of
my name right now it's copper
copper mining is the biggest
operation throughout the state
and has been for many many years
and then there's a smaller
Precious metal type money
operation but
copper far and above is the
biggest Act biggest activity in
in the state right now as far as
money goes and what part of the
state is that.
Mr Bauer would be very familiar
with that down in the grants
Grant County area then but we
don't that is correct Mr Mr
chair Senator I may I'll just a
jump in here and mention that
the all of not only as a copper
miner yeah it's down in the
southwest corner on we are going
strong just a couple of the
comments on the what the
director said is obviously spot
on but I would just point out
that predictions on when mines
make clothes and and no longer
be viable you have to be very
very careful with that does the
world continues to change I can
tell you the Tyrone money that I
run was supposed to be shut down
fifteen years ago and with the
continued demand for copper in
the world in the United States
and then of course with the new
demand coming on for renewable
energy Tyrone has recently gone
from just one or two years of a
life of mine now approaching ten
the Chino money that will be go
over we'll go from ten fifteen
to potentially twenty thirty
it's twenty to thirty years
further out and so I just
We just throw out there
especially as I as much as the
president of the New Mexico
mining association just caution
you to to think about when these
closures may come about but you
know the
timing and and contracts except
for on as the world moves
forward trying to understand a
better and more reliable energy
mix those things continue to be
in flux at best certainly I I I
I do understand that but it does
look like things could be
happening for a while I just
want to make sure is we clamp
down on copper thought that
we're not inhibiting the mining
activities of New Mexico to
replace everything that got
stolen.
the up
What so in terms of in terms of
these legacy.
Mining.
Projects that have happened in
terms of living in terms of of
of
uranium in terms of phasing out
coal.
R. what what are the what are
the
Branded cleanup issues that we
need to assess for the state.
Where is that within your really
what.
Mr chair Senator yes it is we
share that responsibility with
New Mexico Environment
Department so I could say
anything any money operation
that was permitted oris was
existing after the nineteen
ninety three mining act was
adopted in nineteen ninety four
rules were put in place we have
financial assurance for a
hundred percent of those mine
sites so any kind of.
Activity that is required for
reclamation at the end of mining
will be paid for with financial
insurance now there are legacy
mine sites particularly in the
uranium area but there are a lot
of federal and state activities
are going on right now you're
probably aware of the topics
settlement that was put in place
many years ago is a billion
dollar settlements that provided
funding for fifty four mines
within New Mexico Senator and
also in other states
so the federal government's
looking at a large areas of the
grants money districts some
areas have been designated as a
Superfund site of Family tail
creek for instance the basin
that had a high concentration of
uranium mine sites so the big
large mine sites for the most
part are being addressed but
there are still some outstanding
issues on adequate funding so
for instance the Trimax Madam
but I spoke about it the billion
dollar settlement but estimates
are about two million dollars to
clean up all fifty four side so
there's a huge gap there in the
funding clean up all the fact
but again most of the larger
sites are being addressed to
some degree and there's still
some on work being done to
trying to address and find
responsible parties for some of
that and maybe some of the
funding to be made up on in that
respect as far as hard rock
mining
so the infrastructure bill just
just assigning adopted by the
president provided some
additional moneys for abandoned
mine lands so that program is
existing they are to get about
two point eight million per year
that has been we authorize for
the next thirteen years an
additional thirteen or eleven
point three billion was provided
as a one time stimulus over
fifteen years New Mexico share
is going to be about two and a
half million over the next
fifteen years on that side of
things as far.
Is safeguarding old money
features and those would be most
of the coal mines for the most
for the most part that's with
them that funding is geared
towards and it is a feed off of
coal mine so that's why it's
geared towards coal mine
reclamation that's kind of
taking care of
within the infrastructure bill
there was an amendment by
Senator Heinrich for the hard
rock hard rock was authorized or
I should say it was authorized
in the adoption of the
infrastructure bill but it was
not appropriate there were three
billion dollars that was
supposed to be appropriated to
what which fell off.
For some reason so they're
trying to find a funding
mechanism to deal with back
loading that's three billion
that was part of the initial
bill yes that comes to be half
that would go to the federal
government for federal sites on
federal lands half would go to
states and tribes in that would
be competitively awarded and
that would our first.
I think our first task there is
to go through the state and get
a very good inventory of what
exists out there that does not
have that requires reclamation
remediation that has not been
completed or that does not have
a responsible party that was
truly abandoned and those funds
could be used to clean up those
sites so in the big picture how
big is that problem you know
the.
The BLM has provided some
inventories over time we can say
it's fairly large but we don't
really know how big that
community this issues are we
would have to verify that by
doing this inventory which would
be our first step and we're
gonna trying to some of that
work under the AML work R. A. M.
L. funding that was provided
under the infrastructure and we
also have some youth
conservation corps money that
we're hoping to use to do that
same type of work.
Okay I really appreciate the
detail of that and and and it's
the kind of thing where I think.
Is you know as we.
As we're trying to and we're
trying to figure out where we
need to be spending sort it out
certain amounts of money that
are coming in with certain
opportunities happen that
something what we need to I
think be aware of in terms of
some of these legacy mines.
and and and be we should get out
of try to develop some kind of a
longer term.
Plan on how to fund some of
these
stranded mines.
That are out there and you know
if it sounds like it's kind of
thing where if we could develop
up a relatively modest but
consistent funding stream it
would you know.
Over time we will be able to to
take care some of these.
The other thing is.
If we're looking at a twenty
twenty seven phase out of coal
mining.
I do think.
I want to go back to Senator has
been as initial question.
That while there may be a good
reason to have the separated
right now I I do think this is
probably something where for
looking at you know just four
years from now three years from
now a phase out we probably want
to look at combining the axe and
combining the commissions.
Going forward so that so that
way
we make sure that the
responsibilities from coal
mining.
We don't just deactivate Lee and
and the number with
responsibilities public folder
and the money commission
altogether and so that's that's
something Representative you
know I really appreciate you
bringing that up and and
that's something I think I think
the the committees particularly
those members who are overlap
between the committees are the
commission's shipper you know
might want to start taking the
lead on on working on this issue
so that we can address that not
at the last second but
make sure that we've got we've
got a plan and and it's in place
maybe a few years beforehand and
it'll and that way able to.
It'll just naturally happen at
that point so Mr chairman thank
you very much appreciated the
point thank you senator any
other questions for members of
the committee.
I have just one question is the
coal mining or the coal surface
mining commission just made up
of two individuals.
Mr chair Senator no there's
actually seven members seven
voting members Representative
basically by the same group that
is in the mining act that State
Land Office state engineers
office bureau of geology
department of game and fish the
NMED secretary and then in this
case the chair of the soil water
conservation and director of
agricultural experiment station
down in Los crucis thank you so
much Mr Shatner now I just want
to make a comment Senator since
we do have a quorum we're gonna
keep things consistent and we're
not going to be voting on
appointees today will be
avoiding voting on appointments
the first week of the session
and then planning on going the
second week of session and to
the floor for a full Senate
confirmation so with that being
said we're done listening to the
mining commission and the call
service mining commission and I
want to thank all of you for
your service and for spending
part of your afternoon with us
today thank you.
Thank you thank you thank you no
thank you to everybody who's
listening and I'm so we will not
be hearing from the appointees
to the state racing commission
will be doing that the very
first week of the session
support at some point during the
session so once again we won't
be listening to the appointees
from the state racing commission
but we will now be transitioning
to listen to those for the New
Mexico finance authority.
Others.
State.
This.
Thank you so much for joining us
this afternoon we're going to be
hearing from the appointees to
the New Mexico finance authority
seven ask each of you if you can
briefly give me your background
how many years you've served on
the commission anything else
you'd like to add and then we'll
wrap up by hearing from Marquita
Russel who can offer COVID and I
want to do in order of the names
on my agenda and I'm gonna start
off with and through birth.
Mr chair members of the the
committee first of all thank you
for the opportunity and I'm
certainly honored and privileged
to be are recommended for
appointment by the governor to
the New Mexico finance authority
I I begin serving on the New
Mexico finance authority in
twenty nineteen as the higher
education CFO designate.
since that time I've also served
as the chair of the audit
committee.
from a personal standpoint I
grew up in Los crucis New Mexico
and attended public schools
there all of my degrees
educational degrees have a come
from New Mexico State University
I have a bachelors in business
administration master's of
accountancy and more recently a
doctorate in education.
as a young man Hey briefly
served as a banking examiner
with the federal government and
and was employed by a fortune
five hundred
company
most of my career's been with
New Mexico State University
first about thirty years with
Dona ana community college I was
both the finance officer and the
interim president two different
times and you know had the
opportunity
you madam in that capacity to
work with local government to
so general education bonds
and so forth
In the last four and a half
years I have been
The CFO for New Mexico State
University system
hi I've had the opportunity to
to refund revenue bonds and
review revenue bond
opportunities within the
university of as well as
I'm the treasurer of the Erro
arrowhead center the business
incubator with Mexico State
University and also the
treasurer of the Aggie
Development.
in.
In this particular
You know capacity I'm being
recommended for for a public
board member appointments to the
New Mexico planets Authority.
And with that I think all stand
for any questions you may have
later thank you entry well
Mexico to more in slides of.
The chairman of the members the
committee of one of thank you
for us having the here today up
actually of I was appointed to
this committee on what twenty
eighteen hi serve also as as a
committee member but also as a
teacher of finance disclosure
Committee New Mexico finance
authority of most of you
probably have met me through the
political rounds I've been
involved in politics probably
since I was old enough to to
walk coming from some to get
County there's not much another
choice to do that
from business perspective small
business owner Las Vegas New
Mexico about the same business
for over thirty years
but later on in life I learned
it was talk to be a business
developer from gentleman by the
name of don Tishman most of you
would probably also remember
and I would was been fortunate
to build the housing for for
people that need it and I was so
fortunate to help build the
school gyms academy Steve school
and also Mr Mexico
in the middle of all of that the
was so bad he partnered up with
the my third business my third
the job which is I'm basically
the executive vice president of
business development for a
company called plastic gas of
which actually takes all forms
of plastic waste and converts
them into usable of gasoline
these apartment chairman
kerosene and unlike the building
in the same business for thirty
years was biggest Mexico are we
now have Transylvania all over
the world so well I guess I
started the local eventually
ventured forth to all of
globally
and stand the.
I just that's about it in a
nutshell happy to answer any
questions that the committee
members may have a little bit
later and the.
So again it's a it's a pleasure
and an honor to be here I
thought of you guys today thank
you thank you Mr now Senator
there is a third appointee
Katherine Miller who is it going
to be joining us today so we'll
have to hear from her later but
I now want to turn it over to
Marquita Russel for any comments
that you'd like to.
Thank you Mr chairman again my
name is Marquita Russel I'm the
CEO of the New Mexico finance
authority and I'm very pleased
to stand in support of both of
these come for me as you've just
heard they're both exceedingly
well qualified to serve on the
New Mexico finance authority
board our programming is quite
diverse everything from small
business financing to
environmental funding programs
up to infrastructure loan
programs and we work our our
board members very hard as you
heard earlier Mr Burke served as
our audit committee chair during
which time we went he oversaw
the development of of our
finances we have redevelop them
so that they're far more
transparent so that the
reporting is more in depth and
we do monthly close outs and
we've been under his
Oversight he has overseen annual
comprehensive financial reports
so the highest level of
financial reporting that we can
do both of those on it so far
have received commendation from
the governor a government
financers off officers
association so you know we've
we've done a great deal we've
developed our financial
reporting significantly all of
which happened under Mr Burke
similarly
Mr Suazo serves as both a
finance a disclosure committee
chair as well as a member of the
executive committee and he has
been really critical in helping
us not only to ensure that our
agency is staffed with the right
kinds of contracts that are
oversight documents we offer and
and of in preparation of a bond
document have been bond offering
have been overseen correctly
he's been critical in helping us
at the mission of the finance
authority I could not ask for
two better candidates very
diverse in their in their
experience and they really do
add to the operations of the
finance authority so I'm happy
to stand for.
Any questions about what the
finance authority does or you
know give you any more praise
for these two gentleman they
really are well qualified and
I'm very happy to stand here in
and pass your for your
endorsement thank you market at
now before I go to questions I
just want to remind everybody
that we're not going to be
voting today where a
subcommittee today will be
voting during the first week of
the session and the planning of
going for a full Senate
confirmation the second week or
sometime thereafter so we will
be voting on appointees today
and so I now want to turn it
over to any members of the
committee who might have
questions.
And the question Senators.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you both of you for.
Or being willing to to to
continue.
Serving the people of New Mexico
by by your work on the.
The finance authority
My my question maybe most
directly put to Mr Russell.
Until recently I wasn't aware of
a program that you all have at
the finance authority.
Whereby.
health facilities like the
community clinic can can be
finance could finance
construction of a project
through you with with is it low
interest loans or grants could
you say a little bit about that
program and and maybe I'm maybe
describing it too narrowly it
may be broader than just health
clinics but the under what
circumstances would that be a
resource.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm happy
to answer that question the
second program authorized for
the NMFA to operate was back in
nineteen ninety five and it is
the primary care capital fund
and under that program were able
to make both low interest loans
at the right now the interest
rate is three percent to
nonprofit and government owned
of primary care clinics but then
they are able to repay a portion
of that loan through their
provision of Services to the
indigent and medically needy so
they can pay up to twenty per we
pay up to twenty percent of
their loan principal in and
interest annually through the
provision of services that they
frankly already provide by
virtue of them being nonprofit
or government owned facilities
so it does combine sort of a
grant like feature to it we have
a similar program that was
authorized about eight years
later called the behavior health
capital fund and so similarly
loans of up to three percent are
made to these clinics and
similarly up to twenty percent
of their annual principal and
interest payments may be kind of
repaid through this contract for
services.
Mr chairman and and miss Russell
thank you this very very
intriguing of it are the
behavioral health.
The funds.
Limited to outpatient.
Mr Chairman no as long as they
are of licensed by the
department of Human Services so
they don't have to be out
patient they could be
The substance abuse which often
has an in patient element to it
so they could be impatient at
the the key here is that they
have to be licensed by the
department of Human Services and
and Mr chairman of those.
Of of the to the state funds
that are created with that with
the revolving as money is paid
back the restored or the kind of
combined into one.
Mr chairman that they're
operated as two separate funds
so they were created in
legislation under two separate
funds they are currently
operated under to certain as as
as a separate funds I would note
however that there's not
actually in that case of the
behavioral health clinic there's
a limited amount of money maybe
enough for one small loan less
than a million dollars on the
primary care side of that and
that program is pretty much out
of money where is a reversion
from that fund two years ago and
pretty much we have to collect
from our remaining I think six
or seven outstanding loans it'll
be a couple years of repayment
before we're in a position to
make another loan so there's
these are good programs they are
not they are currently under
capitalized for additional
applications however they could
be met and Mr chairman and and
mistrustful they could be
replenished though or or
expanded.
In a in case there is a year
when we have a lot of money
right.
Mr chairman that's correct
and again one of the things that
the oversight committee The New
Mexico finance Authority
oversight committee considered
in the in our was mending those
two statutes to allow for
operating capital right now
those those of both funds are
limited to a building
and equipment capital equipment
so it has to be these long term
fixed assets what we're seeing
particularly on the side of
behavioral health is the need
for operating capital so that
they can staff up and expand
their services that the need for
buildings parks and mortar is is
more limited in what they really
need our staffing so that was a
something that the finance
Authority oversight committee
had considered over the inner I
think the issue we ran into a
door spent time was exactly how
that would be awarded but it was
certainly something that would
be eager to see implemented as
an expansion of those programs
to allow these funds to be used
in all ought all facets of the
operations.
Very very good thank you that's
something we might want to take
up actually with and then Mr
Chairman one less thing for Mr
Suazo had a question I I am so
intrigued with your plastic yes.
maybe Mr Suazo you know one or
offline or some you can Phyllis
and I know that's kind of
it what we're actually talking
about that what a great idea
because the idea of doing
something about the plastic
waste that accumulates in doing
it in a I I would assume in a in
a way that can service a you
know reduces the need for other
kind of fuels would be great.
Yes first of all of the thank
you for the question Mr chairman
if I may
Senator I'd be happy to have a
discussion with you any any time
you would like to all all you
have to give you a call and then
we can talk about that simply
put we already have we're moving
on it begins what we call a
proof of concept plan the into
law students New Mexico it's
already in the works we're
expecting that the the land
probably as early as March it's
already being manufactured sure
what that will do will it'll
will allow us to to show you and
rest of of stakeholders New
Mexico how the how the process
works how we do things and
it'll allow us to maybe bring
the add up big bigger plants
bring plastic gas to to New
Mexico
so everything is as well as way
but yeah I would love to engage
in a conversation with you Sir
and you know point to note is
that our company does not the
blue the environment anyway so
we're not exchanging one one one
bad thing for another thing it's
we have almost zero emissions we
don't use water and we're able
to get the plastic waste out of
the system and put it to good
use so.
Sounds great to and to I'm
Senator Baca will be invited to
the ground breaking absolutely
Senator Baca is is is well
respected and and will serve.
State and he's been keeping this
secret from us but I know he's
been following its development
closely so thank you Mr so so
yeah we would like to hear more
about it when the time is is
appropriate thank you Mr chair
that was wronged question thank
you senator any other questions
for members of the committee.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr can you hear me.
That's.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
I just want to say thank you to
NMFA for what you do in our
communities we talk about what
we can offer hope for many of
you know for development for
building of infrastructure that
so needed in many parts of our
state just thank you and thank
you
you know for for both of you
gentlemen for your willingness
to serve
in the course of Mr spas so it's
always good to see you I know
your commitment for many of our
communities you know having met
you many many years back I know
of your commitment and your work
so again thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator thank you set
of.
I just have one question and
maybe this is for you Marquita
but does the board by any chance
are you are you working with the
the governing of the cannabis
micro business program by any
chance.
Mr chairman of the finance
authority board approved rules
to operate a cannabis micro
business loan program
so for those micro producers
there will be some funding made
available the rules for those
were also approved by the New
Mexico finance Authority
oversight committee at the end
of November so we're currently
working on an application and
working closely with the
cannabis control division to put
together a program that serves
the needs of the small emerging
businesses thank you for that
market of the reason why I asked
as I did have a constituent who
reached out and asked if there
could be any type of of
assistance so thank you all the
to go back and look at your
meeting notes or minutes and and
be able to answer better when he
calls back so with no other
questions from the committee
once again we're not taking a
vote today but we'll be doing
that but when the session starts
I want to thank all of you for
your commitment and for serving
on the commission and I look
forward to seeing you soon.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members yeah.
You too we're not gonna move
bonded to the unemployment
compensation board of review.
Okay we have with us today one
appointee to the unemployment
compensation board of review and
that's Trent and James and then
after we hear from Trenton James
city give us a brief background
let us know how long you've
served on the committee and
anything else you'd like to add
with the go to Wesley Logan who
can offer any comments and so
Trenton if you're if you can
turn on your camera please do so
now if you can't you can on mute
and begin.
Centennial this.
I apologize
Mr chairman are you able to hear
me alright I can't.
Mr Chairman sure my name's
Trenton James R. hi.
it's a I'm very grateful to be
able to appear before the
committee today I recently
received an interim appointment
from governor Lujan Grisham to
the unemployment compensation
appeals board.
At I came to the department of
workforce solutions back in
nineteen ninety nine as an
attorney and labor law
administrator after working at
the witching hour bureau for
three years I was promoted to
administrative law judge of
course served for the last
the last nineteen years retiring
in November of last year it
after it was after my retirement
that I was able to begin serving
on the up appeals board up I am.
I I think I have a good
background Mr chairman in the
review of the conduct conduct an
overview of those our forty
appeals and we have a we have a
of a commitment to get those
reviewed at the board level
thoroughly and timely so we can
get a distraction for the
parties.
As quickly as possible
There's lots more to be said Mr
chairman but without I'd be
happy to answer any questions
that the committee might have
for the thank you drafted before
we do that I want to have two
year Senate sponsor Senator
Stewart who's gonna say a few
words on your behalf yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman and
welcome Mr.
and you know he he told you what
I was going to tell you which is
yes got to me and I'm on the
perfect background because he
has been an administrative law
judge for many years to have a
quorum court appointed
arbitrator on these issues so he
knows about the unemployment
fund from the inside out and so
on I think I'm just grateful for
him now that he's retired from
that work he is willing to serve
on this review board I also
really liked that he said they
are committed to timely reviews
because all of us have heard
from constituents who have not
been able to access that system
these last few years it's just
that nightmare and so grateful
that we have someone who is so
knowledgeable to be on this for
he is a constituent of mine so
thank you Mr games.
Thank you Senator Stewart and
now out west will get it do you
have any comments to make.
I do Mr Chairman.
My name is Wesley Logan and I'm
the general counsel for the
department workforce solutions
and just general counsel
I said is the chairman of the
board of review.
The.
The process that Mr James
described starts of course with
the party either an employer or
an employee appealing and the
termination with regard to
unemployment benefits that
process then moves to the.
The.
The appeals tribunal we're as
you heard Mr James has been.
A an appellate judge there for
quite some number of years fact
I work with Mister James as a.
On the appeals tribunal myself
for a number of years before
moving.
Over here to take up this this
position.
And the.
I have.
Read quite a number of Mister
James this decisions and have
found them all very
thoroughly researched and
thoughtfully presented.
The board of review that is has
been established under the
unemployment.
Compensation law of the state in
New Mexico and it is the last.
Point in the administrative
appeals process for a party to
bring their bring their appeal
from an adverse determination
made by the appeals tribunal
there are three members of the
board myself as chairman.
And Mister James what.
Part of the.
Remote well as a as a member and
walk trump who's not available
here.
Today.
So the.
Next step from any any decision
that's made by by the board of
review of the party.
Chooses to they may appeal
directly to the District Court
this is where the we are the the
final link if you will and
administrative training for
those decisions.
Yes there are any questions I'd
be glad to answer those
questions related to the board
of re or Mr chances are noted
for quite some time.
Thank you so much Mr Logan any
questions from members of the
committee.
Thanks to no questions at this
time but we want to thank you
for joining us today and for
serving on the committee once
again we're not taking a vote
today we're serving as a
subcommittee will take a vote
during the first week of the
session and then sometime during
the thirty day session will take
it to the Senate floor for full
Senate confirmation and so I
want to thank you again for
joining us this afternoon and
for members of the public who
are joining the as soon as a
reminder we will not be
listening to the state racing
commission today we'll be doing
that sometime during the thirty
day session so with that
committee members with no other
questions of no other business.
We will be starting tomorrow at
nine thirty AM then as of now of
