and that we continue to
represent our constituents and
then I'm looking forward to
learning and meeting each and
everyone of you and meeting the
needs of our constituents thank
you.
Senator Griggs would you like to
go.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair I'm Ron
Griggs I have been in the Senate
now for a for eight years this
is my ninth session I live in
Alamogordo I represent Senate
district thirty four.
Senate district thirty four
takes and Otero eighty and that
little banking part of that Dona
Ana County
I've I've been the mayor of
Alamogordo I was on the city
commission for over twelve years
show when we talk about rural
step small communities I'm I'm
pretty well versed in that as
well we're we've got to go I
think in in our state and maybe
was this committee hopefully
we'll see some important
legislation for that because the
divide does seem to be getting
larger and and hopefully we can
carry the rural poor H. to a to
the other members of the Senate
so thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator senator Brenda
McKenna.
Good morning chair vice chair
and fellow.
Senators
really pleased to join you in
our very first meeting and
Of as Senator how to me said
this is our first time out and
Be patient with us where there's
a there's a lot for us to learn
I I'm originally from nam bay
Pueblo and I reside in Kerala's
now.
I and senator for district nine
which includes counties of Santa
and a bit of Bernalillo to so
from the north the district is
starts and all good honest part
of San Felipe pueblo and then
comes down south where I have a
couple of areas in Albuquerque
when I'm not
working as a senator I'm working
part time as a field
representative for
representative deb Haaland it's
been wonderful training ground
with constituent services so to
job I really enjoyed.
And.
And that's it chair I will turn
over the Mike.
Senator said Sanchez.
Hello everyone I'm Josh were
playing the second week as a
senator and when I'm not being a
senator I'm farming ranching of
here in the rural area of.
The land lancer County
My district is district thirty
it goes from highway forty seven
in Valencia County all waited
there is on the border.
I have so coral Valencia Cibola
and what can we County.
I have
I.
Tribal areas that I represent
and have gotten really close
alone got to.
Make some good friendships
across the way campaigning and
stuff so it's it's been a great
experience and I can't wait to
work with all of you.
And thank you for this
opportunity.
Thank you and Senator Shendo and
the.
Right.
Morning everyone.
Good good to see you all
State senator Benny Shendo from
payments Pueblo representing the
Senate district twenty two.
I have portions of Santa Fe
County McKinley County San Juan
County Rio Arriba county and
Bernalillo county's so
I go from the.
Order of five twenty eight Rio
Grande all up the.
Revert to the Colorado border
with the hickory Apache nation
and then a over towards the San
Juan river south of San Juan
river south of Farmington.
Now to.
From points east Crown Point and
back west or east to the
Sandoval County in a small
portion Bernalillo county so I
have a seven Pueblo sits in my
district I also have the tire
hickory Apache nation as well as
seven of twenty.
Of Navajo chapters along with
the northwest portion of Rio
Rancho and the all the little
small towns cities communities
renters branches small towns
in the districts so
Any of you guys
sometime one of the right along
with me just let me know it can
take this some of the best
hunting grounds in Victoria to
the fishing ponds.
So anyway I'm glad to be here
and excited the to be part of
this committee this is my
starting my third term and have
been on this committee ever
since and so looking forward to
the work.
Thank you Senator Shendo and you
being one of the longest members
on this committee would I would
like to request invocation
prayer from you and we won't be
doing prayer every meeting just
to kick off our little new
committee and board members
chair.
Chair if you don't mind the for
the application if you can let
our viewers know all about your
district and how you
Representative does a Senate.
Yes I agree that.
I do usually cutting that well
on one say soon but I represent
district three parts of San Juan
McKinley County.
Khaddam lead most of that major
Navajo reservation they got that
thirteen chapters in my district
and it is very unique and and
I'm sure Sir Senator Shendo can
attest to this that.
Working with the Navajo Nation
government on top of the New
Mexico government along with the
chapters and our little move
counties with your district is a
governmental top but we have
many years that we do deal with
so.
It we had our work cut out in
our in our little area versus
just having the to deal with the
state of New Mexico so in that
too I have to school districts
Sen central consolidated schools
and.
Got McKinley County schools very
big districts landmass whites
but we do have a major and are
are.
What about to turn around the
education system and the health
care and we do this year is been
unprecedented in the sense of a
lot of industry sleeping in my
area in the northwest corner you
name it I think will be the
biggest suppliers right now are
the Navajo Nation.
The public schools and.
Despite our small businesses so
in in the moratorium on the oil
and gas but it doesn't have to
play against the existing
licenses that are there so it's
six and I think most of you are
aware of my grandfather being my
predecessor and cents before he
went on his journey and that's
where I came in I'm very honored
to be
Part of this committee.
From the beginning and the get
go and
Something different and even
with the name change that it I'm
glad you can take on a little
bit more for the Senate to to
help all of our colleagues
within the legislature so thank
you.
Thank you madam chair
I'll go ahead and assay the vote
per of this committee and and my
language.
Thank you is it dont though
she's a.
Global login are who's done a
bill get the look but just a
don't we all right the let you
book a trip we've been a lonely
it would have gonna use a low
show quit line you know
knowledge alone not we're not
raking that we'd and all those
who have to cope with whatever
little league does a Moscow
clinical looking a little
backbone Zabel of the twelve new
when all the locals will do we
don't you go to ocean what will
show up with no commercial Lou
will insure to hold a gun to get
the.
The home of the attendees at the
moment to come in and get those
who can aligns implement all the
way that the ownership in a
liquid onto it and not sure they
want us to that goal number with
the loan will be over the moon
in opal group with no bush or
Quayle and looked a looked on
hello we have gone in and loan
all the blue route of actually
eight the only we've done no no
Oklahoma low we've shown the
neon of measureable will look on
the in the huddle develop into
looked into a secretary who
would have to a little known
homeowners on juice at in the
apple into a limit on that.
home built on the no no no
comment to move.
With the local with our true and
it and then the connection that
in the we'll watch was no no no
with home work with Oakland
although the district drive
which is eight the bloke we will
it should go more but I'm not
not into the actual single.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator Shendo and I
would like current staff to
introduce ourselves yesterday.
Everyone my name is Rebecca
Martinez and
this is my second year with the
state legislature I work for the
Indian and cultural affairs
committee last year and this is
my second year in this position
I come to this committee I'm
retired from state government
and I have about thirty years of
background working for tribal
governments and working with
tribal governments I work with
the Indian Affairs Department
for many years and as well as
the aging and long term services
department and got to know
every
tribal community in the state of
New Mexico and work with their
staff and then I'm no stranger
to the legislative system either
because in that capacity working
capital outlay for the state I
work with the legislators a year
after year discussing capital
projects that needed to be
completed or
a communities that need capital
projects with me today I have
Merion.
And
Go ahead hi everyone.
my name is merry instance rude
and I am the actually the
committee secretary for the
Senate Education Committee at
some of my responsibilities
include helping all of the other
committee secretaries in their
committees and I have the
privilege to have help Senate
Indian affairs press long as
I've been here which has been
nineteen years and so I
thoroughly enjoyed being a part
of this committee when I need it
otherwise I turn it over to
Rebecca she is an amazing
Committee secretary and I'm sure
that everything will go really
well with her and charts this
year so I'm just going to be
taking her place for a short
time today should she need to
late thank.
Thank you.
And I will have to leave about
ten mins ago.
Okay okay in about ten minutes
we do have an endless out.
Okay and do we have our analyst
on it's I don't see him on I
don't know no Richard Lindahl
okay the committee analysts is
Richard Lindahl and I don't know
if you can send him a link to
see if he's killed respond he
was just barely getting set up
to date and you should be able
to this communication set up by
this afternoon if there's any
questions
for him or to do the work that
we do are that they do for us
and thank you for.
Our staff for being here and
helping us and in the past
helping this committee move
forward and continue the great
work that the state of New
Mexico has some very unique yes.
I fail to introduce to other
staff that are here in the room
with me I have okay then Ruben
filled with our soon authority
and then also we have Jane
Alvarez who is our Committee
assistant and she doesn't have a
computer so she said in here to
the side they're waving at you
thank you.
All right thank you and so.
We will try to set some
consistency as far as if you
need help setting up the
background and this'll probably
be my back up background is a
blanket that my grandfather
received twenty became the she
had got his honorary doctorate
degree and my auntie spell that
I am should.
Carry it with me so that's where
that comes since the that they
get from it into you on program
point.
So.
We did receive the agenda for
the Senate in the in rural and
cultural affairs committee.
And for today with the
implication members and staff
introduction and we did have to
bills on the agenda and I think
I don't the I believe all the
members were sent to
communication on this if there
are any issues with
communication please communicate
that with that Rebecca Martinez
but that the email and then the
office number.
And as far as committee and that
ten minutes.
One of the things we do try to
with the consistency is getting
our background set up and that
way we are.
For security reasons also as we
move forward with the.
With our meetings and I don't
know if any members have any
questions right away about the
agenda today we did have Senate
bill forty five it a cheesy
Pinos procurement students in
underserved areas and Senate
bill one eleven higher up to
Mexico licensed surveying
Attorney with that Senator Lopez
are there any objections to
having hearing those two bills
today.
No.
So we're okay with the agenda.
Yes madam chair.
Okay thank you.
And just a few of.
Things that.
Organizing is we don't have our
gavel to.
Put things in order in that
sense so please be mindful.
The.
The caring and going to the
chair.
On that and.
I don't know if there's been any
questions about the procedures
Everybody has at least been
through one committee meeting.
So far I think yesterday or
today.
Adam this happens to be my first
committee meeting.
Sure I'm sure that you of all
the following your lead and and
the other senior senators.
Okay
well thanks chair our meal.
So if I have a bill presented in
front of the committee you'll be
chairing the committee and in
that sense or in my absence and
then we go down the line if we
have to be out of the committee
here so that is role in that
manner and we're still in
organization waiting for like
forty five minutes.
Yes.
I'm wondering if this would be
an appropriate time to talk
briefly about some of the some
of the things that we talked
about for instance when you
renewed your education meeting
in terms of procedure and so
forth if you want to yes I just
real quickly when we're
listening to a bill I assume
authority will put the name of
the bill right where you see
circus zoom authority so that
way you'll know we what bill
we're discussing at the time and
then of course
all the bills the TIRS any
analysis can be found on the
legislative website and
I I think most most of you know
how to search for a bill if you
need assistance I'm happy to
walk you through it give me a
call and to and if you go to the
bill finder and insert the name
of the bill it'll take you to
the page in there you'll find a
PDF of the bill itself and the
barriers and any analysis
if we have amendments in
committee they will be scanned
and Arzu moderator will show the
amendment up on the screen up
for discussion purposes
if we have long amendments and
substitute bills
That could roll over into the
next hearing I just that pending
on the discretion of the chair
the agenda is will always be
available at least twenty four
hours more more I'll try to get
them out as soon as early as I
can
will send out copies in word
perfect we'll send it out in PDF
and then I'll also copy and
paste it into the text of the
email just for your convenience.
As you may have noticed on the
agendas that I sent out
we will always provide
information
To the public that the meeting
can be viewed via webcast at NM
Ellie G. L. I. S. dot gov and
then we'll also indicate that
all of our meetings are by
virtual zoom meeting with the
footnote at the bottom for
public participation to us if if
anyone in the public wants to
submit testimony on any
particular bill that we're
hearing there's a email address
at the bottom of that at the end
of work we're asking people to
send their name the entity that
they're representing the bill
number and what whether they're
for or against that bill and
then
and the deadline will be by
three o'clock the day prior to
the committee meeting I assume
authority will be then being
close copy contact with the
virtual meeting instructions.
Will
let's see I think.
Expert witnesses I'll always ask
whenever we get a new list of
bills to be heard I will contact
those senators and ask them for
names and contact numbers for
their expert witnesses so that
we can get them into the zoom
meeting and put them in the
waiting room until the Senator
has presented and we're ready to
hear testimony.
We'll do call on every built
just for zoom transparency.
roll call vote excuse me
that summarizes what I have
thank you.
Thank you for that and the well
our meeting times will be from
nine to twelve Tuesdays and
Thursdays as we get further into
the session if depending on the
work load we won't extend the
time past twelve it'll be a hard
stop at twelve but we might meet
earlier if needed be so eight
thirty eight o'clock if need be
depending on the workload of the
committee and the bills that are
referred to west so keep that in
mind to.
And.
I don't know that I don't think
there's any conflicts with the
scheduled time frame right now
and if you have any interests
are a.
That we would like the committee
to share our where we could
Depending on the workload any
updates from.
Department or a.
Special.
Considerations are issues in
your area please feel free to
present that to the committee
and we'll see what we can now
bring forward because that is
our our job did have some
discussion and debate on.
Issues.
So.
Any questions from the members
so far.
No.
For the transparency of the.
Committee and for the public
welcome to the public in those
that are viewing asked here and
keep that in mind that we are
publicly broadcast committee
even though we don't see all the
public
Basis on our screen here.
To be mindful of that and we
also did have a few technical
difficulties yesterday so
hopefully you don't have any
today and will be Ford but if we
do experience some technical
difficulties we will probably
take a break and.
Give it five minutes to.
Resume our see what yeah hello.
To resolve the issues and
hopefully on screen will be able
to have a whole screen that will
let the public know if we do
have technical difficulties that
we're still in progress but to
please be patient with us at the
time.
Thank you we're ready to go and.
I believe we have sent Tory T.
Z. Pino.
These are fairly short bills
that are up on the agenda today
so if there's no objection to
moving forward on the agenda.
We will move forward with the
Senate bill forty five preparing
math students in underserved
areas.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino for more
info madam chair and committee
members.
It's good to be with you this
morning morning however making.
You.
Madam chair and and committee
members Senate bill forty five
is is the bill that
Was the.
Endorsed by the inner
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee.
Hello that about senator do we
need to do roll call before we
start to
Here that the bills.
Just for record sake on having
us merry the membership of
Marion no you do not need to do
a roll call what she does is she
has an attendance sheet and she
will take attendance and if one
of you happens to leave the zoom
meeting at the time of a roll
call vote that person will be
excuse at that point and will be
voting so you kind of need to
stay around or let us know
you're coming back.
You know looking at it disappear
just for a few minutes okay so
but I know you don't need to do
that cause she'll know that all
of the committee members are
here.
Okay thank you all right sorry
replacing her shortly.
Okay okay okay Senator Ortiz can
I'm sorry go ahead thank you
madam chair at a the the the
purpose of this bill is to.
Prepared medical students to
work in the rural communities of
our state or in underserved
urban communities.
That is those areas of the state
that they have difficulty
attracting
practitioners.
It creates
an appropriation of two hundred
fifty thousand dollars to the
U. M. school of medicine.
And the idea is that they would
use those funds.
To prepare of medical students
through a series of the summer
programs where they go out to
work in the communities in
clinics were through experiences
on campus where they where they
are and bring in people who work
in the rural communities to
discuss the the advantages and
and and the the the good things
about working in rural
communities the whole point of
it is to try to expand the pool
of health care professionals who
are serving our our underserved
areas this money would replace.
There's been a federal grant
they're that's that's run out
this is an attempt at keeping
that program going.
We have a terrific need in the
state as you know to provide
health care professionals in our
rural communities.
And and with that I'll I'll I'll
stand for questions I think of
Mr Roddy is here from the
the primary care network and and
he might want to say a few words
about this bill as well madam
chair.
Members of the committee my name
is David Roddy.
Can you hear me.
My name is David Roddy and I'm
of the health policy director
The New Mexico primary care
association an organization I
directed for twenty years prior
to that I spent twenty years
working in rural health care in
New Mexico the run program is
absolutely an excellent
investment first I'd like to
thank the committee chairwoman
of the committee for the
opportunity to address you and
and to think the sponsor senator
to see Pino was been a champion
of so many bills of benefited
rural and underserved residents
of New Mexico to to access
health care of the
Representative program began in
two thousand and fifteen with
thirty fifteen students it now
has a hundred and thirty three
students including twenty nine
the students or graduate from
medical school and the now in
residency programs the program
was founded to give some
training and experiences to
medical students in rural areas
and underserved clinics you know
such as the homeless clinic and
in Albuquerque amount and first
choice clinic I provide some
training experiences mentoring
on the go to seminars and
workshops shops and conferences
they get students support they
need with each other and but
most importantly it helps to to
support and provide experiences
in rural communities with the
the physicians to be go out and
work in these clinics for weeks
or sometimes two weeks are there
that works are everywhere and
Shiprock Gallup Roswell Santa
Rosa from Dona Ana to Rio Reba
they work for at IHS clinics
tribal health facilities
federally qualified health
centers private rural practices
and it makes a tremendous
difference in that perspective
and I'll just give you out of
trying to bring from a give you
grief perspective but in
nineteen seventy four I
graduated from from college in
Massachusetts but.
This guy from Boston I was gonna
be a a black suit in the CPA
firm in Boston but I decided to
volunteer for year in rural New
Mexico and I end up working in
rural health care and the
experiences that I had by the
end of the year I want to
volunteer for another year and
and I have a it just changed my
entire life in perspective and I
can tell you working at likely
to get a familia for twenty
years subsequent to that we had
doctors come and visit doctors
like Mario Pacheco and and
Patrick Rivera they came through
and and and works as medical
students sometimes sophomores in
just for a week and they then
you know have great careers of
rural health and serving and
serve people so it's it's it's a
wonderful investments are is is
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino said it's
it's been recommended by the LHS
it's run by Dr Robert Williams
who was present at the LHS it
just S. as well so I I you know
will certainly stand for any
questions the investment is
terrific because we have this
shortage of people in these
areas and even if a couple of
people a year you know a turned
and and and going to the careers
of rural areas it's a it's a
fantastic return on investments
so again thank you for the
opportunity to make these
comments.
Thank you thank you senator
Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
Mr Roddy and.
Marianne.
The do we have any public
comment that we are aware of.
We can't hear you.
We can.
I thought all of you could hear
me from miles away.
We do not have anybody in the
waiting room for public comment.
Okay did we receive any emails
for against this bill.
No we did not.
Okay thank you so with that and
Senator Griggs I think we will
go forward with the because of
questions or comments from
committee members Senator
Griggs.
Thank you madam chair is just
always such a delight to get to
ask a Senator or PC penal
questions and more and in Jori
issues answers but
A couple of things I wish I was
reading our committee analysis
and it talks about the fact that
U. N. M..
Didn't ask for this this funding
is part of the process that they
go through so could you explain
to us how all this comes
together.
Madam chair and and Senator
Griggs.
I I really don't know why you
know you amendment didn't
included in in its list of
priorities.
It certainly is one that we've
heard in the past and we did not
funded last year.
This is an effort in trying to
get it funded this year and it
may be that that the University
of New Mexico had other
priorities
but I can assure you that that
that this money would would have
terrific pay our rural
communities in our state
the the.
The amount of money is so small
compared to some of the other U.
and M. priorities I suspected
probably just got moved down the
list of their.
The incentives the things that
they wanted to make sure got
done because they were they were
so much more
High profile and and being
involves so much more money but
at this point
I just think that that what
we've got here is an opportunity
for a relatively small amount of
money to leverage terrific
benefit for communities.
And thank you Senator I think
Mr Radhi made the statement and
and David nineteen seventy four
was a great time to graduate
from college so.
Is it is a good deal but at the
made the statement that it and
maybe it was you Senator that
the there been a federal grant
that wish this expired are
was it re re issued was that was
that grant in the same amount
doing the same saying or what
what was it.
I'll have to defer to Mister
Roddy on that I'm not sure the
size of that federal grant this
is what the doctor Williams
indicated would be as an amount
that.
Would permit the university
continue to the program but I'm
not sure about the size of the
federal grant.
Madam chair some of the greats
likewise I am not sure I do
believe that the grant was in
the amount of two hundred fifty
thousand dollars but I will ask
the doctor Williams to respond
to you directly I spoke with him
this morning and he
unfortunately you know missed
the deadline to to testify you
know to get into the waiting to
get on the on the bill but I
will ask him to communicate with
you directly some of the greats.
Thank you thank you miss right
thank you Senator
How many present I'm getting
some other information but I
just want to want to ask Senator
has this bill been introduced
numerous times in the past or or
just just recently.
Madam chair and and Senator
Griggs I am only aware of it
having been introduced last year
because I carried it last year.
And then of course we were in a
very.
We're in a situation where it
would have been funded last
year.
We would have.
The run afoul of our budget
problems right after the session
anyway but I think we the
committee heard the bill again
this summer and decided this was
something they really wanted to
to to.
Continue seeking so I'm only
aware of these two years as
having been involved in this.
Okay thank you thank you senator
did the the error interim
committee endorsement without
opposition.
Madam chair and senator grace
and that's right there was no
opposition to this.
Thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Griggs and we
have Senator Shendo.
Okay hold on.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator jerky subpoena.
Question I have it looks like
the.
This is this program maybe from
your expert witness is this
program for medical students
that are actually in medical
school at the moment or is it
part of a prep as well into the
medical field as a.
I am sure some of the some of
the Gendell this is a medical
students they can enroll as a
freshman first year medical
students you know for four years
our later on down the line but
it's it is for medical students
okay I know that the maybe this
is not the appropriate question
but I know that the university
started there be a.
Of medical program probably over
a decade ago.
What's the success of those
students you know I know the
whole thing was to grow our own
it's kind of a long term
investment how many of those
students are actually attend the
UNM medical school and how many
of those students that perhaps
would have graduated are
actually practicing in rural
parts of New Mexico
The building in New Mexico and
then no rural versus urban area.
Madam chair and and and Senator
Shendo.
The that be a in the program we
also heard testimony this summer
about that and I'm afraid I
don't remember the exact numbers
but I do remember the the the
overall impression that the that
the.
R. U. N. M. medical.
Officials who testified before
us again was that that's been a
very successful program because
they're they're recruiting into
the program
students who who are from the
small towns and and and and
communities of the state who
would otherwise not really have
probably thought of medicine as
an outlook as a career.
Opportunity and and so because
they come from the the loving
tends in the Espanola is in the
Deming's of this of the state
when they get to U. N. M. and
then have an opportunity to
be exposed to the medical
profession and the opportunities
involved in they get special
tutoring they have seminars in
the of summer experiences
they've they've been very
effective recruiting tools for
U. M. medical school and then to
graduates stay in their
communities so that has been a
very effective programs.
I think you're correct that.
It's been about ten years that
that started the first
graduating class at a medical
school was just and David might
correct me on this but I think
it was just four years ago.
So that they went through S.
freshman and then they went into
the the medical school completed
their medical education had to
go for residency then and and
now some of them have come back
and are working in the state I
don't know if David has any more
information about that
particular program which is
distinct from the one we're
talking about here but the two
are efforts at getting more
rural communities served by by
our young people who become
doctors.
Madam chair Senators Gendo I
like what I see not have numbers
regarding the BA and the program
but again I'm I'm office good
with the anecdote I have a
nephew and a niece
A Christian so lease was in the
B. A. M. D. program he is from a
ski New Mexico he graduated and
is now in his third year of
residency and the second needs
time you're right yes who is
from Espanola New Mexico is.
Was in the first graduating
class the BA and the it her
residency at Saint Vincent's and
is now working at.
The el Centro wholesaler in
Espanola so that's two for two
and in my family success.
And that that's been a wonderful
program I had the opportunity to
work with you know many years
ago.
No okay appreciate that thank
you madam chair and and that's
it for me I was just trying to
figure out the relationship
between those two programs thank
you.
Thank you senator Sando and we'd
have the vice chair.
Thank you madam chair and you
know one of the things that
we've realized especially in Rio
Arriba county is the lack of
health care providers in rural
areas so I did like reading this
bill introduction and seeing how
we want to help rural
communities and underserved
communities and so my question
of me are to what Senator Shendo
as well as is if we knew how
many graduates practice in
underserved communities we don't
know that yet but you might be
able to answer to more for me so
Senator to the Pino will every
medical students enrolled in the
U. M. medical program
participate in this program or
just medical students who might
have an interest in rural health
care.
Madam chair and.
Madam chair and and the Senator
how to meal I don't believe it's
for every medical student at
their it it's a voluntary
participation and so what you
get are.
Young people who know they want
to practice in rural areas
because they came from rural
areas but also others who may
come from urban made from
Albuquerque or Santa Fe Los
crucis but who are intrigued
enough to find out about this
because it does give them some
expansion of their businesses
and I think that's that's the
way it's designed is to kind of
the.
intrigue medical students in the
possibilities of of working in
in rural communities as primary
care doctors I mean that's one
of the other big budget the you
don't see neuro Sir urgency in
Espanola or in.
Lovington but you do have the
primary care doctor so those
medical students who are more
interested in family medicine or
pediatrics or or.
Primary care emergency room
they're the ones who would be
most intrigued into this program
I think.
Perfect.
Madam chair I think Mr Radhi
wants to say something as well.
Some of the Hummer I don't know
Hermio.
It's true that there's none of
the students will graduate from
this program have finish their
residencies but twenty nine of
graduated in twenty six of those
students chose the answer
primary care residencies and
other urgent shortage you know
residencies you know such a
psychiatry and what not that it
needed and you know what to
serve rural areas.
Thank you now one last question
Madam chairwoman and one
comments I'd like you to welcome
I'd like to welcome your needs
to the Espanola valley as a
doctor Mr Roddy and so we're
happy to have her serving in our
community and so my last
question will you amendment
works closely with underserved
communities in an effort to help
place these doctors back in
rural New Mexico.
Madam chair and I think Mr radi
can speak to that from his own
experience with working with you
and then.
Madam chair representative
Hermio I don't believe that UNM.
You know gets at the residency
level fortunately most of these
students in all our many these
so it's probably about half of
the students and doing
residencies at UNM but I don't
believe that this is like a
formal involvement in it and I
could be wrong of the one and in
placement more or less when
students are in their third year
of residency if it's a four year
residency they start getting
millions of office from
recruiters and headhunters and
various people so this program
has to do its job you know in
the in the early yes and and
plant that seed that that the
students you know have the
commitment and the desire to
work with the with with their
these folks.
And madam chair and senator I
would mention that on Thursday
your committee will hear of bill
and I hope Mr radi can come back
for that one as well Senate bill
sixty one.
That is a way to to use the loan
repayment as a way to attract
some of these residents back to
the rural communities it's a
it's a rural.
Clinic loan repayment program
for for practitioners.
Do you think you senator Ortiz
Y. Pino thank you Mr Reddy and
so no more questions madam chair
thank you.
Okay so Senator McKenna.
Thank you share Pinto and
senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
I I have to say I really applaud
legislation like this because I
know how dire New Mexico is.
To recruit medical personnel I I
remember talking to
To rate a nurse not too long ago
and this was before the pandemic
she said the Albuquerque
metropolitan area alone was
short thirty seven hundred
nurses.
and I know that it's been
difficult as well for us to
recruit and retain a medical
doctor so I I really applaud an
issue tips like this and I
applaud you Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino for the where with all to
replace the the federal outlay I
I do have a question however
I know the the importance of
certified nurse practitioners
and physician assistants and I'm
wondering does this program is
it open to them or is there
another similar program that
would help them of with under
certain areas in New Mexico
thank you.
Madam chair and and senator
McCain to that that is a great
question right I don't know the
answer to that when I wonder if
Mr Radhi does.
Whether he As an and then.
There's practitioners are are
involved in this program as
well.
But
Senator McKenna
I do not believe that is a
similar program for nurse
practitioners and physicians'
assistants and and one would
probably be useful.
The programs of course so much
shorter the the gently to test
the the three yes depending on
the discipline I I may be wrong
on that but I know that this is
been much more migrations of
specialties and and non primary
care you know
specialties but that's not as
valuable in the in the rural
areas such as you know we need
lots of in a certified nurse
anesthesiologists but but not
particularly helpful and you
know clinic in in northern Rio
Arriba County.
I thank you madam chair thank
you senator Pino and thank you
Mr
did it my pronouncing it right
Roddy that is Senator I'm here
madam chair members of committee
that is perfect okay thank you
and it sounds like you came to
New Mexico in the seventies and
you decide to stay right.
madam chair some of our Rio I
mean yeah so so Senator McKenna
I refuse extradition back to
Boston and I.
That's great.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Senator
McKenna and thank you senator
Ortiz Pino thank you Mr Robbie
for breaking this.
Bill Ford and.
Shedding some light about
underserved communities.
One of the things do you have
any other comments Senator
Shendo.
No no I I was if we're doing a
quick I was gonna make a motion
for the past but.
Whether it's okay so question.
The.
When we talk about allocations
from the state and funding from
the state and one of our I think
objectives from.
Well for me I guess and want to
speak for the rest of the
legislature is when we get
federal funding from the federal
government as far as in grant
form that is something that the
criteria of a grant has to be
met.
And it sounds.
Some of the comments made that
the grant was lost do you know
if it's because of the data that
was who who dropped the.
What was the reason and if there
was no reason are I think that's
one of the things that needs to
be addressed especially when we
talk about higher ed and when
they do receive some of these
requests is there very our
problem with the higher ed
maintaining these requests that
should be addressed.
Madam chair and and
you know I.
I really don't know the the the
circumstances around which the
grant and it I don't think it
necessarily should be inferred
from that that that there was
some failure in the program I
think that it could be simply a
question of the money that was
made available
No longer was available as part
of a lot of a and it
appropriation that ended or it
may have been a time limited
appropriation for three years or
five years sometimes those
requests have that kind of
Qualification on on that you you
get the money for three or five
years you show it is really
working in in your local
community or your state has to
pick it up and in this case I
don't.
This case I don't believe that
that that is what happened.
Thank you senator Ortiz Pena and
when we come up with COVID and
unprecedented time I believe the
state to take action to kind of
blessed the license saying for
medical student
So that we could get more people
to.
We.
Practice in New Mexico is do you
are you familiar with that.
Madam chair I I did hear that
that the part of the governor's
public health order was to
Facilitator or two and.
Speed up the process by which
medical students are able to get
into actual clinical work in
practice to try to increase the
manpower available for
responding to the COVID epidemic
pandemic
but I.
I don't know that I know about
the specifics to be able to give
you a.
The very helpful answer David
Roddy might be able to however.
Madam chair members of the
committee
again I I I would agree with
what Senator Tracy Pino that.
They've made steps to
facilitate.
The license saying you know
unfortunately and in times like
this everybody is competing for
people so if you know the
difficulty is that there is not
a lot of people that are looking
to move from one place to the
other the problem is more that
people are moving away from the
from the be coming health care
providers of these you know for
sure what time do it about the
dangers of the problems in their
life circumstances.
So this is not something that is
Going to address the media are
have the media perfect as far as
when we talk about the pandemic
and what is going to happen in
our shortages that might
possibly happen with funding am
I correct.
Madam chair I think you are
corrected what we're doing here
is is sewing.
The seeds of interest and and
and and trying to get people
thinking about working in rural
communities for when they
complete their residencies so it
it really won't wouldn't have
pay off in terms of people
showing up to work at a clinic
for a few more years but as we
build that that.
The pipeline the people of
medical students interested in
working in rural and underserved
urban areas it'll have benefit.
Very great benefit in a few
years.
Thank you senator and one of the
things and it's just like that I
relate this to what that
needs to see an education as far
as housing in our rural areas in
providing those little systemic
day lead.
The number of over your head and
having the utilities and even
what telehealth a broadband
throughout the state so that the
rule communities can have health
care verses when we talk about
this it seems pretty broad when
we just say a program that can
be implemented because we do
have you know some of the
medical people that have
graduated went out of state
because we were not able to keep
up accreditations with some of
our health care facilities which
comes out to administration and
who is running the health care
facility.
So those programs to the unit
there there's buy in on it so
that they do get their loans
repaid in that sense
So I think it just takes a
little more planning and stuff
and those are all the questions
I have I don't know if you want
to respond to that.
Madam chair just to say I think
you're right that that this
program by itself won't solve
the needs of rural clinics in
New Mexico it it's it's one
piece of what has to be a.
A complete package of of
incentives things like housing
as you suggested loan repayment.
The tax credits other things
that we we're trying to do too
to improve the health care for
rural New Mexicans it's all part
of the of the total package.
Thank you thank you are so
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and Mr
Roddy and do we have what's the
pleasure of the committee.
Senator Shendo a motion for the
bass.
Senator had a meal I second that
motion.
Okay so we have a motion for two
passed by Senator Shendo and a
second to the motion by vice
chair Leonhard mural and we will
do roll call.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator said yes yes Senator
Shendo yes Senator Hotmail yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have a due pass.
Thank you very much madam chair
and committee members very very
good discussion thank you.
Thank you thank you and thank
you for coming today and thank
you to our public that.
Now they're listening.
We'll both be back on Thursday
to so it's been good to see you
again.
Okay and your bill will be
moving on to Senate finance
right yes.
Okay so there thanks for this
Senate Bill.
When the Senate bill forty five
will be moved with the past will
be moved on to pledge at Senate
finance thank you thank you have
a thank you Senator Lopez.
For Senate bill one eight eleven
hired New Mexico license survey
or an attorney.
Thank C. Senator Lopez
there do we have any others on
with you back to you.
Are to Archuleta.
Is on Senator Lopez do we have
any other more.
Just to see to okay.
Thank you and the Senator Lopez
COVID.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm here to
present Senate bill one eleven.
which was endorsed by the Land
Grant Committee earlier this
past interim.
What this bill is actually
making an appropriation of
course to the department of
finance and administration for
the land grant council to hire
in New Mexico licensed
professional surveyor and
attorney who specializes in
property law and with me today
madam chair members of the
committee I have our through our
to let that who is the program
manager for the land grant
council at the university of New
Mexico and if I could madam
chair defer to Mr Archuleta.
Thank you madam chair actually
thank you madam chair members of
the committee good morning a
pleasure to be here with you
today again my name is our kids
are to let the in the program
manager I'm here for the New
Mexico Senate council we're
staff out of the university of
New Mexico and the purpose for
this legislation is to provide
some much needed resources for.
Land Grant community start the
state Land Grant our political
subdivisions under statute but
unfortunately they do not have
at this time a guaranteed
revenue stream so they're one of
the
Porter local governments are in
New Mexico on that don't have
access to resources most of them
will fall in which you would
consider tier one or tier two of
the stay audit required
reporting requirements so that
means they make less than ten
thousand dollars a year in
annual revenue most of them are
well below that line and so what
we do at the council we're state
agency tasked with providing
assistance alignment communities
I and one of the things that we
do provide is legal assistance
to Canadian land grants on the
of the a variety of different
issues ranging from encroachment
to maybe it's contract
negotiation for development of
some of that the economic
development options to try to do
on the common lands as well as
the need for surveys in terms of
protecting the common lands at
the still have from
encroachments and even just
reviewing surveys that are being
done in properties are adjacent
to the common lands to ensure
that there are two treatments
and so these are both a real
challenges on that these
communities have faced on they
really don't have the resources
to support that so what the
council has done is we we
dedicate a portion of our annual
budget towards hiring a
contracted attorney to New
Mexico legal aid at this time on
that we've also recently in the
past years brought on the
contracted a professional
surveyor our resources are tall
enough to provide for full time
so what this legislation would
do is provide the resources for
us to be able to fund over five
years to actually have full time
on staff Attorney an official
survey or they can provide
assistance to these communities
hi this bill was originally
endorsed by the committee two
years ago and it was kind of the
last.
request of senator Carlos the
sentence you kinda had the idea
of of funding it this way and
and so on we're thankful that
the committee has endorsed again
this year and and now stand for
any questions.
Thank you.
One thing Senator Lopez Mr
Gillette did you send out some
information.
With this I think there I don't
know if it was you are with the
bill we had before was senator
Ortiz Pino that email at seven
out with some power point staff
which you guys.
And the manager okay okay just
want to make sure it might have
been for the next the agenda
item.
Senator.
Are actually protected do we
have any public comment.
I'm sorry Marian.
We had one person that
indicated that they were against
this particular bill.
And then I believe we have we
have some people in the.
We do not have anybody else in
the waiting room it was just one
email indicating that they did
not they were opposed to this
particular bout.
Okay thank you Merion and we
will entertain questions from
the committee vice chair Hermio.
You madam chair Senator Lopez
good to see you today have a
question for you and for Mr to
let that with every land grants
be able to utilize the services
of the attorney of the surveyor
in district five we have a
number of land grants but I'm
sure could utilize the services
and I want to make sure they
would have access to the
attorney of the surveyor.
Madam chair representative how
do we yes so the land grants
that are eligible are those land
grants are political
subdivisions of the state so it
there statute those are under
forty forty nine one article one
and and then also forty nine
article four those are the
political subdivisions New
Mexico right now there's
approximately twenty five land
grants that have that status and
because of the New Mexico
that dedication Clause of the
New Mexico situation we're only
able to help those land grants
so that there are some of the
land grants that are organized
as sort of private entities we
would be able to assist those
ones at this time but if they
were to kind of come under the
the statutes as a political
subdivisions they would be
eligible that.
Perfect thank you that was my
only question Madam chair.
Thank you senator Hermio Senator
Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and and
real quick you all I guess what
you're looking at is about two
hundred two hundred thousand
dollars a year the analysis
indicates that we have and we
have spent but about oh goodness
forty thousand dollars on that
legal aid and twenty one
thousand dollars on on the
server at wouldn't it be or on.
Why would we want to to allocate
this amount of money when
seemingly contracts fully we can
go out when we need him to and
funded probably a lesser amount.
So madam chair Senator thank you
for the question so the amounts
that are funded right now our
orchard restricted by our budget
so we actually have a really
long list of
projects for both legal services
online consider requested legal
services from the council as
well as a long list of projects
pulling answer requests serving
services and so the both the
surveyor in the legal aid
contracts don't meet the need in
terms of actually providing
services to everyone we get a
really great deal in terms of
legal aid at this time for I
think that the rates about a
hundred twenty five dollars an
hour for legal services so you
know that's that's that's a
great great deal for us but even
at that rate that doesn't amount
to a whole lot of hours of
service in terms of and so when
we have right right now we have
to be.
Pieces of litigation are going
out with different land grants
and so that it's a lot of that
attorney time so we do have a
gap in terms of services for for
legal needs are being met I'm
and then in terms of the
surveyor that twenty thousand
was allocated last year and that
was probably you know we comment
to us getting we got three
projects done but it's it's so
cool it's like a very part time
server you're right just because
of the contractual lease for the
services so we do feel that it
would be cheaper in the long run
if we had folks on staff on the
could provide that work for long
term contracts that would allow
for us to sort of engage in a
contract that would be for a
full time attorney they can
dedicate themselves to just land
grant is very work full time
survey or they could dedicate
themselves just to to serving on
some of the issues that we have
and I think this five year
period would sort of really
clear some of the the log jam
that we have had created a of
these communities that are in
need but we're not able to meet
those services at this time.
You madam chair and Mr Archuleta
I'm I guess when I when I look
at it still I'd I'd prefer even
an approach where you you
allocated money to be able to
hire contractual stuff as you as
you needed instead of hiring
hiring them directly.
And putting them on staff but
The those are my comments should
just it looks it looks like
there might be better ways but
you know I wouldn't part of the
the interim so I didn't I didn't
see all in here all.
So thank you madam chair thank
you Mr credit thank you senator
and congratulations on your new
position.
Thank you Senator Griggs and
look at I have a Senator Shendo
did you have a question.
Of the yes just a Madam chair in
the is that they are Mr
Archuleta representative.
Okay okay yes what what are some
of the the the the issues and I
had the same concern you know
that the Senator Griggs had you
know we're asking for a million
dollars and only sixty one
thousand you know has been spent
both on the server you're in the
the attorney's from I think one
of the one of the years I'm not
sure it was last year for but
anyway what what are some of the
issues that that these that the
entities are are dealing with
maybe gives an example.
Sure so madam chair Senator
Shendo you know right now we
actually has a mention terms
legal service we have services
we have a couple of cases that
are being litigated all one of a
relates to the some property
dispute that took place are
there it's taking place on some
common lands at the land grant
that are being cleaned by
private individual and so they
were going through that process
of you know affecting the land
grants sort of claim and and and
disputing this other claim
that's being made on that's one
example that happens quite a bit
we also have a land and it's
being assisted with through the
judicata process on many land
grants have on their common
lands a common waters such as a
communal Stockwell's for grazing
of livestock and so they also
have to our subject to going
through that education process
so providing them with legal
assistance and services to do
that we also have some land
grants in need assistance with
negotiating contracts for
example we have one Land Grant
that's working on developing a
solar I mean a wind energy
project and so kind of going
through and and making sure that
their interests are being
protected in lease agreements
that are being proposed by the
project proponents so those are
the kind of the you know the
different gambit of things that
we were seen right now in terms
of legal services in terms of
service Services it's really a
couple of things it's either.
Getting good surveys on the
common lands one of the things
that happened for nearly all the
land and communities when they
were initially patented by the
US federal government
recognizing their claims there
was a survey done of the
exterior boundaries and then
that's the last through that was
officially done for the land
grant so as common less of sort
of been carved out conveyed for
various reasons or lost through
the back taxes delinquency
because language still pay taxes
on the common lands the service
have not been completed and so
the only services are done
internally are typically at for
a private individuals will be
for a survey also that has
resulted in folks insulating
maybe their their actual claim
that's tied to their deed and so
this would allow for us to serve
existing common lands as well as
review surveys that are done
adjacent to the two common lands
are within the exterior
boundaries to ensure that those
surveys are are correct in that
they're not encroaching on the
comments.
Appreciate it another question I
have I don't you know I'm not on
the interim committee for land
grants but I know that the this
in a lot of the land grants are
are you know also adjacent to in
a lot of the tribal lands as
well are there any
Dispute state you're aware of
with the surveys or any issues
that land grants that are also
issues with any of the the
tribes in on in those areas.
Up Madam chair representative
Shendo at this time there are
I'm not aware of any active land
grants that have on any of
boundary disputes in terms of
their patented boundaries and
then the boundaries of of the
adjacent or nearby up or try I
do know that there are some
areas for example in B. L. M.
has a what's known as the
buffalo tract which is just a
little bit north of plastic dust
and that's an area that the San
Antonio that's what this is
outside of the pandemic
boundaries it's kind of the
historic boundaries that they
have expressed an interest in
and so have some of I think
something on a Pueblo as well as
some believe the pueblo and I
know they've been in discussions
with each other and and with the
B. L. M. about you know the
potential for use and sharing of
that space but those are all you
know really related to the
federal management of those
lands because they're the right
now they go on to the federal
land management but I'm not
aware of any any disputes
between a land grant in a.
Fiber up of local in terms of a
boundary dispute.
So so so so so those kinds of
issues that you just described
now that's more of a federal
issue of and it's not even
though that there's a of a land
grant they will need so those
one of those but that type of
stuff would not be eligible or
will be eligible for you know
resolution of any of these
disputes or of madam chair
etcetera etcetera that really
that's more of a of the policy
issues so it really wouldn't be
a legal issue that we would take
on typically the legal issues
really to relate to sort of
direct action that would be more
of a sort of you know we've
we've for assistance to the
policy discussions around that
in in you know in that area but
when it comes to actual sort of
disputes on their typically
between private parties on that
are sort of cleaning common
lands within within a land grant
that's what we we have typically
seen
There's some issues that come up
sometimes when there's a common
road for example where it's been
a road it's been using it's part
of the common lands and then the
county maybe abandons the rotor
doesn't I'll keep the road and
an individual maybe tries to
close the road and claim as part
of the private property you know
those are the kind of things
that we see where the community
says a that that really is going
to be closed and it's gonna cut
off our access to to the forest
on that so we kind of go access
the for service properties that
are surrounding our community or
how we access other sets of
common lands on that so those
are typically what we see it's
it's more internally within the
communities.
Okay appreciated the thank you
madam chair and thank you Mr are
slim.
Thank you senator passionate LOL
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chair of Pinto and
Thank you Senator Lopez and Mr
Archuleta for being with us
today so Senator Shendo
really touched on the first
question I had and and that is
that there is any distracted
disputes with
D. I. A.
or you know other Indian lands
and so so Mr chair you said not
that you're aware of.
Okay and I'm so glad that you
mentioned
That the buffalo tract area you
think they're that's part of
some contention is that am I
accurate about read re saying
that up madam chair circuit I
would say that it's a
contentious area I just know
that it's an area where there's
multiple folks including our non
tribal folk for there's like the
there's some folks that are
interested awhile our it kind of
stopped being some of the gravel
operation going on there from
environmental community that
just have an interest in sort of
how that public land is is used
and what are the uses on it and
so I know that the the land
grants have expressed an
interest because of their one of
the districts there the regional
sports settlement actually still
part of that property so some of
the the some of the old sites
were there and so they do have a
an interest and senator
preserving some of that but I
know that there's also an
interest by some of the tribes
in that area for four years well
you know that there is subject
to the management plan by BLM
and the the real political field
office is been working on a
management plan for that area
for several years it and it kind
of stopped within you with the
past administration under the
trump administration and I
understand is going to go back
and start reviewing it again but
really nothing nothing happens
in terms of uses until the
approve that management plan so
I know that it was set for up
for disposal in that last plans
going does have a disposal
authority my understanding in
the current plan is it it's it's
going to be removed off the
disposal list and there is
actually act legislation at this
time that's going to be
reintroduced by Billy senator
Heinrich that would remove all
of the mineral rights from any
future disposal by that by the
United States just to kind of a
curb some of the concerned about
active mining for gravel pit
operations there.
Yes very good Mr Taylor and I'm
I'm pretty familiar with the the
operations you just mentioned
because of of that's that's my
it's within my district and
because it's in my district our
chair and vice chair
and because I'm a freshman.
I'm.
Do I have to do I put a pause on
what I decide because there's
possibly an area in dispute you
in my district I just want some
advice on this.
You so you don't have a problem
with the bill it's just the
issue with in.
Because there's a it you think
there's an issue within your
district yes and
And you know I I always follow
my gut and my gut saying ha I
wonder if I need to put special
consideration about
participating in this vote
because.
Of a possible conflict.
Possible conflict or you with
drawing your at with the color
drawing your band.
What's the word Senator Shendo I
know there's for recusing
yourself I mean you don't have a
reason though but I.
I think what you're.
The issue you probably haven't
researched for some.
And then go from there
but it should from the FIR and
analysis you can talk to and the
analyst
And try to maybe if you feel
that the bill needs to be
amended
then in the next committee you
could ask somebody to amend it.
That's a member of that
committee but to if you don't
have any.
Problem with the bill and
there's not really much she can
do right now besides up both are
at your you don't have to
my correct the the other thing
we could do I mean I know that I
I mean I haven't really looked
at all the issues I know that
this is the first time I think
this bill has come to to at
least this committee and I mean
you you know we could always
table and and get for the
information and and once we have
more information move along or.
It will lead detained the
questions from the committee and
then when we decide and then
we'll decide on action after
we're done with the committee
Madam okay Senator Griggs.
I mean sorry excuse me senator
Sanchez hasn't had stepped good
Senator Sanchez.
Thank you
just with Mr Greg's early what
hits up madam chair thank you
Mrs Lopez thank you for bringing
the bill and I have a question
for Mr Archuleta.
I see with the numbers you gave
us currently you you know we're
using three hundred twenty hours
of service for legal fees per
year.
And you're thinking that it's
going to be you know you're
asking for
the two hundred thousand which
put you to about sixteen hundred
hours of legal services for the
year you think it's going to
double in the next five years
four times legal services that
you're gonna need.
That money is.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
senator Sanchez yes so we do
like I said we are currently
underfunded in terms of the the
water resources that were able
to put for legal services
when can we look at that the
cost if we were to do this
through through an actual hired
attorney and kind of looking at
what the rates are we do try to
look at sort of the kind of that
we have to follow the rates for
example you went and has if we
get to the university we
continue the contract here we
have to follow with sort of
those rates in terms of the
employee plus you know the the
budget portion cost if we were
to do it to a contract most
definitely in terms of the
amount of work that's all out
there that we're we act actually
sort of put on pause we do try
to work with like the UNM
university Mexico has a a lot
clinic actually sources and I'm
a lock on it that we try to
refer some land grants to to get
assistance and and they're able
to provide some limited support
but in terms of the really
meeting the need that's out
there in the demand we're we're
far short of that at home at
this time.
So currently with the numbers
you gave us.
Your with the forty thousand a
year legal fees you're still
getting a deal around one twenty
five an hour.
That Madam chair Senators
correct script.
Okay thank you.
Thank you senator Sanchez and
the Senator creeks.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to go back to Senator
McKenna is concerned and I guess
the only the only person that
we've got in on the panel that
is close to having a law degree
is Center Lopez
but it doesn't look to me the
light it's a it's a conflict
because there's not there's no
personal gain.
That that Senator McKenna is
obtaining through that and
Senator Shendo as well so sure
Lopez I mean would you care to
care to comment I mean I don't
want to warm the body jump out
there and get in trouble because
of of something but it certainly
doesn't look like it's a a
conflict of interest that would
keep you from voting on the on
the issue.
And madam chair Senator Griggs
and Senator McKenna usually for
refusal on a vote either in
committee on the floor is if you
have a particular financial
interest if your vote is going
to assist in a contract you have
or family holdings that you may
have a within that area but if I
may say also Senators
Madam chair Senators is that
this bill doesn't it's just to
specifically asking for monies
to go to the land grant council
office at UNM to assist in us
providing more services so that
there is nothing that I would
see madam chair Senators that
unless you have again a
financial interest in the land
that is surrounding
at that what you've mentioned
but again the bill doesn't
necessarily touch on that this
is for the greater good of of
the other councils the council's
work with the land grants all
around the state.
Thank you thank you Senator
Lopez and anything further
Senator Griggs.
Thank you senator thanks.
Anymore comment by the rest of
the members Senator harm you.
I was just a comment madam
chair.
Senator Lopez I did hear from
the by the law meshed out just
Land Grant in district I could
read the bill and think it's
important that this bill go
through because they talked
about how expensive legal and
survey fees could be on a land
grant and how this would limit
it you levy eight that financial
burden on land grants and it's
time to do surveys or if they
are in need of legal assistance
so I wanted to pass that on but
again came from the but the
lowest I'm just land grants
thank you.
Thank you bye staff meal.
Any other comments from the
committee.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chair woman I'm and
thank you Senator Lopez and
Senator creek Senator how to me
of for the input
I would like to confer with.
The appropriate party because I
also know that I have to be
careful because of my part time
job in the the representative's
office I got clear
direction from the house ethics
office that I be sure not to
introduce a third party when it
comes to dealing with federal
issues and I know the buffalo
tract area.
has been.
Is it is identified in one of
the representatives of
legislative issues
and so I just I just want to
have that extra.
Extra check before I participate
in a vote.
Thank you thank you senator
recommend them yeah he can you
do what you need to do so we're
we're not to.
Acting on any toes here any
other comments.
No I do have a couple of the
questions we talked about
property law specializing in
property law.
And because this is the Indian
Affairs Committee are we going
to extend that and also said
that assume that even though
there's no conflict or.
Dispute with between them and
indigenous tribes that we would
also assume that that property
law includes the.
Knowledge of Indian lands.
madam chair the
That that language was actually
something that Legislative
Council Service kind of put in
what would we account
additionally and the question is
really just for up front
attorney and it when we see
where the there's a benefit for
journey can specialize a
property because a lot of the
issues related to property law
but most definitely what we want
is an individual who is versed
in understanding the issues that
relate to so our communities and
so this is specific to property
at also we have a issues
relating to water water rising
mention before terms of
education that's why we
currently partner with the
contract with you Mexico legally
because they do have a land and
waters Division that's able to
provide us some some assistance
and issues that we have I
definitely know that it is
important for a community sister
understands tribal law and and
so you know what we would hope
to be able to do is also not
just utilize attorney on staff
on contract but continue our
relationship with the University
of New Mexico natural resources
law clinic they also have a a
try tribal clinic that they can
confer with and then there was a
another piece of legislation
that passed last year that's
just seeking and needing funding
on the created a program for
third year law students to get a
loan forgiveness for their
thirty year if after upon
graduation date work for a firm
thank that a nonprofit
organizations such as something
like New Mexico legally they can
provide assistance to Land Grant
acequia and colonias community
so New Mexico and so if if that
if if that were to be funded
properly and and and we were
working with law school and sort
of put in a fight how we can do
that then that would provide an
opportunity for you know what
New York attorneys coming out of
law school to can understand
work and some of these issues
similar to to the what was
discussed earlier in the
committee so that rural health
bill would be similar that would
provide them opportunities to
work in some of these rural
communities these issues and it
kind of sets a cap on how much
they can make and after working
for two years in order to.
It that thirty year of law
school for given we're hoping
that that'll provide a better
understanding for attorneys in
the future judges on sort of
some of these complex issues
relating to these traditional
communities in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman because
online that twenty one year it
states that a higher one New
Mexico licensed professionals
bear and so are we also assuming
that the one attorney that's
going to be hired is going to be
at the New Mexico licensed
attorney.
madam chair yes I've I believe
so again this is a so it's kind
of the way that Legislative
Council Service crafted the bill
and there may have been some
specific need to sort of
indicate that they're a licensed
professional serving New Mexico
but of course we would also have
to hire an attorney who's
licensed through the bar here in
New Mexico to practice.
Thank you and when we say
professional and then you're
saying that they need to be
advised by UNM
higher ed.
It's hardly sounds like you were
saying a professional that would
do that it seems like we would
it would be the other way around
where they're teaching us about
it and putting forth some
advisory legislation if
necessary to that we can access
the to advise us in the sense of
resolving some of these issues
that there's issues with our
legislation.
Our state just madam chair
that's correct and we we would
hope to hire somebody who's that
are actually a practicing
attorney with some experience
obviously they can actually
provide some of that and if we
continue relationship that's
where we kind of see beneficial
where they can service and
helping some of these upcoming
law students to understand that
but then it's also you know
there are areas that some
attorneys that the people
specialize in an area sometimes
you need to kind of seek advice
of other attorneys in terms of
like how you know how does this
work we've also been able to do
to to our contract attorney now
we've had issues to investigate
sometimes just because a lack of
resources they've been able to
get assistance from the law
clinic where the some of the
students have been able to do
some of the research and get it
back understanding look at areas
of the law and then they can
pass on to our contract attorney
who can that sort of look at it
with their specialization is a
yeah this is going to work for
you know this is going to be
appropriate for us so it really
is kind of a a process but
definitely we want to have
someone who's experienced it has
that the knowledge in all the
areas that are that are
necessary to sort of be
successful for community.
So this is our some should that
the whatever of services that
are provided by you and them
will also be compensated.
madam chair I'm not exactly sure
what you mean in terms of
District we hired this lawyer
and then you're saying they
consult with the U. N. M. so
we're sitting this money that we
put towards them also trickle
down to those.
I miss our whoever's helping I I
understand madam chair no so the
work that we do with the clinic
that clinic operates and but
what the council does do is we
we provide like up four hundred
dollars a year she that the
clinic charges the charge I
think like fifty dollars for new
clients and so the council gives
them about four dollars a year
to cover the cost of new clients
that come in and that's just
like an advocate help will be
for paper and stamps and that
kind of stuff but apart from
that do the U. N. M. I. natural
resources law clinic is a free
clinic but they're they're just
limited by how many cases they
can take on in any given year
based on the number of students
that they have assigned to the
clinic and and what what the
lotus the supervising attorney
can sort of take on and so those
services that we kind of partner
with them on that is a Canadian
cost it's just they're limited
in terms of their ability to
participate in every and
everything we do so that's why
we kind of have to.
Because the lack of of resources
that we have we we try to do the
best we can to figure out where
we can get service needs met but
if we had a full time attorney
obviously there may be some
stuff that we would continue to
partner with them on just to
continue to grow that knowledge
base but our hope would be that
we can take a lot of a lot more
on in house and be approved by
the services directly.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Mr arbitration process in place.
madam chair and arbitration in
terms of of before you go into
litigation are needing a lawyer
as far as when you tell a
complex of the common land just
arbitration process in place to
so madam chair not going into
yeah and it just depends madam
chair obviously the the goal is
to always try to settle these
things before they actually end
up in court so we do do a lot of
that work will try to bring sort
of the different communities you
know whatever the differences in
terms of the issue to try to
solve that issue and reach
settlement prior to to actually
going to court just because it
you know it increases the cost
and the number of hours and it
needs to be dedicated to that so
that's definitely a priority to
try to get as much of the stuff
resolved without going to court
as possible because litigation
just costly.
Do you have any data on that
about how many of those cases
are going to arbitration instead
of litigation.
So madam chair not not any like
hard data but I can tell you
just based on the on the work
that we do because the council
approves sort of work that can
be done and I would say that
of all the the case is that the
that we put before our our
contract attorney I would say
that at this time maybe three
out of ten have ended up in
litigation on the other seven
have just been sort of services
that have been provided that of
with that of and some of them
don't necessarily require lead
litigation because someone might
may simply be a like I said a
review of of a contract lease or
the review of.
Some question that they have in
terms of you know is this what's
the interpretation of this you
know and so a lot some of some
of its just and legal advice it
hasn't actually been resulted in
the need for education at all.
In these conflicts as their
timeline deadline on it like you
say this is a thirty day process
are a six months or what do you
unfortunately no that I think
that are twenty one will be like
that just because they could put
some stuff to rest but you know
as things sort of developed it
just depends and and training so
what we do is we can have a list
of the different projects that
they can can work on and then
there may be times when there's
litigation that requires that
they do a brief that's going to
take up you know this month for
them to work on on on that and
then they'll be a little for you
know six to eight months for the
courts not doing anything and so
then they'll work on some of
these other projects and sort of
giving advice and some of those
can be resolved with a simple
phone call and putting them in
the right direction some of them
may take a little bit more
investigation so I really just
depends I'm so you know basis
usually they can kind of stay
open and then until until the
the resolution has been reached.
Okay thank you Mr Gillette at
thank you for all their.
To some this and thank you
Senator Lopez for being in the
sport do we have any motion by
the committee.
I make a motion to pass.
We have a motion to pass by vice
chair Hermio do I have a second.
We do not have a second motion
to pass so
the table the table that
I like to make a motion to table
this bill to get for the
information so that we can get
clarification on how we proceed.
Okay so we'll put it back on the
agenda later.
In that as we go through the
process and
Senator you.
Yes Senator Lopez no.
Yes ma'am this is Mariann a
table motion is a debatable and
we do have to take a roll call
vote.
To take okay well if you want to
just.
Remove that table like motion
if if in fact for the Senator
center Shendo may have wanted to
do was just possibly roll this
ball bill over to your next
meeting with more information.
and or you could do with the
tabling motion I'm not exactly
sure what Senator.
Exactly talk about rolling it
over and Senator Shendo is
talking about tabling at.
What is the pleasure of the
committee Senator Shendo.
No I was a.
It seems to me that there's more
information that that needed I
know that I I'm not on the on
the Land Grant Committee I I
like to have more information I
know that the senator I think
Brenda McCann also certain
issues that she's got a dress so
of the maybe we've you know
service table and maybe rolled
over on to the next committee
and then we can have more
information on.
Okay.
Yes I think you are if you are
rolling over that's certainly
your your
might solely.
Roshan.
Yeah Senator Shendo wants to
table the motion tabled the bill
I think he needs to table it's a
to a specific time or mentors
tabling motion does does a lot
of damage to the bill so I don't
I don't know if you've Center
Lopez or or you guys really want
to do that.
Show you measures were rolled
over and and I think we'll be
we're we're certainly.
Supported related over to get
more information to make the
right decision.
Okay hi Jen that for next.
Meeting is that full so we'll
probably well we're Littler but
it'll probably be in jail maybe
next week.
Senator Lopez that's okay.
And I'm sure and I appreciate I
know there are some questions
that senator McCain and his to
have answered I was certainly
very appreciative if you could
roll the bill over and so your
questions are answered and madam
chair Senator Shendo has some
additional questions if you
could let me know please so that
we could try and have a
resolution to some of your
questions also.
Okay so Senator McKenna did
Senator Shendo will communicate
with the committee when they get
there questions answered and
then we'll let Senator Lopez
know when we will hear this bill
again on and put it back on the
agenda as we roll it over.
At is that okay with membership
of any more comments or
questions by members with bill
Senator Lopez arms start to let.
No thank you Senator Lopez thank
you Mr Archuleta for bringing
this forward and that educating
us about the land grants and
stuff and then we'll move
forward thank you guys have a
great day.
And.
On the agenda the Senator John
Pinto memorial film fund and
with this there is
There is a recommendation by the
governor and her budget to have
the film Fund.
Funded again but with an
increase in funding and.
We have the our and we're done
said our director but in Mexico
Film plan to give us an update
on that to let you guys know how
well we did thank you for
joining December and.
Are you ready are you connected
and we can proceed as.
Yes thank you so much chair
person Pinto it's great to see
all of you here today
yeah what I thought I would do
is just give a quick summary of
this program and then I do have
if it's okay with you
chairperson Pinto to share a
quick video showing some of the
participants.
Yes and I'll be Michael that we
do have a hard stop at twelve so
go head and the.
Okay thank you so much
Let's start here the indigenous
filmmakers content creators and
indigenous stories and
characters as we all know remain
vastly wrecked agency
represented under represented
and in some cases invisible in
the film into
across the.
in twenty twenty the Senator
John into funds
as special appropriation to the
New Mexico film division of the
economic to the development
department supported native
American filmmakers and projects
and the special appropriation
was in the amount of a hundred
thousand dollars the fund
promoted twenty native native
American film projects led by
native filmmakers of New Mexico
in a pre production production
and post production this program
program helped propel in career
and project development and help
to move the needle toward a more
diverse film and TV landscape in
New Mexico.
Filmmakers were required to be
registered members of one of the
tribes or pueblos of New Mexico
and applications opened in
January of twenty twenty and
closed in June of twenty twenty
and in total we ended up having
thirty six applicants
and then for twenty twenty one
funds would go toward the
promotion of native American
filmmakers and film projects
again including but not limited
to training programs education
workforce development career
development as well as other
efforts to promote diversity in
the about Vance meant of native
American filmmakers and
projects.
the the review committee from
last year's program was quite
impressive we had a four member
committee all experienced
filmmakers writers producers
directors or all three the
assisted in the selection
process and also provided
guidance to the filmmakers and
all of this the review committee
was comprised of native American
filmmakers and then I also have
a list of the native American
filmmakers who did participate
in this program if you'd like I
can read that and then thank
you.
Amber I think the committee was
sent the R. jump in total of
what you wish what you sent to
me I believe the committee merry
and went off line there to
verify that it was sent the
committee members receive that.
On the John okay we'll have that
sent to them but there is a some
information on that so we can
have that sent to them.
After the meeting okay good
right
and then finally the required
submission materials for
application was a bio or CV
resume current or previous work
samples are project information
such as you know that the
logline the treatment the
artistic statement in the
distribution plan as well as a
list of funding and grants
received to date in two letters
of support
And then I will go ahead and
share the video chair women's
Pinto if that's okay.
Yes.
Make them can you put that four
thank you.
Our system.
Okay can you all see my screen.
Yes okay here we go.
The primary interviews momentum
in support to continue our
production.
And I just want to say that I've
been able to.
Finally received actions that
is.
Story to people about.
Try not to let that go and move
forward.
Even if you're not native anyone
furniture medic time in their
life can relate to that.
Maker.
Right now.
We submitted an application to
secure funding to complete post
production on the film.
I'm happy to say that next week
some listeners to hear case
studios here in Albuquerque.
Celebrex done on the phone with
something I would not be
possible without the funding.
Accent became increasingly
likely.
In the number of COVID cases in
America is beginning to search.
So the divide.
In two days with the U. haul it
Dolly.
Packard plant chicken.
The end of.
It is straight to my childhood.
This funds has.
Completed project over to my and
this was called marketing.
And the production team myself
the director the cast and crew
are deeply appreciated the the
civil war this would never have
happened it was the spark that
really need to happen to start
the production of this film and
my career will feel some of
these powerful impact for women
that are behind Mr missing
murdered indigenous women and
men specially in New Mexico so.
I'm very grateful.
And I'm proud to the recipient
and it was quite an amazing
individual and a lot of that is.
His legacy will live on.
My name is Melissa Henry helped
me create free educational
movies for New Mexico's
children.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Do we have any
Questions or comments from
committee.
Okay so what I was thinking
because we do have a
recommendation by the governor
and the if there are no
objections that I would like to
have a letter drafted I don't
know if we would object to.
Just having me sign it on behalf
of the committee or the whole
committees in support of a
letter being drafted are few
individual and would like to
sign it.
We could Senator should I have a
question madam chair was curious
I know that you know on you know
you're up in the bill and so I'm
just curious whether it where
why there wasn't a bill
introduced to increase as we to
others I'm just curious what
what the dynamics of this
decade.
What what for this was at first
we put it on the agenda was to
update the committee about the
fund and that was up on the
governor's.
Budget and so to support
as far as if the committee
members felt in support to
support the the fund and if
there is increase in funding I
believe it's fifty thousand and
that's really in due to the
COVID.
Criteria to help supplement some
of them completing their
projects because they did have
to do a little more and it it
did increase the cost of them to
kind of start projects or
secretary still projects so
there was a proposal from the
department to LESC on the
increase in funding in our and I
do not.
I did not get the feedback from
LFC if that was in their
recommendation but it is in the
governor's race a budget
recommendations.
So.
I think we did was to protest to
this idea
that'd probably still drop a
bill the table it.
If it does go for it so we can
go from the LFC origins have.
A letter drafted saying that
the.
Who's in support of the.
But it would be drafted by that
committee secretary or maybe we
I I disagree that project.
The and I think it's a great
project I was just curious as to
you know the process I know that
LFC does their recommendation
executive there's a
recommendation and then of
course the House Appropriations
and and and the committee in a
debate that and then we vote on
the budget and and usually even
even if it's a LESC of or
executive recommendation
sometimes built our job
sometimes or not but in this
case what you're asking us madam
chair is if we're in support of
it is to perhaps just a letter
from the committee in support of
the of of the increased support
for the funding is that yes.
Yes and it would be sent to the
members of the committees and
then to the governor all those
involved to that approved the
budget.
That good senator Griggs.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and amber is this I guess and
I'm I believe I'm understanding
the the chair correctly I mean
there's already funded in the
the film offices budget and
we're we're just been asked to
say that we're going to support
the inclusion even though
there's an increase but we're
supporting the inclusion of a of
this program and have it
continue in your budget is that
is that what we're doing amber.
I thank you hi Senator it's
great
We this is not already included
in our budget for twenty twenty
one so we are asking as as chair
Madam chair Pinto mentioned this
is in the governor's executive
budget recommendations a special
appropriation for twenty twenty
one in the amount of a hundred
and fifty thousand.
And madam chair amber it was a
hundred thousand last year.
Correct yes okay and and and
madam madam chair we is this is
is not in the LFC is budget.
I did not get feedback on that
yet that was are not.
Okay madam madam meeting I know
that would set in research
process supports.
In yes good to each if it's not.
If it's not in their budget and
it's not in LFC it it almost
looks to me like we need an
appropriation bill to our to be
sure it goes in there.
I don't I don't I don't know for
sure is that right but a I'd
hate for to get lost because all
we do is Shendo send a letter.
I think it would be the better
approach to doing appropriation
I know I know Senator Shendo
would just love to do that and
that mandated get it there.
I do have a bill drafted
but we were hoping to avoid the.
The the process but we do have a
bill drafted so but I was trying
to hoping in time and in the
manner of time and not having a
little bit of time on our agenda
to bring it forward our have
some support I'm already in
process for it so.
We will see a bill.
Entirely I think since I haven't
gotten
anything back from LFC at.
Thank you madam chair I just I'm
I know that I imagine the
committee supportive of the of
the effort I think that a a
letter from you would be
sufficient on behalf of the
committee but I think ultimately
it's gonna wind up in the budget
somewhere and if if there's not
really an a and appropriation
and it's not in amber's budget
we've got to get it in the.
And that's where I think the The
appropriation would be important
and lash your mission of
removing you know sure.
someone else knows a different
approach such as what I would
think and I I think you know
it's not a it's not going to
take very long you could readily
admit on the next agenda and I
think this one would be the
approved pretty quickly.
Okay you Senator Griggs and I
think that's one of the our
challenges at this time good
Senator Shendo this quickly
Madam chair of this is a
question for amber so the so the
so the hundred thousand that's
in the film your budget that's
recurring already right.
Or is that a one time or
recurring how how does that
work.
I hi Senator Shendo thank you
for that question the I will
have to consult with my dad
director but I believe what we
had to do due to
Staff operations is is the
hundred thousand was had had to
be reallocated partially for
staff but can I let me get back
to you on that.
It that that's fine I the only
reason I ask is that if we're
going to draft a bill then we
would definitely have to draft a
bill for the four hundred fifty
thousand not fifty thousand
subject to clarify if you had a
recurring budget of a hundred
thousand and we're going to add
to it then the bill will be for
fifty thousand but if it's you
know not recurring and we're
doing this on a yearly basis
that it will be for the full
amount one fifty Senator make
sure that that we're all clear
so that of when the chair gets
for bill drafted it's for the
right amount.
Yes thank you so much yeah and
believe of ninety nine percent
sure it in this case it would be
for the one fifty go in forward
okay I appreciate that thank you
that's all madam chair thank you
amber.
Okay thank you and I guess we'll
see what further information we
get and the I think that's one
of the challenges right now is
we do send emails or try to make
phone calls sometimes we don't
get immediate response verses if
we were in the capital seeking
someone face to face and able to
chase them down and get the
answer right away
being an answer right away
before we started our had our
committee meeting today so
hopefully I'll get some more
information and we'll probably
see something introduced me
anything else from members.
No so there's any thing you guys
would like to have updated our
and.
Concerns or anything to please
communicate with the committee
secretary and we do have a
couple of bills on the next
agenda we got I bills from would
souls yes the phonics and R. T.
P. now and we'll see you again
Tuesday at nine AM.
Thank you when we are done for
today thank you.
Rebecca came back.
Thank you guys have a good day
thank you madam chair thank you
members.
Do you guys think you.
