Well good morning everybody
thank you all for joining us for
today's rules committee meeting
we are starting off and a
subcommittee with several
members who are presenting in
other committees.
But I did want to respect the
time of the expert witnesses
that Senator AUMENT house of
four Senate memorial two so
we're going to go ahead and get
started with that presentation
Sierra this was it thank you Mr
chairman thank you for putting
this on the agenda in a timely
manner.
This memorial number two.
Urges the.
State legislatures to support
the national infrastructure bank
the American society American
civil engineer status recent
report that United states
receive a grade of D. plus
regarding the current state of
infrastructure anybody's been
overseas lately compact United
States looks like a third world
country I've been to China twice
by two thousand.
Six in nineteen ninety five and
infrastructure improvements mind
boggling what's going on over
there this bill this program
will not only include bridges
airports and roads but also
include power grid upgrades for
Texas could use that clean water
projects broadband flood control
just to mention a few so it's a
very comprehensive
infrastructure program.
Almost five trillion dollars are
needed to restore the nation's
infrastructure to a state of
good repair.
Also the slot cited engineers
civil engineers also stated that
thirty percent of New Mexico
roads are in poor condition each
driver in the state spends
nearly six hundred dollars and
car repairs.
Six percent of our bridges are
rated structurally deficient
hundred sixty seven dams are
rated high hazard potential and
the cost to bring drinking water
to a state of good repair is
over one billion dollars twenty
five percent New Mexico students
lack internet service at home
eight percent do not have a
committee your.
The situation is even worse than
the tribal communities.
Mr chair this the national and
for trade infrastructure bank
would help finance much of the
infrastructure of New Mexico in
partnership with state and local
governments.
The N. I. B. is modelled on
previous banks which helped
build much of our infrastructure
including presidents George
Washington James Madison Abraham
Lincoln and F. the R..
So the last such bank help bring
us auto depression and when.
World War two Congress is
introduced H. R. six four two
two.
The national infrastructure bank
act two thousand twenty.
This legislation creates four
trillion dollar bank authorized
to invest in infrastructure
projects only it require no new
federal spending and be
capitalized by re purposing
existing
treasure debt if it interested
in more details I have to.
Expert witnesses on board.
Tional infrastructure bank will
create twenty five million new
high paying jobs Hey Davis bacon
wages ensure project labor
agreements include American.
And include buy American
provisions.
Disadvantaged business
enterprises received significant
support.
According to experts the bank
will grow the economy by forty
five percent per year.
As did its predecessors.
The public I'm almost done.
Anys state and county.
Councils the labor unions and
other organizations issued
indoor Spence including.
Our central New Mexico labor
council hi we have mark strand
stand by.
Who is president of the central
New Mexico labor.
And this memorial Mr.
Chair because my United States
Congress to pass HR six four two
two to create a national
infrastructure bank finance
urgently needed infrastructure
projects.
So with that group includes my
remarks I have to expert
witnesses thank you Mr chair.
I thank you very much Mr Roberts
we have anybody who signed up
for public comment on seven one
two.
yes we do we have one Here
manning and I'm letting them and
now.
Much.
I just summon please proceed.
But you only get their project
thank you thank you.
The chairman Ivey Soto members
of the committee I am Sarah
manning I'm a member of the
alliance for local economic
prosperity which is New Mexico.
What bank think tank I'm urging
you to support Senate memorial
to the proposed national
infrastructure bank is both
inexpensive and innovative
method for funding our nation's
dire need to replace rebuild or
even install new roads bridges
dams sewers water treatment
delivery systems and broadband
issues that New Mexico struggles
with every year the
infrastructure bank is also an
excellent example of looking to
history for an idea that worked
before and then re engineering
it to fit modern needs the
beauty of this bank is the way
it recycles and leverages
existing money I heard support
percent memorial two thank you
for hearing me thank you very
much appreciate that
I was hoping to spend a little
time with your expert witnesses
on etcetera but
given the time of the initial
presentation we're going to go
straight to committee and then
and then a phone we need to fix
any questions over to them we
will so are there any questions
from committee at this time.
Very well ready.
That are are.
Thank you Mr chairman my only
question and to do with the
sponsorship.
The congressional
Bill is being considered now.
We we do have some and possibly
Senator Tallman can fill us in
on.
Who in Congress sponsoring this
legislation is only a great
idea.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator for your question.
I don't have that information
although stew Rosenblatt are you
can you answer that.
Last year I would just I would
actually Sierra I can just tell
you that some sponsored by
representative Danny Davis
some distance District of
Illinois.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
pass on this motion on this
Memorial.
Well any other questions from
committee.
Staying on other no others at
this time of the critical
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Moores.
I'm sorry no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator would you say that.
So.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Representative yes
sorry.
That was a yes thank you Senator
do ich.
S. and Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am what was about it was.
I need to.
Well congratulations Senator
Tallman you have a do passed
from the Senate rules committee
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you a need witnesses for
their patients and here this
morning
very well.
based on.
The
The folks that we have in.
Yes
are popular now thank you also
pope you have Senate resolution
sixteen.
Reporter number and the
constitution article X. section
fifteen of the constitution so
would you please Medicine.
Would you please inform us of
the proposed on.
You Mr chair committee members
Senator Wirth Lucian Lucian
sixteen as an amendment to
article eight section of the New
Mexico prostitution.
And what this does is it extends
across section for disabled
veterans their widows and
widowers currently New Mexico
provided.
Property tax exemptions for
veterans who have a one hundred
percent disability rating from
the veterans administration.
This bill will provide relief
for those who have a disability
below one hundred percent and
provide them a property tax
exemption according to their VA
disability rating for example
the veteran was rated at forty
percent they would receive forty
percent tax exemption from the
property taxes and if it was
eighty percent they receive
eighty percent of the property
taxes so on and so forth.
Full disclosure I may be a
disabled veteran and this
legislation would provide some
property tax relief for me but
more importantly this
legislation would provide some
much needed relief to veterans
in our state not rated at one
percent one hundred percent we
have so many that are rated at
sixty seventy eighty percent
that right now there
disabilities are so harmful to
them that some of them are not
able to work at this time and I
think a measure like this would
go a long way to keeping a
disabled veterans in their homes
or even give some of them an
opportunity to even purchase.
This bill that mirrors H. J. R.
two in the house and it's also
been endorsed by the military
Veterans Affairs interim
committee.
That's all I have Mister chair
and I'll take any questions.
Very well thank you very much
Sir pope and also just by way of
a reminder as to the policy of
the rules committee R. which is
that we will hearing house bill
or Senate bill but not both so
so having given today and share
sixteen a hearing aid share to
will not be heard by the rules
committee so if this is to go
through hopefully the H. as your
system will will travel all the
way through the process
Mister Roberts do we have
anybody was signed up for public
comments Mr chair no we do not
well in that case to go to the
committee Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator pope does a of my
question is this is a does this
only apply to to the primary
residence of the veterans.
Mr chair Senator Baca
correct it would be the primary
residence and then of course it
would also follow the window or
the wood or as well.
Rebecca thank you Mr chair thank
you senator pope
I think that's really all I have
found the language just now as
you were speaking and so I see
that so thank you Mr chair thank
you senator.
well and Senator Moores.
Sh thank you Mr chair Senator
appropriate thank you for your
service for previous forward
I'm not a veteran someone it
listen to your expertise and
Senator officers parties on this
my question is is if the
survivor or the veterans still.
New Mexico during your opening
session Mr also reset could help
our people stating homes which
seems so governance but my
understanding of my limited
understanding just that those on
better and disability can still
be employed or have other
resources so is that true Mr
chair Senator Mr chair Senator
Yang disability.
And so I have other income.
Mr chair Senator Moores correct
this is true and what I was
referring to that is the case so
for example I'm a disabled
veteran and I'm able to still
work and collect my disability
but what I'm referring to our
members that are disabled say
you lost a lamb you're dealing
with severe PTSD or other issues
that you received as a veteran
that may you may not be able to
physically work what you're not
at one hundred percent that's
where this bill would really I
mean this legislature really
helpful staff.
And we.
I could totally see that but is
there anything in this that Mr
chair Senator but hi is it to
income
Is it just it's only tied to the
disability so so I I mean I'm
I'm gonna have to start but I
just don't know Europe educating
our Mr starters say someone is a
disabled veteran I have some in
my family still have stopped our
jobs on the suicide with Senator
still have a business service
order good sources or they're
married your spouse is the
operator has to Tom orders well
speaks of yours are able to work
a lawyer from Santa Fe city do
US tax law Senator true we will
fix up the old house up there by
the capitol.
are they
Those that pass on the minutes
there's not that economic the
for that.
Our.
Our researchers.
I believe I understand it Mr
chair and senator Morris what
this bill it would only it would
only address what their rating
is and you're correct someone
could be ninety percent but you
be a disability where they can
still work and and and do their
job to where someone could be at
sixty percent and there
disabilities because of not not
to be able to work and then you
and then we would know what
their other income is whether
they had a wealthy spouse
whether they had a military
retirement on top of the
disability you are correct
there's no way to track that we
would only be tracking what
percentage of disability they
have I will say that there are
some people that are a hundred
percent disabled right now that
can or maybe cannot work and
under the certain under the
legislation right now they're
still able to benefit with no
property tax on the primary
account.
Yes definitely respect what
you're trying to do here I do
see job that is Sir I have just
read district I represent I know
people who are out Montoya
stories include sports car
college of arts.
If we come back to school.
This still one are very
successful careers Sanchez
social workers I have a very
good income despite the
challenges faced only as you
move forward with this normal
ideas that you consider that
part of it also.
There should be some kind of
from our cap on teachers so a
lot of.
Small communities missing out on
tax revenue for schools local
store from ocean transport what
we're trying to still protect
people from Cheshire Veterans
all four of your considered
adequate that the tickets would
strengthen structures for thank
you Mr a summer.
Mr chairman and senator Paul
don't all the entrants already
getting property tax exemption.
Mr chair Senator Ortiz Pino
right now all veterans
regardless of whether disability
or not three four thousand
dollars exemption but that's
just a tractor that from the
total property taxes
and then disability all the way
up wait until you get to one
hundred percent you get no other
type of property tax.
Thank you for that Senator
Mister chairman Senator called.
Looking through the FIR.
Brings up the issue of yield
control.
Which really means that any.
Additional exemptions to one
group.
Really express everybody else.
And.
And and I would
you know as much as we do want
to honor the the service in the.
Credible contributions use
disabled stated in the service
of their country.
Legislative system.
It is kind of an awkward.
Where are.
Trying to honor service and and
and a contribution that they
may.
Just remember your owned
everybody else.
Many of four many others who
would be
you know the.
By it so yes yes some serious
questions about it in light of
the FIR.
Thank you for for working on
this.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator pope for bringing the
bill I also was looking through
the FIR and would note at the
bottom of page two it gives us a
very good analysis of what all
of us would be paying for this
recognition which is fourteen
dollars per person so what does
readjust
Based on yield control there's
also some reference in the FIR
that yield control it does not
apply across the board so I'm
not sure if you have that
information but I'm curious the
forty percent areas without
yield control you know where are
those and and what's the
distinction do you do you know
the answer to that Mr chair
Senator Wirth I do not I I do
not have the answers for that
and that's something I want to
follow up on on the fire in
maybe Mr chair to you now yes
you actually.
Of the asked that question so
they are so there's first of all
there's there's project sixty
two thousand veterans who
currently claim the four
thousand dollar.
military reduction across the
state R. M. the average but also
just sent everybody knows the
average percentage of disability
for those factions for disabled
fifty percent.
Not all the sixty two thousand
our our disabled it's a it's a
smaller number there are yield
control doesn't fully cover bowl
when you when you know the kids
crawl the biggest hit that
happens as a hit to local
governments are so while this
would redistribute on the state
portion of property taxes what
would actually
What would actually end up
happening is about a thirty two
million dollar hit to counties
and local governments across the
state that would not be made up
to yield control are based on
this bill.
And
and so and and so the local
governments would have to figure
out how to make up to thirty two
million dollars that because
that's that part is not re
distributed the the amount
that's redistributive the
average amount of fourteen
dollars a three distributed
brought the state is is a is on
the state portion the twenty
twenty males of the State
portion of the of property
taxation.
The but the local part of it
would not would not end up
getting a completely made up
right yeah I appreciate that Mr
chair and basically as I
understand it that's counties
and school districts primarily.
Representative yeah.
It is
the big what Act tax that we
took away the ability of most of
the other local governments to
be able to do.
property taxation right so then
that's why municipalities
primarily relied on G. R. T. but
counties still have of four for
a lot of their social services
they have of the
That Babylon taxation you also
have actually a lot of the
special districts rely upon this
and some of them only have a
half a mil or mil to begin with
and then and then we have the
schools are where they have the
of the mails that they that they
have applied and and fact that
was the first issue that we went
through with all of the those
are rational special elections a
couple years ago where they were
funding not only buildings but
also technology through property
taxation based on what's what's
I think someone in our fully
referred to as H. B. thirty two
and SB nine funds yes I guess Mr
chairman is a good chance to
educate myself and other members
that are listening I guess I'm I
always thought that there was so
now that we've been dealing with
tax lightning.
You know which certainly is a is
an issue that affects the
dollars as I understood it the
dollars going to the local
governments but maybe I was
wrong about that so there's not
a yield control.
Provision with tax lightning I
guess I'm just yet this is I
need to go figure this out in
other words you know we got the
tax lightning issues one that I
think we'll hear the session
again as part of the house tax
reform package
And it's just really challenging
here in Santa Fe in particular
because we've got folks living
right next door to each other
that have tax rates property tax
rates that are three four five
times difference in a live right
next door to each other by
always understood that you know
if we made that adjustment yield
control would kick in at the
local level but maybe that's
just for the state portion.
Well what happens on the yield
control is that if if if if an
area is that is is it right a
local jurisdiction is at the Max
for what they're allowed which a
lot of the school districts are
and a lot of the counties are as
well as Senator the special
districts then yield control
doesn't cover it doesn't
actually make up the whole not
because you because you don't
have the the space to do that.
And that's the reason for the
forty percent or doesn't kick in
because they've gone to their
level.
Right gone to their level and so
right and so if you're below
that level then the new year
yield control actually pick up
most of that by redistributing
job but but but when you're at
the Max and and that's where we
end up with a cumulative thirty
two million dollar hat to local
governments around the state.
Got it thank you so Mr chair
Senator pope does this if you
have a ten percent disability as
I understand it this would kick
in correct.
correct.
Ten percent off property taxes
Mr chair.
So just a couple things to look
at it and and I I agree with
senator Morris.
That you may want to look at
some kind of income threshold
because it just doesn't seem
there's just it doesn't seem
right that that someone who.
You know in a situation where
they are
they have sufficient resources
it could be a huge hit there and
and I just think that's one
thing to look at the other thing
you might look at as well as
whether or not you set a
different maybe bring it down to
fifty percent as another
percentage just as a way to
mitigate some of the impact
because I think the impact is
going to be significant a local
governments I'm actually really.
I'm it's interesting that we do
not have the association of
counties here or the school
districts or the assessors I'm
really surprised because every
time I've carried a bill that
starts to navigate into these
areas why did they ever get
engage so I'm curious about that
but just a couple thoughts
moving forward and again I
appreciate what you're doing
here and and again.
I think I think that it is a
recognition and a thanks for the
service that goes above and
beyond not just a four thousand
dollar recognition because
you're veteran but actually with
a disability it's extending at
that level so that helps thank
you Mr chair you're very welcome
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for bringing this
forward I do have a question
what other tax rates besides the
one hundred percent of disabled
property tax and then they was
mentioned earlier there's a four
thousand dollar up to four
thousand dollar credit on
property tax what other tax
breaks for credits do we
currently provide for for
veterans.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle I don't
have the list but here in the
state there are
Free license plates if you're
over fifty percent disabled
those would be permanent there
are free passes to the state
parks museums and and benefits
like that there are few more
other things but I don't have
the list here but those are some
of the benefits that we provide
our veterans here in New Mexico.
And Mister chairman Senator do
they rank is there a group out
there that ranks state by state
as to help veteran friendly one
state might be to the next is
there information like that out
there Mr chair Senator there are
Mister chairman Senator Pirtle
one website military one source
and I'm forgetting a few of the
other sites but they kind of
look at veteran friendly states
and look at you know benefits to
veterans tax policy even how we
tax retirements and pensions and
and how we treat disabled vets I
do not have that information
what how we rate but this is an
area that coming into the Senate
that I just want to kind of look
at how we can do more for
veterans.
In in Mr chair and senator Paul
I I appreciate that I would like
to know where you know New
Mexico ranks I think it's an
important thing to
try to keep as many retired
veterans or or having veterans
want to live in New Mexico and
and spend their money here
retire here and
you know if if we can do that
through a property tax break I
think that's great I do have a
question however Mister chairman
Senator local what do you know
the average of the property tax
value or amount that people pay
for their primary residences
within New Mexico.
Mr chair Senator pearl I do not
have that information I
apologize in in Mr chair Senator
pope the reason that I I think
that's important they the issue
was brought up on the four
thousand dollars and so I'm just
curious how far that goes in if
if the average of home you know
of of a modest home fifteen
hundred two thousand square foot
in a
in you know just an average
neighborhood how far that four
thousand dollars go and just if
what we were doing now was
sufficient and we could find
some other ways to help veterans
or maybe make some adjustments
as we're.
Senate by senator Wirth and and
senator Morris so I I do have
those questions that hopefully
we can get answer
but I do appreciate you bring
this for everything we can do
for for our veterans I think
it's so the least we can do so
thank you Mr chair Senator.
Ms Senator Baca and we'll go to
some rumors.
And while Senator Baca is on
muting thank you Karen got it
now appreciate it I was looking
at the at the the extension here
and earlier was stated you know
concern about shifting you know
I I we do Mr chair a certain
amount of shifting in a in every
every area of finance and all
the entitlement programs there's
a certain amount of of shifting
going on everywhere you know so
this is the I mean it's not a
rare thing I would say you know
we're a burden is placed on a
certain individuals and then the
benefit is is a dispersed to
other so I I I don't see any
difference here on except that
that these are veterans that
have served and and have a
disability service related in
connection to to a you know
service to their country so I
just wanted to address that of
the the other item that I wanted
to address was
on page two line eleven now it
does it it seems to be clear but
I wanted to see if I can make
this a little bit more clear
that the window or the we're
we're Mr chair is in the same
property so is this intended to
be the same property as a where
the veteran recited while they
were alive Mister chairman
Senator.
Mr chair and senator of that is
the intent and that is something
I'd be willing to clean up the
language to ensure.
That that that that's what's in
that in the language as well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator then I I would propose
an amendment on page two line
eleven prior to the word
property I would insert the
words saying.
Property.
Very well and and let me just
also point out I think there's a
drafting issue on that same line
Senator walking me want to
six of the same time which is of
the use of the word is.
We were later which is struck
out I think of referred there is
an assumption that the veteran
was was male yes and and so I
think what that used that what
that in tended to say was
continued to Oct occupied the
property as the veterans.
Of principal place of residence
as opposed to it the little
would work but let's run them
I'm not a hundred percent sure I
keep going through that back and
forth let's do the work saying
first what we look at that.
R. and then and then the Mr
chair if I may I think that your
proposal would really do the
same really it would be the
exact same cleanup actually
would just isolate the property
which is all I'm trying to do so
I would be amenable to that it
is.
And we could we could alleviate
the words same and just use as
you stated as the veterans.
Thank you know the other
actually if I could just as I'm
looking at this thing is if we
put same.
We could just prepared us to our
property.
That would work as well Mr chair
I would propose that that's
cleaner all right
so so the the amendment would be
on page two line eleven
prior to the work property.
In Sir saying after and then
strike a the remainder of the
language in section B. from as
to residents.
Leaving the period.
Well I do think that clarifies
that line quite a bit.
Are there any questions on the
proposed amendments.
pulp what is your sense of the
proposed amendments is not
friendly or unfriendly that
would be friendly Mr chair row
also are part was this on the
amendment.
Yes it is Mr chair the way if
I'm and that is what I apologize
it is a little bit hard to
follow with with the way we're
doing things on zoom
But I just wanted to make sure
this is page two line eleven.
And we're just putting a period
after the word property in
striking the rest.
In answer to the what state my
prior to property so so Mister
chair and senator Baca with that
mean that if at any point in
time the widow or widower had to
move state down the street or
downsize their home that they
wouldn't give up the tax
exemption.
Mr Mr chair and senator parole
yes that's correct okay thank
you I just wanted to make sure
what we were doing with the
amendment.
Thank you.
You're welcome are you for the
questions on the amendment.
No objections to the amendments.
Seeing no objection on them Mr
help please no all members
present voting in the
affirmative on page two line
eleven.
Prior to work property inserting
the word same after the word
property striking the rest of
the sentence opt to the period.
very well Senator Baca thank you
Mr chair the and the other thing
I would point out Mister chair
and all I'll ask Senator Paypen
and and I'll disclose that I am
better but I am not a disabled
veteran Jan degree but at forty
percent Mr chair and senator
Paul does in a certain
additional amount of benefit key
again for better and is it like
up I don't know if it's a of
free medical or something to
that extent is there some added
added you read benefit of forty
percent.
Mr chair Senator Baca I believe
it's at fifty percent what
happens at fifty percent if
you're a military retiree and
you have a disability you get
them both if it's I believe if
it's forty percent you would get
the disability that would be non
taxable but they would take that
amount from your retirement so
it's not concurrent you wouldn't
get on both it would be like so
say your disability was a
thousand dollars you know to
determine which two thousand you
would get if you're under fifty
percent disabled you would get
your thousand disability they
would give you the to the the
total two thousand retirement
you get a thousand disability
tax free minute thousand
retirement.
If you were fifty per over fifty
percent you would get the two
thousand four military
retirement plus the thousand
disability on top you begin
concurrently both at the same
time that's where that fifty
percent kicks and and and and
Center pop if I just could real
quick to survive could just just
clarify than what you're saying
on the forty percent so
basically in your scenario you
get a thousand dollars tax free
based on the disability and a
thousand dollars taxable yes
okay right yes Mr chair yes what
happens is they're not they call
it can current pay you what you
would basically you get your
disability would be the primary
source and nontaxable but they
would take it out of them atop
retirement pay but once you get
over fifty you get both amounts
correct.
And and so Mr chair and senator
and and you can correct me if
I'm wrong it seems to me the the
the the feds and the veterans
administration at the federal
level then of as a regarding
disability has been terminated
determination that I have both
forty percent and they're both
at fifty percent the
the the disability has been
deemed to be in my mind somewhat
greater at that point and so and
so I think I I do I really do
like the bill I I think it's a
bit brought for me we're we're
including people with even a ten
percent disability and so what
what I would do is I I would I
would offer an amendment that
would increase that threshold
where the where the
The this benefit would not
engage the veteran until they
were at least a fifty percent
disabled so we would affect
those people that are fifty
percent disabled or more since
the since the the feds have seem
to determine anyway and again
correct me if I'm wrong that
that is a more serious threshold
of disability I I have a
proposed amendment page to line
six
set actually set a record for
you continue on that if if I
may.
Our.
Just ask you this when it came
to me I was planning to ask
about making it at sixty percent
or greater.
and so just let you know that in
case you want to consider going
making a sense of the average
the average or or disabled
veteran the average level of
disabilities at fifty percent we
would make sure that we do
provide this for people who are
on the higher side of
disabilities as my thought of we
get sixty percent greater
get your amendment your you're
welcome to do it at fifty or
sixty but I just just let your
mind process was on.
Thank you I I appreciate that
Mr.
And your audio cut out and it's
not because I tend to keep it
lined up with with the with the
federal threshold so I'll
probably just go ahead if if it
a if it if it a means that that
Mr chair would supported at
sixty percent all do that and
also a page to line six after
after federal law I would insert
the words provided that their
rating is greater than sixty
percent.
Actually if I can make a
suggestion having I don't play a
little bit in the in the joint
resolution.
And tell me if this if this
accomplishes what we're we're I
think we're both at a one where
the other item that is on page
one line fourteen.
Right last.
Eight one line sixteen.
Right then a one hundred.
And before the work percent
insert the word sixty.
After the work percent insert or
greater.
So that the title it amended
would be to veterans with sixty
percent or greater disability.
And then on page two line one.
After the article eight.
FY I guess not really after the
B. after striking after the
strike through a one hundred
percent.
We would insert their sixty
percent or greater.
So that it would be right.
Every veteran of the armed
forces the United States was
been determined pursuant to
federal law to have a sixty
percent or greater permanent
service we're connected
disability and then down below
the language about
the exemption being a percentage
a quarter percentage of the
veterans disability is
constrained by the six percent
greater up about.
That makes sense.
It does that's fine that's fine.
Usually it's Mr chair a of
Senator shoe store who corrects
the title though she's missing
today.
Yep exactly so in her absence I
figured I would step into the
breach there
we we have a we have a.
An amendment from Senator Baca
with a second from the chair
Senator Moores Mr chair I do we
need to **** Sanchez it's
friendly or not or what that
said this is our Moores wanted
to come in but let me go to the
sponsor first Mr chair I don't
know if this is an option I mean
hearing today the concerns on
the impacts and municipalities
adjusting it and and I think I'd
be amenable to the fifty to
sixty percent you know as I
stated in the presentation I
want to help those in most need
so I'd be amenable to that
that's what we do here in the
state with the license plates is
the fifty percent threshold I
was wondering is there
possibility of maybe maybe
working on this and working with
you members of the committee and
maybe bringing this back next
week I mean we can continue to
stay here but I just wanted to
know if that option was
available.
so.
But let me R. I hear the request
let me go to senator Morris
first.
And then
and then and then it I would
really I I think I think we're
right on the verge of of a
motion on the on the on the
resolution itself after we do
this ammendment and and then
that is this resolution goes
where to go next to the.
it goes to attacks if we do.
And I will tell you that they
are somewhat backed up last
night their second bill took I
think four hours are and so I
think you want to get into their
queue if if there is a further
modification that might be
needed
that might be the the preferred
place to do it because you're
gonna be waiting a little while
to get a hearing over that
period thank you Mr Senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr thanks Senator pope
thank senator Bach I think you
might be wait till law March
twenty first securing that tax
but the the concern I have is
you continue to work on this
particular one point to forty
sixty what popped in my head was
that this is going to our
constitution and and it's the
whim of the federal government
Congress remember to change
those guidelines in the future
are at least I'm assuming Mr
chair Senator do they do has the
federal government change those
are percentages change those
guidelines as they move forward
more experience which are
special last year war we've been
in.
Mr chair Senator Moores I I do
not know the last time it was
changed as far as I know
since I entered the military in
the early nineties they pay for
made the same.
So as you move forward when you
get to Mr chair Senator to get
to our tax I think a little more
graceful waves are put in our
constitution that that number
might be in order on the first
another more personal way since
we are putting this in our
constitution based on what
federal agency
could not to we have an issue
with the for instance.
Based on our arrests but iris
pretty Representative Naresh to
use this opportunity right so
this almost isn't center I'm
sort of General Services
Department General Services
departments are constitution
refers to one agency which is
our the only way we get
compensated for expenses and
status on your right six so some
more a little more graceful I
think might be helpful taxes
just my two cents on our.
Hello so okay so the.
Senator Baca amendments before
us right now then would just
again page one line fourteen
strike last page one line
fifteen strike them a one
hundred.
After the work percent are and
insert into their of sixty after
the word percent or greater.
page two line one.
After the strike through of one
hundred percent.
Insert sixty percent or greater.
is the amendment that is before
us right now are there any
further questions on that
amendments.
Is there any objection to that
amendment it's.
Mr hill please show all members
present voting in favor of that
amendment and center provide you
think let me just say that I I I
I I do think the Senator Moores
Morse's suggestion is a is a
cogent one it might require some
restructuring of how this is
done overall I and occasionally
I will tell you that
occasionally we will do a repeal
and replace of a section of the
constitution if we need to
restructure or how it is that
the state addresses a particular
topic as long as you continue to
address a single question and so
You know because I I I I tend to
agree that I'm I'm perfectly
comfortable at sixty percent or
higher but we don't know what
the feds are going to do at some
point and and we want to make
sure that we have the
flexibility to be able to up to
protect those who need the
protection and and
in this process so but that it
right I would also encourage
you.
to reach out I don't know if if
if they've analyzed this or not
but I would encourage you also
to reach out to the property tax
division over at
I'm actually not sure yet later
TRD I think there TRD reach out
over at the to the property tax
division they may have some they
may be able to give us some
information on on what the
impact may be also reach out to
the Veterans Services
Department because
They can also
Secretary Smith may be able to
actually give some numbers of
how many people have the sixty
percent greater
disability so that we have a so
that when you get to tax you
potentially have some members of
Chatham coach outlet thank.
anything else on this before we
proceed promotion.
Senator Baca I moved to pass.
Very well we have a do pass as
amended motion on Senate joint
resolution sixteen from Senator
Baca out with the second from
center left us any of the
discussion from the committee.
Saying no once again
recognition.
you Miss Vigil will you please
call the roll Senator Baca yes
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
Yes my vote Senator o'neill yes
and I will not explain my vote.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle Ingle your muted.
Just give us a thumbs up or
thumbs down place.
Thank yes and senator this of
the yes so our congratulations
Center pope you have a ten zero
do pass recommendation from the
Senate rules committee on Senate
joint resolution as amended.
All right thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee members
Senator yes yes.
I I I I ask for more questions
for us what we decide property
tax deduction include graduates
of New Mexico military
institute.
It it's it's it doesn't it
should include all everyone
Lobos and Aggies.
You still got Senator eagles
bowed on aspects such insurers.
Good these legislations thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much R. okay I see what's
that don't see senator
Candelaria but I do see Senator
diagnose so we're going to move
on to Senate memorial number
nineteen.
And honestly you know if you
would be so kind as to alert.
Senator is when you know so I'm
going and Candelaria.
That they're welcome to join us
at some point if they would like
to.
Senator Hamblen on.
Okay very well so well let's
let's are proceed with Senate
memorial number nineteen right
now and Senator guidance please
proceed.
Mr chairman and I appreciate our
listing the debate before and
some of the Center pokes
legislation was both Ivey Soto
and Bakit and now I'm hoping to
get that some type of the
reaction from you all to give
you just a little bit of
background on this for years
we've been talking about well
raise income taxes what it does
to a household here down here in
New Mexico.
A few years ago on this is about
three years ago I normally
creature of habit we go by
McDonald's every morning for
coffee and breakfast at six
o'clock in the morning the
owner of the house in our area
it moved their minimum wage up
to fifteen dollars an hour I get
their search typically the same
ladies every morning I get there
and wait wait about six thirty
I'm honking my horn trying to
get to work and the lady comes
to the door but what does she
tell me she sorry they only had
three employees out of line show
up.
What's the deal well we all got
raises and her thing we don't
need to all work all the out so
about probably about two weeks
later I talked to a lady that
very good friend of mine works
there she single more.
Last year.
She's got three kids and she
worked there McDonald's and in
talking to her I asked her you
know why I search the change
in her discussion was that if
she she's got
Housing through the state and
snap and also medical in her
money increases then she loses
her subsidies and so that
product the thought of we can't
seem to do it here state level
because a lot of these come from
federal guidelines on what we
could do to try to help them out
I like the idea that she's
willing to work the hours she's
she's got needs with three kids
but as she increases that.
The amount of hours you madam
Hey then once for check built up
subsidies go down I think we
need to look at it federal point
to say okay if they reach a
threshold there are certain
percentages of certain subsidies
decline but not all of this
hopefully we would get them to
point their sustainable as
family with whatever the mom's
income is but I think we're
penalized in by doing such a
drastic drop in subsidies are
money goes up and I don't know
where prior.
Amount was one of the girls
damage to the twelve but I don't
know Maria's wages but the from
whatever was to fifteen Qatar
not Harper yeah she cut her
hours twenty two hours a week so
should be able keep assumptions
so with that I'd love to have
some input and stand for
questions and I don't have any
expert witness and Marie is at
work so you'll to the committee.
Thank you very much us at a US
Mister Roberts is anybody signed
up for public comment on Senate
memorial ninety.
Mr chair we have no one Register
for public comment.
Burt wealth are are there any
questions from the committee on
seven memorial nineteen Senator
o'neill thank you thank you Mr
chair and members
Senator Gallegos so can you tell
me what the cliff effect is.
So basically.
Mister chairman Senator as their
income goes up there's certain
point that their subsidy stock
it's not like a gradual but it's
it's it it stops at the correct
stop if you make so much income
and she didn't give me those
numbers.
I don't know that she would know
but she they know not that they
have a a group here in Lee
County that it popped gone as
this was happening it's a
Spanish group currently County
that told them that if they went
over so many hours and they
would lose their budget and
for her.
Is gonna be life changing I'm I
mean if if you're if you're
losing your kids medical Inc
faster your housing and your
staff of it makes it it's not
worth it for them to get to the
fifteen dollars an hour because
they lose everything.
Thank you Senator so I'm
assuming this affects other
companies besides McDonald's
like it's kind of a universal
effect thank you for bringing
this forward us you know this is
not anything I've ever heard
well listen to the debate but
but thanks for bringing this
forward that's all I have thank
you.
Thank you very much are there
any other questions.
Yes I will I will tell you this
is this is this and got quite a
bit actually R. that I've I mean
I've I've heard discussion about
the the whole problem with the
with the club Tax where where
are affected Lee
and and I'm just I'm just making
up numbers here but effectively
somebody gets a raise or they
end up making another eight
thousand dollars a year and as a
result they end up losing
somewhere between you know ten
to fifteen thousand dollars in
benefits and because of because
of how the federal rules are
written and and whether it's a
it's a what was some of so the
programs are one hundred percent
budget and some of them are
sliding scales and and based on
eligibility of different places
I do see I I do.
With one of the comforter Center
Morris on this is that you know
one of the things that I've.
Long
objected to in terms of the
minimum wage where it's at is
that.
And this is a slightly different
but but but also related topic
is that.
Up I personally believe that
somebody's working full time
they should not be on budget
that the that that that any
place of the working full time
the the patient be sufficient.
That they that they they don't
qualify for benefits because
they're making a I'm not and and
the problem we have right now is
is we have a minimum wage what
someone could be working full
time and effectively we are
subsidizing the business for
those employees because they
still qualify for benefits are
and and and so well I I believe
in supporting people
I happen to think that that is
something like I said if
someone's working full time
we've we we shouldn't have to
subsidize in the business for
those jobs.
Well but that's but that's kind
of the situation that we're in
but then the last the the club
the fact is real and and it is
something that Congress needs to
address a mysterious way because
otherwise we don't do people any
favors by
By by increasing compensation or
or adjusting benefits in other
areas so so at least for me
thank you for bringing the
center once.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator we are from by mistake
General to defer to the center
to see if you know in Health
Human Services couple years go
did study does not believe those
as a result of moral for so I
guess my questions to share our
Senator why we do with another
memorial service taking action.
Maybe I'll maybe Mr that's our
question too sure of health
services office to archer so
Jerry.
Course
yes as a lot of things we study
them we look at the
recommendations for a variety of
reasons we don't act on them
maybe budget one year maybe
changing federal situation the
next year I think this is a good
idea if you taking a look at
this because
at some point we're gonna have a
recommendation that we actually
implement and well in the novel.
I think it's important to keep
that hope alive.
Mr chair and chair of health
services maybe they the interim
committee hearing to be at this
all of this.
We we get to the bottom of the
spot thank you Mr the Senators.
very well let me see I don't see
anybody else to get recognition
what's most of the committee.
Remove it do pass it.
Right well we have a question
for senator o'neil with a second
from Senator Pirtle.
I'm quite sure we read this book
that we can find something where
we can change in the language
but given that we are in the
morning I don't think that's
entirely necessary so.
See nobody else seeking
recognition of this time.
this bill please call the roll.
Senator Baca yes Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores.
Yes Senator o'neill yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator Pirtle
yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes Senator Ingle.
Senator do it yes and Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Legends of scenarios on a vote
of as I have it is about nine
steel.
That she yes.
On a vote of nine to nothing
Senator Morial nineteen has a do
pass recommendation from the
Senate rules committee Mr I want
to thank you all I I do I'm sort
of disappointed this is the
first regional legislation are
at it eight years now starting
Monday it is not been Ivey Soto
but I will refer you next thank
you.
The majority I will reconsider.
It thank you they will have
another chance to look at this
when it gets to the floor yes.
Thank you all in great.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator well.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee I do have to admit
that I'm not used to committee
moving through this quickly on
legislation so it's a very
refreshing experience for me I
do have a couple of folks if the
secretary can and she's letting
and damn armor and there's also
Kathy Martin who is my other
expert thank you very much for
this opportunity Mr chair
I also see a Beverly it sings
out in the waiting room she's
the executive director of the
Gerry Association okay chair as
well
also that she didn't she to
participate in the discussion as
well okay sounds great thank you
so much what's on a.
All right thank you so much
should I wait for Mrs Singh and
it should be completely present
so that we okay and then where
all right thank you Mr chairman
committee for this opportunity
to present this memorial I
didn't do very rule affecting
groundwater resources is an
opportunity for us to look at
data that has been collected and
apply that for the jury industry
to help them do what they're
doing already better I'm gonna
give you just a little bit
background briefly New Mexico
has over a hundred and fifty
dairies with the largest average
herd size of two thousand three
hundred fifty seven in the
nation Mexico's currently ranks
ninth in the nation from the
production and fifth in the
nation for cheese production I
do have a little bit of a
attachment to that is my great
great grandfather is the
inventor of brick cheese and so
if you had brick cheese or the
size the way the cheese is made
as a brick that was my great
great grandfather in southern
New Mexico we have a cheese
factory that was brought here
because it makes more sense to
brief bring the cheese factory
to the dairy than to ship the
dairy to the cheese factory so
you know the dairy industry has
brought significant economic
benefits to our state and I want
to be very clear that I
recognize that economic impact
the element that we're
addressing this memorial is
providing the dairies and other
agencies with the data that's
been collected that tells us
what is happening when you
concentrate hundreds of cattle
on a comparatively small section
of land.
Great County tend to have the
largest operations in the state
with an average of twenty seven
hundred cals perform in doing
and we have twenty four farms
with over fifty three thousand
cals occupying the sites so what
we're looking at is years of
data about the ground water
discharge permits we now have
the opportunity to compare that
data and use it to perform a
comprehensive review and
reported the effectiveness of
the Derry role in protecting New
Mexico's groundwater resources
this will also help us is
legislators create policy in law
that not only supports the dairy
industry but also protects our
groundwater especially in our
rural and agricultural areas I
have to experts here I have Dan
Lorrimer from the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club will
talk about the history of this
information I also have Kathy
Martin of Martin environmental
services in Norman Oklahoma who
has worked at the New Mexico
citizens very coalition for over
a decade and has provided
technical assistance in Derry
permit reviews and so I can go
ahead and turn it over to Mr
warmer who can give kind of a
background on that if you would
so choose Mr chair.
Is that I think Dan are you and
you did not lead to introduce
our group thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee Dan
Lorrimer or a spokesperson and
volunteer with the New Mexico
citizens Jerry coalition
very quickly in two thousand and
nine a Senate bill up Senate
bill two oh six was passed
signed by the governor and it
required the environment
department to to develop rules
for the dairy industry two very
specifically of growth
ground water discharge permit
rules of those rules were
negotiated for five years
between
the dairy industry for a cleaner
environment the agency which was
the ground water quality bureau
of the environment department
and the citizens coalition by
New Mexico's citizens dairy
coalition so after five years
negotiations we came to a
settlement.
That settlement proposal was
basically adopted by the water
quality control commission it's
the dairy rule that we operate
under today it's been in effect
for five years as signatories to
the settlement agreement that
led to the dairy rural the
citizens coalition feels that
after five years of
implementation it's time to take
a look.
To see how effective the rule
has been and protecting New
Mexico's ground water resources
and met in a nut shell is what
we're asking the environment to
provide of the fireman
department to provide us they
have all the information they
just don't have it in one
document so that they can get
industry wide statistics up from
their current information and
then and that shows what we're
asking them for.
Yes and I'd like to just add to
that.
The when we were going to do
that during rule the HSD had
prepared a very elaborate excel
spreadsheet that listed every
single Terry was permitted
whether it was constructed or
not and then and location
operator I'll wear them
monitoring wells were installed
or inspected and the the most
We sent or highest ground water
quality data so they are monitor
for ninety days Sen chlorides
total dissolved solids and in
some cases so states that
whatever highest values a
trigger and like if they had you
know some dairies have a hundred
parts per million nitrate
underneath them you know when
the standard is ten and then so
that table it exists and it
insisted during the general and
what we would like to see is
that to be updated with that I
looking back at the last five
years to see if some of the
requirements of the Jerry role
such as are installing plastic
liners.
Those kinds of behaviors are or
requirements have actually led
to an improvement in groundwater
quality that's what we would
like to see and I think the
industry would like to prove
that as well I think that's
something we all can agree on we
would like to know that things
are working and if they're not
working as and to have maybe a
discussion group and to see you
know what what what the next
steps that's our goal you know
we don't want the agency to have
to create something you know out
of whole cloth there is a tool
that are exists that can be
updated that's what I wanted to
emphasize.
Thank you very much miss Martin
thank you Mr Laura Hart
let us turn real quick to mess
it sync up and Mr thank god
You have
what you have about four minutes
this but the.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and
that really isn't that I'm
executive director of dairy
producers of New Mexico first
off I I really wanted I I know
you're on your on your cell
phone logging in if it's
possible to activate your camera
we would appreciate it if it's
not managed.
I can't because then you want
more might audio.
Okay thank you Mr chair and the
first thing I wanted to do was
thanks Senator Hamblen for
meeting with us yes zoom just to
discuss how the Derry will came
to be
it was a a good meeting that I
think we had to give her a
little bit of background about
the dairy industry in New Mexico
so we do appreciate that
we do have to respectfully
opposes for number of reasons
first of all the Jerry will came
to be with a unanimous agreement
between the dairy industry the
environment department and that
citizens environmental coalition
bills Dan and Kathy were part of
that
that resulted in New Mexico
having the most stringent ground
water regulations than any other
state in regards to dairy New
Mexico is number one and
protecting our groundwater when
it comes to dairy and just on
that I would like to reiterate
that all of that dairies in New
Mexico are family owned and
operated they live on the land
they drink the water they pre
the Harris of course they want
to protect the environment
one of our consternation is that
this could be a pathway to
opening up that role after it
took you know.
Over five years of negotiations
between those three groups don't
want to open up that role and
and do all of those years of
collaborative work
in addition to some of the info
required is personal and it
could open producers up to
frivolous lawsuits which we've
experienced in the past as well
as attacks from anti animal
agriculture extremists who wish
to do away with animal
agriculture they look for
databases such as this and
target places that have animal
agriculture and sometimes
violent attacks but I want to
thank you and thank you again to
Senator Hamblen for listening to
our concerns that's it.
Our.
Thank you thank you very much
this thing I also do know that
for military governor Walter
Bradley
came into the our waiting room
so
Mr Bradley if you.
I'll hopefully you're listening
to the zoom now and if you are
please go ahead and get yourself
and I'll let you make some
comments.
What what.
Senator Moores said if you don't
mind
trying to find a way to
communicate with the former
lieutenant.
I want to start let me tell you
what we're doing.
Over here I don't.
Sh.
So there was quite a challenge
Those who you are or new to this
of all for.
Many many years so we're working
with your friends.
What
was your birth mark but I know
you're.
Mr Bradley your live please
proceed all right thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Walter Bradley.
I don't know what more we clear
your life please proceed.
Okay.
Okay thanks very much we are
going to go to the committee
them.
and the.
And if if officer Bradley can
figure out technology or find
somebody under the age of forty
to help them out then we will
hear his comments at the
appropriate time so
Let us.
Representative very for resume
America and I won't belabor the
information Senator A. RD maybe
Do you know what she said we are
a close to to two opening up
that rule and we'd be happy to
work with find out what we can
thank you.
Thank you very much of.
Mr Bradley okay so questions are
from committee and I will I will
indicate that there is.
R. I have received some
information on this.
R. in terms of of what frankly
some national security issues
armed related to this item
but I don't think that that
affects the entire our memorial.
and so if I could Center portal
if if if if you would indulge me
for just a moment before we go
to you
If I could.
Because all this information
would be subject to the
inspection public records act
once submitted and and so there
are there are issues as to food
supply etcetera.
That do get impacted what I
would like to suggest is on page
three B. on page three.
That are allied one eight two we
strike our stop we squeezed
right up subsection a.
Subsection B..
If you turn up the next page
subsection after.
Subsection G..
Our.
But but but leave the rest so
that we get the statistically
supported analyses regarding the
plastic liners which has to do
specific with after the with the
with the with the with the rule
that was adopted as well as
how many meters of been
installed and and as well as
well inspections so that we have
a sense of of water quality
right so that it would it would
actually match up the when the
liners and the water quality in
terms of of the information
being requested so that's
Let me suggest that and and when
we go to Senator Hamblen before
we go to the committee and
center Hamblen what is your what
is your take on that proposed
amount
thank you Mr chair and I do know
that Kathy wanted to say
something I I certainly wouldn't
when meeting with Beverly and
and former lieutenant governor
Bradley and the whole group
heard that concerned about the
public the public knowledge some
information that could be very
damaging to to the Jerry's and
so miss Martin if you'd like to
chime in here at this point.
Yes just to corrections that
where are not us to make any
changes the regulations to be
very clear this is just to
compile data that is submitted
by the dairies to the NMED in
their quarterly monitoring
reports all the dairies are
required in groundwater
monitoring so that day that is
in the Pueblo file it's publicly
available and the original
spreadsheet was part of the
public record of the rule so it
is also publicly available.
So just wanted to add those
cabbie outs of their.
Miss Martin if I may Mister
chair it's that this information
is already out there.
Martin.
Yes they are the actual
spreadsheet as part of the
public record of the Derry rule
and all of the content and it
would be available under each
Jerry's name it would be a
little bit more cumbersome to
get Avid but none of the
information we're asking for is
is a.
Is other than public information
does that make sense we're not
asking for any private
information so it it and and
this time I I if I could just a
suggestion about in terms of.
for example be the compliance or
noncompliance a priest
Environment.
That that is not something that
existed at the time that
original spreadsheet was created
also the number and identity
areas that unspent
appropriations what student
provides action plan that is
also not information that was
available at the time that the
the oil was was adopted as on
right so so that would actually
that would be information that
is not currently public we are I
would also note them that that
the with regard to the name and
location of each very well that
information my understanding as
well as
part of the record and when they
adopted the rules originally
when you are into the rest of
the information about is that
that starts to to tie in with
permission that was not
available at press time so in
other words people already know
the location of all the various
but then when you ask it in in
conjunction with some of the
things that bring us that's
actually different information
almost fell.
Thanks that fact that ms Martin
always go through the chair
first if you don't mind I'm so
sorry that's all right.
Martin again this part if you
want all right let me just go to
Senator so is this just to focus
finally I'm probably neutral
from your perspective Simon.
I'm from Mr chair from the
sounds of it I it makes
practical sense to me I would
certainly like to see with my
two experts if this is something
that we can we can work with
still to get the information so
that we can help move that that
that effort forward so I would
like to ask Mr Lorman miss
Martin if they are comfortable
with these the suggestions from
the from the chair and and and
and really what we're looking
for is a yes or no from each of
the.
Any can repeat that three things
you wanted to delete.
I'd be more than happy to do
that Mr chair if that's alright
go ahead it's on page three it
is one twenty two section a the
name and location of each very
in New Mexico.
Section B. the compliance or non
compliance with New Mexico's
groundwater quality standards
for each contaminant.
Action after the number and
identity of the areas that have
expanded operations while
executing a compliance action
plan to re mediation effort and
then section G. the number and
identity of all abandoned or in
active dairies in New Mexico.
Miss more new Mr warmers that
information are we able to still
have the results that we need
and I'm without that information
in the report.
Yes or no please.
Yes yes great thank you.
Yes thank you so much thank you
Mr chair so that I think it if
you'd you would consider
separately enrollment yes Mr
chair very well let me go then
for to Senator doing your hand
up Mr chair I did but if this is
a friendly amendment ban and
I'll pass and tested Senator
Pirtle is this on the amendment.
Very well while several state
for not his tech issues are is
there anything else on the
amendments balancing non.
R. is there any objection to
adopt in the moments.
R. so we obviously help please
show Senators now we're just
going to call the roll on the
amendment.
Our mystery hill this call the
roll Senator Baca.
Yes.
Right yes yes Senator Lopez you.
Senator Moores.
Yes.
Senator o'neill yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator do it yes Senator Ivey
Soto yes ma'am so on an eight
the results of that amendment is
adopted.
Also we're not back on the
amended memorial either further
questions on the amended
memorial Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair with the
amendment you took away about an
hour of what I had to talk about
so I appreciate you doing that.
you know really will be able to
fill out our capital outlay
she's.
L. have time to do our capital
outlay for sure so I appreciate
that
you know those paragraphs for
we're very concerning full
disclosure my family operates a
dairy and Travis county
but you know the very first
paragraph in it really sets the
tone Mr chair and and senator
that I think is is very
concerning for me where it just
says.
Whereas the New Mexico dairy
industry a large economic
generator the state's
agricultural sector but involves
high risks to groundwater
quality.
Is there of us something that
you can point to that that that.
Can back that up we basically
saying we already know what the
results of this memorial are
before we even asked for the
report and that's that's the
concern here is we we've already
given the answer to the
Department.
Of the question that we are
asking so Mr chair and senator I
would move that on page one.
Line sixteen after sector strike
the remainder of that paragraph
to the cynical and.
Very well let me let me ask let
me ask of a question of Senator
Hamblen.
A two part question what is your
reaction to to that amendment
but I I guess the other question
I have is I read this is whether
that for purpose even necessary
I think I think the the second
whereas where you start off with
in two thousand nine the New
Mexico legislature passed Senate
bill five two oh sex is actually
where you kind of started public
story of where you're headed and
I'm not I'm not really sure of
the for purpose.
R. adds support for the tracks
anything from the from the
From the overall our memorial so
if you would if you would
respond either to what your
senses of of a just simply
strike in the first paragraph
all together that we don't have
to worry about whether should be
parts are well or if you feel
strongly about keeping up with
your senses about parsing.
Thank you Mr chair I'd like to
miss Martin I know wanted to
make a comment to senator pearls
concern so miss more if you
would.
Yes rulemaking that excel
spreadsheet show that over sixty
five percent of the existing
areas had groundwater
contamination of the three or
four main applicants and so that
is where that historical
statement as of the first
paragraph.
It's based on what what occurred
years ago and would like to see
if that's improved actually and
you know.
Less pollution.
Thank you miss Martin so Mister
chair to answer your question I
think that is also part of the
story is to establish that that
is why we want to go ahead and
move forward with this memorial.
Okay Representative also so you
would prefer eight keep the
paragraph and and be if in fact
or are you okay.
This I
keep it intact Mr chair okay
well our questions from so so
the amendment that is before
it's a Center portals amendment
which is to put a period after
the word secretary on page one
line six.
And to strike the rest of of
right from the word but up to
the semi colon on line eighteen
I have that correct.
Server the correct.
Yes I believe that is correct
okay.
Questions comments from the
committee on the amendment it is
not being a friendly amendment
Senator Ortiz.
Thank you Mr chairman and and.
I mean the whole point is the
word risk the reason we have
regulations is a risky exists.
With the notion of there being
any risk planning regulations
and there are no risk.
What we're trying to do is with
our regulations is mitigate risk
and and so I think thanks kind
of makes the whole point of the.
Checking into whether or not
there's compliance of and you
know kind of feudal.
So I I would oppose this
amendment.
well any other members of the
committee.
Okay okay in that case Garcia
noticing recognition this time
misty hill will you please call
the roll on
the amendments Senator Baca yes
yes Senator Lopez.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Your muted certificate up.
All.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart no Senator Wirth
no.
Senator Ingle yes Senator do it.
Now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
No more.
So on a five to six that
amendments does not prevail and
so we're back on the Morial
it are there other.
probably miss miss it and don't
see I I do look at the and about
where the.
Where the are copies of the
memorial should be transmitted
and does seem to me we have both
both Mr Bradley M. S. it seems
that a joined us for comments it
does seem to me we should
perhaps have their
organizations two copies of the
memorial
The agency that cigna could you
just make sure that we have the
right names of the two
organizations.
Sure that would be very farmers
of America for Walter Bradley.
And dairy producers of New
Mexico for Beverly it's saying
that.
That are there are other
associations or industry groups.
We were part of the Dixie the
dairy industry group first clean
environment but it would be
great if we can get those
separated here just because we
are at different addresses.
Okay very well so
So if I could suggest them that.
That on page eighteen.
Are the cleanest place after the
COVID.
we insert
I don't know what it says the
president of which is just send
it to the the group budget
doesn't matter who we Senator in
the group.
But at any rate if I could
suggest that we insert dairy
farmers of America comma.
Dairy producers of New Mexico
just right.
The president of the.
so that would send a very
industry group.
For clean environments.
And then strike the director of
so it would save them just
simply.
Our New Mexico.
Of the this is the and the
doctor said it would say New
Mexico citizens
very coalition so that would be
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to the secretary of
environments and farmers of
America Jerry producers of New
Mexico dairy industry group for
clean environments and then and
New Mexico citizens every
coalition sure.
Our.
Senator Hamblen is that a what's
your take on anymore.
That's a friendly amendment Mr
chair very well is there any
discussion on this amendment
Senator Pirtle are you raise
your hand on the amendment are
you ready to go back on the
medical very well is there any
objections the minutes.
I will say no objection
we are those will be and started
in that way and we'll take up
the.
exactly who descended to just so
we get to that the
organizations.
and so back on the amended
memorial Senator pro.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for members of the committee I
was going to a just interrupt
you earlier say still the floor
but I I like to where you're
going with the amendment so I
decided to wait
You know I think there's.
Quite a bit issue you know that
first paragraph
basically just putting it all on
the dairy industry and we we
don't go back and realize that
some of the regulations put in
by the environment department
actually cause a lot of the
problems and the contamination
and that that seems to be
ignored a quite often you know
when that when the dairy's first
came in we'll say we use Roselyn
is as an example we have
something called.
Creation recharge water which is
not actually groundwater but
because the way the rules were
written that's where they tested
first and so a lot of times on
these dairies they're located
next to a cotton field that's
used
nitrogen fertilizer well with
that water goes in there's a
little bit of nitrogen left goes
down into what is called the
irrigation recharge and it flows
a lot like a river would on the
surface but underneath it when
it comes on the dairy one of
these areas has a monitoring
well both at the up gradient
side other place in SB twenty
parts per million.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and then on the
downgrade yeah we're leaves that
area could be twenty and so
common sense would tell every
single one of us that the dairy
did not add.
Any nitrates or did not cause
any pollution but because of the
way it's written there still
over ten parts per million so
they all are
according to the rule Mr chair
and members of the committee
pollutants and and the cause of
that pollution even though there
is no proof of it because the
standard is ten so the standard
and and the requirements that
are put on these facilities is
something that is is impossible
and I want to point out that
when it comes to these kids Mr
chair and members of the
committee the environment part
is actually the one who require
them to dig holes and and
contain this water and dig a
hole and actually put the
contaminant closer to the ground
water and there's never been any
statement or any recognition
that they were actually part of
the problem and they created a
lot of the issues by their
requirements of their
regulations and so that was
really the main reason Mr chair
members of the committee of of
striking that first a portion of
the first paragraph is just to
say you know
the state has a little bit of of
responsibility in this
this rule is is definitely a
step in the right direction it's
a lot easier for very sick
comply with and in my opinion if
it does go.
And actually accomplish what the
rules are intended to do I still
think that that there's quite a
bit of issue with the way that
that contaminants are are tested
the the standards that are are
put in place and and the fact
that
We treat the entire state as a
cookie cutter where every area
has different issue as to where
the drinking water is and in
that's never identified as
that's the goal is to protect
drinking water the justice first
water and so I know in my area
that's the issue with the
irrigation recharge we're we're
testing the water that people
don't even drink and we're
holding there is to a standard
they can't even be accomplished
because it's not the nitrates
off of their place yet.
Mr chair members of the
committee basically trying to
get them to clean up something
that they didn't create and
holding them to a standard that
is impossible so I'd be remiss
if I didn't say that but
unfortunately I'm gonna have to
go to yes the memorial I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
it
but that first paragraph is just
I mean we Mr chairman and
senator memorial cinema Morial
should be something
that should be bipartisan or
nonpartisan we want to report
from the environment department
we shouldn't make statements of
fact we shouldn't determine for
the environment department what
the results of their study or
the analysis is going to be and
for that reason I would urge
other members of the committee
to also reject this memorial
we've seen this over my nine
years here over and over where
the first couple paragraphs you
step forward in the memorial
basically the results of the
study before we even have the
study and I understand we use
these to make statements.
Or or members use these to make
statements but I I really think
that practice Mr chair and
members of the committee should
cease this this first paragraph
is very troublesome
it's not necessary it doesn't
help the memorial Mr chair
members of the committee doesn't
help the memorial it really is
just making a statement to the
marmot Department that we've
we've determined what we want we
we're making a statement we
don't really need the
information because we're just
pushing it out there that this
is the issue
so I hope in the future this
committee will do its it's best
to ensure that we create
memorials that we can support in
a bipartisan way and still get
the information that we need it
is better than than first
introduced but I will have to
oppose this it is a direct
impact on
the dairy industry and and again
at that sentence is just very
troublesome and and hopefully by
the floor
maybe we can come up with an
agreement to remove it and
create a bipartisan memorial
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
anyone else from the committee
our department Senator if I may
ask.
R. if the first paragraph were
removed would you be able to
support the
memorial.
And Mister chair members of the
committee I would.
Very well in that case we
considered your
your amendment earlier that
would have parts that for
program let me make a
as the chairman of the make up
and suggested amendment that we
strike the first paragraph.
Are to see if we can get to
bipartisanship on this a
memorial and
and then but then leave the rest
of the of the of the
director Miss whereas is impact
as they are
Senator Hamblen what is your
field on the on the some of the
services.
Mr chair I I still thank you
very much for the opportunity
and Senator Pirtle for your
discussion and your background
in this I do agree with senator
to see Pino that we we do have
to establish that there's risk
said that is that is part of the
story that we're telling in this
and the first two paragraphs of
the memorial so I do have to
decline that that suggestion Mr
chair are not
and our and I will just simply
not that we already have the
rules are the rules there
because we have risks about the
nonetheless
so we have an amendments to
strike page one lines fifteen
through eighteen so the whereas
with begin online nineteen is
there further our discussion.
from the committee on this
proposed amendment.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman so yes yes
the amendment that we just voted
down.
Up the amendment senator the
members we just voted down was
simply to strike page one line
sixteen the work but and then
line seven generating this is an
amendment to strike the entire
first paragraph on and it
appears that may get us to a
unanimous to pass on this our
memorial.
And it is an unfriendly and then
Senator.
Ask for.
All right.
Any other questions on the
amendment proposed amendment.
Well in that case Mr don't
please call the roll Senator
Baca yes.
No.
Senator more yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
No Senator Wirth no.
Senator Ingle yes.
In order to do it now.
And Senator Ivey Soto yes on a
six to five that amendment is
adopted.
Is there any further discussion
on the amended memorial.
Representative wealth single for
the discussion on the amended
memorial Miss Vigil if you'll
please call the roll I'm sorry
what is the what is part of the
committee.
Senate
passed well senator Morris audit
passed motion with the second
from service if you know.
The sale please call the roll
Senator Baca yes Senator Lopez
yes.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Ingle yes reporter
Bennett do it yes and senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am on eleven to
nothing you ever unanimous do
pass on your up amended memorial
and if you are able to
communicate with them a little
later today you may want to chat
with Senator.
More about comments that
overstate Representative Max
call
said them.
He was before the Senate
Judiciary.
They are and that's astrology
guys have offline.
So let's see we have senator
Candelaria is thank thank you Mr
chairman thank you committee I
appreciate the opportunity and I
appreciate the lively discussion
and thank you miss Martin Mr
Larmer and Beverly as well as
that from lieutenant governor
Bradley.
Thank all right thank you very
much current.
Very much.
Senator Candelaria you or of the
the
Representative resolution nine
you are also the co sponsor of
Senate bill three fifty seven AM
where
you can with.
May not have time for both of
the.
The thing is.
Okay.
Mr Chairman there was some
background noise I think another
Senator how would you like to
proceed that's what I was saying
is that you are the sponsor of
of a great revolution nine
you're also co sponsor of Senate
bill three fifty seven yes R.
and so my question was how would
you like to proceed in terms
which one of them would like to
do for and I'm not sure that
will have time to get to both of
them I'd like to Senate joint
resolution nine Mr chairman if
that's okay with you that's fine
with me please please proceed
and and and I'm gonna also I
just did take a quick break I'm
gonna ask the vice chair to
please preside over this
consideration Senator
resolution.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
members of the committee I
introduced Senate joint
resolution nine to begin what I
think it's a very important
conversation our legislature.
The benefits drawbacks and
issues that arise for us as
policy makers and for local
governments as well on account
of the anti donation clause as
we are all aware the anti
donation clause prohibits the
states cities counties.
And school districts from making
gifts or transfers of money or
property to private persons.
and that's as plain text of
course our courts have sort of
adopted different
interpretations of the anti
donation clause I think one of
the touch Jones is that you know
the state always needs to quote
unquote get something in return
our local government has to get
something of value in return and
exchange for pledging credit or
making a transfer of funds or
property I submit to this
committee that the anti donation
clause broken that it is a blunt
instrument that a truck chance
to achieve a noble goal but
takes a shotgun approach to a
problem when the demands of a
modern economy require that we
take a scalpel let me explain
what I mean by that.
We are one of the few states in
the country most of them are
western states that continue to
have a similar anti donation
clause in our constitution it
was an idea that proliferated
among states that entered the
union during the during the
great progressive period of the
early nineteen hundreds and I
mean progressive in the sense of
the teddy Roosevelt sense of the
word not in the AOC sensible.
and so the the intent of the
statute is that the
constitutional prohibition is of
course renewable it is to
prevent you know all governments
just blowing the doors off and
making on regulated on
supervised and ill advised
perhaps donations the public
sector.
But this legislature is already
recognized that the anti
donation clause is breaking.
and does not really provide the
legislature with the full set of
tools it needs to manage this
economy or especially to match
the COVID nineteen pandemic.
In the early nineteen nineties
the legislature sent to the
voters a constitutional
amendment to create an
exemption Salita or rather an
exemption to the anti donation
clause specifically for leader.
in order for the state and local
governments to engaging local
economic and state development
activity to quote unquote get
around the anti donation clause
and I think we've seen this
problem rise over and over and
the discussions we've been
having about our response to the
COVID nineteen pandemic
the anti donation clause for
example prohibits the state from
making direct cash transfers or
payments to low income
individuals were quote unquote
not indulge right and so what do
we do we look to our tax code
and we come up with creative
ways of creating giving tax
credits and deductions because
for some reason Mr chairman this
is just the law if the state
send someone a check for six
hundred dollars that's a
violation of the anti donation
clause but if the state gives
that same person a tax rebate
that results in that same person
getting six hundred dollars that
is not a violation of the anti
donation clause.
I've been in this legislature
for nine years and consistently
over and over again.
The conversation often becomes
how do we get around the anti
donation clause how do we how do
we contend with that how do we
do what we need to do despite
says and what I want to start
this conversation Mr chairman is
to submit to the legislature
that the reason we keep having
those problems is that a
constitutional prohibition and
take a nation is again as I said
a blunt instrument it should be
repealed and then it should be
replaced with the statutory
framework that governs and sets
the parameters whereby the state
or local governments can either
pledge their credit or make
donations to private persons we
certainly don't want to blow the
doors off of this and I think we
yeah demonstrates that we can
have a statutory framework to
govern public donations to
private entities that doesn't
require a statutory provision
one something's in the
constitution as we've as we've
noticed it ties our hands I
submitted this committee that we
can achieve the same sort of
public policy guardrails we can
achieve the same sort of public
policy results without taking
incredibly important tools off
of the table there's a reason
states like Texas can outcompete
us for any company when we
really get into a bidding war
and part of that reason is Texas
is approach to economic
development is simply to make
cash transfers to companies to
donate large tracts of land to
donate millions and millions of
dollars and your as direct cash
incentives now I'm not saying
that's the best idea in the
world but I think it gives you a
sense that states that don't
have a constitutional
prohibition rather take a more
policy driven detailed approach
case by case basis approach and
are able to construct a cohesive
and coherent policy in statute
governing donation that those
states are better equipped to
manage their own act.
Namik affairs better equipped to
support their populace when we
are in times like this of
pandemic an economic catastrophe
and are better able to make
better public policy so that is
what I submit to the committee
so the amendment is very simple
before you it would simply
repeal the anti donation clause
as well as all the other
exemptions that we've created
over time for veterans
scholarships for Lida and for
indigent persons and I think
each one of those exemptions is
a tacit recognition that the
over arching policy of all of
article fourteen is far too
restrictive on the state so I
look forward to the discussion
thank you Mr chairman that is
what the amendment does I hope
that we can allow the people to
New Mexico the opportunity to
weigh in in this discussion as
well.
Thank you senator Candelaria Mr
hell is there anyone signed up
for public comment on this.
Mr chair there's no one size of
public comment.
Thank you set will go to the
committee senator o'neill.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator.
This forward all right
look I approached I approached
this issue from the nonprofit
sector this is in the nineties
when I was up at the roundhouse
advocating for Dismas House I
got to explain to my my our
fellow advocates a lot of them
were residents of distance south
not see the state just can't
give us the appropriation to
help our program no no no no no
we must do an RFP and and and
and and crafted so that it's
like a program in the north
valley on Candelaria street that
serves more women coming out of
prison you know like I totally
get the intention of the are of
the anti donation clause
snowball as a sponsor says but
let's be real you know and this
is just from my experience
ground level with with
advocating for a nonprofit to
get help from the state
warranted warranted how big it
should be you know this was
houses now part of the
corrections budget but to play
this game of life in our F. P.
in that situation when everybody
knows it's going to dismiss
house you know to me this this
legislation is long overdue and
I think the sponsor for bring it
forward thank you.
Thank you senator Ortiz Pino
Senator Moores.
You madam chairman and and
senator Candelaria.
Thank you for for for tackling
this.
When New Mexico in the state and
the constitution it's a very
different world.
The
whole notion are for large
numbers or more large amounts of
government money being.
Brought into the state from the
federal government for social
service purposes.
That was that wasn't even
anybody's dream that was that
was alien concept.
What we did then was to the and
your nation's laws designed to
keep us from getting special
benefits to make for profit
corporations the railroads.
With the exceptions we can get.
The realtors land we're tax
exemptions for actual O. right
to.
That is because we use the
Economic Development loophole to
say yeah we'll we'll give you
the money we had gives the
services on the PMR and jellies
with the small organizations are
actually serving people was
inevitable agency.
Vermin entities don't have
instead we we do this.
This routing the money through
the department of finance in
ministration to the local
government division we send
contracts with with the county
or the city we sent has to put
out an RFP which by the time the
money finally source reaching
the people is intended to.
Three years or longer in some
cases we managed to lose very
value of the nonprofit world and
their name in lesser ability to
respond quickly and effectively.
Shandling everything's ponderous
governmental structure.
And we know protecting the
public taxpayer dollars we're
just making it really a lot of
course to get the word
of serving the poor in the
engine of the state.
The state in the in the state.
Way.
I really think this this is long
overdue I support senator
Siraj's.
Taking a look at the entire
constitution because the world
has changed considerably and
earn ten years since New Mexico
became a state and we can try
our hands this way thanks to be
effective.
So thank you senator I think
this is something we really need
to be taking a look at if it
doesn't pass this year we are
bringing up until it does thank
you.
Thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Moores thank
you madam chair and senator
Candelaria mission on this
committee or wish you were back
so we'll talk to Senator Stewart
about that Sunday New York
spotlight a lot of great so
ideas and thoughts and I really
enjoy working with you on these
things as we often agree on
these things.
It's to expand on what the
Senator Ortiz CPN on a talk a
little bit about a recent
business situation that happened
during the middle of the
pandemic that was correctly cost
taxpayers a lot of money to fish
you see during the pandemic that
result our company as you all
know we COVID testing with the
pandemic yet we could not we
have the instruments after two
to one R. O. yes it's a quarter
million dollars to so we just
happen to have a tap room that
businesses would borrow yes so
we're able to transfer to the
COVID yes with some
modifications the FDA we would
love to go out by a second third
or fourth you will have one year
to two thousand of state so
we're during the week we're
running spending seven thousand
yes.
We could not I because our under
EA you we could not go out and
buy another after we were bonds
which would have got our hands
on well you are able I was
federal government and its funds
would actually search states.
we would have respect for rural
dollars get with it will so the
state was able to get a call
you and one of them was actually
given to interest you and our
competitor which is a nonprofit
own have by UNM two zero by UNM
your get this chart on dollar
piece of equipment the state and
ended up paying for the bill the
laboratory S. U. N. M. by the
equipments and then by the
reagents and them and created
infrastructure the cost of a
million dollars taxpayer money
to be able to do it together on
the outside the nation costs
because we could just got on box
the unity are up on last minute
million dollars to get up and
running out of state agencies
throughout sort through tricor.
They ended up on I'm gonna say
this slowly they ended up at the
peak of the pandemic do we seven
percent of capacity on that
insurance NMAA your try court
we're doing five hundred yes
we we're doing seven thousand a
week on that so you need.
That cost New Mexico a million
dollars rating and efficiency
because of the apps automation
Clause normally were you asking
for state to give us that extra
we're willing to buy it we have
the infrastructure we have the
staff so that is an example
besides what so it's the only
Anderson RTC can or talk about
how that.
In a time of critical needs
that's a status based on two
years hello back our efforts in
the state our flight pandemic
and wasted about four million
dollars taxpayer money so
Senator I I thank you for
bringing us on morals issues
that
we all understand the corruption
of all years ago and the
potential corruption now
registered voters guide rails
transparency or critical and I
do believe the Santa donation
costs in that one instance on
talk about for personal speakers
probably cost some people their
wives because we get to people
are are during the height of.
So I applaud you for doing us so
very interesting idea and I do
miss you on the street.
Mr Chairman were always part of
the same team.
There's no I in team.
But I do have a coach state or
is it emini at one time.
Is still that Mr madam chair
thank you senator for the best
quip I've heard all week.
I I don't see anyone else on the
committee seeking recognition on
this Senator at at at and is if
there is anyone please please
wave.
Madam chairman Senator Ingle
yeah I was just curious on this
so Senator Candelaria
I'm borderline with the state of
Texas and committee or with a
lot of the things they can do
their for instance
leverage in Plainview Texas that
the Walmart folks built a thank
you forty eight acre building
and say here distribution center
and they gave their property tax
for I can't remember how many
years thirty years fifty years
with this particular piece of
legislation applied or something
like that for a city or county
in New Mexico.
you madam chair and senator I'm
gonna give you my favorite
answer which is it depends
This by enacting this it would
remove the anti donation
prohibition right for that
transaction so they would no
longer be an anti donation issue
with a local government state
government for giving either
gross receipts tax property tax
income tax eccentric etcetera
for a business as an incentive
or for private persons or
indigent persons for.
Because I know there is a
there's a companion house bill
to this bill that seeks to just
create a new exemption to anti
donation for infrastructure
needed for private residential
use in underserved areas
the issue though it property tax
the reason I say you know it
gets you half of the way there
when it comes to property taxes
there are other provisions of
the constitution madam chair and
senator that also deal with
property tax and that
specifically encumber or prevent
the state or local governments
from doing exactly what you're
discussing except in a very
limited number of cases for
example
wounded veterans right can get
that sort of of of forgiveness
so this this legislation would
allow local government shoe
for give tax liability as an
economic incentive that being
said as I've mentioned I think
if this were to pass and we
would no longer have an anti
donation clause in the
constitution I think it that
falls on the legislature to step
forward the framework for
exactly the sort of cases you're
describing much the same way
this legislature did after the
voters created the lead up
exemption in the early nineties.
I I I trust that's a good answer
for internetting.
You entered a lot of things
around the corner up to create
around the dog but anyway of
another question unless Houston
in my years here when I was
first year he passed a bill that
to your liquor licenses are
expensive and I remember there's
a bill passed by him that let
the.
The brigade the grocery should
H. you're super certain amount
of time to.
Give back some money for that
what these licenses costs and
then we would have an unlimited
amount our licenses but.
The folks that they gave five or
seven hundred thousand for a
liquor license losing that they
got to get back a lot of that
through the exemption from gross
receipts for a certain certain
period of time.
And that was passed by the
legislature trying to the
governor's taken to court and
the Supreme Court said that was
unconstitutional for us to do
that with that apply in a
situation like this if this for
of passed the supreme court's
decision would be different
meeting.
This would change that the
legislature would have the
authority as you said Senator.
To for K. sixty wave G. R. T.
now what I'll say is your
example is interesting so I I
hope I've answered the question
I'm gonna chase the dog for a
few seconds of the tree because
I think it's important the you
you mentioned an important point
in New wants your Senator which
is in your example the
legislature again basically for
again gross receipts tax
liability and that was said by
the court to be a violation of
anti donation clause this year
we are instead of.
Forgiving on the frontend we
just create additional
exemptions and credits on the
back and to compensate people so
for example in the liquor reform
bill that's coming to the Senate
the bill proposes to do what
Senator Houston did but instead
of doing it on the front end
which allegedly violates you
know anti donation you can just
do the same thing on the back
and and grant people refundable
tax credits and that somehow
doesn't violate anti donation.
Interesting to see how that all
plays out because so it's so
it's a question that has been
done you know talked about in
various instances in various
ways and my thirty some years up
here and we all live end up
going around saying tree and not
it's always interesting to see
how it's used and how it's the
average dealt with but to I
don't have a **** is surely a
problem with this but I do think
this is going to be a real
interesting thing when Mr this
this service yes exactly who
applies to and how it's applied
because the thing about it is
when we forgive or we can do
things for.
Gross receipts are exempt them
from property tax or something
like that somebody has to pick
up the slack and the dollars
that we're going somewhere to
that affects so it'll be an
interesting thing to see how
this works out I know the folks
in Plainview Texas when they
realize what they're property
taxes are natural textures
supports our schools.
Out that Walmart doesn't pay is.
The folks to you know did made
that deal with Walmart are not
in office anymore but anyway the
deal was done and it can't be
changed thank you.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator kept Candelaria for
bringing this to our committee
welcome home I'm happy to have
you on the Senate rules
committee
you know I think this this is an
issue that
We've danced around for the nine
years that I've been here and
you know I I really.
Like to think back to what
senator Neil was saying and and
with non profits and in a within
our communities and some of the
services that are vital that are
provided by nonprofits that
really into becoming extremely
inefficient because of the way
we have to work things and go
through and do things because of
the anti donation so I think you
know this will really.
Help be more efficient with with
taxpayer dollars you know
today's world where everything
can be it right in the
information is out there and the
sunshine portal and everything
that there's less of a concern
on that issue so hopefully we
can move this and then come up
with some great legislation that
will still ensure that the
taxpayers dollars are spent in a
way that is open and for their
benefit thank you sure.
Thank you senator.
Thank you and I.
As the the anyone else on the
committee is seeking
recognition.
Senator I I I like this R. S. J.
R. and and I I agree with with a
lot of the comments that have
been made about how this creates
a lot of roadblocks and
in effectively helping folks
especially in a situation like
this
But I wonder be beyond kind of
the transparency measures that
are already in place because
this is essentially and and anti
corruption.
Approach in our constitution
what what other mechanisms do we
currently have in place that
will in part from the
transparency ones that will
ensure that that taxpayer
dollars will be used
appropriately and and I won't be
subject to.
Two more corruption by getting.
To the check area that all yes
this is this is them in this
this is the really important
part of this conversation
Senator thank you all address
what I think so let's assume
this were to be passed and the
legislature to do nothing else
right I think at a very minimum
the governmental conduct right
prohibits any government
deprivations public employee X.
cetera from using their personal
care governmental position for
personal gain right so an
individual who would where to.
You know enter into an agreement
for that for sure motives that
we're not for the public benefit
I think would face liability on
the government to conduct
attacks I think that provides
one part.
Number two I think basically the
criminal law regarding
embezzlement and fraud and all
those other common and statutory
criminal offenses are equally
applicable to government actors
acting in this civil contracts
as they are to criminal on the
street.
but I think the really important
part of your question Senator is
it it highlights that the
legislature's work in this
reform effort is too full first
it is I believe to repeal this
section of the constitution
secondly I believe it is to
enact enabling legislation that
would set forth the policy rate
of New Mexico the answer to
nation clauses the prohibition
it's not a policy right provides
no guidance provides the answer
it provides no answers to all
the questions that we struggle
with in this legislature so I
think it would be incumbent upon
this legislature to enact that
sort of framework as I've
mentioned to Senator Ingle is
simple it would and should
address in what instances and in
what means if at all more local
government wave property tax
rate gross receipts tax waive
income tax to the state
so I think that would that would
be the the missing piece right
and you know there was a reason
I got this idea and well first
is after nine years of hearing
the same debates I think is
Senator Pirtle was mentioning I
just got to a point where we
need to fish or cut bait right
the the the the workarounds in
the back alleys in the loop to
lose that we create to get
around this thing are just
resulting in worse policy
outcomes that if we didn't have
it you know so so what we're
reason I got this idea in
closing is that process I've
outlined is exactly what the
legislature did when the voters
enacted the leading exemption we
came in and established enacted
a statutory framework to govern
local economic development
activity and we continue to have
very very robust debates on Lita
in this legislature and I think
we're gonna have one on the
floor pretty soon on that.
R. what is the pleasure of the
committee on this bill.
Secretary.
Move past I'm sure and I think
that's is that second from
Senator Ortiz Pena looks center
Oct yes.
No I'm not moving to do.
Did you want to speak on the
bill so I did a little bit later
I understand that qualifies for
that.
Please go ahead
You know and I appreciate this
Senator bringing this forward I
you know I I just think of the
some of the real this situations
I run into in my district you
know with constituents who had
issues whether it's flooding
from a DH your.
Well.
Issues or things of that nature
or even problems on the on on
parking lots in on certain
businesses where they request
was madam chair you know
assistance from the state to to
alleviate the small issues and
that you run into the issue
where you you know you're
setting the state tractor to go
to work on private property and
and you know and and people
request this kind of thing all
the time I I run into this all
the time in my district and
those are just small examples if
you want to extrapolate it down
and start talking about the
things that could happen I think
it's rather frightening I think
a prohibitions on this type of
activity or actually critical I
I guess I could understand if
there was the other half of this
equation that put into place
some sort of controls but we we
won't have that with this were
simply removing the restraint
from from our constitution that
to to conduct these types of
activities directly as an arm of
the government exercising its
assets on the on the benefit for
the benefit of private
individuals and corporations I I
don't disagree that it's
cumbersome but I I think having
this restriction you know is
better than nothing at all which
is what we would have if we if
we decided to repeal that
particular section I I I can't
imagine what what some of the
outcomes that that this might
bring especially if we're
delayed in passing legislation
and policy to protect ourselves
in a timely manner which we all
know sometimes doesn't happen
quite as quickly as we want so
there would be lying with the no
and taking donation Clause and
no protection for the public you
know so you have X. Y. Z. person
doing a favor for.
For
some constituent that might
support a campaign down the road
or or what have you I I just I
just think it's kind of
dangerous territory trade into
and that that's my concern about
about this proposition thank you
madam chair.
Thank you senator.
So I believe we're on and do
passed motion.
Miss Vigil would you call the
roll Senator Baca
Senator Lopez no.
Senator Morris yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Senator Wirth.
Senator.
We are muted open your.
Well you unmuted in the needed
yes or no sorry yes okay.
Senator do a yes.
And is the chair back Senator
Ivey Soto.
I am back but I will say yes
because I'm not.
The vote is six to four.
You
I have no illusions that this is
the.
I'm gonna try to get this right
this is not the beginning of the
end this is the end of the
beginning in this process and I
do look forward to presenting
either this session or very soon
thereafter the sort of framework
that I think this committee has
identified the state needs to
govern donations in the event
this is repealed so I really
appreciate the time this
committee Mr chairman thank you
very much I'm circular before
you log off you are also the
cosponsored center built at
fifty seven which represents
that this morning.
Yes Mr chairman if if that is
okay I I am just to alert the
vice chair that she is
continuing to preside over the
committee.
Okay I
Mr chairman I didn't expect that
lasted the past I'm just really
enjoying my Friday morning this.
Mr Chairman our beautiful new
coalitions being sprung up every
day and sent
Mr chairman thank you I I just
getting a Texan Senator money
Austin is asked me to to to
proceed with presenting the bill
for both of us.
I'm.
I want to emphasize that this
bill is about.
A policy conversation I think
you know we all understand that
in the last year the the
secretary of education
designees or or or permanent at
the time I'm not entirely sure
was not residing full time the
state of New Mexico for a good
part of the pandemic.
And I cast no aspersions are
cast no no judgment on that
because at the time there was no
requirement that a cabinet
secretary duly confirmed by the
Senate actually reside in the
state of New Mexico.
and that fact caused some
concern I know for many of
Senator money else's
constituents and for me raised
an important conversation that I
think this legislature should
have about our system because I
think ultimately that's what our
concern is here is our system
and our loss not the person's of
the personalities that inhabit
them at the time but what is the
policy the state of New Mexico
so what the legislation before
you does is it basically
shakes and follows the lead of
the New Mexico constitution.
So the constitution of New
Mexico requires that we.
As elected representatives not
only reside in New Mexico but
reside in our districts the
constitution it's plain language
says that B. executive officers
shall reside in the city of
Santa Fe now that dream court
certify.
In a decision said those words
don't mean what they mean and
doesn't require that all the
executive officers actually
reside in Santa Fe so long as
they have their their chief
principal office in the city of
Santa Fe so that's so
technically if you drive play
reading of the constitution the
fact that this is that the
Attorney General doesn't live in
Santa Fe should mean that the
Attorney General is not lawfully
the Attorney General.
but what does constitutional
provisions tell us and what our
election code tells us when it
comes to single member districts
is that there is an inherent
value in insuring that people
making decisions about our
community are part of the
community.
That they live in the community
they are part of the struggles
of that community they they
understand the ethos of the
community they are part of the
fabric of the community
and up until now there is been
no similar requirement placed
upon the heads of our executive
agencies I'll be very clear
because I expect someone
somewhere to say that this is
out of some kind of animus my
concern here is about our system
and I think those of you who are
on this committee with me during
the Republican administration
now I took very similar
positions than and I will take
that now
I think that if the constitution
requires that.
Legislators and the executive
officers must reside in the
state of New Mexico that is
similar statutory provision
should be placed upon the the
cabinet secretaries of the
executive agencies at the end of
the day we in the legislature
Advise and consent to the hiring
of each of these individuals is
within our purview to decide
what their job qualifications
are and we submit on behalf of
senator Munoz myself that this
is an appropriate qualification
for the job thank you.
Thank you senator and I is there
any public comment on the spell
madam chair known as Register
for public comment.
Thank you I Senator Pirtle.
The new pass.
Is is that other other folks who
wish to speak.
Senator I I have a question
and it goes Pacific plea to.
The use of the word
uninterrupted on page two online
twenty four.
I've done I've done residency
cases in election law challenges
and and the un interrupted.
Residency for it is not required
to be uninterrupted it's
required that that where that
person lives of HB that their
primary residence they spent a
significant amount of time there
but there we have we have
multiple election on cases that
deal with residency questions
where folks have more than one
residents and depending on on
the facts at issue
there's just determination of
what their primary residency is
for the purposes of holding off
at us but I'm not aware of any
that would require un
uninterrupted residency as a
basis for for being in the
position that there and so I
would offer.
Just an amendment to to just
take out the word uninterrupted
from page two online twenty
four.
Miss madam vice chair and
members of this committee that
is a friendly amendment.
I I I provided the same advice.
and did not win the discussion
during the drafting process but
I agree with your legal analysis
and it is a funding.
Is there any discussion on the
amendment.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam chair I
apologize my allergies hit so
bad today so you'll see me back
on and off but I am listening
I'm on your amendment if you go
back up to the line prior you'll
have to change so that's online
twenty three instead of a and
you have to change that to a.
It will maintain a residency
within the state for the term of
secretaries appointment just for
clarification so my twenty three
strike and insert a and then
twenty four continue with your
amendment.
Thank you senator I I appreciate
that catch.
All right so with that amendment
at online twenty three page two
striking and and certainly there
are pay online twenty four
striking uninterrupted.
I is there any further
discussion on the amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Seen on the amendment is
adopted.
Is there any further discussion
on that as a as amended Senator
Pirtle.
Passes amended.
Right the motion for all second
our our Senator Lopez seconds
Miss Vigil would you please call
the roll.
Senator Lopez.
Yes senator Morris.
Yes.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Sen.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth I know.
Senator Ingle human donor.
Senator Duhigg yes and senator.
Yes.
The vote is seven to one.
Thank you Sir and let Mr chair
Jack to.
To take back over.
Very well so congratulations
Senator Candelaria please inform
sermon notes that you have a to
pass on on Senate bill three
fifty seven.
feeling Mister chairman Senator
money us knows and he knows all
somehow.
Even before have anyway I really
want to thank this committee I
do miss being with you all these
are excellent debates and and I
am very very much miss them so
you all have a wonderful day
thank you Mr chairman and
members of this committee it
thank you very much senator
Candelaria and with that the
Senate rules committee will be
in recess until nine AM on
Monday morning
and we will have eight just
everybody remind everybody will
have a slightly shortened
meeting on Monday morning
because the floor is starting at
I think is that report I'm
thirty or eleven.
Remember it's going to be at
eleven on Monday yes so we will
be starting at eleven o'clock on
Monday normally we would start
at eleven thirty so we will
we'll have a short meeting on on
Monday morning Senate rules
committee nonetheless the the
general becoming out we're
trying to see.
If we can get the DFA our
cabinet secretary Debbie Romero
of all of her information
process so that we can have for
up for confirmation on Monday
and then we may also do a couple
of of those as well so thank you
very much and have a good
weekend.
