Committee members up for staff
who log in they will be promoted
the panelists as well we don't
have a specific rule to.
To look at at the moment
this is a discussion and then
based on the discussion will be
drafting.
some parameters.
The
So that so that we can we can.
Appropriate and addressing.
These issues at the beginning of
the session.
Also let me just announce right
now that the Senate rules
committee will be meeting.
Wednesday morning.
So so we can be in on Tuesday.
Of the Senate rules committee
will be meeting Wednesday
morning before the floor session
on Wednesday.
and so everybody I do plan.
for that and we are going to be
at that time then addressing.
of necessary rules changes for
Up for.
Right of these issues.
so with that so what I'd like to
do.
before I give any of my thoughts
this to this to open up to
committee members as well as in
the staff and and and I do not
also that Mr Fleetwood from
Legislative Council Service who
is one of the people who assist
in drafting.
the rules
based on the parameters that we
ask for whether he thinks it's a
good idea or not
is is also here with us and so
if there any technical questions
certainly he could answer them
and I think more to the point
he's here to to also kind of get
a sense of what we're thinking
so that he and I can work
together over the weekend.
On that so so with that let me
let me open it up let me also
struck by saying that the rules
that we.
had in place.
Of for the last two years.
were rules that were adopted.
two years ago for twenty twenty
one the rest of twenty twenty
one at the time that we did
that.
And then we re adopted for
twenty twenty two I do want to
acknowledge and and of the the
former chair the rules
committee.
for leading us through that
process
And so and and I'm like the the
house that kept doing it just
for that session and then every
time they came back that's what
we got to be about something we.
You know for the most part had
something and so
in which which has has
facilitate our work quite a bit
so with that let me let me go
ahead and open it up to and I do
not that a bull Center doing his
log them and also see Mr Taurus
from the Senate Republican
offices lauded will set up the
street from from major office
here as well
and so and and let me just say
also for this discussion staff
is I'm gonna invite staff to
also participate in this
discussion or of not just listen
but also be able to to make some
suggestions.
Thank you.
Yes yes yes yes and and and if
if you guys do what paticipate
also you're you're welcome this
these are just come up and have
a seat.
Over here
And of so and then Mr Mr Taurus
again feel free to on mute if
you would like to up type in at
some point so let me just start
off by listening a little bit to
some of people's concerns are
directions that they that they
think we should be going on some
of these things and then I will
I will give some thoughts as
well after that but I want to
listen first.
The server thank you Mr chair hi
I'd like to start by focusing
specifically on the issue that
we had in the special session
where a member of our caucus
Senator Gonzales I think it's
all public knowledge tested
positive for COVID
and was able to participate
remotely from PED house his home
town of the is assumed in
committees but was not able to
participate on the floor so I
think looking back at Senate
resolution one from twenty
twenty one I pulled it up
rule seven dash one dash three
states that a member who test
positive for COVID
shall either be excused for self
isolate outside the capital in
the City of Santa Fe.
and and participate by
simultaneous remote electronic
means so we did have a provision
where if I got COVID I could
participate from my home in
Santa Fe Senator Gonzales could
not I mean you could err
participated from your home so
he could afford it that's
correct that's correct but he
could not to participate in his
home inTaos correct and so I do
think we need to revisit that.
And I'll just also say that that
is also consistent I mean
Senator Gonzales is not the only
one was impacted by that that
was consistent with the standard
that is applied to Senator
Montez earlier in the year
correct Hickey earlier in the
year
and there may been one or two
other senators off and this
keeps me up earlier in the year
who who were impacted by that as
well and so so so Mister chair I
would like to see that change I
think that makes sense so
Senator can participate from
wherever they need to be to get
the help that they need to
address the illness I also think
it's part of that rule we need
to state that a senator who has
tested positive for COVID and is
participating remotely is excuse
for purposes of the call again
we just have this illness
affects people in many different
ways and the last thing we want
to be doing is is forcing
somebody to somehow was actually
could conceivably could be in
the hospital
have to be part of a call so I
want to start with those with
that specific one out of respect
for Senator Gonzales I know this
was a huge issue and I and I'll
just say Mr chair the other
thing I'd like to just point out
as I think that
We've got the framework that we
put in place is a good one we've
learned a lot since we've gone
through this and I do think for
senators who are concerned about
the risk of being on the floor
the the ability to participate
from their office which we had a
year ago is good
I also think that
My final thing I'll say is in in
terms of committee
I don't think we should do with
the way we did a year ago or we
were completely remote because
the capital will be open for
those who are fully vaccinated
I'm I'm sorry consider what
could you please repeat what you
just that yeah so I I don't
remember the last phrase fully
vaccinated on of the competent
due to the presence start the
capital will be the capital will
be open I'm sorry could you
repeat that one more time
please.
So I mean again I think that the
point is this no I mean there's
a port right yes I've been
hearing from a lot of people I
hear you're going virtual I'm
like really because we're
talking about the rules that I
don't I don't remember that a
decision on this and and the
thing that I've seen as is that
is that the capital.
For people who are fully
vaccinated the capital is going
to be up so let me be clear and
and we're gonna have a
Legislative Council meeting on
Monday so certainly it's not
mine to unilaterally make that
statement but I do think from my
perspective and from seeing what
I've seen about the house and
how they're they are going to
have their committees completely
remote but
I understand ready getting a
phone call that I didn't didn't
take long.
But I just I just think that so
so with respect to our
committees I do think that that
having a hybrid ability so that
we can have both public comment
in person by those that meet the
standards to be in the building
assuming that the council
service continues where we are
number one but also having
obviously the what we've done
and learn how to do having the
option to have zoom testimony
subject to you know the chairs
parameters I mean it needs to be
there for every committee but
the chair will determine the
extent that amount of testimony
both in person and B. as in and
I do think that a senator who
wants to participate the is
assumed for example from really
wherever should be able to do so
for committee hearings so it so
it truly is a hybrid versions of
those are just some thoughts off
the top and I again I very much
appreciate you know the work
that that has been done as you
mentioned and setting up the
room one twenty twenty one and
then modifying it I do think
when we get into the specifics
of the CDC is change the
guidance also talks about yeah
it's involving and so we're
going to need to address address
that on to do this in as safe a
way as we can.
And as we go on the in the
discussion I will I would just
simply say that I do think that
that that we are.
Up Senator Wirth as you said
operating in a hybrid
perspective.
I think I think.
That let's let's let's kind of
re frame that mother way which
is.
To some degree almost there's a
I mean we are operating in the
building with reasonable
accommodations for folks.
And the and this is.
I think after the last session
we got a lot of feedback from
people about the nature of a.
Legislative session where the
public.
is this restricted from having
access to its members and
And so and so
You know this is a this is a
A process right thank I think I
think we're looking at a
presumption of in person.
With with accommodations are up
from regional perspective for
the for folks who either cannot
be here or or or left issues
that that will prevent them from
being here so but with that
having said that in the end I do
want to make that really clear
to because because there's a lot
of things that are being
discussed and there's a lot of
urban myths happening by the
hour.
And and it's important for
people to know that when they
elected a representative
government.
that that where they have a
right of the constitution to
petition there are there are
there are the people that
they've elected that that at
least with this set of
perspective that means that that
to the extent that were able to
be here in the building to the
extent that other people are
able to come in the Santa Fe
generally or to be in the
building that that is something
that we are.
going to be do everything we can
to be open for business on and
and having said that let me also
just simply say we are not
planning to have.
Of all the school kids here
we're not planning to have
you know all of the vendors here
or not planning to have the
exhibits were not planning to
have
of the various different
our currency the ministrations
on the floor
I I let me myself and summer
Stompers but you know this is
and the in the and the fiesta
people from from the house and
the other folks to come in but
you know that those aspects.
Which is part of what makes the
legislature the legislature.
have to yield to the.
To the fact that we're the
pandemic.
But in terms of people coming to
do business in the building I've
also heard that people
understand that they'll get like
a one hour passed to come and
sit in the committee of Lee
I don't know where people have
heard that there's been no
discussion on the Senate side of
giving people a time to pass or
anything of that nature
and and you know and frankly
between between what the house
is doing and and and the and the
joint activities and and another
perspective it is that we're not
going to be doing you know I I
anticipate that that there will
be some natural ability to
socially distance there will be
fewer people in the building.
if if if we end up with too many
people in the building from a
public health perspective that
is something we'll have to re
evaluate but I'm.
I'm anticipating that that
people who need to advocate will
will have an opportunity to
advocate not just for thirty
seconds at a committee but to
actually be able to.
To have conversations with us
Senator Stewart thank you Mr
chairman I just want to follow
up on what senator Wirth said
the.
Legislative Council.
Has is requiring Matt
vaccinations full vaccinations
for we did it for the special
but that was also for this
session so those rules are
already in place from the
council service that the
requirement to be fully faxed
and we've added the booster was
already decided in the last
legislative session the council
meeting we are meeting on Monday
now we can change things at this
point
in fact that Legislative Council
when we talked about rules and
procedures was specifically for
both the special and the thirty
day we do that for both of them.
I will note that the that will
the the Legislative Council.
Up to a large degree up
throughout the year of all.
regulates.
Access to the building.
You know one of the things.
That is important to recognize
is that is that the hearing
rooms that we are in right now.
during the interim are under the
Legislative Council Service.
When we gavel in these hearing
rooms go under the chief clerk
of the respective champ.
And the and so and so while well
the Legislative Council.
All up does have jurisdiction
about the matter which people
access.
Are of the manner in which in
which each chamber operates once
we gavel in is a is a matter for
that chamber and and so
and and and and then it becomes
a question of of of of how we
balance that but not the just
right in terms of course the co
chairs are the speaker and the
pro tem so we try to have that
bye cameral on the aspect to it
so I wanted to also mention one
of the things like
I I agree that it's probably
time to allow our members to if
they are set to be up front to
be in their own home but but I I
would say that I think this is
the time for them to do it like
this that we should also allow
for members who have major
medical issues.
We've got one or two folks that
are like that so it should just
not be if you have been tested
for COVID she six for other
major medical issues or order
some type of language like that.
Absolutely thank M. and there
was also.
some conversation also about
what the rule is going to be for
staff.
And and what was suggested.
To me was that was that instead
of having a blanket rule that
perhaps we allow.
you Senator as to their staff
image committee chair as to
their staff
of the in the rules that they
make the decision as to as to
whether there staff is is is is
in person or remote.
So.
I got up I I do not Senator
Pirtle in addition to center
doing have joined this remotely.
Senator Baca is also up here.
if you will but he needs to
accept his promotion to a
panelist.
And so
Center back if you look on your
screen somewhere that says would
you like to be promoted.
We're talking and assume world
only of course but but that is
available to you that.
Senator do you have jobs some
input you would like to find and
then we'll go to center doing.
If you would.
I'm.
Okay thank you very much Senator
Pirtle Senator doing.
Thank you Mr chair I I just you
know the conversation that so
far and I agree with a lot of
what's been said I also wonder
if it's worth just thinking of
what we have put language about
testing in the rules previously
and I wonder if it's worth
having a little more detail
about that just to insure this
this is a nation that had been
brought up before but ensure
that we're having we have
reliable negative yes before
before returning to the capitol
to the extent that that we can
do that.
And and I'll just tell you all
the because of the fluid nature
of what is happening.
Part of what my idea is on on
how we may want to do this and I
would like to get the input from
the committee is that we instead
of doing up a rule for
twenty twenty two is actually
that we that we look at adopting
simply a permanent role.
That.
That in the case of a pandemic
up for public health emergency
that we follow
that if there are any isolation
or quarantine requirements for
testing requirements that we
would follow CDC guidelines that
there are no CDC guidelines
would follow Department of
Health if it's based on the
public health order not in there
mostly to see guidelines and
that when we are in session the
on the Senate rules committee
page of entomologist Dr will be
posted the latest CDC of
protocols.
so the so that for example when
they went from ten days to five
days we would have to go in the
rule when they went to if you're
feeling if after five days you
don't have any sometimes you
don't need a test if you're
still symptomatic you do need a
test
you know those those kinds of
things and those things change
on a full basis we don't would
not need to change the rule we
would simply update the notice
that would be on the on the
Senate rules committee landing
page for when we are in session
and then that would also then
then that that if we leave and
then come back and there's a
different set of protocols we
would just simply up that that
we would have to update our
rules every single time.
and so so that's that's kind of
the the thought that I had so
that we're able to balance
making sure that we have rules
that that will provide for our
safety the public safety have
flexibility that we may need at
any point but that we also then
have
have that flexibility when it's
a fluid situation and things are
changing.
So Senator Stewart.
Terminal along those lines
You know our director of the
council service road Burciaga is
in charge a lot of the the staff
in the capitol and in
discussions with me and the
speaker he has set up guidelines
for testing for staff I will
tell you they've just started it
they did ninety one yes
yesterday and the last several
days they found I cases might
all a symptomatic.
I will remind you that.
January February March of of
last year when we were all
terrified there's no vaccine or
at the started at cetera.
And we tested we found five
positives for the session.
So
We we are looking at a very
intense transmissibility right
now the only problem but the
good thing is that everyone in
this building will be vaccinated
and with the booster and if you
and wearing a mask and if you're
doing all of that the.
The likelihood of you getting
really sick seems to be very low
on and you know a doctor Fauci
and both and the CDC both inner
directed to to see both of them
have have commented that that
we're at a level of contagion.
In this country that that at
some point will all be exposed
that is where having proper
masking.
is important I will note for
myself.
That well right now I'm wearing
more of a surgical style masks
once we start in the session I
will be upgrading to a K. K. and
R. K. F. ninety five and
you know because because that is
that is certainly the best
practice from us and
you know I think the best
analogy that I've heard
someone give in terms of in
terms of the vaccinations is
that vaccinations are the seat
belts are to the car of the of
the of the disease
the seat belt won't stop you
from getting into an accident
but it will it will minimize the
impact of the accident when it
happens.
So Mister chairman.
Mr Burciaga has also agreed to
purchase the K. ninety fibre
that can ninety five miles okay
so we will be having those for
legislators and staff if they
don't have the appropriate mask
we've been trying to notify
people that.
No it's it's much safer if you
were mass that's highly
recommended so that came in
ninety five or for a in ninety
five
runs against for yes and I will
I don't know that that that to
the extent that we end up
adopting.
The CDC guidelines from us.
I think that would that would
actually put in a rule that
would be left that level of
masking that people would be
doing and a particular them if
we have them available for
everybody you may have some
requests for logos on some of
the masks but
In the less I do also see that
that the
Republican leader and member of
the committee Senator Baca has
joined us
remotely as well and so Senator
Baca you are you are up welcome
to.
to join in the conversation any
time and and provide your input
in this discussion so that so
that we would press some
parameters that work for the
entire Senate as we move forward
and and allow people to.
to be able to we allow the.
Hopefully the the building to
operate in the least restrictive
means possible under the
circumstances.
and so and etcetera but one of
the things that we did discuss
and I know you and I have had
this conversation up is is that
baking sure that part of the
rule is not just the
applicability of the role to
Senators but also applicability
of the rules that it Senator
manages their own office.
In terms of in terms of whether
staff are present for remote
now the requirements to get
hired are requirements that are
managed by the chief clerks
office of the chief surgeon arms
office we would not affect the
requirements for getting hired.
But but that in terms of the
work environment that would be
something that that each Senator
or each committee chair for each
member of leadership would make
a decision for their own staff
on that but with that the
Senator Baca do you do you have
any input that you'd like to
give this time.
Thank you and I do accept my
promotion to panelists so thanks
for that.
Is
not not so much I think we
discussed yesterday regarding
staff so are you know that we we
would take it upon ourselves
just to manage our own staff I I
think that's a I think that's
probably the most flexible in
the least restrictive way that
we could go
I wanted to clarify though the
the use of the the surgical N.
ninety five masks that that is
going to be available and it
will be an option but not a
requirement.
Well that that is frankly part
of the part of the conversation
if if we're going to default to
the to the CDC guidelines.
even in the least restrictive
environment it will depend on
what those guidelines would be
for building with people.
in the building.
and and that may be.
a K. K. M. ninety five R. K. F.
ninety four level of of mask.
Is that is that something that.
You would encourage us to
revisit at at some level I'm I I
think so I think that you know I
think that the the individuals
you know again
feel that that's necessary to
aware of that level of mask I
mean because we could we're
using CDC guidelines in some
areas and and some more areas we
we may not be I think the
flexibility of the person to be
able to decide which type of
mask they're wearing you know is
is is important as well so those
are not a one size fits all type
of mask and I know some people
that I've talked to have
difficulty breathing because
those those masks are a little
bit more restrictive if you have
elements of any kind that affect
your respiratory system and so
anyway I would just leave it
with that but you know I do
appreciate that those would be
available to everybody who who
soffit to to where those
and protect themselves in that
way okay very good very good
Senator do it would you like to.
Thank you Mr question.
With the whole with you know the
Senators what kind of manage
their own offices approach does
that mean that if if a Senator
staff member tested positive for
for comment this Senator could
make a decision that that staff
member remain in person well
positive comment in the wrong
hands.
The part of the.
Would not extend to that level.
Okay great thank you.
So it it would extend to whether
or not you know this and this
last session we have.
senators.
R. it's Senators personal staff
for all forty two I think we're
asked to work remotely.
But then committee staff were
asked to be present in the
building.
And and then leadership staff
was kind of a hot spot and so I
think I think after that
experience you know a lot of
people said you know can we can
we allow the Senator to make a
decision about what the fault is
absent of a positive test for
COVID.
you know I will I will I will
say just on the side there's
been there's been some
interesting research done and
training done up up up around
the country with
rescue dogs
where rescue dogs are able
actually to smile I think in New
Mexico
no but but where were rescue
dogs apparently when someone
comes down with COVID even if
they're a symptomatic.
there is a smell that you it the
the the rest of us.
Probably because were masked I
don't know we can't smile or the
tech but that rescue dogs can
the tax.
And the and that some of them
are being trained.
To you know collected drug
sniffing dogs they're they're
being trained to be covered
seven dogs and and
You know quite frankly I've
there's when I heard that I I
had this kind of vision of at
the as people come into the
capital
you know we have we have we have
you know that what I don't right
and at the dog stops on an
individual then they have to
take a test right there on the
spot that the if the dog
decides that the that your
president's presences Senator
actually not entirely just
having fun about this I mean I
think there's there's something
pointers behind this and it it
is it is something I mean
obviously I think for for the
basis of our members we want to
make sure they're only stuff it
for COVID not for the things but
but it is it is you don't that
is the kind of thing that if we
were able to find a way to take
advantage of.
All it would it would provide
for a for a safer environment in
the building where you could
where you could detect people
earlier on the may be up
contagious.
And and so they're not so that
the rest of us are not in close
contact.
and what not so but it was
Senator Wirth at just one thing
if I could what we're talking
about maths I do think it's
important to just acknowledge
and really think of the members
of our chamber for you know the
evolution of our rules and
compliance and wearing masks I
know there's some differences
but I just think that that I I
really appreciate the fact that
we've we've been respectful of
each other on this issue
and again I think that's
important an important point to
just.
Put out there as we navigate
through.
Virus that continues to evolve
and so many different ways and
we're all learning as we as we
on the fly but I just you know
having gone through a sixty day
session and then just through
the special session I just I
appreciate very much that the
members in the chamber have been
willing to to listen to each
other and.
To wear face coverings and
comply with the rules and again
I just want to state that
publicly.
I I I agree with you and it's
something that we've done I
think out of respect for each
other and and and it's it's it's
it's been very nice and I think
that where they I will I will
also not have I just received a
text message from somebody not a
member of the legislature.
that I have I've heard about
this I've not had a chance to
review the research myself but
apparently there is some
evidence out there of of CBD or
THC having a positive impact
either in terms of running the
virus or helping people deal
with the virus and so and so
certainly you know well adult
use of cannabis begins April
first I think I think there is a
cost for medical card for
anybody who needs it for for
COVID purposes between now and
then perhaps the senator to
speed up.
Also uses I now that's right
yeah that's right that's right
so so personal use is already.
Is already find out you just
can't by.
Without a medical card well but
you can grow it or otherwise
acquire it as long as you're not
buying it and the and so maybe
maybe we can go to council
service on that issue as well
along with the masks to protect
members.
as we need during the session
okay is there any other input
that we would like to give up
with regard to where we're going
on the rules Mr trump if you
said that and and just hit the
hit one of those back funds of
the red light is on please.
This.
Thank you Mr chair to questions
that I know have have come up
that.
there may not be needed to be
included in the rules one.
Regarding room capacity
specifically in the smaller
committee rooms I know we have.
You know there's fire code
capacity so we're used to
restrictions in that sense but.
Is there a need or
consideration for reducing that
and I think I think there is a
part of that will also be of of.
Whether not we use the small
rooms or or try to manage our
schedules otherwise for example
this week we made a decision to
you for this committee to set
and what is wrong with the
Senate finance room for the
Senate finance committee to meet
on the floor the chairman of
finance and I worked through
those issues together so that
they would not be
it in a room that might fill up
more capacity here and we would
not be and in a medium size here
in room which is normally a
large enough but make sure that
we had more space more air
etcetera
center store
yes Mr chairman so this is
something I think Legislative
Council is also going to look at
but I I'm also been in
conversation so.
What we're thinking of is having
a
a eight person capacity for even
these big rooms and then having
overflow room so people can
still here have a mechanism so
if they want to address the
committee they go from
overflowing come and hearing the
facts of and just put you said
being flexible and working
together to manage this so it
seems reasonable to me and do a
book but it's kind of all hands
on deck we all have to think
about this and work together on
it and so that's what we're
trying to do it
the council service that's going
to require operation which
normally we're not used to but
actually people have been
remarkably well kinda like the
Senate finance and roll this
week.
of working together trying to
put it on the Senator works so
one other thing I just like to
throw out on that issue and I
think the cheers are gonna have
a lot of discretion on terms of
how they manage their agendas
but one of things that I've
discussed with various chairs is
you know typically we have a
room packed full of people that
are waiting to hear the it's the
bills down the agenda and I
think one of the things that's
gonna be important is that we do
each bill one at a time and
folks are brought in on that
specific bill because that will
just limit dramatically the
number of people that are in the
wrong but again I think the
chairs are going to have a lot
of discretion on how that how
that's done so we don't have a
situation where a room is packed
with folks that are there for
for a build down the road so I
realize that there's nuances we
have to think through on that
but I just did want throw that
out as well yeah I'm I'm part of
that is we've also had a I think
we've had a
haven't in the past.
Of doing extended agendas
knowing we were going to get
everything and part of this is
going to be committee chairs
really working hard on what.
What are you gonna get to.
Right and and maybe having first
first part of the meeting.
Right take a break second part
of the meeting or or something
along those lines but absolutely
I mean this is these of these
are the kinds of I think
reasonable things that we can do
up to work with folks I happen
to be safe it's a reasonable way
that people can be in the
building maybe in an overflow
room to build a watch or else
you know I don't find a
comfortable place on the
where they're able to to see
things on the webcast we all
know there's a couple minutes
delay there and make sure than
that that is people come in on a
particular issue
that they that they you know
that the committee chairs are
flexible up with folks that they
walk in a minute or two to like
to allow them to be able to.
Again the comic of Chris you
have a second issue that thank
you Mr the other question was on
the floor access and the who
would be allowed access to the
floor and actually.
The area outside the floor that
level of the building
Whether there be restrictions
and who can come down and if if
if there are housing people
corporate permission to to come
down here and I think that's
that's the social one of these
ladies think we need to walk
through.
you know what how we normally
done business but also what part
of important but New Mexico
where people one of the few
legislatures were people do have
access before we gavel and we
may need to go to some kind of a
again.
City and then maybe ten fifteen
minutes before we Gabala and.
you know have people start to
cycle out so that we don't have.
Everybody on the floor at the
same time you know because
sometimes we end up with with
over a hundred people on the
floor just before we gavel and
and what not so that's that's
something something were of a
good consideration to think
through as well Senator Stewart
from Mr chairman the speaker
north and Mr Burciaga have that
through the Legislative Council
have have already decided that
we will limit access but we will
find the public the ability to
make an appointment to see the
the basement floor besides the
floors has the leadership
offices and so calling making
appointment then you're let in
just to keep so many people from
being on that floor we've we've
already sort of set that up and
and we're you know our phone
numbers are public or emails or
public I think we will try to be
as open and as accessible as
possible but limit the times and
so that's for the basement floor
and and and and that is one of
these things where.
Where again I think that will be
good guidance for us as we look
at the rule.
R. in terms of what the
Legislative Council Service have
made worked on some of that all
of those areas as soon as we
gavel and are under the
authority of the chief clerk and
not the Legislative Council once
we get a letter and so so that
is something that that then we
can we can use as a starting
place certainly.
but but also may perhaps find a
way that we don't completely
limit access if it's possible.
As long as things don't get too
crowded and we have a way to
manage it senator and this time
we did that during the special
and it worked fine you just have
to let people know you have to
give us a list to the sergeant
of arms on these appointments
please allow these folks in and
we all did that so what we're
well.
Yeah and I understand that the
council during the special
there's there are fewer people
the few which is being think of
that you know.
R. and it's part of people
having access to us.
a particular sense for for for
most of us there's no staff to
talk to the the talked about so
they don't and and so
that's that is
I get something that that.
Is an important issue press take
a look at the of.
The structure of anything and
the other considerations for
good Mr Taurus or
for miss Romero any
considerations.
No comments at this time Mr
chairman thank you okay thank
you very much Mr Fleetwood.
one thing you might want to
think about how much you want to
export to the rules
because it sounds like you're
headed toward hybrid four
sessions is how you vote
the Senate does a lot of voice
votes a lot of show of hands
I don't know that that's going
to work if you're doing a hybrid
system so I think you're headed
toward locals okay and and and
actually one of things that was
suggested is that is that if if
nobody is getting remotely.
That we can use our normal rules
for voting if anybody is
participating remote.
then we would go to of roll call
something along those lines so
that so that again it would give
us some flexibility
as things develop and and based
on what the situation is I mean
frankly if nobody's participate
remotely there's no need for us
to have to roll call and
everything about Center worth
and the center Senator Lopez
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Wirth I would say that
we err on caution on the side of
caution and continue with just
the roll call vote
yeah I mean it's not and it it
it's worked well for what we've
used over the the sessions that
we've already used it and I
think it's just for us to err on
the side of caution
it's a little bit more work for
chief clerk I understand that I
think it's just for us to air
again on the side of caution.
Thank appreciate the input on
the.
Yes one of one other thought
you know I think the the voice
votes who can scream the loudest
really are problematic we're not
there yet yeah so so that but I
but I will say and and and this
committee is just spent four
days doing eighty hundred
confirmations each one of those
needs to have a floor.
Floor vote and so I was thinking
about.
You know the challenges that you
have so there may be there it
could be a show of hands you
know a confirmation so that so
that we can move through that in
a in a more rapid process and we
may figure out I don't know if
we can yeah I just I just think
it's important to have those
both me eighty roll call votes
are confirmations is going to
take a ton of time so I just
think that these are the kind of
things that there might be an
exception for that but I I do
think it's good to be there on
the side of being safe and and
we've.
Again we're not starting from
scratch and that's really
important is that we've we've
learned how to do this and we've
it's it's always evolving
but I just I just think there's.
This the confirmation votes is a
perfect example of a place where
I do think having roll call
everyone.
They're made we made an
alternate they take a thirty
five days to get through this
well there there you go.
Thank you Mr no problem
let me just check and make sure
nobody who is.
Log in remotely as we're having
our conversation here
in the horseshoe wants to say
anything if anybody does please
feel free to type in.
and
But no that's a that's an
important consideration and and
something we'll spend some time
on this weekend as well I will
also let everybody know that I
will be available
this weekend.
and and I plan to be
other than.
from about noon on Saturday to
noon on Sunday I'm planning to
be here in Santa Fe.
So
So if anybody has other
considerations
any member of the legislature
our staff as well strictly
members of the public I have
considerations please feel free
to reach out to the.
and so that so that you know we
can
the idea is to bring something
in that is appropriate that is
responsive to the needs and also
listens to the concerns.
And and so that so that we can
we can.
Are we can do the people's
business and hopefully all the
people as we do the people's
business maximum extent
possible.
So is there anything else on
this issue at this time just
wanted to share this with just a
request
I know you're gonna be working
on a draft of these rules I
would just ask that if it's
possible we have that on Tuesday
so that members have a chance to
to look at it and think about it
because if we're gonna do this
Wednesday morning
and I just I I I we we need to
get rules in place yep and so I
want to make sure everyone's got
a chance to.
You know talk about it and and
we can all come into the meeting
Wednesday morning not looking at
all for the first time actually
no and no and no and I would
just simply say that the soon
as.
There is the formation of an
early draft.
the the the earliest formation
the draft will immediately go
out to the majority minority and
put some offices.
for for some some immediate
feedback and then and then and
then create a final draft that
we can then get out to all the
members of the not just the
rules committee all the members
of the Senate.
and and and we will see if we
can put a put a
Whether not we may be able to
put a a draft copy on the
landing page for the rules
committee.
even even before it's
introduced.
just so that so that the public
has has an opportunity as early
as possible to be able to see
what we kind but as well Center
were just one more thing
thinking through this
You know to the extent that
there were some.
Very this rules that we all
agree on and we could
potentially have that put into
the script on Tuesday I kind of
think that would be a good idea
because otherwise we have no
rules in place Representative
the formal rules well I got a no
rules related to comment current
none of that none of the
requirements that we're talking
about and so I just I would also
let's and I appreciate I think
what's going to happen as a
result of what you're doing is
you know the leadership office
can work on the specifics but
also I would just ask that you
think about maybe eight in a
small a tight tight subset that
we could adopt in the script
which takes just so the public
knows it takes a two thirds vote
at the outset when it doesn't go
through committee so again I I I
would just see if the if if
that's if that's possible I
think we should explore.
and then
focus from the hands of.
And and I do know.
And I will give a heads up to
everybody in terms of that
opening day script.
And something else that will
probably be in the in the rule
as well.
Is our dress code flexibility
for those with underlying health
conditions.
So that so that somebody who we
do have some situations that
have happened.
and that may happen in the
future where we have members
that have an underlying health
condition that may require some
flexibility from the dress code
and so a will we will be putting
that in the and and that is
something where I don't think we
need to overly micromanage
other than
thank knowledge flexibility has
as necessary
and
and that the person a second
perhaps with their with their.
Up with their office or for the
program.
just just to inform not to get
consent and and so
so that is something that that I
do anticipate having in the
suggested for the opening script
and then having the rules will.
Are there are there are and then
and then there may be also be my
understanding is there may also
be.
Some flexibility as well in
terms of in terms of committees
the make up of committees for
for for if you know how we how
we're able to just manage things
up as well so that so that we're
able to have
Office move the some of the
process as possible given some
some.
Frankly things that we just
cannot anticipate at this moment
and and where we might just
maybe need to have a lot of
flexibility and so I think I
think will be
doing that as well
without without doing an entire
we read of the rules I will also
tell you guys.
you all that I there's been some
early conversation I know that
I've had with Mr Taurus and and
I have also had with the
majority floor leader in the
foot
of of baby
Having one of the interim
assignments for this committee
for the next interim to be to do
Hey more wholesale look at our
rules construct finish.
And for four to point a working
group to do that so that and
then bring it back to this
committee during the interim so
that but you know if you if you
read our rules
it's kind of like when I start
working on the on the on the
election code so much of it
didn't bear any relationship to
what was actually being done and
you know so that so that maybe
we can have a rules more closely
resembled the work that we do
and whatnot so anyways.
If there's nothing else at this
time I want to yes member to.
Mr chairman I just want us to
say once more at the end of this
meeting that of the capitol will
be open next week for our
legislative session.
You must show a vaccination card
with the boosters to be allowed
in to the capital and you may
not carry firearms into the
capital other than just what are
the dangers of so thank you.
And and there is a list of those
lobbyist to themselves have been
labeled a dangerous weapon.
but had a range the.
That's right as long as you're
not carrying those people.
But but no hi hi I also as we
are finishing this meeting right
now I want to give some real
thanks
to the members of this committee
for this week we have we have
done some real tremendous work
in terms of confirmations on
boards and commissions and
authorities this week and and
and we've done so and and kind
of a thematic way that I think
has has
maybe a lot more sense to a lot
of us as we've been working on
this and and I know we've had
some challenges by having to do
so looking at a TV set instead
of looking at real people for
for almost all of these but you
know
I also tremendously want to
thank the work that
Many secretary Miss Vigil is
done in coordinating all this
the governor's board and
commissions person Melissa
Salazar has done and as we have
pivoted several times in order
to get this be able to do this
week as well as the work of the
chief of staff of the rules
committee miss Bennet in and
working on on on getting the
process of the
of the of background checks from
the conferees done we do two
different background checks on
these conferee and frankly we
did not have all the background
checks done and we made a
decision.
in order to be able to to be
faithful to the work of this
committee that we would go ahead
and do the do the hearings
this week and and then wait
until all the all the paperwork
was finalized before we take the
committee votes and and that way
we were still able to to give
life to the hearings and and and
do that work as well as as well
as what we've been able to do
this week so I I just it was I
really want to thank you all for
this also or R. zoom operator
who's been here has and and and
all of the of building people
that have run down here as we've
had different pickups with some
of the tax as we've been trying
to get all that done as well so
it was thank you all for that it
is really very much appreciated
during the session we we will be
doing cabinet secretaries none
of those under this week those
will be done during the session
at the end of this for that we
need to do we also will be doing
there are some some people with
some scheduling issues and
there's a few more folks that
will of course be doing during
the during the session but the
load will be up much lower and
the flexibility will be much
higher on being able to get
those times when with thank you
all very much.
But I definitely think you Miss
Vigil thank you thank you yes
when with that the rules
