Go for a motion we can do that.
We've all heard this
presentation for nine years.
What's going to be Mr chair.
No no last minute surprises.
Not from.
Mr chair members of the
committee we are online.
Thank you very much good morning
everybody
thank you for joining the Senate
rules committee today.
That we are going to proceed
with a couple bills this morning
we also let everybody know that
that we will be a journey a
little bit early this morning at
ten thirty in order to allow for
Allow for some some other
meetings that need to take
place.
R. and so but and we're also
going to change of the order
just let but I do have a couple
of announcements to make however
for everybody who is on line in
particular of particularly for
those who are in the waiting
room.
the first one is at the request
of the sponsored Senate joint
resolution one will not be heard
today and will be removed from
future agendas
and and so I'm I'm always happy
to accommodate a sponsor who who
who has a bill that does not
need to spend time on the agenda
R. it in addition to that those
of you who are in the waiting
room let me just let you know I
know that there's a lot of
interest in a couple of bills
one of them particularly being
you share one are we are as as
some of you may have heard of
senator Morris COVID we've all
heard that bill several times up
we've all had lots of people
reach out to us we're going to
do a limited presentation on the
on that measure when it comes up
and and that will include quite
candidly limited public comment
today because most of us have
heard from people extensively
over the last nine years and up
and and then we will we'll
separate proceed to
consideration of of the matter
we could spend an hour and a
half to a public comment and
then we would not have time.
Consider within the committee
and I think most of you would
prefer that we actually consider
the matter
and then finally the last thing
is we are going to go a little
bit out of order this morning we
are going to get to a share one
hundred and Senator Lopez
actually you have to matters on
the agenda I had indicated that
I thought we might start with
this theme one I actually like
to start with SB three fifty
four that's okay with you.
And if you would please press.
Mr chair Senator Wirth yes also
I I just been jumping back and
forth did you make any
announcement about S. J. R. one
I I I announcer at the request
of a sponsor that will not be
heard today and will not appear
on future agendas right I
appreciate that thank you Mr
chair.
I make a motion to Mr chair for
for good first six of the.
And if you want to second
element often yeah I would love
to I love the table the four
leaders of bills I move to
table.
Not very often you get to do
that is there.
Mr chair I'll second the motion.
And
they're not so we were before we
proceed to set about three fifty
four or on a table the motion of
Senate joint resolution number
one.
Of the work thank you for your
compelling presentation of that
direct resolution.
And is there any objection to
the tabling motion.
Being objection congratulations
senator Morris you have tabled
the the majority floor leader's.
Bill and
What regulations we'll see how
that goes and Mr chair your bill
came for my career here in Santa
Fe on the floor.
I would like to explain my vote.
Please go right ahead thank you
Mr chair I just want to be
really clear that there are some
very important discussion pieces
that were part of S. J. R. one
which involves.
You know having a piece of the
constitutional amendment address
the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit and
and some K. through twelve fixes
I just want to be very clear
that by tabling this that does
not mean that that discussion is
also being tabled that is a
discussion I think needs to
continue what was important
though and and I and
Representative Representative
two chairman Martinez is having
to competing resolutions
did not seem at all like the way
to go so I just want to make
clear for folks so they
understand that you know this
was a vehicle but it doesn't
mean the discussion is over
thank you Mr chair.
Absolutely thank you Mr major
for later this so we're going to
proceed them to Senate bill
three fifty four let me also
advise everybody two things the
first is we do have
interpretation are being
conducted for today's meeting
there is an alternate audio
channel for those who would like
to hear today's meeting as it is
being interpreted in the Spanish
and the so.
As a result I will ask that
folks
Not speak too quickly as as they
are as they are discussing
matters in addition to that are
for those of you who are in the
waiting room if you do get
admitted to our provide our
estimate some point.
Please what is your as you see
your create activate in the zoom
mute the webcast right away
please because there is about a
twenty seven second delay
between the webcast and the zoom
and if you don't do that then we
will all spend twenty seven
second St please proceed.
Hi there please proceed and
there's better use of that time
so so with that Senator Lopez if
you would please proceed with
Senate bill three fifty four.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am here in front
of you with Senate bill three
fifty four the short title
courses vocational rehab
Mr chairman what this bill is a
is proposing for us to consider
this session is to take the
occasional rehab which is
currently an existing division
within the public education
department to remove it from of
pad and creates its own office
and Mr Chairman
there are many of us who are
here on the zoom and I know even
some of the advocates of who are
waiting to even speak on H. J.
R. one are familiar with what
our our vocational we have
divisionist exists currently
what services it provides in our
communities Mr Chairman over the
years
And has a
I think not done justice service
in oversight working with
etcetera with regards to
vocational rehab in the prior
administration there was talk
about moving it from head over
to workforce solutions we're
still here in Pat and I know the
current administration has
thought about moving is also
once again to workforce
solutions department.
but Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
myself and several others sit on
the subcommittee during the
interim that is a subcommittee
of the health services interim
committee and we've heard
testimony many times over about
services are being provided what
is not being provided.
A to our communities across the
state with regards to those who
need access to jobs that want to
work but that have a disability
and it's not just those Mr
chairman members of the
committee who maybe have a
disability that's been diagnosed
within our school public school
system these are also other
persons who may have a dramatic
brain injury and some other
type disability as adults that
they've incurred and they're
still trying to find ways to
work they very much want to work
but they also need I'm services
and help and kind of movie you
know through job developers and
such in our communities for
employment.
so Mister chairman members of
the committee at this bill had
been spoken about with the prior
director who was relieved of
service
miss Diane morning brown.
And we had spoken about this
previously
about what we could do to
specialize to pull out of
location of re having created so
in office this is federal
dollars to come in to provide
services in our community the
state does provide of course you
know for the for the the
director and other staff of
course those are were what we
pay for but if we move this and
create its own office everything
follows the office itself
The the.
I know that former director
morning brown had already been
in contact with region six of
the federal government you
Health Human Services over in
Dallas and they had already
worked through this and I know
that there is support for region
six about what we're trying to
do to propose you Mr chairman
for the committee and there's
much more of course need within
the bill that Mr chairman of
course will be collected trying
to answer some questions and I
know we do have some a public
members would like to add their
support thank you.
I thank you very much Senator
Lopez let me very quickly go
through a couple folks who are
in the who have joined us in our
group here and let me actually
start with correct trap if you
is available.
to give just a couple of words
on this and then I'll I'll pass
it over to well Ryan to Serra
Which is not our.
Mission you shut right and then
and then finally to Mr.
That will we'll go those three
first and then and then we'll
we'll we'll see where we are on
time so this track please this
process at chairman Ivy Soto
members the committee thank you
very much I have been director
of the New Mexico commission for
the blind a similar entity to
what's being proposed here.
Since nineteen ninety nine and
then those twenty one and a half
years there have been about
fourteen directors of the
division's location ability
ation depending upon how you
count.
in my opinion the most important
thing that if you're agency can
have is leadership that's highly
skilled and knowledgeable
skilled competent and well
trained fiscal staff the state
rehabilitation council that is
strong and act and also that it
be placed within state
government in an entity that is
able to maintain the federally
required integrity and autonomy
required for the our program.
I think that having those four
items in place is the most
important thing more important
even than words if we are agency
is located however there are
advantages to being in an entity
like an independent commission.
For one the.
Yes he has the required
accountability I am held
accountable to my board.
I have to do my job if I don't
there are consequences I think
that.
The independent commission
avoids the situation of the R.
agency being ignored or as if
you are director not being held
appropriately accountable.
Conversely the issue of the
federally required structural
integrity and autonomy is also
maintained an independent
commission there is not the
foundation for the head of the
overall agency to
inappropriately improved upon
that structural integrity
anytime on the and a tiny so
there's some advantages to the
independent commission status Mr
chairman members the committee
those are my comments.
Thank you
very much Mr Kropp appreciate
that Mr Bryant.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Dr Michael o'brien and I am
an administrator in the rehab
services for DVR however my
comments have to be these are
personal comments today they're
not an official position DVR
I've been in the field of
occasional rehabilitation for
more than forty years and I do
support the issue of autonomy
and and and secretary in terms
of the organization I'm the good
fortune to work in vocational
rehabilitation agencies that
were under another agency and
that have been independent and
my experiences is that those
agencies that are independent
have removed a layer of factors
that that can occasionally
interfere with the work it
creates greater efficiency for
the organization for to be both
the designated state agency and
the designated state unit where
they have the authority to act
on all issues across the board
and so I think there's value in
considering this but as I agree
with Greg the most important
factors are the integrity of the
economy of the organization and
and the ability to to chair I
think there's great value in the
organization sort of being
equivalent and similar to the
commission for the blind we're
both funded by the same
organization we have the same
rules and direction and this
will allow us to remove a layer
of government and create greater
efficiencies for the
organization and so personally a
good my experience I offer
support but would support.
Any activity that assure the
integrity and autonomy the
organization I appreciate your
time and the those are my
comments.
Thank you very much Dr Brandt Mr
chair.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Serra Massad I am currently
serving as the chair for the New
Mexico DVR state rehabilitation
council.
and I'm just here to echo the
comments of Dr Brian and Mr
trapped in that the S. R. C.
supports any move DVR that
allows them the on the economy
to meet the requirements of the
three sixty one ranks in the
code for your federal
regulations.
That require the agency to have
authority over their services
and their budget we also do
believe that a move to an
independent commission as is
higher out of value of
disability equity.
Considering the impact on
employment can have on the
disability community which is
one of the most vulnerable
populations in our state.
And so we would approve this
move and we thank you for the
time to to say to share
comments.
Thank you very much appreciate
that are.
Senator Lopez if I could just
ask you very quick questions.
Official rehabilitation is the.
Is that funded by state dollars
or federal dollars.
Mr Chairman members of the
committee federal dollars.
Okay so the focus of the federal
dollars would just simply
because I don't have it as I'm
looking at this I didn't I
didn't see operation is
basically run the federally
appropriated vocational
rehabilitation dollars would
just simply love them to
wherever the offices is that
correct.
Mr Chairman yes but the state
treasurer is where the money's
would reside in my simple terms
of it if device because state
treasurer's office and of course
draw down from that point.
Okay okay I just I just want to
make sure does now
state agency insurers or whatnot
the benefits of federally funded
program that it seems like it
just.
It it.
Just for clarification the
employee the employees of course
are paid through the state so
that is where are you know our
our budget but if this does if
this was to be come to fruition
the state employees of course
would move into this commission
so they're already budgeted for
accounted for within the
existing budget so it would just
be moving over to the new office
should passing it's not.
Okay great I appreciate the
clarification with that other
questions or comments from
committee.
And and I I do apologize I
didn't I didn't go to the public
on this a real quickly I just
checked with our the webmaster.
Mr so my sister Mister Roberts
do we have anybody signed up on
this issue and so how many
people are Mr chair we do have
some people find up but they're
not in the ratings waiting room
so.
Well that whatsoever
in that case of questions and
comments from committee on our
on moving this over and and can
I just say Mr crap I really
appreciate your your comments
today because you're in a in a
and a similarly situated
Oct Commission and in terms of
how things work and and the
stability that that provides.
I see no questions at this
moment are there a what is the
pleasure of the committee
Senator Lopez Mr chairman and
moving to pass.
By well we have a due pass and
senator does that second.
Mr chairman it is a second but I
do have a question okay this was
it.
So.
Thank you Senator Lopez for your
work on this and what you're
doing it's needed this for a
while
I guess I can't I I most of
mistrial interstate and why we
are taking blindness out of the
definition for disabled person.
Mr Chairman I'm sorry Senator
could you restate question so in
in the analysis that I've read I
haven't found it in the bill yet
they it says that we're we're
taking on the definition of the
disabled person we taking
blindness out of that definition
and I I don't know why we're
doing that or perhaps we've
changed that I can't find it in
the bill but it's mentioned in
several of the FIR.
And R. if I may madam Brooks I'm
and madam
That would be on page two lines
line fourteen percent what will
be.
It's a person with a physical or
mental disability other than
blindness.
Handicapped and actually if I
may.
If it's okay with you Senator
Lopez since we have Mister
trapped with us yes please yeah.
M. I I I think we may have the
answer are present in our
symbol.
Mr Chairman representative
members of the committee under
federal law
there is a requirement that
there be separate programs for
individuals who are blind so the
commission for the blind
provides location rehabilitation
as a separate state agency
pursuant to federal law so
that's why blindness is.
Carved out from this it's to
comply with federal law.
Right well it's there's your
answer so thank you.
Thank you Senator thank you
doctor trap.
Very well I'm looking to see if
anybody else is seeking
recognition.
Our data center store Ingle.
This unmute yourself Sir.
Okay one seven.
Paragraph B. there's a word
there I'm not familiar with.
Sure I think that's supposed to
be some brigaded.
I'm not sure take a look maybe
it's a different additional new
law word I've never seen.
Mister chairman Senator webpage.
One twenty four.
There's a new material or third
party liability it's in
paragraph be.
Okay.
And it reads from the prior with
the office provides vocational
rehabilitation services to a
qualified person the office is
there a gated.
The right of the individual
against a third party for costs
incurred.
gated.
What what are the Santo Domingo
what one is that on one twenty
four twenty four or very good.
Well we we may turn to our
reading teacher.
I'm looking it up now Mr chair.
I'm doing the same thing.
If.
Yes Sir gate the person
appointed to act for another
like a W..
So.
Very gate so assured that
father.
I just thought it sounded a lot
of work with a funny word to use
in that particular venue there
but I.
Dollars there's just an
interesting way it was written.
So Mister chairman at and
Senator Ingle was correct in
saying.
Are we still trying to say
separate gate because that is
another definition of Sergei.
My career side there's a lot of
interesting word to use their
self anyway whoever the drafter
was evidently like ****.
We'll go from there thank you.
Mr chairman of this bill makes
it out of committee I think it
goes to another committee that
will most definitely be looking
at the definitions yes of the.
This was the yes.
If there's nobody else seeking
recognition at this time
but Miss Vigil please call the
roll Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
Yes.
And I'll go back to Senator
Baca.
No.
And Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am
what was what's sixty two.
well congratulations Senator
Lopez on a six to to vote you
have a do pass recommendation
from the Senate rules committee.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee we are going to
move now to Senate joint
resolution one.
And our and again is as
indicated before
I know that there's a lot of
impressed and speaking on Senate
joint resolution one this is a
matter that we have for much
less money on.
Mr Chairman house
resolution hi white you're right
senator resolution one thousand.
It shows once again senator
Morris.
Mr chair Senator Senator Moores
took care of that one this is a.
It is all our resolution Mr
chairman.
We are I would have loved to
have the the committee
substitute for House strict
resolution one.
And
and so as as indicated before
we've we've part much public
comment on this over the last
nine years and while it we
really do find it very
controlling I think we've all
become very educated on this
matter.
And so the main thing that I
would ask the Sanchez to point
out would be out what you did in
the house Education Committee
art with the committee
substitutes are any differences
from previous years but
otherwise I'm with respect to
the public I'm pretty sure
everybody locked in their vote
about three to five years ago on
this on this measure so with
that chairman Martínez and
chairman Maestas R. if you would
both of you so kind as to make
your presentation on the house
Education Committee substitute
for House right resolution one.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
are will members of the
lightning round let me just
remind us of a few things.
Turn off my other device but
also resolution one deals with
With our permanent fund and a
couple of points for the folks
listening at home our permanent
fund has two sources of income.
However Gail are UT Austin two
sources of income and that is
financial investments global
stocks in real estate you know
which gives us a return of
anywhere from seven percent
eight now percent a year on
average but also influxes of
cash from the State Land Office
the last two fiscal years
upwards of nine hundred million
dollars cash in addition to the
financial investments also R.
two thousand fourteen
constitution amendment allow
state investment council to to
surpass so what was then a
fifteen percent cap on
international investments are in
Austin international investments
Mr chairman members hovers
around nineteen twenty percent
but more importantly it gives
the she is huge massive twenty
two billion dollar portfolio
which you can transfer of
hundreds then dollars a
financial assets across
international boundaries with
the push of a button the end so
our our investment account is
sound and is growing
tremendously it survived the two
thousand eight banking crisis at
a five point eight distribution.
It survive the downturn of the
oil oil price crisis in two
thousand fifteen sixteen and
continue to grow
but two quick points one is.
We don't have to spend it all.
The the argument that this
persuasive to me as you can put
a hundred seventy million
dollars into a system over night
it will be an efficient I agree
we don't have to.
We do not have to the
distribution to early childhood
educational programs is an
earmark the appropriation is the
legal permission to spend the
money and when you look at when
the state was was grappling with
this issue of almost a century
ago state of Mexico verses
regents of UNM nineteen twenty
seven court case the regents of
the university verses grab
nineteen twenty eight court case
and then Attorney General
opinion eighty nine yes two
thousand thirty which
incorporated all that law.
Says that revenues from the land
grants are public money an
article four section thirty of
the constitution of New Mexico
provides that money shall be
paid out of the treasury upon
appropriations made by the
legislature so what we choose
not to spend from this year mark
Mr chairman members remains in
the investment account.
Collecting interest for our
fourth subsequent fiscal years
and this this can be done with a
simple shall to a may in section
nineteen dash one dash twenty in
the enabling legislation that we
hope to do next next year in the
thirty day session and so lastly
Mr chairman
all right from the to do that I
get nostalgic Mr chairman from
the Ferguson Act in the enabling
act section six.
The passage of this act are
hereby granted to the said state
for the support of COVID schools
and so by raising the
distribution from five to six is
for the common schools are
friends in Arizona went to six
point nine keep that in mind
madam pro tem six point nine
Arizona we're proposing going to
five to six for a five year
rolling average and if I made
sure the screen Mr chairman of.
Yeah let me ask our Mister
Roberts to give Jr Maestas in
general it's very good.
Let me know if you see a a power
point thank you a wonderful so
real quick I was German so all
had our five year rolling
average the whole and another
argument is persuasive to me
somewhat as you can go above
five percent in a fund that
strictly financial investments
we have two sources of income so
we go above five but also it's a
five year rolling average so
what we do is we take the amount
of the fund on December thirty
first of each year of the past
five years we average it out so
in this fiscal year we're not
taking five percent of a twenty
two billion dollar fund which it
is today we're taking five
percent of sixteen point seven
billion five percent of sixteen
point seven billion even though
the fund actually on on January
thirty first was twenty one
point six billion so we take
five percent of the sixteen
point seven billion which in our
current fiscal year is a hundred
thirty six million we don't let
out marvelously in twelve of
financial transfers from the
permanent fund to the general
fund which this year is
approximately seventy million
dollars so when are fund was
twenty one point six billion on
December thirty first and we
transferred seventy million on
January first it was a three
point eight seven percent
distribution three point eight
seven percent distribution all
it can handle one percent if we
were to go generational equity
Mr chairman of it would be far
far in excess of of what we're
talking about here so with that
I will turn it over.
To up.
I will turn over to a co sponsor
a Representative Martinez thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much markets thank you Mr chair
and and thank you members of
Senate rules I'll be very very
brief you've seen this before we
know that these investments in
early childhood in the earliest
years can yield up to a thirteen
percent return on the investment
for the state for society
there's no disputing that these
investments are sound what my
colleague just presented to you
is the other side of the story
these investments can be made
and the fund remains healthy in
perpetuity so the choice between
us here today is whether or not
we want to roll the pots of
funding for early childhood
education and I think you know
over the last ten years we've
made the case that in the we
should.
So with that Mr chair and
members of the Senate all of you
back but thank you for the
opportunity to present here
today.
I thank you very much I do
appreciate that
I
I hesitate to forclose
additional comment entirely
however again because this
matter has been heard over the
last nine years.
We've all we've all been up
covered I think with the not
only with the
study benefits of investment and
early childhood education we've
also been peppered with the our
fiscal consequences of
additional distributions from
the fund and and and and the
impact of that house up which
ended Lee I'm not a very they're
both compelling arguments but
these arguments that I think
we've all heard we've all had a
chance to weigh them and
determine of what we are going
how we're going to of the vote
despite or in the context
actually
In the context of all of all of
that information of the of the
research and the evidence both
in terms of the finances as well
as in terms of the education and
and and how best we prepare for
the future of our state.
R. and so so I'm actually going
to go to the committee and let
me just simply see if there is a
motion from the committee
senator office.
Good morning Mr chairman and
gentleman from the house as a
proud co sponsor I move we do
pass.
Second what.
The second from Senator Stewart
senator did were you going to
second or or did you.
You are muted.
Mr chairman I was going to ask
you a question the issue is
we've already moved to a motion
that's fine.
By well if and if you do have a
question the Sanchez the please
please go ahead.
Mr chairman and and of the for
the sponsors of the bill and I
and I apologize I just got here
because I was in a meeting with
presenting a couple other bills.
But we were very familiar with
this legislation.
I wanted to ask about is.
and and this the income up so so
just.
Building maintenance and and
we'll move on but it is often
election it would be impossible
for us to spend all this money.
Early on early childhood
programming.
Home visiting is stationed we
were very slowly moving the
Medicaid funded home visiting I
mean it is it's like watching
paint dry is just slowly slowly
happening but it is happening
and we're seeing increases in
and and childcare funding and
increases in pre K. funding
increases in in a lot of other
really childhood programs but
it's still the amount of money
would possibly be more than we
could immediately absorbed into
the early childhood programs
would you be encouraged to to
spending some of this money in
the first few years on K.
twelve.
Okay part of the question that
you're being asked is that we've
never had enough money for
education how you handle the
problem is we have too much
money for education.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Ortiz Y. Pino
without the proposition
There's been supported by
seventy five percent of the
voters in a recent poll is one
percent for early education.
We do not have to spend the
money distributed just because
money is distributed per the
constitution we still have to
appropriate it or give the legal
permission to spend the money so
with regards to.
Spending money officially that
that promising Care of with
regards to the issues of K.
through twelve
we have a taxing authority so
that sometimes we forget and we
have a constitution a
constitutional mandate regarding
with regards to the holding in
Martinez Yazzie but that's a
conversation that we need to
have before this goes to the
voter here in the next couple
three couple three what weeks
because the the fund can handle
it the fund can handle it if we
were to go to straight
generational equity the
distribution would be someone
able to seven point three
Arizona went to six point nine.
This proposal however Mr
Chairman representative would
is the Pino is one percent for
early childhood education.
Just just in the past year you
imposed in previous years that
in the first year you need
finding percentage that would be
available for K. well is that
off the table now and and it
would be also early childhood.
Representative right here.
Still a viable.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ortiz payout no absolutely every
idea is viable and that's what
we're grateful to the.
Majority Leader for for for S.
R. one because it's part of the
conversation how do we best
invest this permanent fund
because we're not utilizing it
is but as efficiently as we can
as we could so definitely part
of the conversation but were a
what's on the what's up what the
motion being made as we speak as
one percent early childhood but
we have one more committee to go
so we'll definitely keep
talking.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much senator
being all and it is a it is a
problem to figure out what to do
when you have too much money for
education.
R. another.
R. okay with that signal but
else seeking recognition at this
time Miss Vigil if you'll please
call the roll Senator Baca.
No.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Moores no.
Senator o'neill yes Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes hello Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator do it yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Yes ma'am.
On a surprise vote our
congratulations chairman you
have a do pass recommendation
from this committee on a vote of
seven to four good luck in the
Senate finance committee I did
just let everybody know I did
let the sponsors know that
though it was against my DMA not
to scrutinize line by line up
there their drug resolution
given that this is already gone
through a committee substitute
the house Education Committee I
thought it appropriate simply to
let the finance committee deal
with financial issues are in
income before the so thank you
very much for the presentation
thank you everybody who logged
in again my apologies to those
who wanted to speak on this
matter please know however we
really really have heard
what people have had to say on
this issue on all sides of both
on the financial side as well as
on the early childhood
development.
so with that graduations that
will be reported out to the
floor.
Thank you.
You very much are we now are
going to turn to
Are we gonna do again we're
going to be
recessing
by ten thirty today as there is
at least one caucus that is
going to be meeting today so
we're going to be going now to
Senate Joint Memorial number
four and then I do see Senator
Hamblen and so we will then go
to set a bill for twelve R. as
as time permits and hopefully
we'll be able to address both of
those matters I would ask people
to be
R. so thank in their and our and
our comments so that we can we
can get through both of those so
with that Senator Lopez please
proceed on Senate Joint Memorial
for.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee
I am presenting this memorial of
course it's requesting the New
Mexico Legislative Council to
direct legislative entities to
develop and implement policies
to identify assess and decrease
institutional racism
Mr chairman members of the
committee as you know we've had
a a bill going through our
chambers for the last almost
decade
trying to deal with
institutional racism at the
executive level for state
government and its agencies.
we we've almost gotten to that
point and then of course we just
haven't quite been successful
and that current bill is working
through the system R. this
particular measure Mr chairman
members of the committee is
asking us as the Legislature to
also review our policies and
what we do within our purview
with regards to making sure that
there are you know there's
there's ability for persons to
advance within our particular
entities that we have oversight
so this legislative finance
committee Legislative Council
the legislative education study
committee and of course the
chambers one to make sure that
we are representative of the
state of New Mexico he doesn't
this doesn't effects
particularly caucus work but
this is looking at save for what
we're looking at for the
legislature so Mr chairman
that's what this is here in
front of and to see if we're
asking the executive to do
something with the other bills
that again is working through
the system I I think we to need
to look take a look at ourselves
and see what we are doing also
to address the issue.
Thank you.
Thank you very much our.
locus.
If there are miss Roberts do we
have anybody who has logged in.
Up to speak on this matter.
where we did not have anyone
registered.
Well in that case let's go to
questions and comments from
committee on this issue.
Is there anybody our committee
who would like to.
Speaking on or ask questions on
Senate Joint Memorial.
Well let me ask what is part of
the.
With a do pass.
Well I'm not sure produce pass
from Senator Stewart with a
second from Senator Lopez are
Ortiz Y. Pino actually.
And
Looking to see if anybody else
is seeking recognition chair not
seeing that misty he'll please
call the roll.
Senator Baca.
No.
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Moores no.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator.
Yes and Senator Ivey Soto yes.
One sixty three Senator right
very well
very well congratulations
Senator office you have a we.
Our reputation for the quick.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you very
much it's important discussion
that we need to have and and and
it's it's a discussion that that
I think will will will be a four
discussion as this goes a long
way.
R. let us move now to Senator
Hamblen.
And Senator Hamblen you have.
set of bills for twelve and I
believe you have a committee
some of the Senate Bill proposes
that is that K..
Yes Mr chair the committee sub
addresses some of the issues
that we had talked about that to
remove the option or clarify
that sixteen year old cannot run
for sixteen seventeen year old
cannot run for office if I may
Mister chair at your pleasure go
ahead and go through the bill
and and then address the problem
there before you do that let me
just make sure that everybody
has the committee some.
And if not let me see make sure
that we can.
Yes the committee sub pop on the
screen I have the original bill
on my in my pockets
So that's the if you could miss
Roberts that is existing
language if you can move up just
a little bit the other way.
Okay great so that is that is
the operative language that
we're looking at right there as
as an amendment to one dash four
dash two so Senator Hamblen
please proceed with your
presentation thank you Mr
chairman thank you committee for
allowing us this opportunity
here you know I think back to
when I was sixteen years old and
I was working part time in high
school as a lifeguard I got my
driver's license I wasn't really
interested in politics because I
couldn't vote at the time and
you know and I think nostalgic
leave up getting mixed tapes off
the radio you know making sure
started my consent when the song
came on the radio but sixteen
year olds today are different
and you know many young people
are working and paying taxes
they have no representation or
voice and how their tax tax
dollars are spent as I mentioned
sixteen year old's also driving
Kerry insurance but have no say
in the governance of the roads
from instant infrastructure to
economics education to the
environment sixteen and
seventeen year olds have a stake
in the policy decisions being
made and I feel it's really
important that we give young
people the votes of the entrust
them to participate in decision
making processes that will grant
them the respect to the self
agency and the representative
representation that they deserve
I think we'll all benefit from
inclusion of their voices in our
civil discourse and after years
in last place on state ranking
such as education and child well
being I think New Mexico is in a
position to take this powerful
step to improving the lives of
young people and the way that it
addresses the situation with
this bill does is that it allows
sixteen and seventeen year olds
the right to vote and all
statewide elections they cannot
vote in federal elections for
president for Congress that
can't participate in school
board elections bond elections
may oral county and city
elections and for offices at the
state level as I mentioned it
does not allow them to run for
office and it doesn't go into
effect until twenty twenty two
which gives clerk's offices and
secretary of state time to
modify their election processes
to include sixteen and seventeen
year olds I would like.
To clarify that the clerk's
affiliate is neutral in this
they already register people to
vote this is nothing nothing out
of the ordinary I do have to
folks that are very much part of
this movement who I would like
to have the opportunity to speak
we have as a almost who is goes
to a three school high school
and is a member of the New
Mexico Dream Team invoices in
action is United for climate
crisis section which is yucca he
will share with you how
important the bill is to him and
then we have go ECF Montfort
they who is from Rio Rancho high
school and she'll be talking
about how youth are important in
the work force and have been a
frontline I'm gonna frontline
essential workers through the
pandemic so if we could if we
could let Isay at speak Mr chair
that would be fantastic.
Are we see I am looking for
items that in the zoom.
And as a are you the US yes.
Mr chair.
Well if you would please give a
brief summary of your your a
statement.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator is my name is
of you you need a summary.
What is just Representative.
Thank you sorry about that.
Mr chair Senator is my name is
Yasser I'm part of New Mexico
Dream Team it was an action you
data for kind of course of
action and come from education
Mexico the following is a poem
addressing validation.
I was eight years old my parents
separated back then I was told
my father that I had to be a man
of the house so I had to grow up
fast protect my siblings six
years later when I was fourteen
year old I finally stepped away
from my first abusive
relationship because I cannot
tolerate anymore.
I left my mother's house I can
do my father between those years
I had someone there my father
constantly validate the
experiences I was going through
weather was the bowling in
school or the PTSD depression I
was going through
Development mother's house I
knew that things I went to work
right yet because the validation
I receive from my father I was
able to make the decision to
pursue a better life last four
two years later I became an
activist to fight for document
assistance rights I knew where I
stood and my political values as
much as I do now during this
time I took exported mired of
losses from psychology sociology
Chicana studies and many more to
increase my knowledge to support
people and those I met along the
way validating makes feelings
each step of microaggression.
Last four one year later and I'm
seventeen reaching out to a
plethora of organizations to see
how else I can support my
community further I became
involved with educational issues
to increase student democratic
power I became involved with the
battle against white supremacy
so people can read without
discrimination based on the
color of their skin I can
involve the economical Justice
so people exist within the
bubble wage and I became
involved in many more causes
such as where liberation
feminism and I'm open to
learning about more other
movements see how it could be
the best accomplished I can be
I'm eighteen years old now and I
still get people who come to
tokenize me for my use and yet
they aren't willing to validate
my experience is enough to fight
alongside the youth so we can
participate in the democratic
process.
I say we because I'm including
every younger version of myself.
The connection from the very
start of my story do not pass
this bill is to invalidate me
when when I'm eighteen twenty
one fifty and a hundred because
I am the same person as I was
when I was eight fourteen
sixteen and seventeen.
This last message is for my
younger peers whether or not
this bill is passed today the
ability to vote is only one of
many tools connected to the most
powerful tool which is your
valid experience and your
ability to express that any way
you can deliver a ourselves by
any means necessary as all Mr
chairman centers thank you for
your time thank you very much
Jim us we go now to mess up one
point that out for a brief
comment.
Good morning Mr chair and
honorable members of the
committee my name is please him
on for and I am a student Rio
Rancho New Mexico and I'm
humbled to be able to stand
before you today representing
myself another sixteen and
seventeen year olds in favor of
Senate bill or twelve the right
to vote is not a partisan issue
but acts as an early education
and head start part of our state
as a vaccine our political
atmosphere.
My generation is the majority of
frontline workers in that
industry risking our health the
distribution for coffee or fast
food working hours a week but
have no say in legislative
processes that decide the
minimum amount of our paychecks.
We are taught in school that
this great nation was founded on
revolutions and patriotic acts
such as the Boston tea party yet
sixteen and seventeen year old I
still to this day taxed without
representation.
In today's society we are
required to be taught the steps
hide run and if needed fight for
our lives for school shooting
school shooting drills yep we
have no seat at this discussion
table with our lives at risk.
Senate bill for twelve access
and early education for the mock
Chrissy creating a trickle
effect voting continuity for
generations to come because we
are no longer and trapped by a
bubble composed by a biology
test and hallway jokes but a
welcomed by political rulings
that continue to affect us every
day.
Thank you I'll my time to the
chair.
Thank you very much I do also
note that the I don't Ana County
clerk has joined us and so Mr
chair she's actually here for a
different bill
but if I may use as an example
that the Dona ana county clerk's
office one of the reasons why I
was very excited about this bill
is because of the example of the
Dona Ana County clerk's office
this is not an endorsement by
the way but because of the
outreach that they did to young
people in high school for voting
and I feel that this is a really
great example of working on
civics lessons and and talking
about the importance of voting
in our process and and by
allowing sixteen and seventeen
year olds to vote that closes
that gap on what is already
being done by clerk's offices
around the state engaging young
people to vote I feel that this
is an opportunity to really
complete that circle.
well I so let me also note that
Care process for the secretary
of state's office is present to
provide technical assistance as
needed
I do know that we have
representation from both common
pause in the league of women
voters I'm assuming that they
support this if they don't they
should let me know and I'll let
you speak if you do support of
we anticipate that thank you
very much for your involvement
in this
and so
Mister Roberts is there anyone
else who signed up to speak on
this issue.
Mr Chairman living in New Mexico
Isabella Baker and then there's
one more after that in the
waiting room.
Let the other one please at the
same time and.
Miss Baker if you could activate
your camera and given the very
brief presentation please know
that we we will be recessing at
ten thirty so
you can either let us consider
the bill or or you can keep
talking about the bill but I do
I don't want to forclose
completely so miss a few lexical
point you may or you can you.
Okay yes I'll be super brief
yeah hello Mister chair members
of the committee my name is
Isabella Baker an organizer and
co founder with the voices in
action and the member of tens of
education New Mexico you know I
wasn't seventeen not that long
ago and I can tell you the
profound impact this would have
had on me to be able to vote
thing a person who has worked so
much and social and political
and get out the vote movement an
effort throughout my life even
when I wasn't able to be
involved in voting
so yeah I just ask that the
committee really consider this
bill and then vote yes to just
show the young people in our
state that we respect them their
voices and their ability to be
involved and be
the expert people within our
democracy is so yeah I think you
so much thank you so much is do
all our state thing you're
welcome to speak a second words
if you like our recognize the
impact that it has on time on
this visit.
I thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee my name is
Lisa deal and I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty and all I will
say is that an MCO P. and
transform education in Mexico
students in strong support of
this bill as centered student
equity in the voices of our of
our students thank you.
Thank you very much very well we
now turn to question the
comments from committee.
So let me our.
Members of the committee Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm I'm just
noticing on page two line twenty
one that I think it would really
improve the low I just.
Are just real quick we have
those that miss Roberts could
you put up the the order back up
on the screen please so we can
have that in front of us as that
part was talking thank you very
much Senator displace K..
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you the
Meister forgetting that up
so on page two one twenty one
where it says sixteenth birthday
I would move that we strike
sixteen and insert in lieu there
of seventeenth birthday.
Okay so that's a motion to amend
page two line twenty one.
By striking sixteenth inserting
in lieu thereof seventeen.
And let me just just so that so
that everybody understands the
the structure of subsection B..
R. in general because I think it
puts the of both the the bill
and the and the proposed
amendment in context so what
that's what you
Allows people to pre register to
vote.
And the
pre registration with what we
call a qualified residents which
is defined term election code
which is basically but for the
but for age they are qualified
elector.
And so the and so basically what
happens right now in the
election code is in the home of
voter automatically when they
become a team which means not so
they can run for office etcetera
they also.
are considered a voter
participation in elections
currently if they will be
eighteen our honor before the
day of of an election
previously our policy was if you
turned eighteen state October
twenty fifth and you showed up
early vote October fourteenth we
said come back in a week and and
so this allows for that election
you get to vote regardless of
when you come in and then the
third provision we have right
now is that they can they can
vote in a primary they'll be
eighteen by the general
and I believe that was actually
Senator Morse's Bill and our and
so so what this would do is send
strike those who please miss
Roberts believes we what we're
west.
Thank you what this would do is
that would that would the strike
both of those provisions and it
would just simply be as
presented on restricted your
your vote or your concern about
our you're not a voter budget
considered a voter for purposes
of participating so you can well
but you can't run for office and
and the other provisions to
apply as presented as of your
sixteenth birthday and then this
amendment would make it
seventeen because of that we
don't need the other two
conditional issues are but I I
just wanna make sure everybody
understood the structure have
works
and so very well Senator Hamblen
what is what is your take on the
proposed amount.
And I appreciate your.
Trying to make the legally is a
little bit more understandable
if and and if I may Mister chair
so what it seems to be is that
the proposal from Senator Pirtle
is to change it to seventeen
rather than sixteen hours per
okay then I consider this a from
the amendment Mr chair.
What what questions and comments
from committee.
On this amendment as to whether
the threshold should be set at
sixteen or at seventeen Senator
Moores the author of one of the
provisions in the sector.
It's not work.
Know your on you just muted.
You're still need.
Somers R. Pirtle if if
I'm sorry because I can't hear.
We can hear you.
The second talks you know I
actually think this is a great
the amendment because
I actually what I was the floor
of sponsor for the bill that
senator on Steinborn I did for a
number of years for our reducing
the ability to primaries to
seventeen and I use the example
of exclamation reserve or
support of that is because I was
in high school I was in Maryland
at the time so I was actually
able to vote when I was
seventeen before my birthday my
eighteenth birthday which
happened before the general
election in November so Merillat
the time we allowed me to vote
in course was very active as a
teenager politics just like our
expert witnesses were and so I I
really do like the seventeen
that's what I had that's why
strongly supported and backed
efforts and
when we finally passed a law
allowing under Sir seventy years
of our primary as long as a
Perkins for eighteen so I do
like the public engagement
aspect of this bill so I am
willing the sixteen number I
think it's just a little bit too
far for a bridge too far for me
I think the seventeen number it
should be friendly would
definitely get more votes on
final passage amid this
bipartisan effort and so the the
sponsor will consider that make
us more bipartisan by Jordan
this to a seventeen and a you
know I know that whatever number
we pick is arbitrary and human
difference in sixteen seventy or
fifteen and sixteen everything
elses are richer our hope
response will consider that your
our support on the spices even
at sixty for now let's see how
it works in with parents move
forward we get a lot more
comfortable with this new have a
conversation future so thank you
Mr chairperson to thank you all
Representative Sir Senator on
Hamlin I will not report your
music private piracy offense
from when you were in a high
school Ajijic disclosed publicly
but I know is on the on we're.
Right around around like we did
or you did exactly exactly you
know my music preferences.
Well other questions or comments
from committee.
Miss hill will you please call
the roll on the
Based on all on the amendment to
on page two line twenty one
strikes.
That sort of thing Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez.
No.
Senator Morris yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth.
No.
Senator Ingle.
Senator do it.
Now.
And just go back to Senator
Baca.
Yes thank you.
And Senator Ivey Soto.
Well yes on this correct now
just as I think it helps us get
the concept going into.
What was the what was the vote I
have that six to three Mr chair
also on a motion of six to three
the
All the work on page two line
twenty one the word sixteenth is
not changed to seventeen R. and
if this matter is adopted
Representative report about the
committee will be reported out
as a claim committee sub and a
half point three person.
Mr chairman when we have to
change a title I I can see the
title there.
That's a good question miss
Roberts could you go down to the
top of the ago shows page one at
the very top.
Thank you very much for
perfecting that up senator if
you know.
And so just as a matter of clean
up I'm gonna make a motion that
on page one line eleven we
strike the workers sixteen and
seventeen I'm sorry sixteen at
we're sixteen M. so that would
re permitting person seventeen
years of age to be.
R. and and actually then also
spread qualified electors.
And insert in lieu thereof
considered voters.
But we're consistent with the
language that we use in down
below so that.
And I think this is just clean
up but so that it could not that
it would be permitting person
seventeen years of age to be
considered voters for a
statewide special elections.
Is there any objection to
adopting that amendments.
Staying on top no objection
Mister hill please show all
members present voting in the
affirmative on that is there
are further questions or
comments from committee on the
amended committee substitute
Senator us.
I thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Senator Hamblen for
bringing this forward and thank
you to
our issues leadership for being
present today and speaking on
behalf of this bill I I thought
against the removal of the
sixteen because Mr chairman
members of the committee when I
was a senior in high school I
was sixteen.
And I think I could makes pretty
good decisions at that time that
I know there are a lot of other
students too who are in their
senior year that are also the
age of sixteen and I think you
should be able to afford the
opportunity for those who
want to participate and are
willing to register and you know
do the duty as we should be
doing in this country to
participate in elections just
want to make that comment Mr
chairman thank you thank you
very much Senator Lopez our.
I'm gonna also just make a quick
comment and is this and in terms
of this bill.
you know senator Morris talked
about how he got to vote when he
was seventeen years old
many of you have know that I'm a
Peter scared and was very
involved in the Methodist church
when I was.
Growing up in and from most of
my life
when I was
sixteen years old I was actually
elected an alternate delegate to
the highest body in the in the
church over the United States
and thirty four of our for other
countries.
I was seventeen years old I have
the privilege of having a vote
on who would become a bishop in
the church.
That was a big deal.
Something that I got to have
gotten to do another four times
throughout my life.
As an adult but as you I I I I
was I was given the privilege
and with one that I took very
seriously it's one that I I I
probably spent more time
studying on the various people
than than the most of the adults
that because of my exuberance.
And and and you know in in terms
of of decision making
you know I'll I'll say six
seventeen year olds are in the
prime of doing research and and
making decisions
so so anyways I just I just want
to make that comment before we
proceed resolution on this
matter.
Is there anything else on the
committee if not what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Yes I also this would be a a do
not pass on Senate bill for
well and a do pass on the rules
committee substitute for Senate
bill four four twelve point
three the point three will
incorporate those changes.
It's very well and the second
from Senate office.
And see nobody else seeking
recognition from the chair Miss
Vigil please call the roll
Senator Baca no.
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Moores.
Yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
Senator Pirtle.
No yeah we Senator Stewart yes
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator doing.
Yes Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am on a seven to vote
Senator Hamblen congratulations
you have a new pass
recommendation from this
committee thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee for doing
this I just a a point for
Senator Moores there are five
cities in Maryland that have the
voting age for local elections
at sixteen so there's been some
progress since you were last at
that age and and able to
participate I do feel that
there's an opportunity that we
have here as legislators that we
obviously have a young folks who
want to get involved in the
process and when we are able to
welcome them into our offices
it's this is I think our
obligation as legislators to
provide them with as much
guidance and mentoring and
information that they want so
that they can continue to carry
on the legacy of come of
compassion and dedication to
their community so thank you for
this opportunity I appreciate
and thank you to the folks who
spoke in favor of this I'm I'm
grateful for your time thank you
Mr chair thank you very much
Senator Hamblen and ya mas and
at least yeah thank you so much
for your time but it is funny as
well we very much appreciate it
out with that are we are at ten
thirty
about forty five seconds before
that I did indicate that that
there was request that we
recessed at that time so that
are one of the Caucasus could
meet and I'm not there some
other meetings that need to take
place so the Senate rules
committee will stand in recess
at this time thank you all very
much.
