Happy of the decision on remand.
From the first judicial District
Court.
From two thousand and eleven.
And this is
Further distancing of the New
Mexico house representatives.
Not sure why we have this right
here right now but nonetheless I
the first to have it does give
some good standards and interest
and the bridge there there's a
handout from fair districts for
New Mexico that was put in
there's a legal voters of New
Mexico advocacy statement on
redistricting.
there is the to Senate rules
committee SB to committee
analysis.
Which also has with the the
legal case.
And then we have farmville
our gender and our bills.
for the bill we'll find out
about our ability.
that is the for us along with
the taps Matt.
And we also have a district
profile page.
that gives us a lot of this
information I will note for
every for those who are watching
online following the audience
other than some ahead of.
The
The bills and maps are available
on line.
And if you go to the New Mexico
Legislative websites.
And go to Senate bill two.
And the twenty twenty one second
special session.
you will be able to find of the
bill with the description of the
to the districts and then you'll
also find out the maps there
that is sometimes easier to
follow sometimes not.
in terms of in terms of the
various different districts.
And so with that we have the
sponsor of the bill.
Senator Lopez who
I know as part of tremendous
amount of time and effort
into this process and and also
has the experience.
of of having
Up in the chair of the rules
committee the last two times
that we did redistricting and so
I'm quite positive along the
way.
She may during this period she
may find a couple pointers to
this chair about what to do next
and and that will be fine and
appreciated so so with that
Senator Lopez if you'd like to
present.
And they were also drawn by ms
Britney poss from research and
pulling
and she's not here advocating in
favor or against any particular
map nor does she necessarily
think they're a good idea she
just is here to provide the
practical answers to any
questions you may have
but with that then lotus you
would please present thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee
I would just say you know the
past four months you know we
have that.
Senate Democrats have been
participating engaged with the
citizens redistricting committee
and as not just us is the
Democrats that we know that
various Republican colleagues
have also been participating.
And what that process included
Mr Chairman was listening to a
public comment comments from
committee members during their
deliberation processes of the
many of the maps that were
proposed at the hearings and of
course analyzing the committee
works accounting ratios which is
what the CRC not to propose.
Of the bill that we have in
front today contains much of the
work that was provided to us by
the CRC the citizens
redistricting committee.
it also reflects the diversity
of our state Mr chairman if
fully recognizes the needs of
our native American communities
and protects the many to
communities of interest within
our borders.
I'm Mr Chairman at this bill
adopts the consensus map.
By the pueblos C. cardia and
Mescalero Apaches and the Navajo
Nation.
Mr chairman it's important to
note that the deviations from
the ideal population in a
consensus plan establish the
maximum and minimum deviations
for the other Senate districts
throughout our state which is
approximately negative six point
nine percent and three point one
percent so we have that ten
percent range that we're still
working at from a negative six
point nine to a positive three
point one.
Mr chairman as we go through a
little bit more in depth on that
day the proposal in front of the
committee today I will go into a
little bit more in depth for the
committee.
What I also and wanted you Mr
chairman is allow.
The native American consensus
group to have a chance to
present in front of us and give
us some of their rationale as to
why we have incorporated very
map within the map it's a
proposed in front of us so if I
could Mr chairman of the last
like to invite three of the
members I would like to say a
few words to the committee.
And I also have a press release
that was issued this morning
from the
The tribal redistricting
committee that of course does
want to support the efforts that
we're presenting in front of of
us today and Mr Baca can hand
that went out to so if I could
Mr chairman
I have.
Mr king king Mr chairman and
then on the definition of the
two.
Do this for L. Department
continues to do this
effectively.
If you would.
And
Okay so on the while you're
coming up Mr Mr chairman.
Thank you what what you're what
you're coming up than what we
have up on the screen.
right now is is the maybe
American consensus plan.
And and so.
and
Actually missed one there's a
there's another chair on this
side I'm actually gonna ask Miss
pasta come back just because as
a talk about the different
areas.
But different areas than you can
you can go ahead and and and and
common sense Mr over there's
another for over here.
And so
Yeah for the for the two of you
sitting at the table the you
just speak to Mike that will
pick up Mr Borman you may want
to just pick up the microphone
and push the button when you
speak okay and and are you gonna
need to use your laptop well you
you are okay so let me see if we
can get the up this table moved
up a little bit towards you so
that you could use that.
Budget arms Mr.
Do that.
Thank you thanks I appreciate it
Yeah there you go.
Okay.
Okay so very well please
introduce yourselves
your
tribal affiliation as well as
organizational affiliations and
I go ahead and present.
Thank you Mr Chairman name is
Keegan king and co chair of the
all pueblo council governor's ad
hoc redistricting committee.
Good afternoon my name is Casey
dumont I am for the public.
Cochair the off of the council
governors as well as as well as
the Attorney for the public
representing this redistricting
process.
And I'm advocating what you're
probably.
Mr chair committee members and
from the public that.
The state.
At.
Thank you committee members for
giving us some time today to
talk about SB two and the tribal
consensus plan along with my co
chair Mister Casey do then our
committee members we have work
to support the leadership of the
all public council of governors
and been charged with working
with their brothers and sisters
at the Apache and Navajo Nation.
Our goal in this process was to
build consensus and to present
that to truly represent our
tribal nations safeguard their
right to vote.
And to create maps to comport to
traditional redistricting
principles a coalition of tribes
nations and publish the chief
consensus we brought together
the best thinking of the Apache
Navajo publications to create
house and Senate maps that are
compact contiguous Energy
reasonable deviations and
maintain native American
majority populations in our
protective districts.
For the past eight months tribal
leaders and work with their
administrations there councils
and their communities to
understand what communities of
interest look like to our tribal
nations.
Where tribal leaders have shared
with this is that the community
of interests is much bigger than
the part of the state that you
live in it includes our
traditions our languages our
long history in the state the
way we make a living in our
shared with experience.
Through articulating these
points with their communities
with that tribal leaders
leadership has guided us in this
process and drawing maps that
protecting reserves the right to
vote for our respective
communities.
Now the hickory Apache nation
Navajo and publications are
United in their support behind
one map on the Senate side that
is Senate bill two.
You know pulled the principles
of the voting rights act the
deviation statewide is within a
ten percent range and the native
American voting age population
maintains good native majority
populations in these protective
districts these maps have been
crafted the truth tribal
consultation and collaboration
with communities across our
state they have the support and
blessings of the sovereign
tribal nations and we ask for
your support in this thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
The importance of developing the
consensus map what you see
before you was the ultimate goal
for our publications.
At
the end of interruption but.
Yes
we have a I'm back again.
Everybody please check your
Mike turned off.
And and we'll see if we can get
If we get somebody to.
On that and you do this sect.
that that my friend there make
sure it's turned off.
Okay.
The way.
Member number.
From.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay very good and then actually
with the point of that way too
much warmer will build speaking
will building up to.
Yeah
I think so we'll see if if if we
get a notification that the that
the home is gone I just I just
wanna make sure that people are
listening at home could actually
hear what you're saying.
So
Yes fixing the internet would be
fine however we we try to get a
hold of help or he was not
available right now.
So.
Okay good good good perceive us
so we can thank you Sir thank
you thank you as mentioned
before the goal for the public
nations and sitting out in this
redistricting process was to
achieve a consensus with our
system for those Navajo Nation
the correct pagination as well
as our brothers to the south.
The consensus process within the
next minutes amount of time to
work throughout many months
where.
The pollution.
Matt amongst one another meant
together collectively with
various tribes around the state
to to view this northwest
project the area of particular
importance is you see are
maintaining the three native
American majority districts in
the Senate as well as the
influence district in Senate
district thirty.
Ten years ago I believe there
was mention made of the opinion
you have
ten years ago in the litigation
the redistricting litigation the
court acknowledged the creation
of an influence district in
Senate district thirty that's
comprise of the puzzles of SUNY.
After more photo the chronicle
the Navajo Nation as well as in
this rendition yes little
public.
Each of these sovereign nations
have come together to build the
insults in Senate district
thirty influence district is
something that's particularly
important for the public
communities and so as we engage
in this process.
texting the influence district
by also increasing the native
American percentage in Senate
district thirty became one of
the ultimate goals from a
publication.
So it's not a problem which used
to be in Senate district twenty
nine.
Through talks and discussions
with the problems of SUNY Act
money gonna.
Made their intentions known by
leadership of the council and
governor to come into Senate
district thirty to connect the
communities of interest and the
alliances that have been
established for generations upon
generations this is the Senate
district map reflects a strong
native American influence
district in Senate district
thirty and so the map that you
see the consensus.
As the boundaries go from Zuni
pueblo make it's way too slow to
pull all the way through the
middle Rio Grande puzzles all
the way to hickory Apache nation
reflect the sovereign decisions
each each particular nation now
that was something very
important to other schools
because in this process the
tribes have taken it upon
themselves to do the heavy
lifting for this body to do they
have a list heavy lifting and
identify those native American
those protected.
Senator districts and so today
we here to to assert our support
for Senate bill two as it
reflects those seventy stations
of our publications as well as
contains the consensus back
which each of our nations of
work so hard to achieve thank
you.
Thank you Sir.
Good afternoon actually Mr
Chairman but if you have one we
try to just do it.
This is going to be difficult
those are pretty sensitive my.
This Mr chairman and members of
the committee.
And and and and and we do do do
that too got your mask on thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present.
Do not use in support.
Senator.
More hearing this committee
hearing.
This Madam nation.
Has had the maintenance.
Dissipation and redistricting.
The past several decades.
Unfortunately as we all know.
Ten years of being as close to
the New Mexico the case.
Process and all of the cases the
nomination.
Okay.
We don't want to go down that
track again.
And I think that has been to.
Important no go.
As part of discussing the
decision to the point.
level nation became amended the
task force and the decision to
slash.
And I'll nation raise a number
of points and pieces to that
past winners and report that you
see.
Earlier this year maybe Dawn
next to the mission.
From the New Mexico yes for
Senate district.
And several of the
recommendations pertain to to to
to send in New Mexico.
Part of your.
Law that we passed in the Senate
bill three four.
And provides for the opportunity
to re alligned peace and
In that respect indigenous bins.
And we undertake that actually
moving on after you pass
legislation to address
increasing families to ensure
that all these County prison
down these the staff Navajo but
track of them locus of.
They were very successful in
gauging the McKinley County.
In the history of the United
States that is the first County
that actually passed an
ordinance totally respecting.
Indigenous political.
We've Kaesong County.
After that and they did some
it still has does not totally
respect the boundaries of the
negative thing.
Then the last one we utilize the
opportunity to to ensure that
the map that you're looking at.
Does not split.
That chapter.
So as you go through the process
of examining those districts on
the four and twenty two we
have detected effort not to
speak.
I will check.
And that's that's a wonderful
attitude to this plan.
The second part is that you also
in your Senate bill three four.
Provided for what we refer to as
a sliding deviation.
And.
That sliding deviations
although.
In norm says that this is a
positive I in the negative far
from the ideal deviation ideal
population.
We understand that that sliding
deviation was to
contest a positive three
eighteen ninety seven sliding to
use.
And it was wonderful to learn
all the discussions that we have
had in the early part of this
redistricting season we met with
the legislature that.
Part of the special
circumstances that the state of
New Mexico faces is taken into
consideration when you decided
to have that sliding deviation
and the dominantly is related to
the pandemic that happened last
and there will have been very
serious on the counter process
the New Mexico indexation in
rural communities and Navajo
Nation was no exception and
there's there's a change that
there's there's there's statute
under current on the Navajo
Nation so that's sliding
deviation helps in that
information to see if there are
this presentation that is the
voting rights act the voting
rights act provides for the
protection of minorities in the
country.
And Navajo Nation is part of
that tags native Americans in
the state of New Mexico part of
that Senator disadvantaged
blacks Asians anyone that's not
quite as part of that Texas tech
so.
Legislative deviation as you see
on districts three four and
twenty two and the ticket
district three has a negative
six point nine the deviation.
The special technician special
circumstance pertaining to
district three is that on that
negative six point nine provides
for the opportunity to make the
effort to maintain the the
standard that we need to change
we have data management Jody
will be voting district and that
is set by the courts in the
state of New Mexico that's a
sixty two percent native
American units populations were
able to achieve those standards
with the with the sliding
deviation and thank you to your
wisdom and forethought about the
need to have that slight
deviation as we get into the
redistricting committees so at
the end of the Navajo Nation has
discussed the need to to at
least a minimum sixty percent
all with a brothers and sisters
in the pueblos in the Rio Grande
Valley communities to ensure
that we achieve that we cannot
go down below the sixty two
percent because we've still
looking at ten more years twenty
more years from now and we just
didn't get to be setting a very
bad precedent does not take so
with this pattern members of the
committee Navajo Nation supports
the consensus and and hope that
the committee and the
legislature passes the speed
thank you very much.
And thank you very much would
you give us a tour.
Of the of the well north west
quadrant and and how these.
Of these districts are are
composed I will also note.
that Senate district three
actually we have with our
numbers show that it's seventy
two percent sixty two percent.
Senate district three we have
some district or at sixty two
point two.
Senate district twenty two of
sixty two point two.
and then we also we also show.
Senate district thirty.
Five percent of the district of
employment.
At thirty four point five.
And Senate district one at
thirty five point one.
so but it was if you would if
you would be so kind as just
kind of give us a torrent.
And
of the of the various different
districts so that we can
understand.
Yes Mr chair we'll go ahead and
start with the middle Rio Grande
region
and Senate district twenty two.
So Senate district twenty two
you can see here looks very
similar to the current version
and that was part of our goals
to be conservative in our
approach to any changes to this
northwest quadrant on both the
house and Senate is a real quick
as possible of the of the
existing boundaries.
yes.
Yeah.
I guess.
Okay Mr chair committee members
you can see in the black and
white alkaline that is the
current congressional boundaries
of Judaism into the northwest
region.
Excuse me that I might be easier
as you speak pasta check the
area.
Yeah if we could but if we get
into twenty two.
Since the in the black and white
outline is the current Senate
boundaries and so you can see
that
Senate district twenty two in in
the center right there.
In the tan color.
Is very similar there have been
some changes to the northern.
Part of the region two precincts
in the hickory Apache nation
removed from Senate district I
into Senate district twenty two
to help with population and
those precincts fall within the
hickory Apache nation
reservation boundaries
that was an expressed wish of
the hickory pagination president
Velarde and his counsel
Along the eastern boundary of
Senate district twenty two that
remains the same that it does
not change that dog like section
in the center is one precinct in
Santa Clara pueblo.
that is currently part of the
district and remain so the
middle Rio Grande pueblos remain
in Senate district twenty two
at the request of the portals
and questions Rio Rancho have
been moved out of Senate
district twenty two in the
latest rendition in the
consensus maps and part of that
is to improve the effective
native American voting age
population to
Increase that we had to
remove some of those populations
that have grown in your ratchet
wrench of being one of the most
the high scoring populations in
the state over the last ten
years and New York for the non
native growth in that area
that's correct senator let's
talk about that blue area.
Right there at the top.
That is correct same okay very
good and then you can see just
below that that southern portion
is to hi Julie so that is the
Navajo chapter two hi Julie that
would remain in Senator park
excuse me in Senate district
twenty twos district
on the western border
Mr Gorman can talk a little bit
about the amendments or the the
changes to Senate district
twenty two in the Navajo Nation.
Okay so there have been some
some additional changes to
Senator twenty two in the west
and you can see that in Senate
district thirty and as was
mentioned.
this is now an influence
district going from
approximately twenty five
percent native American voting
age population to thirty four
percent let's go back to twenty
two request couple stages so
that we've got a change of the
western side between number a
district to.
And district twenty two.
Yes that districts three and in
district twenty two.
Right up there so that.
Yeah this area right here that
was a district to it's not going
district twenty what would we
deal with that areas.
Okay.
But.
Bank used to.
Court I have known that the.
All I see to plug in okay got it
So what that in that case I I
understand I will will look into
with the public areas of the
we'll go back to the level two
chair we take a look at Senate
district thirty yes I guess so
in Senate district thirty
the problems do the after an
to and site at works together
for the past eight months and.
Attempting to build this into an
influence district
The changes you can see here are
an additional precinct including
Pueblo as well as the addition
of the Pueblo on the slide in
the eastern part of the
district.
this builds the native American
voter age population to thirty
four percent in the district is
not a major it is not another
major district but it does
increase the ability for tribes
to elect a candidate of their
choice.
Then we got this area over here
Valencia County.
Yes it Mr chair Alamo chapter
continues to be in Senate
district thirty as it was before
and they were at some additional
precincts picked up in well into
a County to help with the
population deviation to ensure
that it was wasn't too high so
these used to be part of which.
Right here I believe these were
part of Senate district twenty
nine twenty nine and I got over
to third.
Okay yeah Mr chair those are
actually a proportion of thank
you reservation another okay and
that was at their request okay.
And and so you can see here some
modifications to the area that
is known as real communities
that would no longer be included
in Senate district thirty and
again this has to do with
achieving correct population
deviation to ensure that there
is a native American major we're
influence in the district.
And so that was the reason why
Rio communities is no longer
included in Senate district
thirty.
But those are the changes to
Senate district twenty two
Senate district thirty and then
I think Mister Gorman can speak
about
the Navajo majority districts.
Okay and so this woman want to
come on over here so that you
can plug in.
What you do with that let me
just thank the three of you not
only for all the work that you
all have done but also for this
presentation very helpful.
We got our state.
The end of the standoff with
them.
The need to pay the Navajo
political subdivisions.
This the doctor lines represent.
The political subdivisions
boundaries on innovation in the
food to them is chapters.
You'll see the four corners area
to study I'd.
And below it it is to talk to
put.
And these are political
subdivisions and these are
boundaries and which Navajo
incentive within those areas go
to central location to cast
about.
And make government local
government decisions.
So overlay the regional.
Of precincts.
In the counties.
You'll see how it by that.
Many of these areas and which on
the political subdivisions.
In which never was cast a ballot
we're essentially spread around
to cast their ballots at the
state and federal and Navajo
legends when it happens on the
same time and we'll see how we
can the McKinley County area.
Hello Navajo land in political
subdivisions were scattered
around.
This is an inform of a
disenfranchisement and explain
to the counties and finally they
drive me plans new pacing down
these that provide for the
opportunity to coincide as much
as possible.
With the Navajo attractive and
easy to see these reddish color
line in room can lines with the
numbers and the precinct
boundaries in the state.
So you see in the.
Making the county area
substantial part of the track
the builders are now coinciding
with the PC thank.
So it was detected counties that
just it decreases.
In the movie San Juan County
area we still have some problems
like a long in here two grey
hills do you come and then set
to most it and this district
line is actually part of.
And their population sectors in
between these little gaps that
exists and we still have the
issue of having to campus the
Navajo lands to cast ballots to
the principal reason why we do
that is because as you may know
the Navajo elections take place
and we do tend to have a form of
social event during these times
of the election and families
meet relatives meet and and
things of that nature so that's
the reason why we like to go to
chapters for casting ballots so
being that this is the building
block for the state of New
Mexico redistricting impact upon
the need to provide for
and
unsatisfied the redistricting
principles in the state of New
Mexico.
So here are the plans.
And then we put together.
Starting in the northwest
corner.
You tended to the this he just
in.
District one.
Has become an influence
district.
Thirty five percent and native
American voting age population
of support are you able to put
up the current boundaries for
for the District.
We could see where that
providers are for different one
and then the proposed farmers in
the.
This line is that dependent is
okay I get that.
So as the hoops in research and
pulling has
The stated many times the the
area in which Farmington on
being feel as Texas located
that's where the it was a
concentrated and attention given
to where the population to this
week the trees in that area.
And the need to ensure that the
non Navajo lands and non
renewable areas
are given the opportunity to
design their own districts has
become part of our constitution
but we also realize that and
drawing districts one and two
and particularly one in the
Farmington area there is an
opportunity to proton to
contamination to make sure that
there is that balance that
exists is within the area so you
see that districts wanted to
have the low the negative six
deviations and the numbers are
stacked on the the top number
does the the district number
that number it was the deviation
and the number below it is the
native American voting age
population so district three is
negative seventy one point
ninety six percent of Americans
with an age population we make
the effort to unpack.
That particular districts so
that it runs past the Navajo
Nation lands the unit lands and
going on into the plot area in
this region and so that we can
be able to affect that district
from the eighty percentile to at
least seventy one percent
seventy two percent at this
point time with this iteration.
And then also Israel I district
three was eighty percent yes and
it's not down to Senator yes we
made the effort to massage these
numbers to put in order to bring
those those percentages that.
And and then you'll see here
that some of these pre sixty
still do not conform with the
with the tap abilities but we
have we we we were working with
those families installed by the
San Juan County for districts
that it catches on to chapters
the we two twenty lakes and
crystal and then it also put
takes we feels
and say leave from there was on
a portion there's a portion of
it is sticking to the New Mexico
side and then it goes down to
Navajo and then picks up Mexican
springs forty funds chapter area
to twelve and then then you need
to look at the and and and we
need to run and goes into part
of it goes into Gallup and picks
up traditional Pinedale number
two on the Navajo Nation Santa
Ana goes back down into the
original plan that it had to
pick up grandma and then go into
the north side of
That so we've tried to make the
effort to maintain as much as
possible and the court of the
district as as we can so you can
see that that that was the then
in which we make those changes
to to the current proposal and
then district.
Twenty two.
And this vast area here on the
west side of of district twenty
two is the the Navajo land area
this is a very difficult area
need to capture the data on
particularly in the nineties the
counselor photos through your
own own scene public conceal
area this is checkerboard area
and that the census department
really does not accurately
capture the Navajo believe that
because of check borders in some
of these are a few areas like
for example the final slide
where there's no trust land
these these blocks here the
trust land areas which are the
the.
Allotment areas these are all
other land areas and they
referred to as off reservation
lands also Natalie people live
along these areas also also the
we we try to account for all of
those neighborhoods that live in
those areas and so we see you
see that.
We've included several Navajo
chapters in and the district of
of twenty two.
Well we don't necessarily have a
whole lot of and.
Eagerness to include this area
this this point here in the real
need the but it is this is
because this area consists is
predominantly non native
American area and a challenge
that we see in the state of New
Mexico for the pueblo lands is
that well these lands are
defined as a business Lannisters
dominant out non native
Americans that live on and and
in those pockets of areas which
and maybe just a lot to live on
on indigenous areas also that's
been a challenge for us but with
our brothers and sisters in the
Rio Grande Valley and the
pueblos insisted that these
these be captured and we need
maybe that that would be the the
consensus to go forward so then
on this lower portion and
had intended to.
Look at the prospects of being
part of district thirty but with
the concerns and issues brought
forward by the Public brothers
and it just became necessary to
add remote back to district for
to ensure that that sixty to
fifty percent native American
going this population is is well
maintained so in this plan.
And members of the committee
that.
Influence districts and that are
being put forward district one
and district thirty the post in
the thirty five percent of
native American music this Mr
chair.
Back at
What is the overall native
American.
population in the state.
Mr chair I don't know if we had
an inequitable.
It is I believe twelve percent.
And we we don't have the actual
numbers I've always I've always
affected just totally like that
at about twelve percent but
it'd.
And then there's multiple
constituencies multiple
variations to that there's.
There's the the total population
maintenance is the the.
This panic native American so
there's so depending on which
one you focus on it over to you
a different number and a
different percentage of the
state okay bring up and then and
then and that topercent includes
the native American population
in New Orleans county area.
That does not include
unfortunately right it's it's
the the the urban urban native
Americans and and Albuquerque.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I think overall in
the state.
Mexico City twelve percent
native American population if
you go into the northwest
quadrant.
Then that percentage is up.
Thank you to to a delay and
community element community.
Senator Wirth.
This is the July one twenty
nineteen as a lot of point out.
But that but also I mean what we
all need to remember is is the
other connotations.
Think of that as well.
Which are pervasive throughout
New Mexico but particularly and
and the network Mr chair Mr
chair back in at that one of
the.
One of the very important
aspects those present presented
to the citizens redistricting
committee is that undercount and
one of the things it's very
important
As a precaution as the types of
measures taken by our tribal
nations to to curtail the
impacts of COVID was to shut
down many of frontier
communities so total shutdown
where if you are non resident
you could not come into even if
you're from that community so
you were not residents
oftentimes you're prohibited
from coming and so that to the
to the presented some challenges
for the census count and so we
have that will documented
records within the CRC
indicating how difficult the
count was and so as Mister
Gorman mention deviations became
necessary to offset some of that
on the account that's been
taking place well you know
that's been a very important
aspect of of the redistricting
process for us is to account for
the impact of the census count
and the types of measures we
took to protect our communities
that are I don't know but other
places I have lived simply but
still has the
So as of the robot of the
roadblock on.
these other members of the
committee to work on this one I
just questions.
Mr Mr chair just the the point
about the indicate.
And.
On the Navajo Nation it was a
very difficult situation during
the pandemic.
And in one message of the
government was telling people to
stay home.
Stay home be safe throughout the
year twenty twenty.
On the other hand the U. S.
Census and district and efforts
to collected data through self
reporting dominantly using the
internet.
The internet is very scarce on
the Navajo Nation.
And and it's very difficult to
find a good spot to to get a and
online let alone and then you
have.
The proper instrument and to
access that data or information
on the internet many of our
people do not carry the
smartphone in order to get on to
access to the US Census
department finally posted in in
October we made an effort to
encourage Navajo people to come
out as we listed the and an
internet company to go around
with that global access.
But our Navajo people said no
I'm not going to.
I am not going to participate in
the self reporting it was a
serious challenge and it does
show Mr chair in our data we
have it Navajo Nation religious
program that collects data on
page four structures on the
Navajo Nation occupied.
And we see an overlay of that
data on the census blocks and
many of us and spots on the
Navajo Nation have zero
population yes that the Senate
data has gotten those and since
this point and that's superior
to the connection between the
undercount and and the ticket is
that we carry on a lack of
activities during the year
twenty twenty two.
Thank you very much thank you
very much for the testimony.
on and I just ask you of and
Senate district thirty.
Where Senate district thirty.
Yeah thank you.
So that districts the the
The performance by party in that
district.
changed
I guess around fifty fifty four
percent fifty three percent.
It's moved up to about fifty
eight percent.
and so it was there was there
any discussion about.
About other areas that that
quite a bit I know you talked
about rate ofpercent visually
moving in the Senate district
thirty.
What other areas that might that
might kind of maintain what the.
What the Republican performance
democratic performance numbers
may have been.
Mr chair committee members in
drafting these maps are primary
motivation was in preserving
communities of interest in
working with tribal leaders to
articulate that and party
affiliation or performance
numbers wasn't part of our
discussions with tribal
leadership it really was focused
on shared lived experience in as
you know in many of our tribal
communities
there is a preponderance of.
Democrats and and more Democrat
registrations Fund at the same
time in every one of our tribal
communities there are
people from all backgrounds of
all political persuasions and so
that was in a primary factor in
impacting these districts.
And I I appreciate that I hope
you appreciate that
Your your community is of
interest.
R. travel membership.
Our communities of interest tend
to be of a political
performance.
so but but anyways the CDC Mr
chairman members of the
committee for the Navajo
nation's perspective.
Our primary goal.
Is to achieve the voting rights
act stand his number one
priority.
And the secondary part are those
principles of the district
including the community of
interest issues that we have
this federal law.
That is very beneficial to
indigenous peoples in the state
if if we can be able to draw
upon a good set of population.
That that has the sixty percent
Navajo has those numbers so
that's the primary concern for
us the political affiliation to
competitiveness aspects is not
part of our assessments at this
point time and what we hope that
the VA never goes away so that
we don't get into that dynamics
of the competitiveness future.
Certainly not I and I and I
understand that the
and of course the Navajo Nation
is a.
Is a much faster and more
populated.
Areas than than amended the
pueblos.
And in fact we see that in in
district twenty two where we
have ended the pueblos
kind of amalgamated together and
then and then the entire western
half.
A western third being kind of
Navajo.
in addition to the other to
districts please thank you thank
you that in that in that regards
I think you know when we as Mr
Gorman said when we set out in
this redistricting process.
Each of our nations.
Sent forth guiding principles
using what works for us in past
redistricting cycles knowing
that many of our maps have been
vetted through the courts
throughout the years of
redistricting is so using that
as a basis to guide our process
the voting rights act being the
the centerpiece.
And so in in looking at the
different renditions and those
traditional redistricting
principles of packing and
unpacking no we saw different
variations proposed in the
citizens redistricting committee
that would put.
All the problems of that are
currently in in Senate district
thirty.
And put them into a Senate
district twenty two.
And you know the governor's the
council's waiting on that type
of rendition and said this is
not in their best interest
because.
We can we feel very strongly as
possible.
That we can.
Have the best opportunity to
elect a candidate of choice in
Senate district thirty and in
addition to Senate district
twenty two is so rather than
just have one opportunity have
multiple opportunities and so
that became a very important
aspect to encourage active
engagement in the political
process for my tribal nations.
And and up along those lines
A
I know with with
It depends on the particular.
subgroup that's being discussed.
for example with Hispanics a
fifty five percent district is
considered to be a.
expeditors Representative.
for the native Americans
districts I thank you all of
unpacking.
at sixty two percent.
Level.
That.
For for native American district
and and also what is the
definition of a of a
destructive.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
As we said on this process in
their multiple factors that that
have come into.
That threshold of.
Sixty two percent and higher.
Is the target goal.
Four million for tribal nations
the onset of redistricting that
is higher than the Hispanic
constitute what constitutes a
majority Hispanic districts.
And the case law that supports
that identifies that for native
Americans due to pass.
Voter discrimination past
history of voter
disenfranchisement and the many
historical implications of that
type of discrimination that
increase the number of sixty two
percent and the ball will
provide the opportunity to elect
candidates of choice
consistently the voting rights
act.
And so as we.
Look at the.
Need to American majority
districts we also look at the
influence districts.
And the influence districts are
part of that.
That still over population so we
target that sixty two percent.
There is excess population that
can contribute and influence and
neighboring districts.
Now there would be.
Contrast to the idea of.
Taking in the need of major
district and breaking into
multiple influence districts
that's not the case you start
off with those native majority
districts and then look at what
is in the sense that excess
population that can contribute
to the native American
voter the the increase in in.
Creating the opportunity to the
kind of choice in influence
district so ten years ago the
litigation that twenty five
percent was.
What was targeted at that time
as an input because that was the
excess of what was not in need
of major district with the
inclusion of this little Pueblo
now in Senate district thirties
influenced District that
increases the opportunity to
thirty five percent.
And so that's how we arrive at
that influence district number
and so you know what we set out
to to focus on protecting the
native American majority Senate
districts you do in order to
maintain the
and prevent hacking of native
Americans into a single district
you will have to access
populations that can contribute
to an influx District.
Mr chair members of the
committee the question with
regards to wipe the the national
of sixty two percent.
It's a very unique situation on
the Navajo Nation.
You take a hundred voting age
population leave a message on to
that.
These are just voting age
population eighteen on above.
You take twenty off the top of
that one hundred you're left
with PED that twenty and then it
just in the kitchen they don't
vote anymore you should state
federal county election.
With eighty New Mexico.
On the line issue date twenty
off that topic in the last
sixty.
At twenty is confused.
They didn't need that the cast
all the ballots on election day
particularly last year in the
state.
The cast all the ballots with
the only go to the Navajo
Nation.
Women please.
And they don't cast a ballot in
the other.
Election state county federal.
So we left sixty that have the
potential to cast all.
However we have to take off
twenty more so that less use
only for the building.
That third set of twenty.
And I'm able to go to the
police.
They don't have any gas money.
This system has the capability
to the one that we have here to
connected to.
To route if voters
driving distance from polling
place eight department please
speak on that mission.
Often times Alan half drive.
Between two totally cases the
Navajo believe please and the
state federal committee please
please.
And that's a very serious issue
with the conditions on the
Navajo Nation road conditions on
the Navajo Nation.
It's very tough to travel around
on the twenty ninth mission like
anywhere else in rural
communities across the across
the world.
And that exists on the map
mission so at the end of the day
we're only left with forty forty
eight population.
Of that forty thirty five
absolutely tend to lose.
They will pass both the Navajo
and the state election ballots
on election.
The other factors that we have
to take into consideration we
did a study twenty twenty
sixteen and the result is that
and on the Navajo Nation in
Arizona New Mexico we prefer at
a substantial rate to go to the
phone please.
You do not like million dollars
you do not like voted
convenience centers you don't
like anything.
Those matters are not
trustworthy you do not know
whether your ballot has been
counted.
And all so Navajo referred to
cast a ballot in that machine
and the machine will get the
message to the voters and your
ballots accepted.
And it's County.
That is a Navajo voters across
New Mexico and Arizona.
That's the reason why it's
important to understand that a
Navajo voters the floor is to go
to a polling place.
And the conditions on an
animation that it that it
prohibits a disincentive ISIS
and one of the conditions was
that these precinct boundaries.
All over the place they don't
respect Navajo political
boundaries on these and hope in
McKinley county with the need.
That there will be improved
performance goals so that
substantiation that justifies
the sixty two percent.
That's that's incredible.
Thank you.
And
One of things that we're looking
at doing in New Mexico.
In the urban areas were we
didn't go to the need centers
we're looking at going also to
convince others everywhere so
that so that at that point then.
for example you know degraded
and and San Juan county where
the proceed batteries don't
necessarily match with the job
of this.
What are the closest present
those are all the places I'll be
able to cast ballots.
And and and hopefully that will
help.
With that situation
Anyway so I I mean I I work for
the Navajo Nation department
justice during twenty twenty.
On on on some loading issues and
that was
Of the challenges are possible.
Under the influence district in
southern twenty five percent is
a influence district with a
preference for the for the
higher number or.
Yes this is Mr chair I think we
have incentive threshold with
that influence district number
existed ten years ago at twenty
five percent because that was
the native American population
that we could achieve but we can
if we achieve more and we do
this time around with the
collision provided focal
increases that to thirty five
percent if we can keep that
number is going up we would
fortunately we don't have any
other native American
populations to bring it to
Senate district thirty and so
that is the best of course
overachieving and influence
district was capped out at
thirty five percent.
Mr chair.
And members of the committee.
I hope that you're this section
not that.
Every situation and every
circumstance.
It's an indigenous people all
together to see.
Yes.
Circumstances that exist on the
Navajo Nation fashion different
from those that exist within the
cluster panel communities.
The district.
And Navajos travel vast
distances.
Not only for groceries.
Thank you for getting services
for conducting businesses such
as an election.
It's a vast area at the.
And that is very minimal
convenience centers within the
state fifteen minute drive from.
Those don't exist on the Navajo
Nation.
So the influence district and
others talking about.
This is something that needs to
be studied.
We wish that we could hire an
expert this is costly to do
that.
And all and off the top you want
to go down to track.
To hire experts and spend
hundreds of thousands of dollars
for the purpose of
redistricting.
We hope that in the in the
Senate bill would be adopted.
To ensure as we're all sitting
here telling the committee here
we believe based on the nation's
this is.
This is in our best interests.
And and that's a that's a very
important situation and dynamics
that needs to be changed.
Mr chair thank you and just on
that point the.
The influence district this is
been used in previous
redistricting cycles ten years
ago the Senate district thirty
wasn't influence districts are
indications the multi trouble
places which also co counsel
hired Dr Richard instrument he
is an expert on influence
districts and the goal of the
infants districts is similar to
achieve that the purpose of not
diluting native American
minority low so when you do have
the opportunity to create major
districts.
In these cases sometimes you'll
have that access population so
influence districts but she says
nothing just discard that it
nexus populations singles off
let them go fan offenders of the
influence district is a as a
means of.
Of preserving and maintaining
the minority voting power.
That may not you might not reach
above fifty percent to create a
major a simple majority but to
increase that influence as much
as possible achieve the same
goal of protecting minority
will.
Thank you.
Thank you all very much thank
you this presentation.
Thank you.
Hello and our of the three of
you going to be around the rest
of the week as.
Mr Chairman he can this
committee.
Is receiving news and need time
to do some to the to the two
hundred prove it.
In this building we're very
concerned thank you Mr Mrs.
Information on we we defer to
the chief of families.
And not be in in this situation
Mr our music that these kinds of
findings and I think for the
nomination will be returning
home C..
I understand that and I'm sorry
to hear that
I know not all of us wants to be
around each other either.
The.
If if the if the three of you
would be so kind
to
to make sure that just to help
has your phone numbers and email
before you leave up that would
be that would be very helpful
for us okay thank you Mr I thank
you all for your presentation.
Number of.
Yeah and then Center Lopez if
you and as poss.
Would be so kind as to give us a
tour of the state.
Under these new maps and I'm
going to ask that are doing if
you would chair during this time
right now and I'll be back in
just a moment.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee
And again thank you gentlemen
for your presentation.
Very thorough very informative.
And I know the presentations
that they were able to give
during the C. Garcia hearings
worse
they were able to give much more
of a historical perspective on
voting rights issues within the
tribe's when they were able to
actually have the right to vote
nineteen forty eight
so they haven't you know there's
just there's a little history
that we shared so if any of you
have an opportunity please go to
the CRC website and sit through
this in December the
presentations especially here
with the native American history
that they shared it's truly eye
opening.
So madam chair I have just to
reiterate as I have mentioned
previously is that the bill
that's in front of us does adopt
the consensus map that again was
approved by our native American
brothers and sisters it's
important again once more to
note that the deviations across
the state of New Mexico will
begin at six point of minus six
point nine percent which is in
Senate district three.
And with the ten percent that we
are allowed to do by law we can
only grow a district by three
point one percent.
So what you'll see within this
map madam chair members of the
committee again the the lowest
number you can see is again
minus six point nine in district
three and then you'll have some
variations across the state but
it is we do not grow more than
three point one percent in the
positive second that stays
within the ten percent
deviation.
So I'm what we'll do now since
we had a picture of the
northwest we're going to go over
to the northeast section of the
state.
And what you'll see madam chair
members of the committee and you
do have the maps with you by the
chance occasion don't want to
look up here you do have some
colored maps they can also help
I know I'm I'm site challenge so
sometimes I can't see numbers
and that the hard copy makes it
much easier for me.
I'm but madam chair members the
committee you'll see at the
north east region you see you
Harding and curry county.
These counties are largely
agricultural in nature populated
with many ranchers and farmers
as well as home to cannon Air
Force base and the status quo
these counties are represented
by Senator wide is maintained
with little change.
And as you move over to the left
in district eight at you'll see
of course that there some growth
in that district and part of the
reason madam chair members of
the committee yes there was a
loss of population.
And across the state is round at
the southeast.
Portion of our state is where
the growth was as well as an
the at Rio Rancho northern
Bernalillo county area so we had
to make some adjustments.
But a population declines in
Senate district eight
was proving to be challenging as
we were looking as to how to
make sure that we can stay
within the deviations.
so what we and.
Have to do is act.
Speaking with some of the other
senators and looking as to where
we could do some sharing US
Senate district eight now
representative all of the city
is west of Las Vegas.
As well of parts that were in
district six
which of course is Senator
Gonzalez and there is some
sharing up in the northern
section the northern parts
of around Taos yes County.
You'll see those areas
Senate district to US six still
maintain Stallis and Red River.
and Cuesta but there were some
negotiations that we had to work
with the in looking at the map
and making sure that we can
still have the populations
needed for Senate district
eight.
But this is what we have as a
result in front.
I'm and madam chair members of
the committee during the CRC
public hearings it became clear
at that from the public's
comments that US Senate district
nine.
which is currently represented
by Senator Stefanics was largely
representing the northern areas
of New Mexico and also the
southernmost county it was
largely not a community of
interest so Senate district
thirty nine previously went to
all the way through Lincoln
County.
And in listening to the C. R. C.
presentations Lincoln County
didn't want to be part of Senate
district thirty nine.
And if you go back to the C. R.
C. maps Senate district thirty
nine did not include Lincoln
County.
So madam chair members the
committee would like to refer
back to is could to completely
say thank you continuing thank
yous at Tennessee Garcia for the
maps that they did adopts and
that are on their website those
are used as a basis for what we
have here in front of us and
you'll see a lot of similarities
in in in this map that we're
looking at.
I'm just the and still looking
at the northwest quadrant
because thirty nine is still
part of that the northern
community
The.
Native American Community a
consensus map that was just
presented to us.
in Senate district and just
five.
You'll see where they did come
into the trauma community.
So we have to find some
population there for that
particular Senate district so
there were a few changes on the
southern side of four we did
take a few precincts
And from that.
both the Senator Wirth.
And also ensuring with Senator
again Gonzalez.
Then again the deviations that
you'll see there are within of
the ten percent range as to what
we have been committed to
working with.
And then as was mentioned it
just as a another
Reiteration is within the native
American consensus map
we still look with reguards is
Senate district one which is
Senator shares the
representative Senator this time
and Senate district to we're
senator Neville
each of those persons of their
districts has a larger deviation
but again as was just explained
by Mr Gorman I'm again trying to
would just with regards to the
native American
needs and such you will have
some of the slight larger
deviations and again trying to
work with the the packing that
was in existence in Senate
district three.
See going through here if we
look a little bit more closely
into this particular area of
Santa Fe County.
And that is currently
represented by Senator Wirth and
Senator Rodriguez there are a
few changes
but again they had some excess
population that they were able
to share and with neighboring
Senate districts so there's not
as much change it you will see
in their Senate and and current
districts as to what we have
proposed
Senator Stefanics in losing
Lincoln County still had to
acquire a little bit more
populations so we did there were
some sharing with regards to
Eldorado.
and to us some of the other
southern portions of Santa Fe.
And that again was shared
between senator Wirth and
Senator Stefanics.
You'll notice this Senator
Rodriguez is district has
changed a little bit a few
precincts but she's the core
center of Santa Fe so there was
just a few precincts that
she was sharing.
So as we go further south we'll
do Albuquerque last as we go
further south we'll go down to
the southeast quadrant corner of
the state of New Mexico we look
at the Census numbers there's a
large number of that had to be
distributed through
That particular portion of our
state.
C. R. C. maps as you will notice
did pair some of our senators
in that particular area of the
state there is appearing between
Senator guy goes and Senator
Kernan and there is also
appearing between Senator Griggs
and Senator Burt
but the map would you see that
we are discussing right now does
not have the parents in them.
And as we look at the southeast
quadrant.
It also had an effect on Dona
Ana County.
So in doing so we had to place
and figure where we could move
some population mainly from shop
but I'll.
Which is being pointed out at
this point in time.
Shut up in this C. R. C. maps
was accommodated completely into
Senate district thirty one.
But as you look north was
senator schools district he too
had a larger population.
So again as we try to work with
the deviations of no more than
three point one percent
Senator Cervantes is district
which is thirty one right now
had to lose two precincts that
went back into Senate district
thirty four so we talk about it
communities of interest the
majority of it is still in
Senate district thirty one.
but again because of the
population that was in Senate
district thirty seven we had to
make some adjustments within the
map.
Senate district thirty one still
maintains sent that that isn't
and Senate park.
Senate district thirty eight
there is a request of course
rooms Misia that they wish to
state complete and whole so this
map represents that we're in
Senate district thirty eight
right now Misia is completely
within that particular district
previously it was in Senator
diamonds or previously before
that senator Smith district but
at least it can that community
of Misia is now whole is Senate
district thirty eight.
You will also look M. there in
downtown Los crucis and of
course this is within.
Currently represented by Senator
Steinborn used you have a
building in downtown Los crucis
to historic community which by
the way was part of his
existing district
he wanted to make sure that he
could maintain part of that and
still continue to move north
and wanted to keep the
communities of
as we were discussion a media of
hatch and Dona Ana so we're able
to work to keep those
communities of interest together
and again part of those we're
under his a previous
down to reset he had.
And if you go more now to the
southwest part of the map madam
chair members of the committee
you'll see that there is a
change between Senator Diamond
and Senator of Korea Hemphill.
it's kind of like a flip in many
for purposes of discussion at
this point in time Senator Karia
Hemphill goes from Silver City
south into the bill hill area
there's much more of a community
of interest within those
communities
and it looks a little bit better
on the map anyway when we talk
about how the visual looks
Senator Diamond of course goes
north so it doesn't compass
catching County and the northern
part of Sierra County and again
many of the communities of
interest if there are ranchers
ranches and I'm kind of more of
the open space but there's a lot
of commonality within those
communities of interest of
course which is part time hi tam
many other communities that we
know when we drive through I'm
going over to Arizona.
And let's see if we go back up
to kind of the middle Rio Grande
area.
we will see a based on a Senate
district thirty on the native
American consensus map.
sick it to has its boundary you
can see there and ballistic
County
similar to the discussion that
we had previously B. as take the
western part of the land to
county and have left the area.
Between have pretty much the
river area and some of the other
real communities and such for
Senate district twenty nine is
at this point again another
community of interest.
As we go north.
and if I may say to a in this
particular
After proposals that we have
here in front of the committee
today there is a parent in this
district and that does Karia
Senator Sanchez and senator back
up.
As we go north into I'm sorry
but I am not that person
understand that's because that.
That's the accommodate the the
Senate district thirty yes and
from the native because it just
because of the way the
boundaries that have been
proposed for us that we're
discussing here with regards to
this Senate district thirty yes
thank you your current.
Going further north
Here we come into the
Albuquerque area.
Yeah Albuquerque Rio Rancho as
part of the you want to blow it
up just a little bit more
please.
Rio Rancho a community of course
has had a large number of a
person Sechrist voting age
persons who relocated up there.
With the constrictions that we
have from the native American
consensus map you have a large
number of population that had to
be distributed someplace amongst
Albuquerque namely the west
side.
As we began to look at the
numbers madam chair members of
the committee
we realized that with the
population distribution it
needed to take place there have
to be some movement as to how we
can distribute to out of Rio
Rancho there have been requests
madam chair members of the
committee M. F. a C. or C.
hearings at Rio Rancho wanted to
stay home
there's some split between a
Senate district ten that
overlaps of course into Rio
Rancho and some of the other
areas of other representatives
and senators.
So and discussion and what you
see in front of you.
We have taken Senate district
twelve which is in downtown
Albuquerque primarily and moved
it up to the west side kind of
the northwest area of
Albuquerque southern part of
Santa Fe County.
And has been it's an area we're
able to be a population from
Senate district forty which is
Senator Brandt and create a new
district there in between
That that allowed us to move
some populations and that's a
new proposal in as
the registration the performance
numbers doing Republican so that
is what is here in front of us
at this point in time.
When you move over of course
that does allow us to be able to
bring as we talk about
communities of interest we were
able to move more of Senate
district ten and thirteen into
the north valley which of course
there are communities of
interest along those areas north
all the way to the south part
since we don't have Senate
district twelve at this point we
also had to share some of those
communities between twelve and
thirteen.
and now it's in Senate district
thirteen we do have a pairing of
Senator o'neill and Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
that that you'll see here on the
map.
for the west side of Albuquerque
of course Senate district ten
still does come across and the
river but you still have a
community of interest that was
previously engaged and again
we're still trying to keep these
maps school even with what was
previously listed.
Senate district twenty three.
again as you look at it on the
far west side of it there are
not much of a population.
At what you'll see there of
course a lot of jackrabbits
priorities cal's and such and
the major part of the population
is again along paradise hills
part of antenna ranch Ladera
some of the other communities
that's when you'll see somebody
in roads and part of the Senate
district twenty three if you
look in closer to to Senate
district ten are currently
within Senate district twenty
three so there's not that much
of a to much of a deviation in
their.
Senate district twenty six again
it was move south as we look as
to how to distribute population
so Senate district twenty six
again picks up some of the areas
that a Senate district twelve
used to cover Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino so Senate district twenty
six now comes and further into a
south of central.
And then the southwest quadrant
otherwise Senate district eleven
and fourteen pretty much have
not changed.
At this point in time.
so that madam chair it's it's
just kind of a quick overview of
where we are on the map again
the deviations state again that
the.
six point negative six point
nine percent and you will find
within the communities and we do
not have anything larger than
three point one.
So with that madam chair if you
want to get into more of the
weeds we can I'd be glad to
answer some more questions thank
you senator and then I.
Did you want to talk about
Easter Senator perky at all I
don't know if we I'm.
Sorry.
We used to have a curriculum
sorry I'm just trying to give a
quick rendition before we get on
east Albuquerque you will see
with Senate district sixteen of
course
had us in population of where we
could move again in removing
Senate district twelve we had to
figure how to maneuver and
manipulate some of the
populations so what you will see
here again is we try to keep the
the interstate as the
demarcation line pretty much in
between the west and east and I
think this map continues to keep
the current communities of
interest
Senator one of the maps for the
C. or C. did requested doctors
requests I think the west side
meeting at west mesa high school
where the international district
wanted to keep hold and we've
honor that request here in
Senate district seventeen so we
have as I mentioned previously
madam chair members of the
committee we have been using the
CRC maps as a basis and trying
to work as to how we
again distribute population that
started on the northwest
quadrant kind of moved across
the the City of Albuquerque.
So again is here and.
Will stand for questions.
Thank.
Do we have anyone here in the
room for public comment.
Those that microphone on the
other side of some of their.
Yes you may.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and
head of religion and president
of the league of women voters of
New Mexico.
You've already been legislative
advocacy statement redistricting
so.
Then.
Eight been involved in
redistricting reform for very
long.
On the national level here in
New Mexico.
We work through the legislative
process and to the point.
To ensure that the redistricting
cycle can the.
There are more transparent to
review press.
We respect the impact
contributed to this matter.
But we wish that the three
districts maps for the New
Mexico Senate.
Created by the C. R. C..
Then made available.
And we're also going to request
being made.
That
all deliberations on
redistricting.
Full of the spirit and the
letter of the open meetings act.
Thank you.
Thank you very much is there
anyone else present in the room
like to get public.
All believe we have a couple of
folks on zoom Sir did you want
to as are you looking at a.
Said Levi hall on all morning.
I'm sorry.
Come up with if you like to make
a public on.
Madam chair members my name is
Robert up without going on the
lobby.
Thank you.
my name's Robert up with us and
on the of this for the he could
be Apache nation what the global
and will present a lot is not
able to be here today but just
wanted to give remarks that of
the Jicarilla Apache nation has
been engaged in this process
since early summer
working you know with the Navajo
Nation and the the proposed on
reaching the consensus not for
the Senate.
Senate version so of the and
this that this apps and support
of the bill that you guys have
in front of you today thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Yes yes public come on up if
you'd like to.
The state.
I think if you sit in this chair
I think I think that's what the
other month will remain on the
public don't you think.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee my name's
Austin we again the political
director for animated film
we also worked on with the if
you see need ad hoc as well as
the native redistricting
coalition and we're here in
support of the pueblo and and
tribal consensus maps this is
the representation of probably
about eight months of really
hard work and just very proud of
the all the collaboration that
took place and
the compromise and all of the
work that we that we did
together with tribal leadership
and and just for the privileged
is been to really work with
tribal leadership to not be
prescriptive in the solutions
that we create for tribal
communities but to really leave
it up to the experts in the
community to really advocate for
themselves this is the first
time process which I think we're
very grateful
and I really hope that those
lines will be honored and and
that
you know that that this really
represents a a lot of work and
finally in agreement so I'm very
happy thank you thank you for.
Anyone else in the room would
like to provide public comment.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Dave Mason
I am
Provided a fair description in
New Mexico you have opted out
with thirty nine organizations
representing over fifty thousand
New Mexicans.
And as
The president leaving lotus said
we were disappointed that the
three I see actually maps
Representative for the state
Senate and the Congress we're
not submitted.
The public could see what to see
us in presented.
The process you went through
just like this map we have no
objection to this map
necessarily we have talked
against food processor.
So I'm despite we would like to
see the three maps submitted and
that the CENIC so the public can
skip it the point I would make
the right decision thank you.
Anyone else in the state.
To public comment on zoom.
We set up.
I believe that Maureen Skelton.
Cookie and Granja everything is
possible champ accommodate then
Merican concerns last.
Traditional district.
Yes and this map does not do
that.
all the cookie was signed.
Is a strong boundary but that's
not used in these maps and the
thing is according to objective
measures this map is less
compact being all the maps
approved by this year's team.
The compactness makes travel
easier
and officials and it.
Representative communities of
interest.
From voters to identify
District.
So.
Thanks for.
But this year she thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman all we
have all Montana governor CO the
tech of rival apologize I was
illustrious name.
Thank you chairman.
After the on page that members
the committee this process.
I am the first.
Last month.
Opportunities become legislation
from.
Representative captures wishes
and preferences of the back
especially the Senate district.
The tribal consensus Senate
district.
District.
I suppose the resignation as
this.
That was in district to support.
Torrez.
The legislation protects the
existence.
Excellent is that districts.
As to the purpose of tribes
madam restricts.
Administrative legislative
districts for addresses the need
protect was almost considered
important significant and so
great.
Also affects the high cost of
the seven termination because.
In the heart of tribal
sovereignty last question I
tribes pueblos emissions of.
The committee support passing
Senate bill two thank you
chairman.
Thank you the tech governor and
then we have
yes and I'm not presentation
what your lesson.
Please proceed.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Preston
Sanchez I'm an attorney for the
state of New Mexico.
And so it's to protect and
advance the rights of indigenous
peoples New Mexico and that said
during this redistricting
process we want to make sure
that state leaders are hearing
to the.
It's act which is intended to
protect the rights of native
American voters including their
sovereign rights to determine
what is best for their tribal
communities and the rights to be
able to elect candidates of
their choice as mentioned the
presenters that we here in the
room
Achieving consensus among the
tribes was the ultimate goal in
developing the maps that are
being discussed here today these
maps reflect the collective
interests of the tribes as
you've heard testimony.
Comply with the laws that
protect native American rights
and these maps reflect the right
tribes right to exercise self
determination in this
redistricting process for those
reasons we want to thank the
sponsors of this bill and just
add that they say you prove
support Senate bill two yes this
committee to support as well
thank you.
Thank you.
What I think that is all we have
a public comment on.
As I mentioned before this is a
process we go through once a
decade so that to this please
let us know and we will school
funding any additional full time
that there is this you will go
to the committee.
All Senator Moores thank you.
Medical care which not that
much.
No this is the the comments
would have as little
conversation over the last ten
years but this year C. will
distribute Committee was brought
out by the testimony and also
that these bills this year C.
bills would be introduced on.
Out of withdrawal myself on so
but I do think it behooves after
they went to that effort the
meetings around you talk about
the presentations that they have
the work that they have on the
whose us to tell.
Public Enemy CFC wide there are
three maps weren't even
introduce awarded consider that
they could be we need to know.
Public needs to know what's
going to expense in exercise why
those three maps which is drawn
out on a big one by one we need
to know what was wrong with them
in the eyes of the majority
party that the to snap together
on why the CFCs
Effort is being lost so if you
wouldn't mind going through
those three Matt and telling us
why those maps do not eight
muster to be introduced.
I'm madam chair.
The.
We don't have the concepts to
show up at this point in time
because we can again we don't
have a map of which to introduce
that was introduced we actually
have those maps on who.
Okay are you asking for need to
do to presentation on this
you're seeing that or I want
madam chair Madam chair that you
know why we're more in this
CRC's maps if you could tell
tell us what was wrong with the
first map that we're not even
introducing.
What was wrong with those maps
that were not introduced.
Madam chair Senator there was
nothing wrong with the maps as
the C. R. C. adopted
in reviewing them looking over
them I mean anyone of us have to
for you to which to do so as
many other organizations have
it's a basis of what has been
used for the map that we have
here that we're discussing at
this point in time.
Each one had different
perspectives that was brought
forward
even with the map with the
native American portion which is
part of what is been a concept
that has been placed in this map
is in here.
There are some areas that again
that are that were adopted from
each of the maps that are better
placed in
so it is kind of a
conglomeration that I have here
in front of you.
but again you know for me it was
a matter reviewing them there's
this vast and different and in
all of them even I guess in this
map as we go through it.
It's just a perspectives and
again it is a review process.
So again Madam chair I'm not
hearing a reason is one
introduced why why weren't they
introduced for Lebanon vote
after that exercise and we had
the taxpayers spend money we
passed a law to get their input
they gave us three options I was
told they were gonna be
introduce or would have drawn
to for consideration I think
that to horses left the barn and
it sounds like the majority
party has drawn these maps and
associations audit throughout
the C. or C. maps if they have
you have not given a reason for
throwing out those maps Mexico
C. R. C. deserves to know what
was wrong with their equipment
Madam chair Senator into who's
anyone of us could introduce a
map any one of those three
concept maps at the C. R. C.
adopted.
It's not just prevalent upon
either Democrat or Republican
includes anyone of us that if
it.
Is something that we wanted to
have as part of the discussion
anyone of us could have
introduced a bill and and I
think that's the problem one of
intervention.
And madam with is that it's we
don't know the end of the summer
will give you an answer to this
year student community what was
wrong because maps that the
majority party with this back
together is it going on we're
doing a presentation
about negotiations that happen
in different parts of the state
between districts of the north
northwest Central Park was no
decisions happened between
members of the spot.
I just wonder whether in public
or in open meetings act very
responsibly talked about senator
X. Y. Z. and center it's wise
the I needed to get together and
work their maps and get their
population all we heard that
over and over again we.
Funded in student no incumbent
is paired in this map of so
many.
Things are now very instantly
drawn.
and also doing a presentation of
these dishes were referred to as
belonging to members of this
body metal belong to any of us a
lot of people New Mexico I think
what we have right now is
situation and what I've been
opposed to the last ten years in
this body because we have a map
that was drawn by the people.
Who are in this body for the
people of this body Rep Matt
what that is were people in this
chamber or picking their
constituents are positions
picking up so we will ignore to
CRC and that's why we need a
constitutional amendment because
politicians can't be trusted to
draw their own maps and this is
a perfect example of that
the gross agents happened within
a caucus.
Move down trees around these
communities of interest around.
Remove from is it was very
interest.
we don't even have to purchase
body to tell the CRC after
working for months and months
close Roger maps I suspect what
was wrong is that the building
from because I suspected maybe
you come it's more likely not to
win reelection and I was what's
wrong with the maps as opposed
to protecting the interests of
New Mexico so I'm very
disappointed in the process like
I joined my friends of the
league of women voters and other
groups that this process is
broken this is a process of
politicians picking their
constituents in that situation
our politicians this body has
the courage.
Most people are going to do so
reform legislation that passed
will have the courage next year
the stand up and actually pass.
Reform or constitutional member
take this off so we did to ten
years from now when most of us
will be here I think it actually
have a real redistricting
process.
Reflects the people of New
Mexico City interest not the
forty two people in this
chambers on New Mexico
associations happen.
Not behind closed doors which
seems that happened right now
but happen for the best of New
Mexico this is what's wrong with
American politics right here we
can be trusted as politicians to
do this I think this map shows
that I'm very disappointed we
spent a lot of money as
taxpayers three zero C. with a
great group of people more I
wasn't happy with all those maps
that they put together.
There are a lot better than this
now because we so it's fair and
honest this map is politics as
usual thank you madam chair
missing Mr Chairman very
disappointed in this process
thank you.
Senator Stewart.
I thank you Mr chair and to the
my colleague you're still most
my thunder of.
Thanks I just.
Often.
That.
Thank you Mr so
The store was the my thunder but
that that's really what this is
about we we have power to a body
to produce maps and we've yet to
see even one of those maps we've
had now six opportunities to see
them I think it's disappointing
that this is what has come out
a map that really looks foreign
to what we were looking as a
concept maps that that were
selected from from the CRC and
the amount of work that they put
into it
and the the amount of discussion
public input to have a basically
a map that that looks a like a
market departure from what was
envisioned
I will correct my colleague
though there is still you know
there were many pairings of
those maps both Democrat and
Republican and
this apple there is one period
and that pairing is happens to
be a in the district twenty nine
which is us senator Sanchez is
it appears to be in a district
twenty nine on this map the as
well I do there are no others
that I can see so I I hope that
wasn't intentional or partisan
in nature
but unfortunately that this is
something that I probably could
not to.
voted to pass on thank you Mr.
Thank you Sir Baca Senator
Stewart thank you Mr chairman I
want to correct a few things
that happened said.
So this particular map.
has followed for one of this
here see more Senate's it
Sixtyeight percent of what that
C. R. C. met Pat so the majority
of this math is one of in one of
the state are seeing that and it
was mentioned our effort was to
pair people are we paired two
sets of Republicans one set of
Democrats and then one of our
pairings with on the home I
discussions with the native
American community so that we
look to posi Garcia maps in
great detail chose the one that
sort of fit better what we
thought and Sixtyeight percent
of this follows that Matt so I
think that's a pretty good
average especially since we were
able to fund Karia two sets of
senators so that was one of the
purposes of not just accepting
this year see maps I don't think
any of us all want to do that
and I'm certainly willing to
continue working on that other
period thank you Mr.
Senator Stewart.
And I'd like to make a couple
comments myself as well because.
your existing how how the two
chambers function on things.
in the house they they
introduced all of the CFC maps
and then and then for the house
map then they they went ahead
and and introduced another bill.
of what
exactly as as a center store
indicated we we started with the
CRC maps.
And and then and then I moved up
from from there and and in fact
I think southeast New Mexico.
is a great example of where you
know we made we made some
decisions to set apart from what
the C. Garcia had.
recommended in southeast New
Mexico.
looking at.
Lincoln.
Chavis Lee Eddy and Otero.
from a from a your.
Perspective.
As I think the C. Garcia did in
good faith.
you know they kept.
Most of the terror county
together Campos in Lee County
together.
most of
Chavis and Lincoln.
And then Eddy County where
there's there's been a fair
Papen for more population growth
and and from from a demographic
perspective I can't.
Argue with what this year see
did in southeast New Mexico.
But the the political reality
that we were dealing with was
was that we have.
two members.
On the Senate from currently
reside
and Yamagata area we have to
members of the Senate and
currently reside.
fairly close to each other in
the and the Lee County area.
And and doing it from that from
that fairly here perspective.
has consequences.
And and as senator Morris was
saying.
You know when if it were if it
were just up to an independent
commission.
then those would be the maps
that we would have and from a
demographic perspective I can't
say that that would be wrong.
because the constitution still
leaves.
The legislature with
responsibility of making the
final decision however.
you know we even though there's
a map that was that was
developed out of the Senate
democratic caucus.
you know we look at those
pairings and said well you know
can we do something about that.
And and and made changes.
To the south eastern part of New
Mexico in order to remove those
parents.
and and so.
that is what you get.
when you when you have the the
people.
We're gonna be living with the
maps approved in the maps is is
we do consider.
We do consider to take into
consideration.
has been serving those
communities.
We take into consideration who
has been was offered themselves
for public service.
And and we'll have the voters in
the past Joseph in those areas.
And you know it would have been
easy for us as a as a all of
this it is of the democratic
caucus a little bit easier for
us to say.
Well we're we're just gonna
leave the southeast part of
Mexico exactly the way that the
that the
That the CRC data.
and you know but but instead we
we chose to make accommodations
for people who with the voters
in the past is that.
they want to have been in public
office.
And this
and so from a demographic
perspective.
I don't fault the CRC.
But from a public service for
perspective.
I do think that that the that
the changes that were made from
here.
Are changes that do respect the
voters.
and in that regard and and so.
You know it's a good thing we
only do this once every ten.
And and
you know it is.
up your system.
would be fantastic if we could
have won.
The transition to appear system.
Whenever we do that is going to
be really thankful.
And that transition to the pier
system is going to come with
consequences.
That will affect people who
voters have selected.
The those democratic voters
Republican voters at the end of
the day their voters and that's.
Who has been selected for these
offices.
And and so and so
I'm sorry madam program how much
how much is this map
comes from the from the CRC.
According to the demographer
eight sixty eight percent okay
yeah so you know we've got sixty
percent of this.
Of this map that that because
for this year C. we.
You know we could have.
And I know that a lot of people
who would have liked us to have
started with one of the CRC maps
and come in today and.
And then adopted this map as a
committee substitute.
and and I and I appreciate the
concern that people have.
that I've heard are taking we
have people reach out to me.
As the chair of this committee.
And as.
One of the people who wrote the
bill.
yes that that created the Sears
and.
of how could we how could we
then take nor the CFC and I just
I want to make very clear with
that that we have not ignored
this year's.
would not ignore the CRC.
the the not only have the maps
been very helpful.
To us and and and the lines that
we have which are probably not
the lines that we would affect
in many places.
But in addition to that the the
the testimony.
That
I was delivered to the CRC is a
very different testimony the
from what would have been
delivered to a legislative
committee.
Because people testified the
legislative committee would have
been testifying to those who are
most intimately involved in the
process.
And I think people felt more
free to give testimony to the
CRC.
of a more.
Just communities of interest and
more honest nature with that in
as much taken recap necessarily
who was representing.
for for for their certain lines
were drawn because of of of
certain personalities.
And the and that testimony has
been extremely helpful.
and and I and I want to really
appreciate the fact that the CSE
has put all of that on the
website not to the broadcast
everything but that kept it on
the website.
I tried to follow along
sometimes I get a phone call or
something I get pulled away
what I was going to accomplish
that was able to go back and
watch.
And and that was very helpful
and and so.
So for me.
This map is really an
affirmation of the work that the
CRC has done.
And and I think there's a better
map because of the C. or C..
and and and and so.
you know that the.
The question of whether or not
to start with the C. R. C. map
and then replace it at the end
of the day what we decided was
we wanted to we don't want the
public to feel like we were
doing a bait and switch when I
got to committee.
And suddenly depart from the CRC
map into something different.
And so we decided collectively
and leadership having
conversations to
to proceed start with this map.
and and the Senator Lopez.
I spent quite a bit of time
traveling all over the state.
And talking a lot of people.
And and taking a lot of input.
and to where this map developed
into and
and and Senator office I I I
personally want to thank you for
the work that you've done on
this that has gotten us to this
point that and the on the fourth
day of the session we're able to
have this hearing because often
this this this hearing doesn't
happen until the twelfth of
session.
And so Center thank you very
much for that.
and so Senator o'neill thank
you.
Personally.
Very.
Start.
The store.
All the task manager.
Ten years ago or.
What
better process.
Services edges from the first.
On the north like maps.
With this.
That makes sense of the world so
I just want.
It was introduced.
If the person is very seriously
and I see.
For more politics.
Are also just for context of the
dress this is the reason Sanchez
in this direction towards.
The distribution point.
We're passionate independent
distributions this.
More often than not they are
states that have a process with
the legislature have.
Related to the forces.
Now
there is a solution to the
ongoing as we were brought.
In New Mexico we have taken the
initiative as a legislature
using then
that.
We have this is the right
direction and our first.
And if you look at the different
permutations of.
The use of the move on the.
Virtually all.
Representative Representative
Morgan state Colorado we're
we're issues forced.
The initiative I personally.
Recognizes you know we need to
do that so additional
unemployment I want to just
Is.
I mean I I think we're we're
heading in that direction and.
All of this.
Work.
Thank you very much.
What I'm gonna do have some
Senate bill two.
We have a motion for to pass the
Senate to move from Santo work.
In just a moment.
The second half Center doing.
So what did you have another
question sure.
Very well.
Senator Lopez now Senator
Moores.
Senator.
Senator TCP nope nope Senator
Pirtle.
Yeah.
Senator Stewart.
The.
Senator Stewart.
Senator okay no.
Senator Ivey Soto no matter.
Well
voted three to seven that motion
fails Senator Lopez before we go
to a vote on the two passed
motion would you like to close.
Mr chairman I just appreciate
the discussion and.
Let's move forward.
Senator Baca.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Moores.
Senator any of yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino yes.
The fertile.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Duhigg yeah and Senator
Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
A vote of seven favor three
opposed
Senator Lopez you have a due
pass recommendation for this.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank.
with that the
Senate rules committee we'll be
in recess just to announcements
the first is the September kind
of this is going to be having a
this meeting tonight at five
o'clock in.
At four forty five thank you at
four forty this why we're making
announcements that I know at
four forty five in room three
twenty one.
And and then the floor session
tomorrow will begin at nine A..
How did this.
Or see us moving forward as a
committee will meet tomorrow I
mean do I'm not sure when the
rules committee will be meeting
next we have to see when
something's coming from the
house.
And but most of this group will
be reconvening in the form of
the Senate Judiciary Committee
