Senator Gonzalez present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator huh I'm here.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville I.
Your own meal.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Provia.
Senator Ortiz.
Senator Sylvia Lopez present.
Senator sure.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
the revenue Judith now hours
pastors are for administrative
sense of the fact that you
remain standing for the pledge
of allegiance to be led by
Senator Hamblen.
Our technical difficulties this
darkness in the deep days of
life.
They're the reminder the cycles
of nature and of life that our
creator provides for all of us
on a on conditional Law.
sisters and children of a good.
Gracious god we just.
God bless the work that set out
for you all today.
The.
I.
States are.
The system.
And this is all of.
Officers.
public today thank you very much
to Reverend in the end you need
who serves courses are Senate
chaplain for leading us in
prayer this morning.
Senate for you for information
of the body Mr president
capital outlay sheets which is
of course very timely she's will
Morrow and will be due on Friday
at three PM.
also Mister president of there
is also for today on the floor
And on that Mr president
unanimous consent to go to the
order of messages from the
governor brown that order
business Senator Lopez if we can
And also in the gallery Mr
president yes thank you thank
you thank you seeing no
objection it is so ordered we're
on that order of Business
section five of the New Mexico
constitution I hereby withdraw
the following nomination.
David A. Martinez for
appointment to the New Mexico
finance authority.
Senator executive message number
three.
of course that is the.
three dear president pro temper
you Stewart and members of the
Senate in accordance with
article four section forty two
of the New Mexico constitution
and NMSA nineteen seventy eight
finance authority for a four
year term commencing January two
two thousand twenty one and
ending January one two thousand
twenty five respectfully
submitted Michelle Lujan Grisham
article four section forty two
of the New Mexico constitution I
hereby submit to the Senate
rules committee the following
nomination for appointment
Deborah K. Romero for
have all duties responsibilities
and authority of this office
during the time prior to final
action by the Senate
respectfully submitted Michelle
messages from the house from
that order of Business messages
from the house the reader to
read.
Message from the house of
representatives.
Mr president I'm directed to
shall show the message from the
house has been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill forty one
and house bill forty seven as
received Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the duly enrolled in
engrossed copy of house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for house bill eleven as amended
McCutchen chief clerk of the
house.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
And I'd like to announce to the
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill eighty two
as amended by the house house
bill thirty one as amended by
amended by the house and house
bill one hundred fifty eight in
requests the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk.
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five as
amended by the house without
emergency clause.
House bill one fifty two as
House bill one hundred twenty
five as amended by the house
house bill two hundred sixty
house bill one seventy one and
house bill one forty six in
That's also.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr president
animus consent to go to that
consent to excuse Senator
Steinborn until he returns to
the chamber no objection it is
so ordered.
Thank you Mr president Mr
rules we suspended in the
journal so all those present
this morning session presents
afternoon session there's no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent to the rules be
Senator Lopez thank you very
much Mr president
unanimous consent to go to that
order of business of committee
reports.
Senator if I may we do have a if
announcements and miscellaneous
business I thank senator we are
on that order of business
committee the.
Reader to read.
Thank you Mr president are you
asking can't consent to inform
the chamber what I have for
breakfast this morning.
no objection please proceed
thank you Mr president today is
my daughter a to grace's eighth
birthday and like to wish you a
very Happy Birthday today thank
you Mr president happy birthday.
seven some of the body pay
attention the members of pay
attention.
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr president thank you very
much chairman when you notice in
referred to as the supplemental
appropriations act that that
language is correct and again
are purpose of that is to ensure
whenever the bill does come out
president thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you thank you
Senator Campos any further
announcements Senators.
Si no further announcements
Senator Lopez.
read.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill forty has
had it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
committee report centers we have
a motion to adopt the committee
report.
I see no objections the
committee report has been
adopted.
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator William P. sold chairman
Senator souls.
Sorry Mr president ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that three
to be allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill three eighteen do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
Senate bill three hundred thirty
sold chairman missiles I move
adoption the committee report we
have a motion to adopt the
committee report.
one twenty eight has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that a
do not pass but that Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show all action for
placing
For the.
Senate agree to be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion in the journal reflect
their act.
Individually say no objection
sentence referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two thirty to do
pass and thence referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two forty two do not
Senate bill two forty four do
pass and then to referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two forty seven do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the judge Judiciary
Committee.
Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino chairman
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
I move the adoption of the
committee report Mister
president Senator as we have a
motion to adopt the committee
reports.
to home has been referred Senate
bill three ninety eight has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then for for
to the finance committee
we vote on then with one motion
and that the gentleman reflect
that they were acted upon
individually see no objections
the reader to read Senate bill
three ninety nine to pass and
Senator Pinto I move the
adoption of the committee report
that is we have a motion to
adopt the committee report.
I see no objections the
committee report has been
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill seventy five to
pass respectfully submitted
committee reports on the Senate
Judiciary Committee that we act
on them with one motion but the
journal reflected they were
acted upon individual.
I see no objections the reader
do not pass with that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill three seventy I
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Joseph Cervantes chairman.
committee report has been
adopted and the journal show
that they're acted upon
individually.
Mr president your rules
committee has had under
consideration Senate executive
security and emergency
management for a term commencing
on may twenty sixth two thousand
twenty to be served at the
pleasure of the governor your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment
committee reports that the
said about on them with one
motion the return or indicate
that they were but upon
individual.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read.
referred to the finance
committee.
And Senate bill three eighty
seven do pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
The credit card is been adopted
in the journal so that they were
acted upon individually.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
Benny Shendo junior chairman
Senator Shendo Mr president.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to re
all the committee reports that
pass sentence referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill one ninety I do pass
and it's referred to the finance
committee.
Senate Bill to eighteen do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two fifty six do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee.
amended do pass as amended.
Senate Bill to nineteen do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
committee substitute for Senate
bill four forty is reported
without recommendation and for
the recommends that it now be
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Seeing no objection the
committee far has been adopted
the journal show that they were
acted upon individually.
Mr president your Judiciary
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen and senator cliff R.
Pirtle cochairman.
Senator Hamblen.
committee part is been adopted
I'd like to announce.
The members of the body that the
offices of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
bill ten as amended.
And Mister president you're
the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen and senator cliff R.
Pirtle co chairman.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
body that the officers of the
Senate has signed an open
session Center memorial eleven.
Thank you Mr president and Mr
president your Education
Committee to home has been
submitted senator William P.
sold chairman Senator souls
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent Senate that
three to be allowed to read all
I think it's both of the
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted Senator
William P. sold chairman Senator
souls I move adoption the
committee report that is we have
Senator Lopez thank you very
much Mr president unanimous
consent to go to that order of
confirmations on that order of
business.
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Bianca Ortiz
worth time S. secretary of
homeland security and emergency
management.
native New Mexicans she
graduated with a bachelor's
degree from the university of
Oklahoma.
As she also graduated from the
university of New Mexico
Richardson as director in the
staff with staff in his term.
She also Mr president members of
the Senate has served to
And before that in March two
thousand nine to August twenty
fifteen she also served as state
director and I have a US senator
present as the secretary of
homeland security and emergency
management and Mr president with
that'll stand for any questions
Senator Lopez I'm gonna yield
equities worth time was when of
when secretary of the department
of homeland security and
emergency management and I yield
to Senator Lopez to continue to
present this conference thank
you etcetera etcetera etcetera
ahead and move forward so with
the presentation I just did Mr
president members of the Senate
I will stand for questions with
regards to a secretary to be
Thank you Mr president I stand
to commend this up appointment
during the interim we did have
the acting secretary now
prevention and fire mitigation
efforts when we have wild fires
in our state and she was very
cooperative and now she she and
her staff are working on an
energy grid is down and I would
like to commend this appointment
thank you very much thanks
Senator phonics further debate
on the confirmation we have
center by the other then Senator
Campos.
and I will say that the customer
service and follow through and
and care and love in feed and
and standing on top of every
single thing that she's ever
been a part of has been evident
Senator Lopez for killing this
thank you thank you center by
the end just for informational
purposes for the body.
We do have Senator Campos
Senator Ivy Soto and Senator
Sedillo Lopez on the list.
authorities fourth time has been
heard pro activeness and
everything that she does she
anticipates she works very
closely with people she helps to
ensure there is collaboration
support of this particular
nomination thank you Mr
president thanks Senator Campos
Senator Ivey Soto I thank very
much I miss president was
president I to rise in support
of this confirmation I've known
Ortiz worth I'm off just Ortiz.
And she and I also both both
started at the end of the
school's management same time
one of the things that that was
we look for people to do these
key positions in the state of
New Mexico we need people who
are going to be focused on who
are poor accomplish leaders and
we're strong managers and she
what she has brought to the
position that she is now served
in since may of last year thank
you very much thank you Senator
Ivy Soto we do have Senator
years as well and every role
she's ever taken she's been
attending credible success she
is a child of New Mexico she
have a woman of her talent and
skill in this really important
position
at this time so thank you Mr
president again I commend the
designate of.
I'm at the
there's an at the worst time.
she's got a a great
of.
The people skills and I think
being a manager that's a lot of
what it takes and I think in her
very successful in any
organization says he's been with
so despite being a sooner I I
rise in support of of theirs and
to inform the body that during
the confirmation secretary
designate having a a very
partisan background assured me
that in her role as the
assured the committee that she
was going to be nonpartisan
thank you Mr president.
Think centre pirtle any further
debate on the confirmation.
Senator Morris thank you Mr
homeland security I know she had
a a high level political
position in Washington but she
does she's not a member of the
military she's not a member law
enforcement on a member of first
responder so does seem to be a
partisan position and this is
such a critical office that we
need a little bit more expertise
now I think she is qualify for
number of offices in the in
state government and even
number of years the resume was
very very shy to say the least
in these areas which might be a
good manager she might be able
to handle the a lot of stressful
the robust resume I would
normally expect for such a high
profile come secretary thank you
Mr president.
wartime has a background that is
Senator Moores mentioned does
involve extensive management of
large staffs and one of the key
things about being in a
leadership position is
terms of the support for her
confirmation and I agree this is
an important.
Position and you need someone
parties worth time and so I just
wanted to stand up in full
support thank you.
Any further debate Senators.
been called and all those
present voted by a roll call.
Senator Senators tier seats
where voting on the confirmation
of beyonc over the fourth time
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd
senator Byrd now Senator Campos.
Senator Diamond notice Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator o'neil yes senator to
subpoena.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the year yes Senator
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes senator Sanchez no
senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
and emergency management
chairman commencing on may
twenty six twenty twenty to be
serve at the pleasure of the
governor has been passed by the
New Mexico state Senate Senator
new secretary.
one through six on the agenda
for the floor today and also
number sixteen
which is Senator Morial won
Representative David who are
wearing a mask so we'll go to
Senate our calendar number one
Senator Gonzales.
Mr president I ask unanimous
On final passage.
Has been taken and that it's not
for subject to debate amendments
are substantive.
Hearing no objection.
amended is a committee bill that
was endorsed by the investment
oversight committee.
On this last interim committees.
programs from nineteen to twenty
six and the late so requirements
for them to be on married are
enrolled as a full time student
not have a physical impact as
the agency's has administered
the program according to the
The second part is the for
eligible child dependence over
age twenty six the bill replaces
the term mentally retarded with
retarded to intellectual
disability.
From its listings of
impairments.
The third part it deletes all
been funded since FY eleven the
amendment deletes the reference
to the board's authority to
administer the senior discount
and members so I do have on Mr
David R. to let us an expert
witness if needed for technical
assistance without all stand for
yield Senator Gonzales yield
Mister president yes hi yield to
the senator thank you Mr
president senator would this
apply to a grand child Mr
It would apply.
So Mister president senator if
they claim them as a dependent
on their federal income taxes if
that would not be a trigger that
witness coming into this Mr
David R. to let the.
on we do have X. for witnesses
on the floor it goes to the
Senate sponsor so if you can
communicate their expert witness
but you'll need to present the
information that was shared.
Gonzales I'll go ahead and
you'll to you.
Mr president I yield to my
expert witness Senator Gonzales
the expo in this and you will
Mr president and the Senator
proles.
is the provider for somebody up
to the age of twenty six but the
may not be the legal guardian
but they claim them as a
dependent on their taxes why we
You know they would be
considered.
Under the guardianship under the
grandparents.
Yes Mr president Senator but
those lines so it makes sense to
me Mr president center if we
were going to do this that we
wouldn't exclude grandparents or
aunts and uncles who are also
president's and I would suggest
that maybe consider that going
forward if we're going to make
this a policy within the state
of New Mexico that we don't
unintentionally exclude people
can get on their health coverage
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Pirtle.
Any further debate centers.
Senator committee.
of the body a a a solution that
I think is is better
than this and I I would love to
work across party lines on this
issue but it would be to try to
to divorce
maximum wage caps the city
cannot pay people more than than
a certain
salary or or hourly rate now we
we the employers reacted to that
by saying well we're gonna we're
gonna offer you more benefits
we're not the health insurance
those sorts of things and I
think that the this solution
between jobs or college or
whatever that phase of life I
think it's great to pay
attention to these people but I
think if we were able to
separate and make health
lose your health insurance you
have to deal with all that that
I think there's no place for
that in our society anymore this
all started with a wartime
effort and I'd love to work with
some of the members of the body
debate senators.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president not only the sponsor
yield hi this is a would like to
they actually waved it for the
federal government.
Of everyone realizes that but if
you are in the military I think
the
champ VA.
And my children were on champ VA
until they turned eighteen.
Then they were dropped.
except those who serve the
country we're able to keep their
family and their children on the
ACA on their health care.
Any further debate Senators.
Scene and Senator Gonzales
close.
that on Senate bill one twenty
one as amended.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the roll call
has been called in all present
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senators around
is yes Senator so wrong because
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Gallegos knows Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores Senator Moores no
Senator manos.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
committees.
Senator Schmedes no senators to
the all of us yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure
no one to explain my vote
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
center should explain its vote
thank you Mr president I think
this was a perfect example of
not having the public
participate Senator Pirtle
brought up some great points
the what they know about things
and I think this is a perfect
example of voted for this in
committee I thought it was good
all I heard was one side of the
debate.
Mr president and members so
thank you very much and the.
You know as I mentioned this was
to item number two Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much Mr
president miss present ask
unanimous consent that the
record show that all actions for
placing Senate bill two sixty
six on final passage has been
customer number two which allows
the legislature to a liner
stagger terms of offices of non
statewide offices
county offices but that there
would be a to with the support
of the judiciary will be looking
at staggering are district
judges right now all ninety four
district judges rougher looks at
debating Senate bill two six
six.
Senator Morris you Mr a
president with the sponsor
Senator Ivey Soto my good friend
from south of Academy yield
section.
This president
I did.
This president provided there
thank you Mr president.
Thanks Center Moores any further
debate senators.
president I move that Senate
bill two sixty six do now pass
and ask for a roll call vote.
Then Senator will go ahead since
you you are on closing and then
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Candelaria yes senator to run
this yes Senator chevron does
test Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator for the A. S. Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez Senator Sweetser yes
Senators committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senators OCS Senator share
planning.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
you Mr chair wanted to disclose
this vote before the.
Before this but you can see my
hand
this this directly affects my
that thank you thank you Senator
Lopez.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much Mr president thank you
colleagues.
Moving on we'll go to item
number three we have senator
Byrd.
Senate bill one forty five as
amended.
on final passage and it has been
taken and and that it is now
together committee to evaluate
and then decide whether or not a
boards or commissions that are
coming up to sunset date should
approved and this bill simply
extends there since that day.
Thank and with that Mr president
I stand for questions thank you
senator Byrd Senators we're
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president with the sponsor
yield.
Yes Mr present I will.
Thank you Mr president senator
the.
records on that but I seem to
remember over the last few years
I don't believe that we have
denied any boards or commissions
Can can explain that to us and
that was a process set up many
many years ago that allows each
board commission to come up for
review every five years so that
Mr president Senator who does
that review.
Legislative finance council.
The president Senators
legislative finance council look
So is present senator and we
have hundreds of boards I think
of and it seems like
board commission they have
someone assigned to to do that
all of these boards and
commissions
are verified that they have a
presenting any issues that may
come before that particular
committee or board and and if
need be bring those issues to
either the administration or to
sponsor you you'll for a few
questions yes B. one happy to.
Thank you Mr president is there
a statutory requirement on how
these boards and commissions go
this is been the process for for
quite frankly years and years
and years.
And thank you Mr president and I
believe there is a requirement
that they go before them and I
of were added did they go off in
front of LFC or did they miss
that statutory requirement yes
conditions some boards those to
boards and commissions were a
little bit behind on their
meetings and verifying their
members and quite frankly the
comply they have completely
complied with all of their
requirements and they have the
meeting on a regular basis so
they are in full compliance
according to their reports and
for now nine years the book of
boards and commissions is is
thicker than the Bible and I
think it just brings to light
that it's time that we we really
something that takes a lot of
time and and energy and effort
out of a private citizens lives
and we ask a lot of them to
participate in these and I think
they'd be a lot more effective
thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator any further
debate senators.
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted by roll call
vote.
Senator right.
Senator Baca yes senator rand.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd test center
Toronto's yes Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond DS Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator to subpoena yes senator
for the M..
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Lopez yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Pirtle to explain his
vote.
Mr president if we passed Senate
bill one oh two all sunsets
would be extended by one hour
thank you Mr president.
Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
actions for placing Senate bill
one thirty one on final passage
comes from the public school
capital outlay oversight task
force it has to technical
changes that it makes.
but that bill had to be repealed
and our special session.
So it corrects the way that we
actually look at the Senate bill
it just correct set so that it
reads the prior year final
program units.
Are the units that are required
to determine the mill levy of
These are units that are
optional to districts sometimes
they have certain programs
sometimes they don't so by
Senators we're debating Senate
bill one thirty one.
Anyone wishing debate.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president the sponsor you Mr
deal certainly.
Mr president this is the school
systems a school districts raise
a two mill levy for six years
there is some funding as I said
for maintenance so
yes don't think your question
pertains to this bill.
Okay Mister president senator I
Senator Morris thank you Mr
president on a serious note with
the speed then pro tempore yield
your.
Thank you madam president thank
out Donna donate but we
appropriate some of our capital
outlay to Albuquerque the
there's a trade off there does
this address that issue or not
the seventy two with our capital
capital outlay and everything to
do with what we are calling
Senate bill nine even though we
passed it many years ago it's
the capital improvements act so
presentation then a program I
was aware of that so
appreciative cation thank you.
Thank you senator Morris any
further debate Senators.
Senator is more voting tier
seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Yeah senator Munoz Senator
Brandt Senator Brandt as senator
Byrd.
Senator Campos.
chair Ron to CS Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator that goes.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Where are you.
Senator one LCS Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro.
Senator songes yes senator
smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is yes senator
severe Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez VS
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Hickey.
By a vote of thirty nine the
affirmative during the negative
Senate bill one thirty one just
passed the Senate Senator
Stewart thank you Mr president
members of the body.
all action for placing Senate
bill sixty four on final passage
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution no objection
calendar at the very and and so
we're doing it again this year
and all it is is a technical
correction the original bill was
passed a year before that or so
word in the build that needs to
be changed it should have never
read a certificate of deposit
account registry the word
registry what's the problem so
correct in that piece Mr
president and and the reason is
is that this registry service
Rigas we are debating Senate
bill sixty four senators.
Anyone wishing debate.
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of hands
Senate is more voting to your
seats please.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator to run this yes Senator
to run this test Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Ivey Soto Senator Ivey
Soto test center how to me or.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
yes senator money us.
Senator Munoz yes senator
senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Sen Senator suite is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Hallman.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator
Candelaria.
By a vote of forty one of the
affirmative zero on the negative
Senate bill sixty four as passed
the Senate Senator yes.
Mr president members of the
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
one fourteen on final passage
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
parole based on inmates advanced
age or and medical condition Mr
president members this bill is
committee and for that price for
this I stand for questions.
So we're debating Senate bill
one fourteen.
Anyone wishing debate.
The president decided to drop as
much stuff and for some.
With the sponsor yield high
yield to my good friend from Rio
Rancho Mister president senator
and it's not a uniform
checklist it's it's they
evaluate the risk factor the
condition involved and so forth
for what's right what's really
diverse groups just.
More in attorney's this kind of
work the parole board so
basically what they already do
this it's putting it in statute
and so
know in past sessions and that
they wanted to go with low
hanging fruit that people can
agree on so this is what they
came up with to keep it out of
an omnibus approach.
Well I can it's it's
You know it's it's more a
question of is an appropriate
given the if this the somebody
that call so again it's it's an
individual situation but if
somebody is like on deaths door
or with various other medical
Thank you Mr president so.
I'm not sure I got the answer I
I know that you have servicer
and many years of your term or
That person was in this
condition yes.
Thank you for thank you Mr
So.
As long as they have one of
these conditions they could ask
for the parole board to review
In this present senator have to
be I believe over fifty five
years of age on the jury after
in make situation yes Tom Miller
concern about fifty five in
that so and I'm not sure about
the work on the geriatric yet
but there are some days I really
feel that way but so that with
for this you have to be over
fifty five fifty five and over
but but again it's it's
individual and what what I you
know what people have to
understand this is the
public you know public safety
and so forth and as a former
member executive director of the
General proboards Act in my
experience has been whatever the
composition of these boards to
even if they're healthy or not
they're not often pose the risk
that the younger inmates due to
the community which is really
the risk is you know and then
also victims are always part of
the parole hearings they always
are and I I hope the public
That have gone out and committed
some pretty heinous crimes
it's happened in this state
probably mostly in Albuquerque
or laws that they have to follow
up all continue to listen
I do appreciate that we have to
trust them some but at the same
time they haven't always been
I've heard they've gone downhill
quite a bit and we may you need
to keep a closer eye on thank
you thank you senator.
Any further debate Senators.
My Bernalillo county he'll
please federal
your email to my friend from
you know your new district.
Agency present law got the four
counties I do live in Bernalillo
probably matter of just personal
preference I I'd probably prefer
to put in statute an exemption
to kind of tighten the the range
for the pro aboard a little bit
felony or the first remember
those sorts of things but I I
realize pry preference that you
would say well we're gonna we're
gonna you know put that in the
hands of the proboards I'd
prefer to put it in statute but
definitions section but I'm I'm
just on page six the languages
the same
quick technical question here to
make sure I understand the bill
existing medical condition so is
this is the implying and or
there or is it in and fifty
fifty five do we do it we have
I can't having the right
business reminders Santo Domingo
just reminded to go to the chair
I'm sorry Mr chair yet just give
me a second because I can't wear
my glasses and have my mask on
Yes I would and okay Mister
president and and and senator
that that's what I was thinking
it's it's one and two.
to identify to make sure I know
exactly because the the my my
main concern question pertains
to to this part of the bill
because I I fully support the
could be a fifty five.
And suffer from a chronic
infirmity related to aging.
of medication and so when I read
that Mr present center I is that
is that the intent of the bill
to you know allow the fifty five
year old that has chronic back
bill we're all thinking of the
these are people that are
elderly and dying and suffering
of cancer are are we allowing it
at fifty five or with chronic
back pain by statute are we the
process like I have it which was
my profession for several years
and and for the juveniles and
there's no way on god's green
earth that somebody coming in
with some like marginal illness
stakeholders to different folks
including the victims groups
they agreed to this language so
you know it's just it's just not
no circumstances is that going
to happen I can just assure you
just know from working in that
area that's all.
Okay thank you and and Mr
or or something like that is is
would be my my preference but I
I thank you for your your answer
your point is well taken thank
you Mr president thank you
center street is any further
debate Senators.
bill one fourteen do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate.
That we go for a roll call vote
on this one senators to seeds
please very voting on Senate
bill one fourteen.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt passes senator
Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Ron to CS Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg AS Senator guy a
goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
of the all of us yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
No I'd like to explain my vote
Senator Candelaria now.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes.
By a vote of thirty seven the
affirmative for the negative
Senate bill one fourteen has
passed the Senate senator
Candelaria to explain his vote
thank you Mr president I I I
six lines four through ten.
The fact that an inmate is fifty
five years or older.
An example given has chronic
back pain under this bill it
to justify that presumption
respectfully vote now thank you
Hey Sierra that is Senator him
thank you Mr president and
members thanks going on to the
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate Joint
Memorial one twice amended be
put on final passage and then to
now subject to debate amendment
Congress to board fund the
bureau of Indian education
higher education grant program
so that the bureau of Indian
affairs administers grant
programs and provides higher
I see no debate Senator Pinto to
close.
Mr president I move that Senate
The clerk to call the roll.
Mr president.
thank you Sierra the clerk to
call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
Senator serve on this yes
Senator savant is yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond DS
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator probe
smitteez Senators maybe CS
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn S. Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto yes senator
Munoz.
Senator one yes yes.
you we are gonna move on to go
Senate office of Mister
president if we could go to one
more item number seventeen on
today's agenda as senator
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
memorial one on final passage
has been taken at and that it is
of the Senate I am very excited
to introduce Senate memorial one
today requesting this tablet
shipment of a task force to
promote the use of outdoor
surprise that this last year has
been one of the most challenging
years it's been filled with
tragedies and equities and
to go to online instruction and
this is increase the in equities
in our education system.
So research shows that by
and health issues and during the
pandemic and long after this can
be of of great way to address
well being and to help promote
Development intellectual
development and growth and motor
skills as well outdoor
wind and sunlight also can
reduce
the viability of bacteria and
viruses so it's a much healthier
environment for children to be
to expand and improve outdoor
classrooms in New Mexico and
it'll bring agencies together to
identify resources and supports
that are needed for these
to explore all the different
ways that we can promote that
and it also requests for the
governor to declare the outdoor
classroom date and all of this
can be accomplished using
on the log and then followed by
Senator Pirtle then Senator
share Sierra Nevada thank you Mr
president I think I think our
state.
It has to has made and and
work that is excellent I do want
to rise Mr president in a moment
of personal privilege we think
this body and the governor's
office
preservation area which many of
the members here help to fund
the Pueblo acquisition of that
wetlands open space which is
actually Center o'neill's
all future generations thanks
for the work of this legislature
one of the main reasons we
wanted to preserve that was that
so that amazing natural asset
would be available to our
want to thank the members of the
body and of course the governor
for their generous support of
what will be an amazing outdoor
recreation and education asset
for the people of the west side
yield Mister president I yield.
Thank you Mr president senator
you mentioned studies show maybe
you can give us some specifics
senator for that question on the
research that I've shown it says
that increase it increases
attention and regulation by up
more attentive they're also much
more likely to be self directed
and.
More motivated better able to
concentrate.
been many studies and the UK and
Japan as well as the United
States that that confirm how
and care put into it instead of
just like sitting under a tree
and having some instruction
outside when there's a specific
curriculum that they're able to
you know growing up on a farm I
did a lot of learning outside
in.
Everything my Daddy let me was
outside.
So Mr president center would you
I I guess I could give you an I.
Q. test and and we can talk
about the results afterwards
thank you Mr president.
matter the martyred modern work.
Mr president Senator so you know
I have a hi I took a little bit
of that personal but I find it
interesting that we're talking
about working outside and how
know it's just a memorial but
sometimes we get trapped into
voting for these things because
it's just a memorial but the
reality is of course we know
learning outside is better of
improve their education but we
don't need in a memorial to tell
us to do that it's just a waste
of time and energy of our our
departments we all know that we
don't need a memorial to tell us
that.
live in actually have the press
of the principal of the school
come because the mom said get
outside run around.
You finish your work and yet he
here we need a memorial as as
you learn more by going outside.
Pick one.
We can't have it both what we
need to figure out something Mr
president center we need to
figure it out soon because our
let's put the classroom outside
let's get the kids in school
thank you Mr president.
Senator Pirtle further debate
and just for informational
purposes of the body we do have
several.
Senator wow Mr president this is
an exciting bill obviously our
memorial.
So Mr president I actually have
I have fought for a long time
we don't necessarily need to put
it in writing here we ought to
just do it but.
Different people have different
styles of learning some people
need to be inside.
almost anything that we teach
between kindergarten and I don't
know.
Science class in high school
outside and be effective for
We've got to have the right
learning environment for the
right student.
And certainly you can do it
outside all the time because
up by being outside you have
better cleaner air and
everything to be better than
that I think we ought to add an
amendment to this this is our
session she should be held
close to their place their house
and here we're doing in here
because I'm pretty sure I heard
Thanks very much Mr president I
just price quickly to support
sentiment moral one thing
Senator Hemphill I I mention
this when she was testifying the
other day in the committee were
I was.
largest outdoor wildlife refuge
in the southwest part why the
western part of the United
States now and it's an urban
pristine outdoor area and it's
going to be the largest outdoor
classroom in the state of New
Mexico we're very excited about
that there are a number of
things that you can do there
runs along the beautiful and
great grandchildren will be able
to go there and and and enjoy
this and it is definitely an
outdoor classroom and I just
wanted to highlight that and
think Senator Hemphill because I
hope that that's going to be a
sponsor the semi moral you.
Hemphill do yield Mister
president I yield to present
with the task force required be
required to to do this outside
so that they can learn that but
asking if they're going to me
outside.
Yes Mr presence and what will
the task force be required to do
this outside.
just thank the wild friends to
the students who have been
involved in the wild friends for
their thought and the effort
that they've put in over this
last year putting together this
classrooms to address it's a way
to address
Equity be back with.
happiness of children in are
very affordable way and so the
task force is really going to
help to bring resources and
And I I just think what's good
for the goose is good for the
Gander and and some of the
children going to be outside the
task force on the be outside and
see of how it works is they have
they know what they're doing do
you know how many kids are how
many people are going to be on
the task force.
Mr president Senator I know that
director of outdoor recreation
division and executive director
of environmental education of
force and they're hoping to meet
by October sometime in October
and there's also going to be
opportunities for
Errant's and children and
educators can share ideas and
talk about how to promote the
Mr president with the spot
field.
Senator Hemphill deal Mr
president I yield Senator Mr
president I appreciate the
dialogue on this does not in
and they would take you twice a
year in the class to see the
environment the field study
different things during class
actually talking about how to
create outdoor learning
environments with structure and
curriculum and help to connect
taking kids outside that's
certainly one way to do it but
to maximize the benefit in this
success about our classrooms on
the task force will help to
would this be a year round
program of verses
or maybe an after school program
is on trying to find out how the
way of providing instruction and
outdoor learning areas.
Thanks Mr president then my next
question is it talks about
will be the New Mexico state
parks and I forgot to mention
PED prior also and the outdoor
educators will be part of the
task force.
Mr presence and I appreciate
that the actually the PED was
one I was trying to figure out
kids in our state come here to
participate to learn to to see
what we do and I think this is a
just another Avenue of what
be able to make these so that
way we would still see them and
they still feel like they are
participating so I just want to
bring that up because no are
locked down in the cage and
solidified that people be able
to get out outdoors and enjoy
themselves so with that Mr
president I yield.
Further debate we have Senator
Hello issues and in particularly
with Senator Mario one as we
move forward these memorials
doing quite a bit particularly
to our young people I heard the
Hemphill with the the way that
she approach that and how she
was engaging our young people
and the discussion which leads
to a couple of other points as
we move forward one of the
need to be engaged in task force
and helping each other if you
will to build collaboration and
so that's what in a sense this
think together and to create if
you will a better environment
for not only the outdoors but
for water systems as an example
him go on to become biologists
people to become stronger and I
agree culture and business so
with that the sponsor doesn't
need the yield but I just really
applaud the work she continues
Thank you Mr president.
I guess.
I yield.
I know that you probably have
talked about this but if you'll
just refresh my memory just a
little bit.
criteria that you have in mind
for these young students to
learn Mr president.
Mister president senator thank
the ideas and options and and
help educators to to structure
how to best utilize that time
and so that can certainly be an
option during those times of the
year if we're
that work can be.
beneficial and working toward
outdoor time during the winter
that would be more efficient
thank you Mr president.
President.
When I asked that question what
because they need to know the
intent.
That of what our vision is see
somewhere some time is going to
try to figure out intent of the
legislature.
And I want to say this because I
like Senator Pirtle.
information on so you know I I
look at say
the cooperative extension
service in New Mexico State
University of being involved
with this.
organizations that teach kids.
Two of two.
I have skills that are used
outside.
what I envision with your of
particular memorial.
Is is.
Letting kids know that.
A natural things.
It's something that was then
maybe that that they put on.
And and how important it is
because if we just if we just
accepted the natural food
sources that were out there.
people that are are living out
on those farms and ranches that
are that are using those those
skills and scientific proven
And and to feed more people per
acre.
I'm not I'm not complaining
about your bill whatsoever.
not too long ago.
To discuss this very topic.
With a bunch eighth graders.
playing out there outside which
is a worthwhile endeavor you
know we talk about that.
you know.
My number one subject when I was
to go to release our energies.
In the great outdoors is a great
place to go.
But also the great outdoors
produces things for us.
They don't hear anything else.
I thank you but a but I want you
to broaden your scope of of
thought as to what kind of
debate with Senator committee.
Is present will the bill sponsor
you'll please Senator Hemphill
deals Mr president I yield thank
you present this memorial he
basically said that because of
what's going on with our schools
right now the achievement gap is
broadening is that is that fair.
that because I I hate to be in a
a time when we're just watching
our achievement gap grow
and in my opinion I I know why
we're doing I think I think we
having that take a huge hit to
them because of the specific
Education scenario that my
children are in but I have so
much concern for other children
they say well.
I I check in in bed on the
computer and I go right back to
sleep.
For that many times I've heard
all kinds of stories of not only
conventional public schools and
and as it in and private schools
I mean just all across the board
and so thank you for mentioning
that because
whereas clauses thank you so
much for that I I may be tempted
to vote against the more if you
had done that so thank you I
really appreciate that very much
when children spend more time
outdoors it kind of makes
intuitive sense you know when
you're outside you're kind of
focusing on the long range but
at this age group and certain
age groups especially elementary
mentioned so I appreciate that
really my
My my one question is I I like
to my my
them what to do curriculums that
sort of thing and we have some
disagreements in that but
I I just want to ask a question
is present center is is this the
what what's going to happen here
telling them you know you got to
do this and and that.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you senator for that
conversation
ideas and not dictate to local
school districts what they need
to do but they also serve can
serve as a mechanism for funding
and has access to their own
unique outdoor areas and so we
need to honor that and and
include them in that
conversation thank you Mr
different types of trees were
all marked and you got to the
members I'm showing us around us
fifth grade you go look at it
differently look at the
different trees mother so many
but it was just right there
to say go outside where is I I
think really you know this this
memorial the the the urban
schools that may not have a nice
park right there are bigger
teachers where maybe they make
those decisions that sale yes is
this is go out this this go
outside you know maybe just you
know much concrete or something
so they may need a better
gap and I I fully support the
memorial thank you.
Senator Griggs.
this memorial from Carlsbad.
And we talked about you know
many many things the building
outside and and how they thought
about that we're looking at this
and we're looking at it from
From one perspective which might
be the environmental
resources outdoor.
The lawyers of the oil and gas
guys to have a balanced.
It also to understand how it all
gets paid for.
And I I think when I look at the
memorial.
On on page three we talk about
I would recommend that you also
have just a representative from
energy minerals in management
because.
We've lost and we've we've
talked about this on the floor
before we've lost cold primarily
we've lost uranium.
We need to be aware of and
Mister president and and sponsor
I'm I'm certainly hopeful that
the programs will be broad based
enough.
When we go over to to show over
city and we she mining over by
sure over city and we should we
know.
what it brings to a to show over
city and the surrounding area.
Not wanting dash drive Carlsbad
drives the state.
The states to national park.
The other one of the state's
national park.
A couple over by Carlsbad and
one outside of of Alamogordo.
Sure we have tremendous
opportunities for students are
fact that it needs to be brought
in a half shows students don't
get.
How many unusual word are
probably shouldn't but I only
We've seen we've seen in
committee and other and interim
committees we've seen president
a presentation from
Only been a singular side show
Mr president and and sponsor
Senator I hope that as you go
by the production of natural
resources.
And I believe that that's
important and just as senator
woods said
and many others we've got we've
across New Mexico to see some of
them so thank you Mr president
thank you sponsor.
Thank you Senator Griggs Senator
Diamond.
Very nice Senator just so you
know you're the last person on
the list so the timing was good.
I
see no objections.
Senator Hemphill to close.
thank you to the students from
wild friends and see George for
their help on this memorial and
I think that this is such an
You suicide has increased like
eighty eight percent to ninety
in two thousand and eighteen and
this is one way that we can
especially pertaining to school
were when we got to go outside
we got to learn about the plants
that we're growing in our area
and we did field trips and
memorial one do now pass and I
ask for a roll call vote thank
you centers we're voting to your
seats please.
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the bloody.
goes.
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto Senator Ivey
Soto test center how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto no Senator Pirtle.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees.
Senator submitted yes senators
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator dole money as senator
Wirth yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
Senator you would yes.
members of the Senate for your
support.
Moving on will go to Senator
Lopez thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in the gross copy of
Senate bill ten as amended has
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the house in
Senator Lopez I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent to
go to that order of committee
reports no objection run that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read Mr
president your conservation
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Elizabeth
Stefanics chair representative
Alex thank you Mr president I
move the adoption of the
committee report and as we have
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill for twenty
eight has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that a do
not pass but that Senate rules
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Daniel A. Ivey Soto
chair Senator Ivey Soto.
Move adoption committee for that
that order of business of
introduction of legislation
similar gesture on that order
business the reader to read.
Senate memorial twenty two
grounds and on public land that
is used by or near where the
public recreations or otherwise
uses the land and it to report
findings and recommendations on
Senator twenty two having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred referred to
the rules Senate rules committee
then sent education center
And center where the members of
the body that's going to be
Center memorial twenty two
referred to the Senate rules
committee then sent Education
Committee.
I'm so sorry I keep tell me the
last committee again Mr
president I'm so sorry and of
course that will be sent
Education Committee
Why why are we sending that to.
And it was all yield to senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
this point back and we take a
look at it again and visit with
Senator Woods and we'll we'll
introduced by Senator Lopez a
Joint Memorial requesting the
New Mexico Legislative Council
to direct the legislative
entities to develop and
implement policies to identify
Senate rules committee then
Senate health and public affairs
committee Senate Joint Memorial
for.
House bill forty one introduced
by Representative Miguel P.
Garcia for the Land Grant
Committee.
Mercedes pursuant to chapter
forty nine article one NMSA
nineteen seventy eight amending
sections of the NMSA nineteen
one house bill forty seven
introduced by Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong.
An act relating to health care
and acting the Elizabeth white
Establishing reporting
requirements removing criminal
liability for providing
assistance pursuant to the
Elizabeth white field end of
life options act.
forty seven house bill eighty
two introduced by Representative
Serrato for the economic in
rural development committee.
An act relating to public
purchasing and acting the
underutilized businesses house
bill eighty two house bill
eighty two having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate tax business and
transportation committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee house
military justice amending the
elements and definitions of
several sex crimes house bill
thirty one US bill thirty one
having been read twice by title
to human trafficking revising
definitions used in the sex
offender registration and
notification act expanding the
definition of sex offender
expanding convictions that are
Increasing the age of a child
for the crime of sexual
exploitation of children by
prostitution amending the crime
of human trafficking providing
serious violent offence in
section thirty three dash to
dash thirty four NMSA nineteen
seventy eight being laws
nineteen ninety nine chapter two
thirty A. section one as amended
three introduced by
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
And act relating to public
schools changing graduation
requirements beginning in the
two thousand twenty two two
public affairs committee's house
bill eighty three house bill one
hundred three introduced by
Representative Phelps Anderson
an act relating to certification
establishing fees house bill one
of three house bill one oh three
having been read twice by title
is ordered is referred to the
Senate conservation committee
then Senator acts Business and
expedited issuance of certain
professional and occupational
school personnel and
construction and industry
licenses registrations
certificates of registration
twice by title is referred to
the Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
finance committee house bill one
twenty house bill one fifty
eight introduced by
bill one fifty eight house bill
one fifty eight having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate rules committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee house
control amending and enacting
sections of the liquor control
act to permit certain persons to
deliver alcoholic beverages
adding a new type of restaurant
license that allows sale of
licensing holders imposing a
retailers taxed retailers
pursuant to the liquor excise
tax act post excursion and
Revenue committee substitute for
Sentiment us.
At heard that they had fees and
fifty five and the committee
referrals been to Senate
Judiciary Committee.
Present at I won't invoke my
right right now but when that
bill comes back out I may want
Thank you centerman us.
The reader to read.
House bill one fifty two
introduced by Representative but
it just for the Legislative
Health and Human Services
chair on that board providing
for temporary licensure under
certain circumstances providing
exemptions from the chiropractic
physician practice act house
introduced by Representative
small an act relating to mining
creating the mining act
forfeiture fund making
appropriation house bill one
seven house bill one nineteen
introduced by Representative
all cone and act relating to
traffic citations providing for
remittance of penalty
penalty assessment anytime
before appearance in court.
Providing that uniform traffic
citation is a summons requiring
that a traffic citation be
five section five hundred twenty
five as amended house bill one
nineteen.
House bill one nineteen having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate health of
training allowing for the
reduction of the residency
requirement for the workforce
development training program of
the economic development
department when the training
provided is for high wage jobs
affairs committee that Senate
tax business the transportation
committee house bill one fifty
five house bill sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong.
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
then Senate tax business
transportation committee house
bill sixty seven house bill one
twenty five introduced by
professional psychologist Act
and the counseling and therapy
practice act to allow the
application of technology to
supervision.
Changing the composition of the
counseling and therapy practice
twenty five this bill one twenty
five having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
health and public affairs
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee house bill one twenty
five House Bill to sixty
families House Bill to sixty
House Bill to sixty having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate conservation
committee then Senate finance
personnel providing for program
units for license school
employees certified by the
national board for professional
teaching standards house bill
one seventy one this bill one
introduced by Representative
Lara Cadena.
An act relating to courts
transferring certain duties of
the administrative office of the
courts to individual judicial
by title is referred to the
Senate health and public affairs
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee house bill one forty
six and Senate memorial twenty
pesticides in public schools on
public school grounds and on
public land that is used by or
near for the public recreation
or otherwise uses the land and
to report findings and
two the memorial twenty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate rules committee
then Senator cation Committee
the reader to read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House Bills two and three
Senator Lopez Mr president
unanimous consent to go to that
order business of introduction
of legislation no objection on
that order business instructions
legislation the reader to read.
It does here.
This three.
Okay all right.
Excuse me house appropriations
required by law house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three.
Thank you several of us thank
Lopez I thank you Mr president
just a reminder for of the
public who are watching us today
as well as members with regards
to junior talks aging your bill
if this bill does pass out of
Senate finance that we do plan
on hearing it on the Senate
floor tomorrow and of course
this does deal with our what we
For.
Thank you Mr president we have a
glance at Senate bill forty nine
and Senate finance and and think
Sentiment us you can just a read
you guys couldn't find any
amendments for the bill in the
Senate finance this presents
Senator.
Mr president and and senator I
think there was a shell game
Live or die for another day.
Thank you centerman yes just for
clarification for the ID listen
this on the web who's a sponsor
dropped in the bill will come
down to the floor further
announcement Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Thank you Mr president and the.
bills on the agenda tend to be a
little controversial we have
Senator Lopez's inspection of
public misconduct
investigations.
And the bills by Senator is
pirtle pope Munoz Pinto and
can thank you Mr president thank
you senator Ortiz a panel just
one other thing that last bill
that was read out.
It has a lot of impact on health
and mental health of the
health and mental health of
people of the state so I was
gonna ask that it be referred to
the health and public affairs
committee before it goes to
finance.
Thank you Mr president present
Senate judiciary will meet at
three thirty AM by three thirty
Hamblen Senator Pirtle on Senate
one fifteen Senator Gonzales
Senate one twenty one.
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator Lopez on Senate one
twenty seven.
Thank you senator Montez are
there any further announcement
Senator on this.
It was present that's all thank
at eight thirty A. M. and we
will be finished before the
floor session we're hearing from
the utilities and their plans
for the rolling cut offs or
blackouts in the event we go
Senate bills from nine AM to
noon thank you very much a sense
of panic Center Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president Bonser of
Senate bill three seventy four
child because the equal time
four chief clerk.
Miss present.
Senator so the so just to
clarify the request it's not not
Yes Mr president we would
request that they be inverted.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you Senator Ivey Soto and
that's been a recorded by our
chief clerk.
and Senate finance but our plan
is to to go in there about three
thirty this afternoon and here
few bills we did see House Bill
to cross over so Senate finance
Mexico is in great shape for the
future as we move forward so
there is a little bit or room in
in house bill two not a whole
lot that the house and over
Senate bill three seventy seven
and and I don't know of chairman
Campos got through all the less
today or if he even started but
will work the that we want to
Senator Campos if if he would be
yield to a.
A question Senator Campos de
yield.
Thank you very much Mr president
chairman Ellis
I heard the word.
Would you spell it out please.
But this Mr president the
chairman you know sit second
here hard to here with these
masks on so
and all spell it out E. G. G. S.
anyway going back
kind of a wrangler right and if
you have sheep your sheep
herder.
So what are they called the guy
that does the free range
chickens.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Easter bunny but he brings eggs.
Mr president and Mr chair it's
really easy because the chicken
I'm David.
Mr president is done thank you
about it for just a few seconds.
I think I'm good at agency
president assembly us out what's
it called when somebody tries to
tell a joke and and nobody
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president just
before we wind up I just want to
give a shout out to my co
engineer on this train Senator
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator Wirth for the compliment
it Mr president seeing that
there's no other business I'd
like to say thank you to our
secretaries the only S. C. Ellie
L. F. C. everyone because that
without you all we don't get
this work done so I want to say
thank you and with that Mr
president I'd like to see the
