Senator Baca.
Senator surrounded.
Here.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey there Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
I see him there Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
Thank you just the members of
Rio Grande.
And I ask that you remain
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to be led by Senator
crystal diamond the pledge
allegiance Spanish to be that by
Senator Pirtle and the salute to
Almighty god the creator of all
that is you who are known by
many names.
I give you thanks for this
beautiful land the snow capped
And the sun warms and Lydon's us
all.
I thank you for all who have
dedicated their lives to public
service.
legislators gathered here for
their servant hearts and bright
minds.
And for their families who
generously give them eight to
serve our state.
house for the people of New
Mexico.
And giving thanks for the
diverse peoples and cultures and
languages and states of our
state.
That the laws passed during this
session might be a blessing for
the welfare and peace of all
those who reside at or visit or
What.
chair of the Republican
Representative the when I now
see on on to the US into the C.
Once again good morning Senators
I'd like to start off by
yielding to senator Wirth.
of Reverend Lujan this morning
we do take time at the end of
every week to thank all of our
staff but it's always good to
have those thanks be always with
that happens on this floor so
with that Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
We're on that order business
senator serve on this until he
returns to the chamber.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator can we also get
unanimous consent for the
Hearing no objection so ordered.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president yield any other
members for announcements up
front before we come back and
Seen on nonsense.
the purposes of the call.
The no objection it is so
ordered.
Any further announcements
Senators.
heads up for item number three
Senator Kernan and item number
six Senator souls are sars an
arms has advised me that there
everyone before we do those so
Mister president you can.
Jump over number three if we
don't have that yet and we'll
just work our way down the list
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill ninety
three as amended by the house
house bill one hundred five as
House bill forty six as amended
by the house with emergency
clause.
House bill ninety one as amended
by the house.
House health and Human Services
House bill forty three as
amended by the house.
And house floor substitute for
house bill two hundred seventy
five in requests the concurrence
of the Senate respectfully
Wirth thank you Mr president
emphasis that we go that our
business committee reports on
that order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
pass as amended respectfully
submitted senator George came
when Yost chairman.
Senator Rodriguez.
See no objections the committee
part is been adopted.
Mr president your conservation
committee to whom has been
referred house bill fifty one as
amended has had it under
consideration reports same with
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
of the Senate agree to be
allowed to read all the
committee reports we've on them
with one motion and the journal
reflect they were acted upon
individually see no objections
the reader to read house bill
And house bill one hundred three
as amended do pass and that's
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
Thank no objection the Canadian
forces been adopted in the
journal show that they were
acted upon individually.
And Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman Senator
anticipate all the Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that there we we vote on them
Do pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two eighty to do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman
that are you know I move the
adoption of the committee report
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president to unanimous consent
we go that our business third
reading of legislation ideal to
Senator Campos for item number
suspended and that the record
show that all action for placing
Senate bill one eighty seven on
final passage has been taken is
now subject to debate amendment
on behalf of the legislative
finance committee and the bill
also has been endorsed by the
tobacco settlement revenue
oversight committee of the bill
goes to the tobacco settlement
permanent fund and placed all
the revenue in the tobacco
settlement program fund making
and administration and the
attorney general's office are
projected in this is all in
consensus projecting a total of
twelve million dollars and
programs in the past.
The LFC fiscal year twenty two
budget recommendation would
appropriate all the projected
cessation services at the Indian
Affairs Department five point
four million for breast and
cervical cancer treatment and
breast and cervical cancer.
Screening at the department of
health.
And two million for special
education in pediatrics and
Mexico health sciences center.
After appropriation of the
twelve million dollars in fiscal
year twenty two for those
Senate that's what this bill
does.
Thank you Senator Campos.
Senator is we're debating Senate
although sometimes I would say
reluctantly Mr president members
of the Senate and I I serve on
the actual Committee interim
dollars.
and I think Mr president with
regards to comment that has
really shown for those who do
smoke it has affected many of
them with their loans and such a
That we use monies from there to
help fund many different
programs as Senator Campos did
mention that regards to health
held us in a very good place
with regards to our budget over
the years I remember with
chairman cetera Kiki seven over
this fund that's available for
us to use.
So I just want to remind our
senators and the public watching
Mr president members that I
would hope it some day.
take care of of those so that
when we get into later stages of
life that we don't have all
those long problems so just
wanted to mention that Mr
Chairman thank you.
I'm.
I do have a couple of questions
for the sponsor if you would
yield Senator Campos de of thank
you very much Mr president
senator share ideal.
programs of two hundred and
forty three thousand dollars
Seoul why the Indian Affairs why
not one of the part of health.
have high risk issues and so
that in itself has been one of
the primary issues to address
those issues with those
if you will the cessation so I
would indicate because of that
in that area and some of the
definitely is a high need.
You Mr president so Mister
president senator thank you I do
see just below that we're gonna
say
same or is it a different
program Mister president so
Mister president these are all
separate programs and the
resources are going to address
some of the very specific issues
example the department of health
the health exchange private
insurance from different areas
to go into the areas of things
area that the resources are
going into thank you Mr
president so Mister president
but I'm not a I'm gonna vote for
the bill I'm not opposed to it
Department was dealing with the
cessation because I'm assuming
that it's the same reasoning
for.
One group to stop smoking exists
Thank you senator we do have for
the debate center where
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president well the
sponsor yield thank you Mr
force the bank says cessation
programs that were used from the
tobacco settlement fund to shore
up the previous reserves thank
you very much Mr president and
there were some of the resources
that were used to help to
balance and if you will take
care of our our general fund
resources this specific this
particular year will be used
particularly for the tobacco
cessation programs again what
purpose intended purpose.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
president thank you senator.
Further debate Senate committees
today however I I do not support
the on going
you know.
Use of this fund as counting
haven't want we haven't wanted
to have or haven't had the
political appetite to to really
turn this into a fund that's not
really reserve fund and that's
that we can not look at this
fund is reserve fund anymore and
really turned into a the fact
permanent fund but happy to
support the bill today thank you
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate I truly
appreciate the comments because
I feel the same way the bottom
line with that is as we move
forward these resources were
we move forward again the
resources should be used
specifically for health care as
we move forward.
Mr president I move that Senate
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes
senator to run this.
Yes Senator savant is yes
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Mr president unanimous consent
to excuse except for the
purposes of a call Senator
Shendo and senator Munoz no
passed the Senate Senator Campos
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
senator going on to Sierra for
item number two.
all action for placing Senate
bill one twenty nine.
Voice amended.
I'm final passage of the taken
Thank you Mr president the.
Semenza is also
Forty four would show was an
important piece of legislation
thousand private sector.
Workers
in New Mexico thirty percent
retirees.
Of of employees who do not have
a retirement savings plan.
This.
Bill was the.
Senate finance amendment the.
Remove the section that would
have created a fund and also
clarify the fact that there was
clarify that the board will
design and implement.
The two programs which are more.
and the second amendment made in
tax and
Business was to
Change the implementation dates.
from a.
so up in the original bill.
Call for.
Three changes oh one that the
board would that not be directly
that an employee might have to
the poor performance of the
employees investment selection
and number three the state of
New Mexico and the border not
replaces the requirement that
the board purchased a blanket
surety bond by allowing the
board to determine and then
purchased the appropriate
coverage products.
Two two things it does not
change the voluntary status of
the programs both the employer
and the employees participate
remains voluntary.
and a payroll deduction Roth IRA
programs.
Thank you Mr president that
concludes my remarks thank you
senator Senator has been
debating Senate bill one twenty
The glad to yield to the senator
from farming.
Thank you Mr president so.
So we're supposed to start this
year.
Because of the pandemic they had
a time a difficult time getting
a program implemented so they.
The.
today and there's no people
enrolled in it today that is the
truth Senator okay so would Mr
president you talked about New
Mexico having the highest rate
Well that's because we have New
Mexico we have a very high.
very low percentage of private
to secretary.
A program a opportunity to save
so this.
Did not want to do payroll
deduction with the way we did
want to do payroll deduction and
they can participate in the
payroll deduction Roth IRA
but.
But a.
An independent contractor in New
Mexico today could call up a in
in a in invest Edward Jones for
example and say Hey I want to
start.
This makes it is facilitated and
exit the.
I easier for them for the
employees to participate in a
retirement plan.
broker and say Hey I want to
start putting money into it I
mean I can do it on my computer
I can I could even do it the old
fashion way looking a phone
book.
Call them up and say what does
according to this they're still
gonna of contract with financial
service providers so doesn't it
just add an extra step of
bureaucracy in between.
middle of it.
Well this is the Mr president
and senator I have a expert
witness standing by you
Madam if you can introduce your
expert witness please.
Madam would you introduce your
expert witness some yes my.
We're can save of board.
They no objection so ordered
Senator.
So.
Mr president again.
I can email somebody or
probably.
All kinds of technology ways
that I can get a hold of of a
financial services provider and
and start my IRA.
Me and the financial services
perfect.
phone.
Hi Mr president.
Centers is a holding place we're
just awaiting center Commons
expert witness to get connected.
While we're waiting Senator
comments.
Expert witness to get connected
would you like to go on to the
next the next bill to give that
opportunity.
phoned a friend so it sounds
like he's talking so maybe we're
going to.
We're gonna get there here's a
let's just hold on for just a
second on this one okay thank
center.
Okay.
Lawyers are fifteen times more
likely to say that the.
I have a
If they're automatically
enrolled as opposed to.
about the importance of saving
the number a three it's a low
cost program lowcost for the
program whereby they have to act
out as opposed to happen.
So Mister president.
No only if.
If the employer wants to
participate.
So Mister president so it's
still an often.
Okay Mr president and senator
it's not automatic enrollment
but the state will participate
in a outreach program to
retirement savings program so
this will.
Program will encourage and
educate folks to about the
importance of saving for
retirement.
We also just passed a bill it
said stop smoking.
without us actually getting in
the middle of that as a state
where the state still has to be
in the middle of actually making
it happen instead of just
encouraging people to say.
educating of California Illinois
and Oregon have a enacted
similar programs years before
they've had tremendous success
in getting folks.
That you just can't sit and hope
folks will provide up you have
to up.
To reach out to rural and
encouraging and educating about
the importance of saving.
government employee who gets
defined benefits no matter what
the rest of the economy is
doing.
Of if you're just a private
citizen.
that there's lots of lots of
financial services providers out
there today.
So I'm not sure that we need to
do that but I've got another
question for you.
other hand it says the board
shall act as fiduciaries that
seems.
Backward so I shall act to take
care of your money but if I
Mr president and center can you
hang on just a minute please
well I get an answer.
Currently has been corrected to
that's not a true statement.
Also a just want to clarify that
the.
The board will not be handling
Mr president and senator.
So Mr president and maybe a
Senator Wirth
So apparently I'm reading from
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so yeah we've had a
discussion about FIR is this
morning and what you have should
be the latest analysis by our
Hard to tell here.
anyway Mr president
I do think that it's generally
layering bureaucracy upon
bureaucracy upon bureaucracy
upon bureaucracy.
It almost feels as if we've
decided to put a fence around
everybody so that they can't get
I guess in this case so we're
gonna put a fence around the a
financial services for people
and then and it will have a
somebody standing at the gate
the fence.
is another example of building a
France a fence that's
unnecessary.
Between.
The people it should be signing
up.
With the financial services
I'm gonna vote against it but I
also think that it's a bad
policy thank you Mr president.
Further debate we have center by
the.
I was the co sponsor with
senator Tom and when the
legislation was initially past
couple years ago or was it last
year the two years ago season
last year and just just want to
Farmington Senator sure did did
support the initiative in in the
measure thank you for that I
thank you for wanting to make it
even stronger and better and I
think that's what we all want
but I do have a couple questions
for the sponsor just a if you'd
the sponsor
where's the transparency in in
this measure with regard to how
the provide the funds will
transfer transfer and how they
will
Talking about.
Could you repeat the question
more freight rephrase it please
thank thank you Mr president how
will transparency be part of
public any action that they take
will be
Well advertised.
Thank you Mr president so as a
result you know whether it's a
private citizen working with the
there's a boards or a board in
place to help oversee all of
this Mr president Senator
absolutely yes it's all very
transparent and they have a an
Thank you Mr president so just
just another full stop so what
percentage of this of New
Mexicans will be positively
affected by the work and save
act.
them lead a safe and dignified
retirement.
Thank you Mr president and so
along with that what sort of the
your question.
Thank you Mr president so what
what percentage of increase in
retirement funds funding or or
retirement pay well somebody
Settlement as a reminder to go
to the chair please.
Thank you Mr president that the
question is what what what
increase will people to expect
what are the increase of people
But there be some gain in in an
individual retirement as a
result of being able to
participate in this act.
So as I said before of
we
New Mexico have one of the
highest percentage of people
without.
The savings plan.
Thank you Mr president and
actually helps them to put any
money they have a side so that
they can save that for their the
retirement years I think that
also lends itself to a stronger
community Mr president when
folks have additional retirement
president I think Sierra for
bringing the working save act
and and clarifying the language
that was needed by this board
thank you thank you senator
there we do have for
informational purposes for the
the chair during debate Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Tallman for continuing
to work on on the tweaking this
the work can save a program and
and getting it.
Mr president and the Senator
right yes and and Mr president
Senator Tallman it looks to me
from from looking at this that
correct and and and the board is
up and operating but I don't see
Mr president to in in the bill
either the original bill or or
There's.
How do I forget the exact make
up but the it's could and the
the bill that was passed last
year indicated.
financial industry that with the
state government services thank
you Mr president Sierra and
that's what I was trying to get
at the board itself is made up
brings them together into this
market place that they run and
they they use their expertise to
help the people who haven't been
manage the money they use their
retirement background expertise
the how to how to find the right
match for the for the different
want to invest on their own so I
think this is a great idea I
think this is a very valid role
for the state to play to bring
together the best minds in the
retirement plan to to to
actually find one so thank you
for doing this thank you for
strengthening the board the the
the the overall program and I
Thank you Mr president to
sponsor yield better Tom Andy
yield Mister president center
yes Mr president for the
investment firms that
controls or guardrails if you
will on the fees the amount of
fees that private third party
fees are those regulated.
Mr president senator Candelaria
absolutely our controls and
safeguards.
Mr Chairman can you point me in
then also indicates that the.
The act indicates a one percent
maximum.
A one percent maximum Mr
president plaza plight to what.
the question is what does that
one percent fee cap applied to
in terms of the relationship
between the investor and the IRA
for.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Candelaria.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
and don't have access to two of
these kinds of retirement plans
or any retirement plans to help
plan for their future and
another way to acquire assets
and help many individuals in our
Thank you Senator Lopez any
further debate.
Si no further debate center
Brett.
Thank you Mr president like to
appreciate the Senator a shares
concerns about heading directly
but the fact remains that we
have a.
people implementing and
initiating a savings plan so
that they can have enough money
to live a dignified and safe
Senate that the record show that
the roll call has been the roll
call has been called in our
present voted in the firs affect
those voting in a negative.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Candelaria no Senator Candelaria
Now Senator serve on this.
Senator Toronto's yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Duhigg.
vote for my office over a
laptop.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle passes Senator
Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Lopez yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes senator Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator o'neil yes senator to
should be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the yes Senator
probably yeah yes Senator Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Sanchez
senator Sanchez no Senators
committees senators when it is
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Yes Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no.
By a vote of twenty eight in the
affirmative twelve of the
negative Senate bill one twenty
three that Senate bill one forty
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
one forty is amended.
seeing no objection Senator
Kernan to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president I think
there is an amendment.
Senator did like to go ahead and
In a five year for with this
Senator thank you very much Mr
president today I have secretary
Dr Scrase W. secretary army
one forty would enact several
changes to child support laws in
New Mexico.
The federal office of child
support enforcement informed HSD
million dollars for the
temporary assistance for needy
families are the ten of program
twenty two million for the child
support program we must modifier
revise the retroactive careers
time frame also referred to as
look back period from twelve
years to three years this change
forcing child support orders and
so with that Mr president I
think I'm ready to stand for
questions Senator Kernan we do
have a floor amendment the rate
Senator il please put the.
For the pharma and explain what
it does.
You Mr president I'm I move it
ask unanimous consent to.
Thank you Mr president this
ammendment simply it makes a
change to make sure that
amendment done in the Senate
parents was unable to work
because they have a very young
child at home a child under six
or child who is disabled the way
that the amendment ended up
coming out it would restrict
so that it would make sure that
that's termination was made
either for a disabled child of
any age or where there's a child
sex are under.
Thank you senator we are
friendly.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
Say no further debate on the
amendment senator do hate to
close on the amendment.
that is is better equestrian
Adams consent.
See no objections on the floor
amendment number one has been
added to Senate bill one forty
now is twice amended we're back
committee of yes I will thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr president
I think at this is a I move
absolutely in the right
direction I just wanted to ask a
front of me exactly what is
that.
Thank you Mr president and
senator and I'm looking actually
now to see if it is defined in
including and as you determine
for child support is all about
so it's what can be included and
if I'm not correct on that I
would be happy to refer to my
Thank you Mr president
imputation of income would be
essentially crediting someone is
having income even if they don't
because in that situation they
sponsor then on to the next
question I had and again fully
supported Mr president
so so on the health care
component and the needs of a
that pays the the maybe maybe
medical insurance I can that be
moved back and forth is that
what you're trying to do with
with the medical insurance
component of your bill.
Thank you Mr president I'll
check with my experts.
let's just for for instance the
child support is set at five
hundred dollars a month is to
use around number and the mother
is the custodial parent excuse
Mr president I'm checking with
my experts.
it's on the worksheet evidently.
Thank you very much Mr president
and it is anything in the
legislation because I don't see
it in the analysis necessarily
pay child support for several
years sometimes you know a
decade this is the bill help at
all and recovering those
expenses because those expenses
might have been shouldered by
Thank you Mr president and I do
know that we reduce the look
back period from twelve years to
three and what I have been told
by the department is that in
but by reducing that to three
years that in reality you are
going to be able to to actually
get more money going to the
child but I will check with my
With his.
Mr president we understand that
there is it has been shown to
any Mr president I thought given
to say there is three or more
years of child support that that
the future child support payment
in on so far as the child is
for unpaid child support for the
remainder of the time the child
should receive child support
thank you Mr president Senator
just be clear are you saying
that by decreasing the look back
more artful and better way of
putting it Mr president thank
you.
Let me check thank you Mr.
Yes Mr president Senator they do
have as a as a judiciary the
judge would have the opportunity
want to do that or not Mr
president and senator that's my
understanding based on the
judge's response my expert
witness.
Thank you Mr president I just
constituents in her district my
district across the state at
cetera outside of both of our
districts and I think she's just
a wonderful human being trying
to work on issues like this
along side many of us here in
know the custodial parent
receive the child support that
they're supposed to receive.
We've got to put this stain on
our history here in New Mexico
behind us when the custodial
They're gonna focus on their
homework there probably gonna
get to school the next day and
they're gonna we're gonna close
that achievement gap for these
kiddos in these children we've
done a lot of work in this area
it is is really a great bill my
favorite part of the bill is the
bill that changes the look back
period from potentially twelve
years to three years and what we
with the child and so this this
revision will increase of
contact between children and
parents so I'm really happy
about that I do have a question
and then I'm working off paper
but one of the technical issues
was that gross of on page three
to eight the language in the
deleted that imputation and just
of included res will take care
but then the AOC says on page
of ninety one and the language
that is deleted on page three is
door that imputation because of.
Because of the definition of
income if you look at page
ninety one.
Of.
Winds ten to thirteen.
We missed person Senator we took
that out so I can give you would
find that in the amended bill
okay well then then I I am I am
Kernan to close on the bill
thank you Mr president I
appreciate all the comments in
the help on this bill and
Senator Sedillo Lopez is exactly
the child so I appreciate that
comment so Mr president I move
that Senate bill one forty is
twice amended.
negative by and show with by
local thank you.
We're voting to your seats
please.
Senator Byrd DS Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Duhigg yes senator guy goes
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Neville.
senator by the.
Senator for the yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
Senators committees Senator
Schmidt is yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator sure.
Senator share yes Senator
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn yes in addition I am
born yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Senator Hickey yes.
By a vote of forty in the
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill one forty as twice
Senator o'neill thank you Mr
president members.
Members I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that all action for placing
president member Senate bill
ninety nine raises revenue
threshold from two hundred and
fifty thousand per year to seven
hundred fifty thousand a year
for tax exempt charities that
are required to do an annual
bill ninety nine as amended
anyone wishing debate.
I
consent of the Senate that the
that we do a roll call vote on
this wonderful bill.
Senator is tier seeds please.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
dis Senator to run this test
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator guy
it goes.
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator D. should be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sweetser yes Senators
committees.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Thirty seven to two.
Thank you just before I I read
Senate bill ninety nine at
thirty seven in the affirmative
to the negative has passed the
Senate Senator explains what.
Thank you Mr president I promise
Senator o'neill that I wasn't
gonna debate this and then he
Thank Senator share over there
and and the body and thank you
very much.
And everyone who voted for thank
you so much thank you moving on
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show all action for
placing Senate bill two hundred
bill does.
Mr president members of the
Senate this bill may seem very
familiar because we've seen it
at least twice in the past last
dentistry that we already have
for other forms of medical care
and so this is the tele
dentistry Bill the language is
been changed in this year's
orthodontists who had some
problems with last year's
version that we've reached a
situation where it will be
possible for tele dentistry to
Senator Schmedes.
Senate committees Florida's
thank you Mr president will the
kind Billsponsored please yield
now our our dentists let's say a
dentist in Albuquerque are they
they have the ability to
practice tele dentistry right
now.
makes it possible for people
outside of the state to do the
same for New Mexico dentists to
practice in other states the the
by by Taylor the the various
Is my biggest concern with the
bill is an out a a dentist that
is physically located outside of
New Mexico but has a New Mexico
If that Dennis this in New York
if they are practicing in a
unethical manner or whatever it
may be I want to be clear on
this that that our board does
Schmidt is yes it does require
that the dentist be licensed in
New Mexico to practice yes great
thank you very much thank you Mr
president any further debate
senators.
bill two hundred is amended.
Do now pass and I ask a that we
that we confirm that with a
voice vote I mean a roll call
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd
senator Byrd is Senator Campos
Senator chevron does yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond passes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator day
goes.
Yes Griggs yes Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator resultar yes Senator how
to meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Neville.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
No.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
yes Senator Hamblen Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hickey.
Thirty four to five.
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Pirtle to explains vote.
Thank you Mr president and you
know my father grandfather used
but yet we're running all of our
doctors and dentists and
orthodontists out of the state
and then allowing them to
operate remotely for for all the
citizens I just think we need to
president thank you Senator
Pirtle center participate on.
Thank you Mr president thank you
members of the Senate thank you
moving on to the next item we
have item number six.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill sixty six.
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the small loan that and is a
governor endorsed priority it
reduces the maximum interest
charges to thirty six percent
and triple digit interest rates
because most states to get rid
of their usury laws.
This returns to those times of
thirty six percent.
are angry at me for carrying a
bill that has such a high
interest rate.
Triple digit rates are drain on
the local economy.
of high interest rates that rob
them of any accumulated wealth.
Eighty five percent of the
company's our large out of state
corporations that suck money out
our New Mexico communities where
the money will be spent and
turned over in the New Mexico
economy when money moves the
economy improves high interest
people on the margins and they
weaken the foundations of strong
communities and economies the
that they're built upon.
Mr president when I was in
college.
clearly and this was in the be a
business administration three oh
one that the maximum interest
that could be charged with
eighteen percent that was in the
nineteen eighties.
When interest rates were
people in the property a little
bit of the data.
Is in two thousand nineteen the
last year of which data has been
fully reported two thousand two
hundred and ninety three New
Mexicans had their vehicle
repossessed making it harder for
them to go to work harder for
them to get groceries harder for
them to take their children to
percent interest rate cap works
the federal government has had a
thirty six percent interest rate
cap for all active duty military
because it's in the national
like to turn it over to my co
sponsor if she has any comments
so Senator Duhigg.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president I don't
have any additional comments at
credit union association of New
Mexico Guadalupe credit union
true connect.
the Navajo Nation the Navajo
Nation Human Rights Commission.
A. A. R. P. Medicare
confederation of teachers native
American voters Alliance
Yeah okay continuing on down the
passed a resolution in support
of the New Mexico association of
counties and alleged county all
support a thirty six percent
interest rate cap and that would
Baca followed by Centerville
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor of the bill please yield
initials G. L. yes I will.
I'm.
is the interest rate Mr
president Mr president center
Baca it's capped at thirty six
percent and that's in all in
costs that's fees that other
products that's everything
associate with the loan is
which is different than interest
rate.
APR Mr president includes all
fees associated with the loan
now in a larger loan Mr
loan origination fees that's the
insignificant statistically when
compared to the amount of the
loan therefore the APR is a
highly dependent on the interest
something very close to the
interest rate but as you
approach zero on smaller loans
six hundred fifty two hundred
dollars Mr present these fees
no hundred fifty or two hundred
dollars to get by.
And now.
The the the loan fee might be
twenty dollars and so it becomes
a significant amount when it
because.
If a lender cannot make money
originating the smaller loans Mr
president they simply will not
experience in throughout my
practice and I've never seen
such loans like that I I have
not seen a major banks and
credit unions making loans of
construction jobs that work
intermittently Mr president that
come upon hard times that have
an unexpected expense they may
not have the credit to walk down
to the the Wells Fargo or the
specializes in the small loans
with little to no credit needed
and those loans are important
because many times and what I've
seen is that people use this
laid on so that they don't lose
their vehicle or get into some
issue with with where they can
credit issue Mr president these
these bills will run a smaller
lenders out of business they
will not make these loans
because they will no longer be
profitable they can not make a
loan they have an individual
sitting on the desk that is
making twenty dollars an hour
state and it takes some of our
not talking about interest rate
was said several times interest
rate this is not interest rate
this is APR this is fees this
means that a lender has to lend
out in the cold that leaves our
poorest or most struggling
without access to credit to get
by from paycheck to paycheck
those people and reject this
bill thank you Mr president
further debate.
so your water bills doing you
need two hundred Bucks for
thirty days and you only pay ten
dollars that's a sixty percent
percentage rate on an annualized
is there any provision Senator
Mister president senator for the
fees at all in your bill is
there any provision at all to
Mr president yes of course I
would be okay and now as we've
gone through with this bill in
the past and other states have
done similarly is there all
kinds of loopholes that people
have figured out and so this is
Mister president senator up well
the example I just gave a two
hundred dollar loan for thirty
days with a ten dollar.
That's a sixty percent APR of
about pawn shops to punch up fit
into this at all.
Mister president senator and Mr
president I I may want to defer
to my more legal expert Senator
Duhigg.
restate the question.
Not Mr president that's fine no
contracts would not be covered
under this they are covered
under a different section of
law.
by from month to month and I
want to make sure that I'm I'm
afraid this would be a very
detrimental.
I certainly would hold interest
rate yeah actual interest rate
down I don't think anything
be hurting the people we want to
help if we pass this bill just a
trick so that's my concerns and
comments thank you Mr president.
Senator thank you Mr president.
I I really love like a lot of
parts is built have a couple
questions
these are these are scenarios
we've heard in the debate of you
know these are expected cost
people their paycheck to
paycheck and so.
I I want to see these decrease.
Kind of taking away the supply a
little bit on the supply side.
but my my question is is on the
demand side.
Senator have you
what what what what is is going
to happen has anyone even look
at this and other states kind of
can you give me some
And help their.
been a huge shift that it puts
more people in poverty that they
cannot manage through crisis in
their finances it that is does
But people often try to tough it
out on their own by going to
these high interest rate
companies this would have been
going in seeking help earlier
before they get deeper into
that.
In the state.
and so I hope that you know this
is a I think a deeper.
the debate and the deeper issue
than some of us may even realize
but I also want to make sure we
consider that as the demand is
going to stay there.
We we have to consider human
nature.
there's amended a bill that
would
require some financial literacy.
Our work in high school
excellent bill excellent bill
and that's a bill that's gonna
side in my mind but we the let's
definitely keep working on the
demand side so thank you Center
thing Mr thank you senator we do
have further debate sentiment
world when you run out of money
right.
You got your paycheck may not
major utility bill you Madam
run out of money and things
happen so where they're gonna
go.
Right the bank's not going to
thank you make your loan for
under five thousand dollars.
So Mr president center where
they're going to get these
loans.
somebody has a co pay it at the
emergency room there are quite a
number of organizations that
help and assist with those very
types of things because that
however we've got this myth in
our country that you're supposed
to do it on your own if you can
you're supposed to suck it up
you're supposed to just try
harder and have more grant and
often what that does is it puts
high interest rates on top of it
and the spiral begins.
And and so center I I think
you're wrong.
can you tell me which credit
union would lend to subprime
loans at twenty four point nine
nine percent and loans between
one thousand and three thousand
dollars.
Mr president what if they don't
know what they do and these are
real world situations that that
I don't know about you but I
have the ability to help people
at certain times so they don't
have to do this and so.
lending or check cashing our our
check advances or however you
want to do it.
Their need
Mr president thirty six percent
APR is the maximum out the APR
is the annual percentage rate.
Mr president center if you
divide that by twelve what right
do you get.
I mean we have twelve months I
mean the math is easy I mean
it's three.
Mr presence enter so.
Can I borrow five hundred
dollars from you and I'll pay
you three percent a month and
Mr presence in so if you divide
that by twelve it's three
percent and.
The A. P. R. is at such a low
rate
I don't know how you're gonna
handle that but.
Hispanic people to get the money
when they need it and so you're
targeting in industries that two
years ago I think we did this
legislation to report those
people.
And now where are they going to
go after the two years reporting
on.
There's tribal companies that
currently do this.
At a higher rate.
And so.
Where is it where's this branch
debt and online lenders are
covered under this just as if
they were in the state of their
making loans to people who are
in New Mexico agency
presentation how do you control
legal expert Michael Sanchez
Senator Duhigg Senator Hey do
you.
Mr president yes so under this
bill this online lenders would
And there is a scheme that
happens is because it's a rental
banks came where these online
lenders will will centrally
and according to the consumer
they are the ones making the
loan they're the ones being paid
back there the one servicing the
loan under this bill they would
still be subject to our state
usury laws and so they would be
I want to make a point here when
we're talking about access to
credit.
Access to credit access to to
triple digit interest rate
credit is like giving of a
This presents center with the co
sponsor I guess you'll for few
questions.
They're doing the New York
certainly Mr president Mr
presents are you you say they're
schemes in order to to to to do
this Lente.
And Mister president center and
what is their dollar amount that
they're used to doing in New
Mr president Senator I'm not
sure but what I will say is that
having the the P. I. the
same thing they they borrow the
the tribe's status in order to
evade state usury laws and this
would address that as well.
deduct the payments out of out
of a state employees check I
think there's a bill floating
around to do that for Lente and
the list of people that endorsed
in I mean these are the same
people that that have sued
people over landing
and have made a living off of
but what really really gets me
at the end of the day.
That that people don't really
understand what happens in a
person's life.
what what you could do to
people's lives when they're in
need
I don't agree with that I try to
help those those people that are
opens it up for the the lawyers
to pretty much used these loan
companies.
there hasn't been much
negotiation on it.
Which is a struggle.
Have to buy clothes for their
kids to go to school.
And sometimes people need loans
to do that.
I need loans to stay in
business.
changing something that you
think is the evil of the world a
new evils gonna pop up.
And the evil popped up the last
report all know that had to be a
reporting method so they could
get access to other credit.
I just hope at the end of the
that so thank you Mr president.
We do have further debate and I
just want to give information
for the body we'll have Senator
share followed by Senator Pirtle
for anybody here.
But it was so simple interest is
what was used until about
nineteen seventy or so and so
get a home mortgage so there
were some season there and
everybody knew what those fees
were they paid those fees.
and the interest rate will
certainly wouldn't thirty six or
confused here is when we decided
that interest.
Also included fees.
Now APR means annual.
When you get a thirty year
mortgage annual makes a lot of
sense.
That's what you're gonna pay but
the origination fees Senator
The same thing happens.
But again today which boggles my
mind today you can buy a car
over seven or eight year period.
Of that makes sense.
But if you're getting a loan for
something less than annual.
This doesn't make sense and I
Three percent per month.
Now if you got a five hundred
dollar loan which is loans that
loan for about fifteen Bucks.
Total.
And so obviously this bill is
We have to have an enormous
volume to do that maybe Walmart
could pull it off.
But certainly not any local New
Mexico company can.
political issue over thirty six
or one seventy five or whatever.
When I think that if we use the
term simple interest.
Well.
For an awful lot of folks
especially where we live.
And part of what I try to get
people to do is just walk into
the bank open an account please
just do that.
But a whole lot of those folks
What they know is that the
lender that's right down the
street from.
They know that person.
The letter also knows that that
person.
The.
Was mentioned about how many
people lose their car well you
can lose your car with regular
financing from the dealership or
We're not the only one anyway
that could take your car could
be anybody so this isn't just
focused on on on small inner
people lose their houses.
But we have a default rates
somewhere between two maybe
three percent.
And that's enormous.
Of when you consider the rest of
the the rest of the country.
That means there's a lot of risk
so you're talking about making
fifteen dollars.
Thirty six percent APR.
Doesn't come anywhere near
covering the potential default
And I think if we could define
this as simple interest.
I think a lot of people can get
With inflation.
When crazy.
And all of a sudden an actual
home loan.
That was in New Mexico fifteen
percent back those days we had
to do away with that.
Because you couldn't buy a house
you could buy a car.
But that fifteen percent was
also.
Simple interest.
So you have your origination fee
of whatever that is.
Full can.
Take care of whatever bill just
popped up and they weren't ready
for.
But the way this is written.
percent of New Mexicans I could
be a little wrong right now
little bit one way or the other
forty five percent of New
Mexicans have a credit score of
less than six hundred no credit
scores.
but I fifty eight fifty is a
good working number.
And so if you have a credit
score under six hundred.
The bank might not even open an
account for you.
And that's because they've never
brought money in fact.
I talked to a guy one day.
He was very angry.
Very angry.
why do you have a good credit
score president borrow money and
how credit scores happen is did
you borrow money or not.
about.
Forty forty five percent of the
state.
As a credit score it is so low
No bank is going to suffer a
fifteen percent.
Of lost right there.
There's not no credit union is
going to risk fifteen percent
loss.
I I help people to not do this.
But a whole bunch of folks
really do.
Two billion coming out now into
our trillion I'm sorry trillion
trillions trillions the number
incomprehensible to to our
parents.
twenty dollars pretty soon
because of what we're doing with
our money right now.
But.
All I can see here.
Any other options they have a
pretty limited.
And don't really fit in most
other people's models five
hundred dollars.
Does not fit in a banking or
they don't want what loan for
five thousand no they need to
get through this event.
They don't have to pay that five
thousand dollar loan back for
for years.
still go to work as opposed to
losing their car no they're
fixing their car sitting still
get to work.
This is an important option.
For the folks that are using
amounts of money to take care of
this event.
Instead of a larger loan.
Yep.
I get larger loans.
They don't want to pay for for
years.
They want to take care of the
vent.
This off doesn't get unbanked.
Don't do anything.
I think this is another one of
those situations where we we
I see a lot of those bills
floating around here have for
years I see a lot more this
year.
We want to help somebody so what
we do we make it impossible for
them.
I just don't understand.
How we get ourselves into a
plus interest plus fees.
All that.
Into a formula.
But if we went back to simple
interest.
On simple interest.
But not when you have to put in
The press also as all my gosh
look at this we're abusing
people.
But the reality is.
If you call that fifteen percent
The motion to just drive people
crazy.
And we can make this make sense
to everybody.
This bill doesn't do that.
Including the people that are
gonna report here today that
Senator sure things people are
available money.
I don't.
it's a ninety day right that we
ought to be looking at.
Because that's what these loans
are.
It doesn't make sense when
you're borrowing.
just two different things.
And yet our motions of got us
all worked up over this.
It was it was it last year two
The payday lenders pondered me a
lot.
But that took them out that took
that industry out but that
didn't take those borrowers out
those borrowers are still
Because interest accumulates
over ninety days.
In cumulate over two weeks to
but more accumulates over ninety
days.
Original small loan companies
the original small loan
companies from long ago.
They actually made loans for for
dentists so a new dentist came
couldn't deal with the bank they
went to the small Anderson
that's how they got their stuff.
And then after they were in
business for a while then they
could go to a bank.
customers do exist today.
We're going after difference at
our customers allegedly.
gonna have these unintended
consequences.
We're not going to fix what we
set out to fix.
And I agree we need to fix some
of this.
In a manner that makes sense to
ninety day loans.
We'll never get there.
And I would suggest.
People understand a fifty dollar
fee.
When you get a loan.
From a bank or credit union
The origination fee.
Yep that's rolled into some APR
number eventually but you
understand.
There's a difference.
To think about.
How we really fix things instead
of how we use our emotions to
just make ourselves crazy.
There is a whole different
culture.
Then the culture in northeast
Albuquerque.
It's a whole different economy
assuming that everybody lives in
northeast Albuquerque.
And they don't.
They don't.
So these these loans take care
of that these loans help that
person.
That family.
It's lacking in the in in in the
population of the United States
it's lacking in the halls of
Washington DC.
And some of these issues here
are lacking in this very
How money works compound
interest super powerful
super powerful.
quick that number rules of
really fast.
These payday loans lower over
ninety days.
How we look at things really
depends on whether we live.
In northeast Albuquerque.
Or in some more rural area of
the state.
I want to pursue the ways to
help people.
Unfortunately every year I stand
here saying the same thing.
I wish we could talk about how
to really do it.
I wish we could could meet with
the lenders me with the banks me
Because even the financial
literacy bill that's out there
it's going to be taught in in
schools.
We see this by the results from
a PED in L. E. S. C..
We're failing miserably just
Needs to be taught.
But I think that the bigger
picture is general education.
we've had for a long time.
Has not helped.
This path has not taken us where
we want to go.
This path just brings us to the
we have done the same thing over
and over expecting a different
result.
And yet this is the same we're
going to do it again this year
we're gonna expected different
with money that that makes sense
we need to fix it.
I'm all in favor of fixing it.
Mr president we ought to fix it
right.
So that we stop the insanity
cycle.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator share.
so I'll just stick to the bill
for now Mr president.
Go ahead Senator thank you Mr
president the sponsor please
you'll.
APR versus simple interest
Mr president senator are you
aware of the fees they get
charged whenever you take money
that you already have out of an
Thank you Mr president your bank
must love you
Mr president senator some ATMs
charge upwards around for hot
for dollars just to take out
twenty Bucks at an ATM over the
there's fees there's charges
that that banks use that they
have to have in order to provide
the service Mister president
industry is all over the place
and can't agree.
And Mister president senator so
are you alluding to the fact
that that you did sit down with
available to talk with them this
bill is about protecting
consumers not about protecting
industry.
And Mister president and senator
mentioned today that I don't
think it's coming across
to to the to the members within
the chamber and so you know I
want to know miss present
in the the thirties I mean what
do you mean prohibition of
alcohol thank you Mr president
nineteen twenty the United
States enacted an amendment that
outlawed alcohol within the
country.
Senator is that people died from
drinking the alcohol that was
then bootleg the illegal alcohol
so they actually created more
deaths more problems more
trying to make that although
you're trying to protect a
certain group of people that
that you feel are are being
taken advantage of but Mister
medical bill to to do any number
of things.
If these loans are available
agency presents editor a lot of
these people are gonna find
them.
that actually paralyzed blinded
and killed people.
But yet the government did that
to protect those people but they
and do some of these things now
is interest too high I don't
know interest industry has been
involved.
Industry hasn't had a voice
industry had had a set set the
seat at the table.
This presents in order that
people are going to get these
loans from illegal places.
From places that aren't as
forgiving as these institutions
So Mister president senator have
have you given that any thought
that there's a really big
chance.
Mr president that is not been
the case in other states that
have done that that that is not
have seen an increase in those.
And Mister
If somebody was to go to go to
one of these places after we
put the APR thirty six percent.
What did industry tell you Mr
Mr president I did not
specifically asked that question
industry and so I'd hesitate to
answer for them.
And thank you Mr president
center I think that would have
been of a great question to ask
With the A. P. R. and the
interest rate.
But yet with this limit at
thirty six percent of now they
need to loan out seven eight
thousand dollars but somebody
amount of money that has to be
loaned out at the thirty six
percent APR to make money.
So Mister president senator
again I think there's some
have been but the truth is Mr
president is that they haven't
been involved.
And so I think there are some
huge huge unintended
consequences that are going to
Senator as we move this forward.
That these will be considered.
That we can sit down with
industry find out what rates can
The only way you exist only way
you can make pay roll.
So that your employees can
provide for their families as
you have to make a profit first.
That these are real issues that
need real attention and although
the goal here is is admirable I
don't think we get there.
The prudent thing to do for this
body would be to wait for that
information this is obviously
something that the governor is
is working hard on that she has
a priority.
through the interim process
to determine what these rates
are and do the best thing for
them New Mexicans I think right
now Mr president Senator we're
Thank you Mr president.
Thanks in part we do have for
the debate Senator Ivey Soto.
Right bring up an interesting
discussion I've been looking
during this time of in looking a
lot of the people who commented
transportation committee notice
like to run down some of the
people that spoke in support of
this bill and some of the things
that they said I was in on that
committee but this is
away the concerns of the
industry and if it's good for
the military and their families
then thirty six percent is good
for New Mexico's vulnerable
not made loans unavailable to
military families it's simply
made them at a level where they
can be repaid and the families
can retain their credit.
dollars to sub prime customers
at low rates something that we
heard on this floor is
impossible they couldn't
possibly get credit unions to
lend at lower rates to some for
senior citizens law office
reminding us that this would be
of profound benefit to low
income seniors some New Mexicans
have been evicted because they
to read them all but I I was
struck by the fact that this
bill comes out in the northeast
tights of Albuquerque something
I wasn't aware of
the the the northeast sites of
said we we don't understand what
goes on on the reservation it's
interesting that both the Navajo
tribe itself the nation itself
and the Navajo Nation Human
With thirty six percent cap.
And yet we have in this
information.
Is that forty two states have
caps.
This is baloney that we're being
sold here on the floor when
we're told this is going to put.
For people without it leave for
other states with caps can do it
New Mexico can do it this is the
this is a simple human rights
bill I noticed that many many of
they support this they know that
it really isn't helpful to
someone to borrow two hundred
dollars to pay a emergency room
copay and then to have to pay
senator Ortiz if you know if you
have further debate senator
Candelaria.
thing to the debate again sort
of from personal experience so I
talked about yesterday when I
was in law school I got sent to
collections three times by UNM
hospital and again as for less
So I mean the idea that these
law that these companies may I
please loans available out of
some sense of all juristic you
meant humanitarianism to
diem working and putting my way
through school
I couldn't even I couldn't get
one is companies to even give me
money that's how bad things were
New Mexicans live right at the
cost of financial disaster and I
think what I've heard today is
basically that there's a need
and so sadly he's not here.
Honestly the arguments I've
heard today are the most
compelling case I've heard for a
public bank.
For a public bank that takes
while charging lowincome New
Mexicans and small business
owners not thirty six percent
for something far fairer.
So I think what we've all agreed
just work harder
that works out for some.
But I don't think we should have
a society where.
In order to get through higher
education you you basically have
I mean that's the reality to
many New Mexicans live with so I
think it's been a strong
endorsement of a public bank I
really commend senator schools
for fighting this fight for so
many years.
About morality and of course we
all look to different sources to
guide us and what is the right
decision and I cast no judgment
or have no opinion on what other
a thousand years just didn't
permit usury temperament
landing.
Cause accidents chapter twenty
two verse twenty five it says if
needs to place in his mouth
thank you Mr president I
strongly support the bill thank
you Sierra Nevada moving along
we have center how to meal.
time job well being in school
full time no I didn't have
parents to come home to and ask
for money from so I also had to
take out a loan and was
fortunate that a credit union
poverty I represent a beautiful
valley of hard working
individuals who find themselves
at a point where they sometimes
thank you thank you senator next
Senator Lopez Senator Lopez the
chamber.
to excuse editor o'neill they no
objections so ordered.
Senator Gallegos.
Mr chair souls are just a couple
of questions give you a little
background I work for a
construction company in Hobbs in
bills do you know how many of
these loan institutions your
bill will put out of business
you have any idea on that.
laws to control it so it's very
difficult to say how many people
are going to be put out of
business or how many people will
adjust to the new regulations.
Mr president etcetera I
passes Mr president Senator I
guess my question is and go with
the Senator shares question our
that interest rate good if I'm
not in work or not in Lee County
and they have a need they do go
to the quick loan pool locations
we have any where else that you
could see would be a fast long
form Mr miss Preston center.
Mr president and senator of the
they are better off than if they
had gotten one of these high
interest rate loans we've got
several credit unions and
particularly the the find that
the actual she'd hear the credit
people suddenly become a whole
under class that is poorer than
they were before it just doesn't
happen.
The minorities and the poor and
in New Mexico I was
Was never one with a lot of
money and and early on in life I
nineties but I just know that
when I was in need the replaces
would lend you money and
I'm grateful that I don't have
that.
in San opposition thank you Mr
president thank center.
Thank you senator Davis for a
second time centerman us.
Thank you Mr president I just
want to make a few comments.
so let's clarify that on on the
on the list.
the other thing is that only
mothers to only two other states
have a thirty six percent cap.
The one point I want everybody
knowing that and I just learned
this doctor was my employee.
chapter house.
Go out on the Sunday and people
are on the side of the road.
Trying to raise money for
funerals.
paid and I'm making excuses that
the only thing this is an access
to capital issue our access to
needs.
Most people don't have to do it
legislation how many states have
it and what other options they
have in those states for people
so thank you Mr president.
sponsor yield SLO's yield Mr
president yes thank you Mr
president Center you've
mentioned the military thirty
six percent rate is that APR is
that simple interest.
just to go through to get that
loan.
Mr president I do not.
Mr president Center
know the particulars of it I am
I'm a little bit confused.
Mr president I do not know the
the details I didn't sign the
contracts I don't haven't seen
the paperwork so no I cannot
time ago so I I'm trying not to
speak.
on.
What is currently happening
because I haven't been in in the
Mr president I do not.
Mr president when I was in you
also had to have the loan repaid
President in in that situation
there was really no risk to the
lender.
and so thirty six percent makes
sense because the right lender
at least it was when I was in
that you had to do it that way.
and under those circumstances a
credit union would give you a
Gave me my first loan.
and I think it was for five
hundred dollars.
to buy my first car.
first loan and the only reason
they were willing to do it is
because it came directly out of
my paycheck but I I keep hearing
this and again I don't know if
that's still the way it's done.
that's still the way they do it
or if you actually are taking
out the loan personally and
actually paying it back
facts are around it to make sure
the that we're not comparing
apples to oranges they're both
of fruit.
but they're very different
fruits.
things differently because they
have to be worldwide deployable
at all times depending on what
their career field is sometimes
are dealing with a very
things and credit is one of
those things that a lot of
restrictions on and rightfully
so if you got in a lot of that
positions for the average person
we're talking about here isn't
in those situations
I understand what you're saying
let me let me ask you this when
are they told what the interest
rate is on that loan.
Mr president if I could I would
like to to refer to my my co
sponsor.
Absolutely Senator Hey do you
lending and or I can simply
answer the the question about
the disclosure of the A. P. R.
installment loan Mr president
the senator if you know the
answer of that would be
thirty six percent APR the same
way it is in this bill and a
member of the military and when
they're applying for the loan
they indicate that they are
R. hi in just for any
installment loan yes under the
truth in London the federal
truth in lending act that is a
requirement in in the loan
origination.
disclosed is is the APR would
would that that the the overall
annual cost of the loan to the
consumer and one of the reasons
that the truth in lending act
and what the actual cost to them
was and taking out these loans
and so that's why there is this
requirement to do APR
every thing in the entire cost
of that loan is that correct.
At the under the truth in
lending act yes.
lender is applied by the federal
regulations that this the
consumer certainly should
assuming also they are able to
understand what they're reading.
we will we are the government
and we're here to protect you so
we're doing.
Mr president I believe that the
federal government said that the
we they should know what the
cost is what they're getting
into but we're saying with this
bill.
That we know better than you
circumstances we don't care what
the reason is we're the
government and we're here to
help is that what we're doing in
this bill.
Mr president now.
To make the decision that they
believe.
Is best for themselves and best
for their lives.
By.
Telling them they can have
I'm not sure if that's what we
need to be involved in as a
government again.
I'm I'm assuming that everyone
takes out these loans is over
eighteen is that correct.
That you can't do what you want
to do with your.
Finances.
Then I I think that's a problem
what happens if a person is late
on their payment.
Mr president etcetera so
Do we have a cap in this bill on
how much of a fee they can be
charged.
give me a moment to consult
expert I find that.
correct that that is an existing
provision in law and my experts
are finding out exactly what
that cap is and I'll let you
know.
Thank you Mr president
Mr president I don't have that
information from me but I can
certainly find out for my
experts.
Mr president it's going to vary
by lender because each lender
has its own policies.
So much president senators that
part of the truth in lending it
the seven X. whatever the limit
as on my face.
Thank you Mr president Senator
appreciate that
so do we know if we get rid of
these fees do you have some in
mind that's that are going to do
that this presents center Mister
president etcetera I I'd like to
to kind of correct that the
basis of your question because
Mexicans who take these loans
out are able to actually prepare
them but to it to answer
question about credit unions who
have indicated a willingness to
something they're going to be
offered.
Mr president center
with with Montana specifically.
Thomas present Senator
it is.
Looks like basically kill the
Mr president my understanding is
that in the vast majority of
states where they've done this
it has not killed industry nor
has it been because the
orator in our body said that
there are only two other states
that do this and all those and
the other states that have been.
Mentioned actually still have
six percent all in caps
With even with payday or
installment lenders but if you
look at the handout that was
so they were forty two states
here listed here but you can see
them all listed there.
Thank you Mr president senator
what what is the source of that
handout.
This morning a list of but if
you're asking who drafted it.
Our national it this looks like
the status from the national
consumer law center.
that is on this pandemic is from
the national consumer law
center.
Thank you Mr president senator
or are they opposed or in
support of this measure.
on this bill but having worked
with them for many many years my
guess is that they would be
supportive.
Thank you Mr president Center
appreciate that and and the
reason I ask that is sometimes
particular group or what their
views are and what they're at
the information as it doesn't
mention anything about payday
lenders on their or title
lenders
getting we give them the
information and then we should
be letting them make the
decision I thought we were all
about choice but apparently not
thank you Mr president thank you
Center souls thank you Mr
president and and I apologize we
didn't do that ahead of time we
can to get deep into the bill
before we needed to call on them
Nick Madison and I think my co
sponsor knows a little bit more
about his background and and
such.
Senator the Lopez then Senator
Tallman followed by for a second
time Senator Pirtle.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you president and thank
What is usury.
We've heard that word of that
this afternoon.
The landing of money with the
interest rate exorbitant
among us who are financially
hurting the most.
Some New Mexico lenders are
committed committing usury.
District nine.
The official shared with me how
storefront title and Carmen
businesses.
Need to be looked at because of
If someone gets turned down one
of my competitors.
All on to him that's the way it
works and shrugged.
Just.
To see what would happen if I
applied for one of these loans I
I applied to.
And I Santa Fe hundred fifty
thousand miles.
With an air conditioner that
doesn't work so don't ride with
me in the summertime.
I would get a loan at most of
be thirty five dollars and
twenty three cents every
fourteen days.
Which amounts to one thousand
seven hundred sixty one dollars
and fifty cents.
hundred forty dollars.
There's something very wrong
here.
I've heard for how industries
That's why we legislators need
to intervene that's why we need
SB sixty six thank you president
I've noticed local companies
like citizen citizen loans BC
financials Bolin consumer
finance managed to do quite well
charging thirty six percent or
community and as a contrast to
the store from companies like
the the the full.
It sets up in in areas with high
Hispanic populations they
And this is got to stop in this
bill is a great place to start
to stop that kind of
exploitation thank you Mr
president.
Senator Tallman.
Remember in two thousand sixteen
was going door to door never
forget.
Rent to an attorney.
of money come down in Mexico and
Florence to regarding these
payday loan people.
So the these arguments.
Have a interest rates
thirty three percent or lower if
it's good enough for them.
My is a good enough for us we
gonna be the last state in the
I did pro bono mediation federal
court for several years and
members some of the.
Payday loan people would file
Awful situation regarding the
repayment of these loans so
Mister president I can't wait to
vote for this bill second so
one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill sixty six amendment
sponsored by senator cliff R.
Pirtle Senator moving explained
the amendment Senate floor
we've heard a lot of information
today with regard to these
loans.
And we've we've heard some half
truths some whole truth
have of one hundred seventy five
percent.
Find some middle ground bring it
down to one hundred percent APR
this is a a middle ground
we'll have the information come
out the middle of this year with
all the study and and fax that
the others it has been a little
misleading to me so I think this
is a little a middle ground Mr
president and I hope that the
body can support it thank you
but this absolutely is an
unfriendly amendment a hundred
percent interest rate is
ridiculous.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and so
loan which by the way there was
a there was talk Mr present
earlier about ninety day loans
those are not allowed under a
small business loan act or or
The New Mexico installment loan
paper work you've because of the
truth in lending act you still
have to disclose the APR and the
APR of that loan would be a
hundred and eight percent
seventy five percent to a
hundred if you're eliminating
the all in APR you're still
allowing for unlimited costs of
these loans in the form of fees
and again this is one of the
would offer loans cleaning a
very low interest rate these are
actually very high cost loans
because the rest of the cost
just came in these additional
these are still essentially
unlimited the the cost on these
loans are unlimited.
Senate is debating Senate floor
amendment number one.
Anyone else wishing the debate.
Press nine I rise in opposition
the amendment nine I think one
thing I think we should keep
clear as we're talking about a
three month interest rate per
month that's compounding.
So while the interest rate
remains three percent the
calculated at three percent it's
not three percent of a hundred
three percent of a hundred and
three so the real amount of
money that these companies walk
away with is a lot more than
sponsor please yield Senator
Pirtle the yield Mister
president I yield.
So as I see this you have to two
And the the second is for a
hundred and that's APR is that
is that correct Mr president Mr
president center that is
correct.
Thank you Mr president I was
cards and a Mr present we do is
we go when we get our visa card
we stick in an ATM we withdraw
money on that ATM.
three dollars on a hundred APR
comes out to roughly roughly
thirty percent thirty six
percent just on that transaction
right there to go pull out a
over a hundred percent APR once
again so this is these are the
types of things we're talking
about with unintended
consequences and repeatedly
interest rates capped at thirty
three percent.
Those are apples and oranges are
urged the body to compare
interest rate verses APR
focused on on the the if the
interest rate rather than the
APR so I think what we have here
in the amendment Mr president is
credit we're talking about
people that may need money here
I will rise and support this
amendment hopefully we can come
to at least a reasonable
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator Pirtle the
clothes on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president and I
appreciate the bodies time you
know I think there is a huge
teach financial literacy so that
we can have.
The population that understands
the difference.
it cost a fixed amount to make
the loan.
So if you cap too low it's going
to force the loans to be higher
we're gonna be loaning more
money than people need and
don't put people in a situation
at the bar in more money than
they can pay back this is a a
simple compromise.
And I pledge my support for the
bill if we're able to put this
call vote thank you senator
steer seeds please we're voting
on Senate floor member number
one.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Campos.
Senator Campos no senator
Senator Duhigg no Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales no
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto no Senator
No Senator Lopez no Senator
McKenna no Senator McKenna no
Senator Moores.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
part of the year.
Senator by the no Senator Pinto.
No Senator Pinto no Senator
Senator Rodriguez no senator
Sanchez.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees.
Senators right is yes Senator
the R. Lopez.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator souls.
Senator sold no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Byrd.
Anyone wishing to debate on the
bill.
I
no further debate center souls
to close on the bill.
the Navajo Nation has passed a
resolution that supports thirty
six percent interest rate cap
this is about access to credit.
It's not about access to credit
the economy rather than have it
taken out by out of state
companies that acts as an anchor
on our economy and with that Mr
president I move that Senate.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
six.
Tier seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes Senator con
that idea.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator have
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator manos.
Senator manos no senator
Neville.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope
Senator Schmidt is yes senator
severe Lopez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart
Senators sure DS Senator Tallman
And for fourteen.
Senate Senator souls thank you
Mr president and thank you body
I know these are very tough
issues for people.
Thank you we're gonna move on to
needs for money but.
We just watch what happened
yesterday on the floor with
legislation where there wasn't
agreements and people working
Will need to.
Make sure that the bills the
best it can be.
And that people work together
whatever party whatever side of
remarks you know then present
the Navajo Nation I said in
endorsed this piece of
legislation then setting about
the council I said the Human
Rights Commission did.
what democracy is not about
thank you.
Moving on to go to item number
seven Senate Bill tool for
center by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
amendment or substitution I
apologize Senators yeah you're
correct the Senate bill tool for
rural telecommunications act
center for the
we've had for several years now
we created the
telecommunications act in two
thousand five and companies that
were created in New founded at
doesn't number of things that
that prohibits them from
participating in the real
universal service fund
helped to reduce but costs to
provide access lines in their
Mexico in their service area
they've been so innovative that
they've used in all of the above
approach to deliver broadband
and it's done a really good
thing for New Mexico we do need
to revise that to include other
Mr president and the two years
ago wound up dying with about
fifteen seconds left on the
Senate floor at the at the end
of that session and we're here
letters from the president of
the Navajo Nation endorsing this
piece of legislation which is a
large part of New Mexico with
the service territory exec is
exists so Jonathan as has
you know that this bill does
really three things it brings
fairness it cuts waste and it
improves connectivity to some of
the most desolate and harder to
all to stand for some questions
or how if you'd like to proceed
Mister president Senate by the
US centers we're debating Senate
bill tool for.
legislation brings fairness it
cuts waste and improves
connectivity to some of the
hardest to reach parts of New
Mexico where broadband is really
badly needed broadband is
bringing us economic development
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that we vote on
this bill by roll call Mr
president.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt is
senator Byrd.
Senators around this.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond DS Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Neville yes Senator Neville yes
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator do supremo yes Senator
Padilla.
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez Senator songes yes
Senators committees.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator common yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca.
By a vote of forty in the
affirmative on the negative
Senate bills tool for.
As passed the Senate Center
disciplinary explains vote thank
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
Nanako to Senate bill one twenty
one with emergency clause state
transportation bonds for
Senate bill one twenty one with
emergency clause on final
passage has be taken and that it
is not for subject to debate an
amendment for substitution.
this amends the bond statute to
allow New Mexico department of
transportation.
To issue the remaining
authorized amount of two hundred
And for additional projects at
the New Mexico DOT has developed
and included in the state
transportation improvement
program the state program.
president members what it is is
so.
Taking advantage of the of use
in that capacity and also the
low interest rate and this is
bring in the department to.
twenty north emergency clause
anyone wishing debate we have
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president.
Get some things done here in a
timely matter and I think the
good senator per ring four thank
you Mr president.
Thank you senator
Representative.
Any further debate.
With the emergency clause do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
shows that.
senators we're voting on to your
seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Candelaria yes Senator serve on
this Senator to run this test
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond DS Senator
Duhigg.
Griggs Senator Griggs yes
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Lopez yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman as senator Wirth
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
emergency clause has passed the
Senate Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president and
members of this so definitely
you know we will see a lot of
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
committee reports on that order
business committee reports
reader to read.
engrossed prepare Torrez signing
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen and senator cliff R.
Pirtle co chairman Senator about
to adopt the committee for.
Say no objection the committee
report has been adopted and I'd
like to announce to the members
of the Senate that the officer
the Senate have signed an open
session central moral twenty
introduction of legislation on
that order business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
employment enacting the healthy
workplaces Act providing
requirements for earned sick
leave providing penalties
declaring an emergency house
Also Mr Committee substitute for
House labor veterans and
military affairs committee
substitute for house bill twenty
having been read twice by title
An act relating to education
creating the task force on
sexual misconduct requiring
public schools and public and
private post secondary
violence harassment and stalking
requiring public and private
post secondary educational
institutions to conduct by any
of sexual misconduct climate
surveys amending the public
Bill one forty two having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Education
Committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee house bill one forty
Commission to consult with the
water trust board on funding
water utilization projects in
the southwest water planning
region of New Mexico.
Directing the water trust board
to evaluate and recommend
is ordered refer is referred to
Senate conservation committee
and Senate Judiciary Committee
house bill two hundred house
bill one twenty nine introduced
by Representative for hard.
increased transparency requiring
certain disclosures provided for
costsharing calculations house
bill one twenty nine.
House bill one twenty nine
having been read twice by title
Bill twenty seven an act
relating to hazing.
Rating the crimes of hazing and
aggravated hazing providing
penalties House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee house bill twenty
seven.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
hundred twenty eight.
An act relating to school
local school boards to adopt
policies tracking child abuse
allegations.
Fighting definitions requiring
the public education department
to maintain a list of reports
school training programs
requiring school volunteers to
complete school training
programs requiring reports of
child abuse by school personnel
child abuse by a parent
custodian or guardian to be
reported.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
twenty eight committee.
S. history committee sensitive
house bill one twenty eight
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
vehicles limiting the locations
where a motor vehicle may be
sold or offered for sale
prohibiting the sale of a motor
vehicle by a non owner who is
not a motor vehicle dealer house
Committee house bill sixty house
bill one seventy eight
introduced by Representative
Wonda Johnson.
And act relating to professional
licensure amending a section of
the counseling and therapy
board house bill one seventy
eight this bill one seventy
eight having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
health and public affairs
committee then Senate tax
business and transportation
committee house bill one seventy
amending the definition of
education technology
infrastructure in the public
school capital outlay act house
bill one forty one still one
by Representative county in
Martinez.
And actually need to health
providing eligibility for a
state or local health benefits
to certain non citizens amending
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
then Senate tax business
transportation committee house
bill one to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
act creating the cannabis
control division in the
regulation licensing department
providing duties creating the
cannabis regulatory advisory
sections of law related to
cannabis authorizing the
regulation and licensing
department to enter into inter
governmental agreements with
Indian nations tribes and
Meeting the community grants
reinvestment fund creating the
community grants reinvestment
program creating the low income
medical patients subsidy fund
an revising penalties amending
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight making appropriations.
House taxation and revenue
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
that's house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
bill twelve Mr president.
appropriations should not that
one baseline to finance as well
Mister president thank you
senator share will get us on the
this on a scale to find out the
weight of it I'll go ahead and
and that was the that was the
trigger.
That had a going to
appropriations but it was
amended to take out the the air
mark so I think it's on the same
path as the.
So Mister president this is a
chair finance I don't know if
he's got.
I would like to ask him if he
tax rate that that we can put to
the general fund into their
marks have been stripped
I would like to see all those
marijuana bills before they
with the money bills if I can
have a a
The coordinated effort from the
from the floor later to make
sure that that those fiscal
impacts in those tax rates and
with senator Wirth once we get
off chamber.
Yes well I'll follow up with him
he was busy I'll make sure but
Hello really good hearing and
and Senate tax and there's a lot
of work going on and let's just
take it one step at a time but I
do think the remarks coming out
because it does it clearly does
state appropriations.
So Mister president my guess is
somewhere in that five inch file
taken out and so that was the
reason that.
You know that was the reason for
the appropriation language is my
understanding so that's that's
again.
But I will leave it up to the
chair to make that motion or
whatever it is he wants to do
but I do I do think that it does
talk about taxes it does talk
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill thirty six an act
relating to actions affecting
of living adjustments amending
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill thirty six having
been read twice by title
referred to Senate Judiciary
Committee house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Judiciary Committee
among us yes so read the title.
And that leading to actions
affecting property identifying
and then winning exemptions and
certain legal proceedings
the prior bill may go up in
smoke so.
Thank you centerman yes Mr
president finisher
is this the first bill that's
had only one committee
that he asked for one got one
and he review this bill agreed
that it should also get one so
that is the process at this
stage he and I will look at
Basis so Mr president I move
that Senator Baca be
reconsidered about this bill.
contracting hospital in the
hospital funding act house bill
two forty
plus two forty having twice by
title is referred to the Senate
tax business and transportation
An act relating to criminal
justice reform providing
judicial discretion in imposing
habitual offender sentencing
range enhancements excluding
simple possession from the
As a committee substitute for
house bill one fourteen having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate health
Thank you Mr president Emma
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president members of that sits
first and Senator Vontaze then
Senator Candelaria and Senators
souls.
Senator Steinborn.
Okay thank you Mr president Mr
sponsorship of tax business and
transportation committee
substitute Senate bill four
nineteen to Senator Steinborn
Senator Stewart.
Mr Mr president I am actually I
apologize not looking at the
bill right now but I can not.
Try to pull it up here real
quick Simon I yield to Senator
Stewart.
senator Wirth because that was
one of the emergency bill.
Say no objection.
Semenya's what is that bill do
does that do that have to do a
landowner tags are depredation
Unser is that very dogs on your
ranch or what is that.
No Mr president it has to do
Thank you Mr president and the
guests will a.
We'll enjoy that one and Senate
finance at some point.
We will thank you Mr president
Senator.
on again Senator want this fall
by Senator Candelaria center
schools and centers to phonics
Senator about this thank you Mr
president muse present ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
Mr president this is the
patient.
debt collection matter that was
before the Senate yesterday.
Thank you senator and that's
All right now we have senator
Candelaria.
News presenter new the motion I
made yesterday I'm not sure if
this year is here I would move
presents a bill to thirteen is
the game trans panic defense of
passed unanimously at a
Judiciary it's been there for
over two and half weeks my
office been calling twice a day
defenses and protect the clear
committee of New Mexico
I would I would make that motion
we just appreciate a call back
from the chair of the Judiciary
with the decision so I would
opposes first of all I'm not
sure that last motion was for me
to return a phone call to the
good senator Candelaria I don't
believe I've ever been contacted
by Senator kind a lot in
connection with this bill
Anderson maybe his office has
heard and they get to the staff
but I've I have not been
directly contacted by the
sponsor to hear this bill
number one over to the the
problem the on the subs the
matter the bill relates a great
constitutional issues and I
think it will I think this will
be the first time that we
actually begin to try and
legislate rules of evidence to
the court so the the so there
are some issues I'm not saying
and and it's just very
frustrating the motion was not
for phone call Senator the other
specs thank the motion very
that I was promised yesterday of
some kind of movement so I I
would I move to drop the Senator
Committee refer of Senate bill
two thirteen and as I've been a
Because I've got several bills
here that I want moved in they
don't seem to be going anywhere
so all I want to find out how I
Thank you Senators the motion
has been made so that's the
correct process.
And it goes to each of you as
members.
To vote whether you agreed to
debatable motion so people may
stand and debate the motion of
it like but as usual we need to
go through the president thank
you thank you.
That is where debating the
motion.
to apologize.
That that issue of public safety
matters a little bit more than
perhaps some other issues and
every member is free to make
this motion on the floor.
the plane our usual course makes
sense when.
It is issues of this nature so
it's in my within my right I may
lose this vote probably will.
the judiciary please you just
about the state of.
Yes are you thank you Mr
president how many bills do we
have in the queue in Senate
Judiciary currently as president
senator Senator I haven't done
account on that right now I'd
me so you know the drill and you
know that we spend a great deal
of time of Friday trying to do
with liquor bill and I expect
that I'm told there's twenty
four amendments on the proposed
liquor bill under consideration
bills heard and you know the
reality is if this is a thirty
day would only be two weeks then
starting the second week so I
think we still got a lot of time
who made the motion to yield
please this is the old I'll
gladly thank you Mr president I
I highly support this bill
of public defender had some
concerns but they didn't bring
those concerns of the committee
they said they're gonna bring
those offline and so my my
question is has that has that
hasn't met twice in last two
weeks.
If more backed up than I've ever
seen it and I'm just raising the
issue as every member on the
floor has the right to do can we
withdrawn.
We still announcements and
miscellaneous will go to Senator
souls.
out a little bit before I but
please make sure you're on time
and then we can get out on time
thank you for Senator Stefanics.
already been done that was a
emergency bill.
That was not printed and
referred to a Senate
conservation received a do not
pass.
How to mail.
Mr president thank you yes I
been changed as far as the the
bill goes of the committees and
then now it's being changes the
sponsor I'm Mr president and
senator if that's a question yes
not pass it is a committee sub.
And it we would like to change
the sponsor that's all.
This presents senator with the
youth conservation corps
employment was brought to me as
a substitute to utilize one of
the emergency bills by Senator
Wanting to be sponsor yield and
asked finance question yelled Mr
president yes.
The bill at first was right and
as part of procurement but when
and procedures line up to state
statute when it comes to hiring
these students.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
bill's been referred to I I'm
Sir thank you.
Saying no further debate.
Senator Baca followed as.
deal Mr president I yield.
Mr present was a this is similar
to a bill that was introduced
previously under the procurement
dealing with procurement but
it's no longer dealing with the
procurement code just with
hiring of YCC staff or the
students of YCC.
something in particular that it
deals with it that has more to
do with that and subject matter
of the judiciary.
Mr president Senator the
original bill also went to
correct.
Mr president that's correct okay
so I'll repeat the question
replacing conservation why is a
subject matter more pertinent to
matter in relation to
conservation.
No Mr president.
Centers of annex.
Mr president the youth
doing conservation projects and
I believe that is why it was
assigned to our committee.
Thank you Mr president I don't
have any more questions thank
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president and just
a point of clarification did we
move Senate bill seventy one to
Judiciary moments ago.
Okay.
So the.
that and this present just for
clarification I believe it was
all action regard we've with
relation to Senate bill seventy
one was on the call we took off
Senator about this.
Mr president with the center
yield of world trying to offer
an explanation
we did have the concern that
Senator so the I thank very much
up as president as president.
Given the language that exists
Any action on the floor in terms
of of consideration of the bill
on the floor was was action that
would to us the call would would
pertain.
taking it off the floor the call
does remain in a facts with
regard to that bill.
When that bill comes back for
consideration on the floor.
But it would apply when and when
the bill was being considered on
the floor and a substantive
matter.
Thank you Mr president offer up
Or we could take the call.
So Mister president
you know for for four years I've
Live inside of a fence.
I can I'm confused Mr president
defense is work or not.
I just don't know what to do I
don't have to think about this.
I think that would be useful to
everybody I know that one of the
concerns is that people might
come in here with the disease
but we can have people take
their temperature.
Or are we trying to stop
something else.
I don't know.
But I'm pretty sure fences don't
work with president I've been
convinced of that after hearing
about it multiple times day
the and then Senator Ivey Soto
Senator Shendo yes thank you Mr
president your son Senate tax
business and transportation
committee will be meeting at
three start at three PM.
presents very very important to
me just got a call was notified
by my my son that he will be has
satisfied all as requirements to
receive his masters of social
I'm very proud of those two
thank you Mr president
legislation center.
Consider moving for them to move
AM.
And we'll be doing two
appointments and the three bills
so Senators worth renewable
Lopez and o'neill please be
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
president.
I think we're all tired I said
three PM and nobody even
flinched so we will be meeting
actually has a hundred and seven
bills in their queue right now
so just so everyone knows it's
it's a little bit more than
sixty five.
Senator Brandt Senator Pirtle
for second time.
president and members of the
body Texas is opening up one
hundred percent removing the
mask mandate so I think we'll
see a lot of our citizens going
over and enjoying Texas in the
east can do it we can do it as
well and I ask again of the
governor's office to reconsider
the letter that the Republican
caucus into our to recalculate
how we are shutting down and
continuing to damage our
what Senator said the I really
encourages body whoever has the
power to talk to our security
folks if this is really about
COVID which is what was
to protect their patients.
Omeros transplant people any
anybody that has cancer or is in
a compromised there's a fence
should be doing let's please
follow the evidence thank you Mr
president Senator Schmedes we do
have Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president I would
just like to ask my colleague
CDC is about to release new
guidelines and individuals who
have had the two shots and what
kind of gatherings they can go
very lucky in that we have been
able to do quite well both to
live containing the virus and in
nurse here thank you thank you
senator.
For a second time Senator Ivey
Soto.
I think very much that was
present was president having had
and have the lights turned on in
New Mexico.
I think that's a fabulous for
them that we have here that not
everybody in Texas has been able
to to appreciate lately thank
you thank you for a second time
bill two thirteen and when will
that be scheduled.
Senator is that a question for
Center sensor on to steal it is
Mr Mr president I was told I had
Right I have I want to check my
phone logs fifty calls to the
committee thank you any further
announcement Senator share thank
you Mr president I too like the
Mr president I think Senate
finance we're going about the
state
for fifteen or so Center share
Mr president absolutely I've got
a truck that's run by gasoline
and I will go out there and
start pulling that did down.
Senator will be up tomorrow
about four fifteen will gonna
try to get as long as we can to
Senate finance we got a few
bills that we do need to get out
I want to remember remind
happening in the economy in
states including New Mexico from
small business to hospitality to
and and see how New Mexico's
comparing to to other states or
neighboring states and what's
happening in the economy
remember we came here in during
this legislative session to help
executive oil with the with the
federal government that is going
to be a two year plan in New
Mexico so we need to make sure
that we have healthy reserves we
back in the employment that are
working that are feeding their
families that are having life
and and having fun in life
summer's coming spring is here
this building and we think were
encapsulated in the school
system that's our own little
world.
But you don't realize what's
happening to it to everyday
people and everyday life in
Think about what's happening in
his life to bury eighteen
members of your relatives within
Mr president thank you sent us
any further announcements.
Si no further announcements
Senator Senator Wirth thank you
by Senator Jacob R. Candelaria a
resolution amending the Senate
rules regarding the order in
which bills referred to the
Judiciary Committee are heard
Senate resolution to.
committee Senate resolution to.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president Hamid so that our
business committee reports on
that order of business committee
not pass but that Senate health
and public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill four
forty three is reported without
recommendation and further
Ortiz if at all.
Mr Mr president members this is
one of those generic bills and
this is the procedure we follow
to get the generic bill before
It is so ordered committee part
has been adopted Senator Wirth I
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
that order business
announcements miscellaneous
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning.
Senator.
Our.
