Need to have the reason is.
That the last.
To.
Get in there.
Of course.
You know you want to re
restaurant this right and then
on the ballot it will be like
you know continued on the
ballot.
That I think could you imagine
what my campaign side would look
like I would be to build work
for about four million.
Are you know we just a couple of
minutes for senator Wirth if you
don't mind if if you can.
All of us.
We just.
Good morning ladies and
gentlemen it is a nine seventeen
AM and I'm gonna start off the
Senate rules committee I want to
thank those of you who are here
with us in person and thank you
to everybody who's joining us
via as of now we are going to be
hearing from Senator Ivey Soto
who's the chair of this
committee well he's going to be
talking about the Senate joint
resolution eight I'll be sitting
in the chair as as vice chair
and so good morning Senator Ivey
Soto whenever you're ready ready
to hear from you on Senate joint
resolution eight thank you very
much and actually before we do
that if if we may Mr chair let's
do our well I guess we can wait
to see if other members show up
to the organizational meeting at
that time so we can do this a
bit disorganized so Mister
members of the committee senator
resolution eight.
is a comprehensive amendment to
the state constitution dealing
with states elected officer
salaries the state constitution
our state constitution provides
that the state legislature will
set the salaries for the plural
executive.
and the last time we
successfully did that was.
when Gary Johnson was governor.
Still and
And then we also
our constitution responsible for
setting the salaries for a
district attorney's.
who are actually under the
judicial department.
Of four judges.
and
Which statutorily we what we do
is is we set the salary for for
a Supreme Court and then and
then everybody else right now is
a as a percentage of that
and and then but we do that
based on constitutional
responsibility.
We also by the way our customers
a responsible for setting County
elected officer salaries.
Although we check him out on
that historically and we just
simply set up a limit instead of
actually setting the salary.
and
this and then and then we leave
it to the local folks to find
out as to whether or not they
should implement or not.
and then and then in addition
our constitution uniquely among
the states says that legislators
should not be paid for their
services.
and and so.
There's a there's an argument on
the one hand that New Mexico has
tremendous tradition of
volunteerism and public service
there's another argument that
the people getting what they pay
for
and and and I don't know those
remote community schools of.
and when you consider it and so
what this does.
This woman does is that because
over the years to try to figure
out how to deal with this kind
of a situation.
And so what we've done is
Researchers enrollment is we've
said that we're gonna have a
state ethics commission set the
salaries for all state elected
officials.
and that will take the
legislature and the executive
the chief executive out of
having to value and and then
pass into law
salaries that you know for the
two executive they don't enjoy
signing a bill raising their own
salary get them out of that it
it will I think hopefully.
Depoliticize what we do in terms
of the judiciary and and then it
would also allow the state
legislature to be compensated
but without possibility
ourselves opportunities since
the public I think generally
believes that were overpaid as
it is.
because then what rational
system would we do what we do
for free.
So.
So basically what we do then is
because we're going to be
involving the.
the judiciary in this as well
and by far most the the largest
number of state elected
officials are under the judicial
branch is that.
We leave the membership of the
state ethics commission at
seven.
But instead of having members of
the company of the the the four
legislatively appointed
commissioners pick two more
internally what we do is that we
then have the
we diversify the membership of
the state ethics commission so
that two of them are
Our pointed by the by the states
by the state supreme court's.
and they shall not be members of
the same political party the two
that are appointed by the state
Supreme Court and so what that
does also that that diversifies
the state ethics commission
right now of the seven members
of the state at this commission
the governor appoints one.
The legislative leadership
directly points to but then
those for legislative people
point to more so really we on
the one hand claim to many
places to have an independent
ethics commission but under the
constitution six of the seven
come directly and indirectly
from the legislative branch of
government.
And so and so what this does is
that it leaves the leaves the
direct appointees from the
legislative leadership.
in place it it it leaves the one
from the governor and then the
the the Supreme Court that a
points to and so it did find
something greater balance to the
membership of the state ethics
commission.
and then and then the rest of
the bill pretty much as
consequential amendments.
and including repeals to several
sections of the
of the constitution dealing with
the setting of state elective
office hours I will tell you
that the first time.
I came up with this concept I
also included the
The county elected officers so
that we would be out of the
salary setting business all
together at that time the
association counties said said
Hey leave us operate and I would
like to study it some more and I
haven't heard back from them so
I haven't put them back in the
rate if they want to and I I
wouldn't have any objection to
that but but I would want to do
it there initiative.
and so it was with that Mr
Chairman I'll be happy to stand
for questions.
Thank you senator and before I
go to questions the committee
I'm gonna go to the public for
comment is there anybody in the
committee room who would like to
speak in favor of this bill if
so please come up to the
microphone and I'm gonna ask for
the record that you state your
first and last name.
This is on.
Morning Mr chairman my name is
Michael V. hill from the Chief
Justice of New Mexico.
And I think this.
Very gratefully be able to speak
in favor of this bill before I
begin.
No there's no raised metal
metal.
The number one.
And this committee zoom looking
now to hear all the number one
so I should be nervous that's
why.
So thank you for allowing me
this this brief opportunity.
The.
It has long been.
The.
Three.
Of the judiciary.
This independent commission.
Set salaries for judicial
officers.
The reason for that is is that
judges have always been in a
position of having to juggle.
Needs of their constituents.
Needs for new programs in their
respective judicial districts
with their own personal needs.
And consequence of that is they
always put themselves behind.
You know a behind the drug
quarter behind other programs
behind the.
Modifications to to loans and
and and other programs.
So.
By having to do independent
judiciary sent an independent
commission said judicial
salaries it takes all of that
out of.
And it also allows for the merit
pay that the judges either
deserve or not deserve.
So we're very very happy to see
that in this proposed
constitutional amendment it
provides that the state ethics
commission shall review and
establish the salaries of all
elected state officers every two
years.
No position on whether it should
be this commission the
commission the agency we've
always wanted just an
independent commission.
And there were very very happy
to be included in this
particular legislation.
And I am particularly pleased.
Last session there was some
disagreement.
On the the prop prior proposal
because there was no.
Representation from the
judiciary.
I'm on that commission.
And I am so please and I think
the Sanchez deal Senator photo
on Senator Gonzales for
including the left the
judiciary.
In this proposed amendment that
and I'm I and it's not just to
search and and we think about it
the the ethics commission does a
lot of other things besides that
set salaries.
And it's my belief that by
having representation from the
judiciary on this ethics
commission it will any the
ethics commission and performing
all of its other functions so
if.
Very very happy very pleased to
say that the judiciary fully
supports this constitutional
amendment.
It will do a lot to increase.
Equity in pay for judges some of
you may know that we have also
pending.
The state paying an issue for
all members of the judiciary at
the present time.
And history since it's been a
long time coming and a long time
needed.
I knew the two.
Measures have complementary to
each other fully complement so
that if the.
Fifty pay initiative passes.
And this passes as well it gives
the ethics commission had a
beginning point to work on as
for us judicial salaries.
Our pain issued of does
proposed to exclude.
magistrate judges from the the
pain issued of that we have.
And projects pointed to the
magistrate judge's.
that that if this past this
particular measure passes all
members of the judiciary Supreme
Court match for judges everyone
is on the same for the before
the ethics commission.
And
So on that basis so we feel very
very comfortable.
And with respectfully request
that
This measure passed.
And if if it's allowable I'm
happy to answer any questions
any of you have.
I don't see that fitness thank
you for thank you for your thank
you so much Chief Justice the
hill is there anyone else in the
audience would like to speak in
favor of the bill.
I think no one is there anybody
out there who would like to
speak in opposition of the bill.
I
think none of them include gonna
go to comments from those on the
list and just everybody knows on
the committee of those watching
I'll do fifteen minutes for
those that are in support and
fifteen minutes for those that
are in opposition giving each
person a maximum of two minutes
to speak on the position and I'm
gonna start off by asking those
are the ones of them in support
of the Senate joint resolution
eight to raise your hand are the
moderator will then write down
your name.
All of them come to you in the
order in which your hand was
raised and your name written
down for your comments.
Thank you Mr could you get a
sense also if there's anybody
log in once to speak in
opposition and how many those
are because that.
We may be able to just within
the first seven minutes as well.
We've just got the names of
those in support so now I can
ask those of you zoom to raise
your hand if you're in
opposition of the Senate joint
resolution eight will get your
names written down and while
we're doing that.
I'm gonna go to Mr Paul Gibson.
Who's in support of Senate joint
resolution eight.
Hello Senators chair thank you
for that opportunity speak
manage Paul Gibson
co founder of retake our
Democracy and the very active
Democrat
I would like to speak in favor
of this bill something we have
support for this resolution
something we supported in the
past we feel strongly that the
legislature we're we're our
focus is on the legislature
really
very strongly that it's
important that legislators are
paid we have the only on rate
legislature in the nation and if
we're ever going to recruit and
get younger people of color in
the roundhouse it they're gonna
have to get paid it's a unique
person who can take time off for
and it's not just two months
it's two months plus the
in terms plus a million other
things and and if you were paid
a decent salary to do it we
would have people from all over
New Mexico peoples of color
who are getting involved in the
election after all election
process of seeking offices
around house and that would
change the not just the
composition of around possible
change the discussion is you
have people who live the the the
the struggle not just people who
have heard about struggle.
Making decisions and that that
will make a huge difference and
so we take our democracy is
strongly in support of this.
This bill thank you very much
for your time and service and
you realize is there's no
picture at all.
Yes.
Okay.
I'm not going to move on to Judy
Williams.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Judy
Williams and representing women
voters Mexico.
We support the joint resolution.
Richard orders hours missiles
to the independent ethics
commission we believe that the
appropriate means of setting
salaries should.
On well we remain concerned
about placing additional
responsibilities and ethics
commission we believe that
required step happen procreation
this problem can be addressed
with this action Commission with
could you levels for legislators
as well as judges and other
special.
Contracts that are rising CENIC
salaries by law thank you.
Thank you so much Stephanie wise
brought.
Thank you Mr chair and Senators
my name is Stephanie Weiss very
night live in a rural community
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the democratic a rural caucus
I'm also very in favor of paying
legislators they work so hard
and often are just experts in
one area I'm also advocating for
paid staff for all of the
legislators I don't think it was
still doesn't address that but
we really need to have people in
the provided that the
legislative Representative
people of all walks of life
including low income people and
I believe that this bill would
go far in addressing that so
thank you very much thank you so
much for your time this morning
and rounding up those in support
of Senate joint resolution eight
Condit and associates.
Good morning Mr chair this is
Deborah Condit lobbyists for
kamikaz New Mexico we stand
strong support of itself at
thank you for that chairman I'd
settle for bringing this forward
I know you've been trying to do
this for years but we support
itself for other reasons that
others stated before me in
allowing a more diverse diverse
group of people to be able to
run for the legislature some who
are not financially independent
or have other jobs or single
moms and are going to be eight
Marci we just a few supporters
though and we also understand
that this is hardly a part time
legislature you have those for
thirty days or work on your
around town hall meetings and
answering to constituent groups
and coalitions and interim
committee hearings and so we
really believe that I would.
You for the work thank you so we
can ask for our forgiveness fell
thank you thank you Deborah.
Now we have one member on zoom
or one member of the audience
and zoom who's in opposition and
I'm listening go to Tom Solomon.
Senator my thank you for a.
Allowing me to be heard today I
am actually in favor so I don't
know where I think you mentioned
in my allowed to speak in
absolutely okay thank you
so I'm with the environment
group called three fifty New
Mexico and you standards from
support of up Senate joint
resolution a for a echoing
really all of the comments that
came before.
but yes it's I think it's in the
same that we ask for free labor
from those who serve in the
legislature I can't think of any
other public sector where we
would ask people to work for
create nearly year round and
the.
agree with Deborah Condit who
just said we want the
legislature that representative
you know broad swath of New
Mexicans from all walks of life
and all income levels and as it
stands right now you pretty much
have to be financially
independent or have another job
that you can take the time off
from in order to service the
legislature and that's that's
just wrong
I lead a coalition of kind of.
Interest groups that are in
favor of this bill so we are out
here waiting for something like
this to get introduced and will
support it as it goes through
this may or may not be the year
when we can actually take it all
the way across the finish line
but rest assured that there are
lots of lots of supporters of
this initiative and I think you
will serve to allow us to have
the legislature that is more
responsive to the public and
that maybe can get more work
done and lead to a some longer
sessions where we can actually
pass more bills to address the
needs of New Mexico and those
are my comments thank you very
much thank you Tom and we had
one last participants yes raise
their hand I'm sorry that I
don't know if you're in support
or opposition so if you can
state that and you're listed as
safe access New Mexico.
Can you hear me Sir I can hear
you.
I yes I am speaking in
opposition only due to the fact
that yes part time legislature
isn't benefiting New Mexico
anymore by any means but I
responsible legislative body
would first create an
independent legislative
improvement task force in
you all for you in in in in an
political science departments
in conduct research into our
legislature to find out how
effective.
Things that we are the one
really R. because really it
appears that the structure the
legislature is the repository hi
we are ranked so poorly.
In every policy area across the
nation.
But to consider giving yourself
paychecks without creating an
independent task force.
That seems a little questionable
especially in election year.
That's all I have to say thank
you for your time thank you for
your comments now that wraps up
our comments be assumed and I'm
gonna have to members of the
committee starting off with
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
awesome riding Soto I very much
appreciate.
Justice.
Testifying in the work that's
been done to address the issues
of the issue here I think having
those two appointments in the
structure of the commission will
make it better overall for a lot
of reasons but also really makes
this proposal work.
So from my perspective the
proposals long overdue.
I think that by.
Having the salary set by an
independent body.
That will address the voters
concerns would pass
constitutional amendments that
have gone to them seeking to
raise what the have legislators
Senator salaries that's been the
big concern they don't want also
their own salaries.
and having the ability to do
that by operation of law which
is what would happen if we were
in that process so I think the
independent commission
is the key to the success of
this and why I think the voters
really need to take a hard look
when we get this to them a
couple of questions I know the
house has a.
Different version I don't think
competing version because I
think it's pretty similar but H.
J. R. can
has a different.
Structure for the commission
that would set us out of it just
like you centre right so with
that's plaintiff lost why.
You believe the ethics
commission.
It's better than having a new
independent salary commission.
Thank you Mr chairman and but it
are worth
off and that is a very
insightful question and.
Senator resolution ten is other
than.
From what I can see other than
setting up a new commission just
to salaries they've that copy
the rest of this resolution.
verbatim.
The
So just as and and I guess my
feeling about this is is what
you said a moment ago which is
the public doesn't want us to
value our own works.
And and my concern is that.
If we set up a commission.
To do nothing but set salaries.
That the public is going to say
all sure right that's an
independent commission and all
they do is set your salaries
we're not gonna fall for that
one.
Because we're going to put on
the coverage that is nothing but
that's our.
We're going to put some of the
other things worth a whole lot.
Where is the ethics commission
does other things you're not
going to appoint someone to the
ethics commission for this
purpose.
This will be something that they
also do.
And so because it'll be
something that they also do I
think it gives the the the
the public more confidence.
That that they are looking at
this from an independent
perspective.
That they're not
people who were sent there with
the with the
on orders to.
To to raise our salary to
certain amount there were people
who were sent there to the
business of the ethics
commission.
and and being someone who was
selected to do the business of
the ethics commission one would
hope at least that that that
those are the kinds of people
that would be able to look
objectively at these issues a
valuation of fairness in terms
of people's compensation and
then make those decisions.
R. as well but that is not the
central focus of what they do.
Mr chair Senator I appreciate
that answer I think which really
focuses right on the key
credibility peace with the fact
that what I was asking as the
ethics commission taken a
position on this new
responsibility that we we might.
Senator voters to Senator that
they have an effect on the
position that taken is that they
have no position as to whether
not they should be doing this
however they are capable of
doing that.
they also would like to have
some level of guaranteed
funding.
right they would they would not
like to be in a position of
making a valuation and then
being having that held against
them.
and.
And which I mean I understand
the concern.
there was some discussion of
props including in this
constitution amendment a
guarantee level of funding for
the state ethics commission
however us today after some
initial conversations with
people
within the legislature.
That seemed to be an issue that
might overtake the rest of the
constitutional amendment.
And and so that was not included
but I but I will say it is a
legitimate concern for the state
ethics commission that they be
properly funded and and
certainly I think we have an we
have a.
If I may put it this way I think
we have an ethical obligation to
to fund the ethics commission an
appropriate level.
so you know but that's.
That would that would be there
they're one concerned at least
they've articulated to me
the but they are capable of
doing it but they don't take a
position that they should be
doing or not.
And just one final question I
know this repeals in its
entirety article four section
ten which is the legislature
section it does three things per
diem during session per diem
during interim committees and no
other compensation I guess my
question is
We're we're repealing the
constitutional per diem
requirements of the idea that we
would put those in statute or
would have the per diem work
environment taking those two
sections that certainly thank
you
Mr chairman and we drove for
litter so.
I'm actually pretty was also in
statute so so if we remove the
constitutional language we've
already got the language in
statute and in chapter two.
Second of all.
the the idea is it with this
constitutional moment first of
all they set salary.
Okay we're very clear that they
don't set compensation.
So they're not going to get into
figuring out health plans
they're not going to get in to
figure out pension plans they're
going to set salary.
And and so and so all everything
else that attenuates with that
is normally a legislative
responsibility the pension
programs
you know health care programs
which are run out of I I think
GST
etcetera like like all of that
would still happen in the normal
course of business and and so
and then and then likewise then
the the language in article four
section ten actually go
someone's constitution if I
could for quite.
Number of deaths without one
here.
So that language in article four
section ten.
Right because because it has the
language nor the compensation
for consider a lot once the very
least that had to be struck.
And that have to be struck
anyway and then we look at the
rest of this and the per diem.
is eight so the per diem as it's
written in the constitution.
Says
Senator Internal Revenue Service
standard mileage rate actually
the term Representative is no
longer sets the standard mileage
rate moderate the General
Services Department of the our
administration of the of the
federal government system set
that right and so like we could
just going to keep amending the
stuff or we just live in statute
which starts property.
No I appreciate that Medicare
those are the questions I have I
do think all just began by
saying the fact that this year
is now supporting I think makes
this even better resolution and
I do we're going to this
afternoon I was gonna say we but
I'm actually not on Senate
judiciary even though I'm gonna
sit in because I signed on as a
sponsor of Senate bill two which
is senator Senator vontade Bill
dealing with compensation for
the judiciary and I really do
think to look at these kind of
hand in hand because that's also
something important to kind of
set that baseline of going in
and we could do that and I think
we need to do that self federal
have thank you Mr chair thank
you senator New Mexico move on
Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr chair in thank you
Mr chair for bringing this I
thank you madam former vice
chair.
As you know this is an issue
that I've also supported for a
long time for about a decade
becoming pause and I are co
sponsored a similar bill with
you last session and had asked
you to be co sponsoring this
bill this session as well
I think this is cast a key step
to professionalizing modernizing
the way that we make laws and
policy in New Mexico
and I as Senator Wirth was
saying I think that having an
independent commission being the
one who is setting the salaries
is is critical.
so that the public knows that
that
we are not self dealing when it
comes to to these issues
And I.
You know it's one of the the
folks who was speaking in
support was mention this
actually I think a couple of
them dead but eight.
We're gonna really expand the
the universe of people who are
able to serve
if we have if if we do have a
salary legislature hi right now
it's it's largely the the region
retired and I it was school
right.
I've been learning a is just how
hard it is to to
I'm a single parent and work
full time and doing this as well
and it is hard to make a living
doing all that
so
I I thank you for reading this
I'm really pleased to hear from
justice we held it but he sees
this and SB two is complementary
I agree with senator Wirth that
it's important to to set that
floor four or at least have that
guidance going and for judicial
us salaries
I really.
I I I my only concern is.
How the the public is going to
get all the information they
need to evaluate this bill
making sure that they have.
They have all the information
that they need because I can't
tell you how often I'm told by
folks that that they believe
that we're already us paid for
serving that were paid quite
handsomely and I think that that
I think it's really important
that any public education
campaigns that happen around
this comp a constitutional
amendment
Given the public all the
information necessary to make a
make a good decision when this
comes before the public thanks
for bringing us and that's that
thank you Mr chairman and
senator thank you very much and
and and you have been very
active in this and then I'm
anticipating of your involvement
with this bill as well as it
goes through the process and and
I and I thank you for that it is
you know one of the things that
that I hope.
Is recognized is is those of us
who are saying this is long
overdue and this needs to happen
certainly to the extent that it
does affect the legislature is
we are voting to increase the
pool of people who may run
against us.
And I mean let's just be clear
about that right is is we've all
figured out.
How to manage under the current
system for better for worse.
Part of what we're doing is
we're voting.
Get a some people like this so
you want to give yourself a
salary you know is really at the
end of the day though we've all
figured out how to make it
without a salary what we're
doing is we're voting to
increase pull people who may run
against us believing that
ultimately that is what is best
for the state of New Mexico.
And so so it was so so so thank
you very much and I and I think
your situation is is one that
when this speaks to what I think
I think they're number people
were single parents who who are
working throughout the day
yourself Senator Lopez myself on
Senator Stewart for for much of
the time that she is served
you know and and and they're a
lot of other people out there
who who might have considered
running.
But the the the barriers of life
and gotten that in the way and
and that's where the in we have
been as a as a state deprived of
the opportunity for their
leadership whether they should
have better leadership or not
but we should be leadership or
not the opportunity to have that
discussion so anyways thank.
Thank you so much I'm not going
to go to stand Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman and my
thanks to also Sir Ivey Soto for
working on this for so many
years and finally getting it
right I think the change what
the Supreme Court nominees is
really important and I really
support that and I think that's
probably the the final thing you
needed to do I do have a
question but before I ask you
that question I just want people
to understand what part of the
constitution we are repealing we
are repealing part of the
constitution page fifty four
that currently says our governor
should be given five thousand
dollars as her pay yes it also
says that the secretary of state
the state auditor the state
treasure.
All get three thousand dollars
annually for their
thank and the Attorney General
four thousand superintendent of
public instruction which we no
longer have three thousand
commissioner public plants three
thousand lieutenant governor
according to our constitution
now shall receive ten dollars
per diem.
Well acting as presiding officer
of the state.
So you know originally we
thought it was important to put
those exact numbers and the
constitution but to we're up a
hundred years overdue so I think
this is just a good solution
I've been impressed by the state
ethics commission that we all
worked on so hard so here's my
only question to you and that
is.
So the section one takes if the
voters approve it take effect
January one twenty twenty three
so I walked through the sections
to through I don't take effect
until July one twenty twenty
four just to show us more
clearly how this would work
because I know you I know you
know this and I know you've
stepped through these changes I
can't quite figure out why that
last date is on there for you
would Mr chairman certainly
Mr chairman and and madam proton
so the the
so we want to get people in
place.
So that they can do their work.
but then
the issue is how do we how do we
lean into the work that they'll
be doing and how do we how do we
How do we not leave people with
no salary at some point or else
have them have to rush through
the process to do it so section
one.
which is the section that then
has the the two people who are
point about State Street fort
worth different political
parties.
All right so that because it
affects everyone twenty twenty
three this would be on the
ballot.
In November twenty twenty two of
the passes this year.
And then sections two through
five will take effect July one
twenty twenty four.
So what this requires when they
set the salary.
Is if you look on page three
which is also part of section
one is a set of this commission
so we will establish the
salaries of all elected state
officers every two years the
seller is established by the
state of this commission shall
be published no later than
December one of each odd
numbered year and shall be
affected the first full pay
period of the following fiscal
year.
So.
and of course right that's
that's so that we will be aware
of any budgetary impact when we
come into the legislative
session.
And it's not affecting anybody's
mature but just right that
people need to make adjustments
they can make adjustments so
that the so that part we have
them then the the new members
coming in this gives them
actually.
a good ten months.
To then work on.
What the salary should be for
all the various elected state
officers and there are I have
this in a in a in a slide on a
proposal I'm gonna present but
so there's there are right we're
talking about the governor
lieutenant governor so secretary
state Attorney General auditor
or treasurer land commissioner.
But then and they were talking
about a hundred twelve
legislators but then we're
talking about five members of
the state's spring court.
Ten members of the state court
of appeals.
Ninety six district judges.
And the
fifty magistrates six fifty six
magistrates.
And twenty eight metro twenty.
My dream.
For judges.
Right so so it's a it's a rather
large task actually for them to
do this and that and so this
gives them time to be able to
take their time and do it
correctly bring a recommendation
that would that would December.
so that so that than in the
normal course of business it
goes into a fact then on July
one fiscal year as we can have a
statutorily
for the what we would call the
twenty twenty five fiscal year
which starts on July one point
twenty four.
Okay so thank you Senator Ivey
Soto I I suggest you kinda lay
that out from paper so people
can look at it as you go forward
I appreciate the certificate
those explanations of those
states so thank you again thank
you Mr chairman thank you so
much any other questions
Senators.
No other questions I just like
to make a comment Senator I want
to thank you for bringing this
forward as somebody who still
having to work part time while
serving in the Senate and then
full time when we're out of
session I had to make a decision
if I could financially afford to
live off of twenty percent and
fifty percent of my salary and
then if my employer wasn't as
gracious as they were I would
have had to pay back a hundred
dollars a month to keep my
budget and so I'm just thankful
that you're bringing this back
this will insure that we
increase the pool of New
Mexicans who can run and there's
so many great leaders out there
who just can't afford to be as
senator or four to run so thank
you for that seeing no other
questions I'll take the remote.
I guess what I was a bit with.
Out of the building so Mr
Chairman could be in order then
I would I would move to pass and
senator resolution eight Hey
seven for the motion by share
Ivy Soto seconded by Senator
work will now take it up for a
vote Senator Baca no.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Lopez.
Yes Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes Senator had a meal yes
and Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Seventy one you have a do pass.
Congratulations Senator thank
you very much.
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee.
and the let's not let's move to
our organizational meeting real
quick and we can.
the start with each of the
members introducing themselves
and then and then we'll also
talk about the staff and then
we'll talk about a couple
protocols for the Senate rules
committee
so
I would.
So with that what we go ahead
and.
start with Senator Lopez and we
can kind of move around an
office background of my C..
Excuse me good morning Mr
chairman and to those who are
watching us also Linda Lopez
state senator district eleven
which is the southwest quadrant
of Bernalillo county thank you.
Good morning I'm Senator Katie
to heck I represent Senate
district ten which is
Albuquerque's north valley west
side a little bit of Rio Rancho.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the I'm state senator Jerry
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Representative Senate district
twelve.
which is current form is
downtown Albuquerque in the area
just west of the.
Revert and and Albuquerque this
call that the school mode
maturities because currently in
my district.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman I'm state senator Mimi
Stewart my district is districts
seventeen in Albuquerque it's
part of the international
district in east gateway area
and happy to be here.
Good morning Mr chair Peter
Wirth Senate district twenty
five here in Santa Fe
are delighted to be back on the
rules committee actually Senator
army I when I first came to the
Senate I was Senator Lopez is
vice chair on Senate rules for
my first two years and then was
there for another two years of a
little eight year leave of
absence from the Senate rules
committee but very happy to be
back in.
Part of this committee.
Good morning Mr chairman I'm
Senator Leo how to me
representing district five which
includes portions of Los Alamos
Rio Arriba Sandoval and Santa Fe
counties which includes two
pueblos okay we get it and Santa
Clara and I'm happy to serve as
your vice chair Mister chairman
thank you.
Mr chair Gregory Baca district
twenty nine of the majority of
the lead to county is who are
serve as well as the
southernmost portion of
Bernalillo county in mesa del
sol thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much surviscor
and and members I was Daniel
this auto
I'm honored to be the chair of
the rules committee
at this time and and working to
fulfill
the the shoes that were left for
me.
which is a little bit of a
challenge because
we have different sizes but
we're making it work.
the hi Representative near
northeast heights area of
Albuquerque.
And
have been.
Also just on a side was formerly
state elections director
associate deputy secretary of
state for elections I think some
legal back in the day also for a
while was executive director for
the kind of clerks affiliate and
continue to provide technical
assistance and training.
to local government officials
including kind of clerks and and
currently serve both on the
federal.
Board of advisors United States
election assistance commission
and also serves as the co chair
for the national conference of
state legislatures of their
elections redistricting Policy
Committee so
But
this is this is a fantastic
committee and the work that
we're able to do in this
committee and and and I
appreciate the expertise that
the members bring to the work
that we do.
in addition to that let's let's
talk about the
the staff that we will have with
us most of the days here for
many years with Paula Lee body
as our main sergeant at arms in
this office are in this room but
she apparently has other duties
where.
no longer not knowing comes to
individual committee rooms and
so we are honored to have me as
a long.
Up here and if if you could
please just one device if you
could just introduce yourself
and give us a bit about your
background as well.
This thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name we get
double door and I am a lifelong
resident of Santa Fe.
And the serve as the surgeon on
staff for the past three years
and I'm looking forward to fill
the issues that are going to be
difficult to fill miss anybody
who is responsible for this
committee to pass have a quorum
to the session thank you.
Thank you very much we also have
our tenants
Martinus.
I need this for Martinez
formulation Santa Fe
retired from the type of
business are for twenty eight
years of work for a title
company to get the data entry
for.
And in my other life I will
Botak from us softball I am
tired of girls fastpitch
softball for the high school for
thirty two years so.
So well nice what are.
Look at the Hubble.
We also have our the Meister
Nathan rufo.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name's Nathan
Ruben filed I am that the zoom
operator for that sent rules and
Senate Judiciary Committee at
the my third year working for
the New Mexico state Senate
first what is as an attendant
with that is Senate Public
Affairs Committee yeah and the
last year was zoom operator with
the Senate finance and Senate
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee.
That we have our majority
analysts Helen Bennett and
Claudia Reisner and if you too
would like to just come around
for a second I know you like to
sit in the corner back there
but.
Thank you yes good morning thank
you of Mr chair and the
committee my name's Claudia
Reisner in a retired naval
officer twenty nine years active
duty and we retired to the
beautiful land of enchantment
and it's just thrilling to be
here and this is a wonderful
opportunity Silvercity analysts
and learn about this whole
process it's so important to the
state thank you but in nine
years in the navy and you moved
to the desert.
Very good I am Helen Bennett I'm
a research attorney in
Albuquerque New Mexico and
used to staff of the Senate
conservation committee.
Thank you very much we also have
the major pool analyst Laura
talk.
Good morning Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Laura
chopped and I'm an attorney but
primarily in Oregon right now
but I'm a native New Mexican
happy to be home I'm a demon I'm
a logo and I would to you Law
School actually with you Senator
Wirth we're in the same class.
And I'm happy to be here and
looking forward to learning
about this process in the
committee I worked previously on
the last sixty day session but
that was by zoom and so this is
all new to me nice to meet you
on thank you.
And then we also have the
minority pool analyst
this year although she's not in
the room right now.
Baca do want to say anything to
introduce her.
no you did just fine but be sure
we are for analyst I think most
of us know we're well we
appreciate all your hard work
and the knowledge she possesses
another former state elections
director and then we have our
Committee secretary miss Linda
begin.
Mr chair committee members
you're use to me I'm used to you
so.
Work for General Services in my
regular life but I'm happy to be
here if you need anything on
that end as well let me know
they talk about budget a minute
ago so let me know what I can do
for you and I'm just happy to be
here
the.
I was like an interesting way
somebody my proposed to somebody
else to you you're using.
And then the and then we in my
in my office also my secretary
of a rush who
is there as well and
both this the element and it's
raw fish are at the service of
all the members of the rules
committee as needed so please
don't hesitate to stop by and
and so with that
I do want to thank everybody for
their attention today and
we will be
I know that the committee's
committee is gonna be meeting
this morning as well so we're
gonna go ahead and let them get
ready for that meeting
that will be coming up and so
with that we're done with the
business of today.
That Mr Chairman did you say
eleven I just wanna make sure
better members it's eleven the
