really the opportunity to have
answered I I did as I was
leaving I asked the
superintendent the principle and
others who we were with today
to please turn in and watch us
online I hope though they'll do
so where have the opportunity so
only because at least from my
standpoint
every time I go to j paul taylor
I am encouraged by the fact that
state government does some
things really well and and
you'll may have difference of
opinions or perspectives or
serious have a different things
to add to that today but what I
saw where people who had been on
the job twenty plus years in
some cases many many years so
excited about being there so
excited about teaching their so
enthused about what the impact
you're having on on those young
men's lines and I saw a young
men who have promised and
potential
that we should be embracing so I
I always get into out there no
just from from the committee
who's here how many we all have
been there before and not
imagine that before
representative
city roberts but so not half a
but have a list of been there
before and you all will tell me
later when when or if I chair of
this committee again and doing
what's crisis if if I if I tell
you i'm gonna go to chapel
tailor you all sorry you say
yeah we've already seen it twice
but I don't know about you every
time I go out there you learn a
lot and I feel better about what
we're doing and so again I
appreciate the the other that I
point out to the people do what
they were the car with me is and
I want to think the secretary
and in your mission of all your
host after doing this I think
you all very much notice I asked
to do this probably last
wednesday thursday I think nancy
drive nancy crazy by saying hey
I wanted I want to do this.
Let's make it happen and the
secretary said you've got a big
group he said yes we do but we
can break him up we can do
whatever you do she made it
happen you made it happen and I
and I wanted to do it in part
because of the the scheduling
issue we had with without joe
county but I also really frankly
would like the idea of doing it
on short notice and you and you
may not have been here yesterday
but that's one of the issues
with this committee offered
times as when we go to this
corrections facilities and so
forth if we're going to give you
two thirty four weeks notice or
something we're not going to see
the those facility maybe that
that existing neighborhood would
I want to come out that you all
got to maybe days notice of this
request and them so I appreciate
you do not short notice and you
didn't see audience really
nearly painted nearly carpeted
facilities out the way it exists
so thank you again debit section
will will take questions I think
it's pretty the best idea at
this point I brought this part
from
committee members questions and
comments so rippers of charges.
On the love representative
charges.
Others
all right.
Alright.
I've been about six of you and
we have a little less than about
forty five minutes and ask you
to be all the stay to five
minutes they're about please.
Okay represent child as you are
first
thank you
thank you chairman thank you so
much
secretary for letting us visit I
think every time I visit a
driver now facility
you know it gives us a sense of
excitement for hope and things
like chairman said that we're
doing right
but in visiting the facilities
for the last decade now it just
directly with the staff speaking
directly with the you one thing
is clear.
Is real life skills they're
catching up on their education
they're completing locational
training they're seeing hope
they're seeing a new way of
living and right now it seems
like what we're doing is sending
them right back to the statement
environments of generational
crime maybe some bad habits
before they have the tools to
succeed and so the reality I
think is the more serious the
crime the more time that they
get in there the more structure
that they get that they have
inside that's when we're seeing
through change and if we're
serious about breaking these
cycles as a state I think we
have to extend some of those
commitments cause those short
stays where it's just nine
months is not enough they're
doing wonderful things in the
facility they truly are their
catching up on their education
they're saying sometimes people
that go in there are you know
what a third grade reading
reading great and they're
sixteen seventeen and so when
you're trying to catch them up
it's not working because they're
getting out before they even
maybe get that gd or maybe even
get that to pull my and so how
is there a way we can change the
narrative to not we're trying to
punish them by keeping him there
for a minimum of you know one
year two year three years versus
nine months how can you and your
way of saying it because you see
it and limit every day are we
helping them how can we change
the mindset when it comes to
commitment time commitment from
these individuals
mister chair representative
travelers think you are for your
kind words I really oet first I
just want to say publicly to my
team
they are amazing they're the
boots on the ground every day
who are with those youth and
those youth become.
I mean my workers become mentors
to these kids so me just wanna
applied them for a moment
you're right sometimes nine
months isn't enough and we are
in discussion in researching and
looking at national best
practices of what if we extend
it to six months in transition
instead of three
how can we further after they
leave the facility how can be
further be a mentor to them
outside meaning it's not just at
three months cut off from from
your mentor or from I don't want
to see monitoring but having a
support
and so we are in discussion and
looking at best practice about
how we can possibly extend that
do you want to thank you mr
chairman thank you secretary I
think the other thing that I
took away from today is a lot of
times again they're going back
to maybe generational bad habits
or circumstances where maybe
there family isn't participating
and they know that when they're
released they are going to go
right back into that same cycle
and we can only help
I think with services if they're
eight team and over but I was
wondering if there's a way as
case workers or people that can
go in there if we know that's
happening you know we know
that's the clear path when they
get released and they're under
eighteen is there a way that we
can help them maybe get amounts
of hated and then maybe change
legislation to where those
programs would apply to those
individuals under the age of
eighteen because they need
housing or they need that there
was support systems because that
they stay in those homes or go
back they're not going to get
that support and go right back
to that cycle.
And mr chair representative
travels
there but we do utilize the
reignation centers for a lot of
our people who are leaving and
also transition services to help
support they'll get a transition
coordinator for those who are a
little bit older
I hear you on the younger kids
it's a little bit difficult but
we utilize the toyota programs
as well and through the
reintegration centers to try to
get them that added support I
think the immense patient
had been let's see where for
twenty seven years I think we've
done that twice and that was
just really on a case by case
basis where the family was night
a good option for the kid to
return home but we do look at
other family members as well not
just the the specific
environment for which they can
thank you mister chairman thank
you manufacturer cables are all
the questions there.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you for the the incredible
journey through
the center I learned a lot when
I was really impressed with the
staff that was there I I do
believe what they said which is
it it's not all about the
facility it really is about the
staff and they care deeply about
these years
i'm wondering from along the
same lines as representative
travel as
i'm interested in increasing the
time that we can serve these
youth up to twenty five years so
that would be twenty four
you know up till you're twenty
fifth birthday and if that were
the case I see that and your
data you've got eight use that
are eighteen to twenty have you
all looked at the possibility of
facilities that would serve just
those youth who have actually
become adults
and if we were to raise it up up
to twenty five there may be an
increase or need for services
have you have you looked at how
to have those use in a different
facility and what that might
cost
mr chair senator to heal
what also just prior to them
coming to the facility they go
through an intense thirty day
assessment so we tried to place
them so if it is a twenty year
old who may be
functions at a sixteen year old
working at place then at their
level
as far as keeping them to twenty
five I
have not researched that but i'm
happy to do that and provide you
with some data that I find that
I don't agree with a particular
like like to know is what would
the cost and I think they came
up earlier what would the cost
for another facility be
I know you're staff made it
really clear and I sup.
Or them in that that
exincreasing the number of
placement at the jumple taylor
is not ideal
you're a good
size and I would venture to say
that ydc is too big and I do
think that we have a need for
another facility in new mexico
and i've made it really clear to
everyone
this is very personal and my
community and northwest in
northeast new mexico which
includes lots of against santa
fe espinola tows and all of this
communities in the north are are
our kids are either coming down
here there was a a young man
that was from thousands so our
kids are either coming down here
or they're an albuquerque which
is a little bit closer but for
detention facilities are
actually being sent to sound so
i'd like to do something for my
community I just want to point
out to that we heard that there
at this moment are twenty four
youth that are placed out of
state and the question is why
those twenty four was there a
need that we couldn't meet here
or was it literally just a
matter of space and why were
those twenty four not
individually chosen but overall
why those twenty four
mister chair senator to your I
apologize I thought you were
talking about kids in the
protective service society that
are in our residential treatment
center
so those I apologize when when I
think of out of state placement
I was thinking of kids in our
protective service site that
perhaps okay so none of our are
then of our youth
so who have a sentence to either
begin why do you see or hear a
complicated have been sent out
of the state mr chair center
that you feel that is correct I
apologize no that's fine.
I misunderstood your question I
I appreciate that and and then
the last thing i'll just say is
and I mentioned this at the
center
is that the camp our model
really
it has two two sides to it one
is the rehabilitation and I I
think you're doing very good job
I think we can improve it and
talking with the young people I
think they had some great ideas
as to how there could be more
programming less free time
but it also requires
regionalization and oscrisis and
albucker key is not
regionalization for the rest of
us and so i'd really like to
have a conversation about do we
need to do we've got a twenty
year plan that were fifteen
years into that we haven't
rate and so do we need a new
plan do we need a kind can weap
can we begin looking at
information but I think that
conversation is really important
so thank you thank you mister.
Thank you mister chair so I do
have a few questions i've never
been there before so it was a
real i've I opened her from
on the first page of your
hand out it's it connects john
paul taylor with the southwest
keys the southwest keys have any
involvement with this center
mr share representative chavers
they know they do not good
okay so then on the other the
other
question that I have is on your
data page you have is one of the
current charges possession of
alcohol what is that what does
that mean
so mr chair representative
travels
we we cannot list it all of them
one thing to with our clients
most don't come with just one
charge they come with multiple
charges so that might have been
an additional charge
i've also most claims don't come
to get a commitment that term
for having a possession of
alcohol but it was probably
combined with other but we just
wanted to kind of give you a
snapshot of some of the things
that are current clients are
there for okay
and then the other
question that I asked when we
are in the clinic area was in
terms of
you know the number of kids on
medication and what I was trying
to figure out is how many of
those kids are on psychotropic
medications you know that the
psychiatrist my prescribe they
didn't have a breakdown for that
and for me that's something
group that's very concerning
because sometimes kids get
misdiagnosed and then they're on
those medications and they don't
get reviewed and and adjusted
rate so my question is do you
have is there a way to get a
breakdown and then what's the
process for reviewing and
adjusting whether or not those
kids should continue on those
medications because of them some
of them do really have some side
effects.
There aren't necessarily very
good
mister chair representative
chavis yes we can work to get a
breakdown i'll work with my
medical team there at um john
paul um as well as
like reassessing they meet with
their mdt at a very minimum of
once a month and so as well as
with their clinical behavior hop
condition who then will also say
we need to reassess and and look
at their met management that's
part of the empty
yeah that would be great if you
could get back to me on that one
and then we also need and you
guys are in the room we had a
conversation about
the classes that staff is going
out to to present to to maybe
recruit and I still think that
a targeted effort should be made
to the ms use school social work
because the word looking at
beginning behavioral health
people and their students in
there worst especially
interested in working with youth
I think that would be a great
feel placement to have an
internship to have an growing
our own again rate by doing that
and then the other piece and
it's already been mentioned but
in terms of what these kids go
afterwards because one of the um
then I don't remember which one
which one of the staff there
said you know some kids will
sort of sabotage their plan so
that they can kind of stay
because they don't want to go
back home so if we could figure
out where can we send those
cares who can't go have back
home or who don't want to go
back home and i'm wondering if
if any kind of specialised
foster care
you know my also be helpful in
terms of in your placing maybe
one you don't want to place a
whole bunch of women in a foster
home but maybe one I mean you
know teenagers some people
really like teenagers I had a
young man placed with me when he
was sixteen
he's now twenty one and he's
still there because they need
they need support.
They need to port just like our
own kids new support
and to just sort of let them go
when they're not ready to go or
when they don't have the support
I think is an injustice to them
and then the other thing that I
wanted to ask about to the group
that I was and they did have
some the kids did have some
suggestions about programming
and it would be great I I get
that that there's not enough
resources to higher one teacher
because maybe not all the kids
are interested in music but how
do we sort of individualize
their programming also you know
they talked about music they
talked about art and both of
those pieces over it can be very
therapy dick
and a lot of times kids don't
like to necessarily set an you
know talk to somebody about how
they're filling I mean these are
these are other ways to
basically you know do therapy
right
sports is another way so just
some ending comments thank you
mister chair thank you.
Thank you mister chair I am
I was so glad that we had the
opportunity to work i'm really
really encouraged and I think
from a political close
perspective as well i'm
encouraged that we can do a lot
of work in the specific area
a lot of bipartisan work in this
specific area
I one of the things that I heard
that I just want to re iterate
is I know we've been looking at
the missouri missouri
mississippi thank you motor
models I know even look at the
misery model about the
regionalization and one of the
things that I took from this in
particular was
folks essentially saying please
don't make this place because
you can do a smaller across the
state and I really hope that
we're able to move in that
direction a little bit more of
course a fear rate is always
that rebuilding mass places to
put children that's clearly not
where we want to go and sell
I just wanted to reiterate that
from the tour is we're talking
about
how folks move out of this so
instead of you know extending
the amount of time folks are
here my other question is about
your reintegration programs so I
see behind to talk to and the
person who is in charge of the
transition services just kind of
say like what's going on after
i'm because we know that a lot
of these kids want has table
homes may not have a dods that
they trust
and so what is that we're doing
after that so can you talk a
little bit about reintegration
programs and are those at
capacity how do those work
thank you mr chair
representative of an eye out
well she is the pro at
reintegration and has run that
program for years and here so
i'm gonna let her
speak about that
so mister chair representative
and I am.
Um the reingration programs
right now we have plans who were
coming out on supervise release
so when we talk about the terms
of like up to one years and
there's a mandatory ninety days
there sometimes were we only
have them for ninety days
in the reintegration center so
at that time what we're doing is
they're doing life skills but
they're doing it out in the
community so they're going and
talking to different kinds of
employers were helping them gets
situated with school i'm in the
community helping them learn how
to do the medication by
themselves make their
appointments in a we take them
so they have transportation and
the two reintegration centers
right now there is one in our
current one in equalness and
they're both mel facilities and
those clients are ages sixteen
to twenty one so as it sounds
right now unless the client
works their way out earlier i'm
worried about ninety days with
them now we we also try to get
them well they're still on
supervisor lease in that ninety
day period we try to get them
home or wherever their new home
is going to be so they have the
support of that community as
well and they're probation
officers and transition
coordinators
thank you mr chair so all of the
folks were here are still on
supervised release after that oh
if lenched no they are okay
thank you I was like that wrong
i'm also thinking like
after that what does it mean for
them tonight beyond that release
so I hope that as a committee we
can also brainstorm that is I
know there was a proposal last
session to extend the amount of
days that kids would stay
unsupervised release i'm
imagining they would fall within
this group of kids that you're
talking about now and knowing
that that it's only ninety days
you know as a ready to
transition out i'm trying to
think of like the supports that
we have for them so they don't
have to be unsupervisor lease
but they still have.
Support guidance mentoring etc
so I will stop there mister
chair but i'm really interested
in particular in the
reintegration.
Thank you mister chair and just
a follow that
is there if something happens
where they have a slight you
know altrication after they
leave can they come back for a
kind of like a tuna or you know
a short period of time where
they recalibry.
Mr chair represented the hone so
in the reimmigration center
i'm so
sitting between the two so right
now
kids flip up a lot in the
reintegration setting you know
they're they're out there it's
kind of I say like football rate
you learn how to play football
in a classroom but this is a
training camp and so there's a
lot of support for these kids so
if they slip up it they stay in
the reintegration center we work
with them now if they're
committing other crimes they're
in the community so you know
there could be police
involvement like if there is a a
battery in a reintegration
center and then that would be up
to the to the police but for the
most part a lot of kids do slip
up as there are transitioning
and as long as it's not a
serious violation that that they
stand in the program and we work
with them through that they we
have therapist in the reignation
centers as well so there are can
it out testing the waters and
coming back and they have a
whole team assigned to them to
help them support getting out
that's great okay
also uhm i'm glad that we the
cambr model is also the missouri
model and we've been talking a
few of us too some of the people
from missury and there
program and I visited a couple
weeks ago one of the places in
mount burned your springfield
and got to see their facility it
was a medium facility
but it was more home like is
there a reason that we have the
cells is that just cause this
was taken over from another
period and it's hard to change
but it means such a big
difference for them to have
more of that open room that we
saw but with big chairs for them
to sit in and a big circle and
do their kind of like daily
check in.
Um and get to you know council
get cancelling at the same time
but they did that daily and
maybe even a couple times a day
whereas I didn't see that knees
mentioned just once a week that
they might have been doing that
can you explain
mr chair of representative they
they do groups every day and the
one that they were talking about
was there there be groups so
they have a specific therapy the
group with that therapist that's
a therapist lead but they also
do daily life skills groups and
then they also do check ins in
the morning and then the evening
as a as an entire group as far
as the furniture is I haven't
seen the wind that you've seen
but
that facility was already we
don't build that you know
specifically for so
do the the cells seem to may get
more prison like there any way
to take away you know at the
cells and open a mark to one
room they had like double banks
that you know that part of a
young people were in and it
seems like that kind of made it
so that they were able to
be more human.
Mister chair representative we
can absolutely look into it
and
I mean to be honest I don't know
that we ever even checked but we
can and we can look into it and
see whether that would look like
i'm happy to research and do
some data on it thank you I
think that would be really
important to make that
more a compass home like for
them and then
the oh having the regional
facilities and misery has a blue
print now that they used to
build one model to another and
they'd be
willing to share that it seemed
like it was a really good setup
for going to the classrooms and
they also have it where the
classrooms the teachers go from
classroom to classroom and the
student stay in that one area
and so I don't know we have
they would be you know if
wanting to you know talk to
missouri about how that works
better for them or
you know how.
In oh the regional was so that
parents could be have better
access to seeing their young
person and also getting the
counseling that they need to
change their home environment
their attitude of working with
their young person but sometimes
you know as teens there are
supposed to be making risks but
you know how to do that in a
constructive way and that's why
I was glad to see that they're
going to have the football field
we already have basketball for
them to work off summer that you
know take certain risks in
whatever they're doing but it
could good way
thank you my time is that thank
you.
And thank you mister chairman
chairman
so I do the tour before and most
of that you know we focused on
actually the tour this time I
felt that we had very in depth
conversations with the case
workers the people running the
facility trying to get solutions
of you know what they size the
biggest issue with
repeat offenders or whatever was
happening at what I took from it
and from people who were
actually working with these kids
as a while it's a great when
they're in there yes you have
the short amount of time to work
with them
but as soon as they get out of
there it majority of the time
they're coming right back in
there so they're getting back to
their family in their old way of
life and again going back to
what representative chava said
the solution that I seem to take
from all of the people that we
were talking you weren't talking
to the kids we're talking to the
actual you know what is your
suggestion to make this where
these kids aren't coming back
and again it was like if you do
it one year commitment it's
almost kind of not going to do
anything I mean what you got
your thirty day assessment and
then is there still another like
sixty days I thought it picked
up that of some type of
processing before super
unsupervisor supervised
something before you can start
working with them so it's about
three months did I understand
that right
so mr chair representative read
the ninety days is the
supervisor released term so
that's the the time that the
that we have to put them out on
to provide release
after their yes so they have to
be in the community for can I do
this so mr chairman and so what
happens is you don't even see
him for the thirty days and then
you may have a you know nine you
know to nine months in the
rolled out or whatever they
haven't so you get this.
Very short amount of time period
where they seem to a lot of
times to be doing very very well
and then when i'm here then
you're just seeing these kids
again they get out they get back
to their families back to the
road people they were hanging
around with and again kind of
repeating what representative
chapter said when I heard from
them is actually the once you
had the commitments for maybe
your partner crimes a harder up
there to the age of twenty one
have a higher success rate of
the ones that you know are maybe
doing less violent crimes I even
know that there's a sentence
that these to do when I was a
prosecutor it would it be a
sense for one year commitment to
a ydc with a ninety day review I
don't even know how that worked
and they come back at the judge
review what what did you think
of ydc i'm gonna let you back
out and the to seem pointless to
me so I agree that I think this
from from the take up the
employees there they think the
commitments need to be a minimum
of two years if not longer for
them to really hopefully get
these kids on the right track
and I think we need data if we
don't have data to see if these
kids are coming back and I know
it's hard with the juvenile
issues through chairman and
and it's just but it's something
if we don't see the data we're
putting a lot of money into an
awesome facility that these kids
are just coming back out and
going right back into the old
ways and it is a great facility
but I don't know if it's doing
what it needs to be doing if
they're just getting out and re
offending you're just seeing
them again so that's my my
concern
is getting some data on the
success rates if that's possible
and then lastly
I know there's some mental
health questions we did ask the
nurse how many of these these
detainees are on mental health
medications and basically there
was a thirty I believe thirty
four thirty five thirty four
forty forty okay.
It was it was a a high number of
what the forty eight detainees
and I was told that we asked
like what's the general type of
medication it was for anxiety
depression and impulse control
order disorder
asked him do you give a sleep
mad so we get melatonin you know
do you
what about aderal they go with
stay away from our all we push
counseling and we try to
basically
use those medications at that
impressed that that was
happening and the availability
persues with the doctors so I I
think it's a great facility you
know I I enjoyed it again turn
it but I just think we need to
report a lot of money into a
facility that we're not getting
data on that may not really be
working with the amount of
commitment time you're getting
to work with them I think if you
got two three four years to work
with them I think you're gonna
have a great success rate on
this this type of program the
messaging model or whatever it
is and I i'd like I I liked
mainly speaking with the people
that are dealing with these kids
every day and what they're
seeing and so that was a take
back I got I don't think it's
very informative maybe a great
way to do some legislation that
maybe we do need to like in
these terms because otherwise
they're just seeing them again
and that has insolvent anything
and so you know we can find this
center all we want and it's it's
a great center but you know it
it III kind of he'd say this is
so nice it was like kind of like
day camp you know that the the
kids are kind of a day camp and
it's a you know a disso nice but
we need results we don't need a
fifteen year old you see in them
again and you know at sixteen
and seventeen and it worries me
that someone who's a murder is
in there getting you know up to
twenty one is going to possibly
come out better than somebody
who we could have caught a
little bit earlier those were
just my observations but i.
Love the facility great to thank
you for that and thank you
mister.
Mr chair senator representative
people will get thank you
thank you mister chairman and
mine as long along the same
lines is represented every I
think my biggest take away
within the director explained
that some of them for the more
hanes crimes that are coming in
have a longer time with them and
therefore the procedure is is
less that they seem to have more
of a success story with those
who spent more time and so we
need to see data
to see is perhaps if we're not
investing the time if they only
have a year whichever employee
were ran into said that is not
enough time to make a difference
they continue to return that
year is only forty two
children in there now so that
that data should be readily
available as far as what that
looks like over the last ten
years with precipitous and rates
and I think the data will speak
to what we need to deal and I
say that because it's a missed
opportunity for investing and
someone for one year at a time
six months at a time when that
that position that slight
because there's a certain number
of sites available could have
gone to someone who was serving
a longer time and could have
made a real meaningful
difference in their life we
don't just owe this to ourselves
as lawmakers based on policy but
to the new mexico tax dollars at
payers as well because this is
taxed I would find it and so I
say that that this last
legislation of loan the
government governors recommend
dation was seventy two million
for these juvenile justice
facilities and as the
legislative body we prioritized
cyfd and juvenile justice reform
and actually increase that to
over eighty two million dollars
over sixty million with cut
personal services almost
fourteen and contractual
services and over eight million
and others
that's between two facilities
eighty two million dollars
between only two facilities are
being lumped and on how to be
too line so if you average that
out I mean i'd say was split
halfway between those two
facilities and we're putting
forty one million dollars in
there.
You're averaging almost a one
million dollars per child per
year investment
and I want to say this it's
still worth that until we hear
they continue to return and
return and return to the success
story where the absolutely
changed that child's a life we
paid a million dollars on
average per year of the tax
payers investment and they never
return to the system they
invested and made something of
themselves a new mexico so many
well spent but if they're
continuing to see the same
children again and again and
again we don't just do it to
ourselves this law makers to
change policy but we owe it to
new mexico tax payers to change
policy thank you mister
chairman.
Thank you mister chair I i'm
sorry I didn't go to day I went
a two years ago
and i've so I would ask you this
if i'd gone on the choice today
two years ago I met two young
men who were participating in
the special immigrant juvenile
status program and I was really
proud to see that
seem to be inappropriate for it
for you to tell me that how it
went with them but i'm wondering
how many children are
participating in the special
immigrant children status now
or are you wearing
mr chair center a little bit
sitting a little press you know
I don't have that with me at the
moment but I can look into it
and get right back to you know
it just didn't have my poor
binder of all of my gj stuff
quickly available
for one of those young man the
way he described it was
absolutely transformative for
him so I I really get that and
get stated thank you.
Yeah we have we have a little
bit of time so thank you I was
just recalling that as
people have left and
transitioned out of the facility
that missouri has it where they
have a twenty four seven called
number where if they start
having you know difficulties
with getting a long with their
parents or to side all or any
type of problem they could call
that number and then someone
will call them back but they
can't have direct contact with
people that they worked with
they need to keep that kind of
anonymous but anyway just went
out there
well thank you one reiterate of
our thanks to you and for the
opportunity I do I do have a
couple of questions one of them
were so when I share with my
colleagues my data is really the
solution I think to a lot of the
decisions that we have to make
and that's true when it comes to
criminal justice generally but
certainly true year too so i'm
open that either that it is cap
tractor will be captain track in
terms of what has been described
as residentials and I don't know
where that's the right term to
really think about it but it
it's sort of that and it's also
how many of end up in the adult
system how many end of up and a
pile committing crimes later on
and and where are we missing
those opportunities
I I saw something today I know
and that's moving out seen the
tour before and and may not have
been there today but I think
everybody would have seen the
same thing I did I I saw
leadership on display they're
not just from you secretary but
the superintendent of the school
and credit look at the heads
nodding I I before I left the
facilities that I hope you are
will tune in add to this this
part of our hearing on the
internet and if they if they
didn't get the chance I hope
you'll take this clip and and
give it to him the sheraton
because we are private but I I
saw leadership today
which i've got to tell you my
experience in government in
particular is is hard to find
times and they s.
Superintendent who was enthused
about is his team and those
about his facility I saw
principle who has been there for
twenty three years I think he
said enthusiast excited everyone
of the faculty were excited they
talked about wanting to and
their careers there many of them
had been there for ten fifteen
years are teaching math english
of social sciences ever every
imaginable topic in the every
one of them they they just kind
of got hold into the room and
you could tell they were excited
to be there and an excited about
and being part of that program
while all of them really so they
into the news hasn't for me was
was very
very rewarding we didn't get a
chance to talk to some of the
youth you were with our group
deputy secretary so you know
this that we we did ask I I
asked them where they were from
in every case and
only one of them group that we
visited with was from the local
area many more from what they
had house and albuquerque and
elsewhere close hobs we had we
had folks model with the state
so the notion that them that I
know my my colleague senator
heels said well ten of you
albert kicking in moscow's are
not geographic it would be ideal
to have these in a lot of
communities where they can have
the close contact with their
family remain close to feeling
like they're at home and and I
don't know what what that would
take except a lot of money but
i'll just tell you that as a
business and in my life one
thing you do is when you see
people like that we saturday
that are leaders and enthused
you wanted to capitalise on the
time that you have the mast
every one of them if they're
close to retiring and I asked
you secretary though remaining
again i'll just remind me and
for the committee you've been a
state employee for how many
years
over twenty five twenty five
years of state employee and then
you will see why I do for how
long over nine years and then in
the nine years with cfd you've
now been deputy secretary for
two about a year and a half
years right and one thing that
was that struck me is in the
time that you've been in these
positions with either c wife to
use the director.
How many different direct list
list back at up a little bit see
where he has protective services
right which isn't which is not
what we saw today is that right
predicted services does not take
care of the jake paul taylor
that part of the agency mr chair
that is correct as deputy
secretary I oversee should not
justice and protect it services
at both of those you see both of
those in in the time you've been
with cfd you told me this was
worth we're walking many
different directors have you
seen in the position that since
you've been there
mister chair in the nine years
i've been there and seen ten
different protective services
directors
hope the committee here's that
and in the nine years you've
been there you've had ten
different directors of
protective services
there is the problem and it's
it's really not hard to see
whether it's public education
secretaries or or choose you
have to directors I I know
you're in comfortable answering
this question they I can see the
squirming and i'm sorry but you
know in a difficult situation
because you're not you're not
passing any judgment on it which
you know damn well that we are
because there's no way not as
judgment on that there's no way
not to see that when you have
ten directors in nine years in
protective services that we see
the problems that we see when we
see the horrific stories of
children who are
why in the streets of all the
kirki but it's a four year old
or children that are dying or
tell them that arraved her
children are committed suicide
under our watch and it's it's
hard reading me
secretary of mike my colleagues
only a couple of minutes who
were on the democratics in a
caucus but I think they they
were we're not supposed to talk
about what happens in our caucus
but I don't go into a democratic
car because we have talking
about see why
and in pay seeing the
unfortunately sometimes I get
emotional in these committee
means when I talk about see
where because it's just so
heartbreaking to me but but when
I see leaders today that are
enthusiast excited I I tell
myself we need to capitalise on
them in spread there enthusiasm
and their experience and and
everything that they offer to us
we need to spread that around.
Into the time that we have them
two other facility starting new
facilities introducing them
around and and having that
enthusiasm capture because some
for some reason
when you have a new director
every year or even more
frequently every year
I can't imagine any organization
feeling good about itself right
and in feeling that kind of
investment i'm i'm always very
happy to say that employees that
I have my laugher moved with me
for twenty years plus most of
them in
that makes my job really easy
and and I think it makes it
successful so I hope we'll
figure that out but I thought
when you told me that one factor
figure it told me really all I
had to know that plus to see
what the people that were there
that were today were that we're
so excited about what they do
dm.
The committee I think really
gains a light and I hope the
public here is as I hope the
pressures is because it's it's
always beating up on sea wefdy
and it feels that when I I think
you heard me tell everyone those
people you're today we really
value you very much and please
don't take our criticisms of of
the failures of state government
to to pay in a broadbrush begins
all of them but I thought it was
important for us to see today
where see what do they some
really great things and so so
thank you for doing that and
they as I pointed out earlier we
did this on short notice with
your purpose
so that that we could really see
a genuine look behind really
what's going on here too so I
hope you'll spread that I hope
you'll spread that to the
governor on down
I i've been critical that the
agency private more critical in
most I think I have described
the the
described
leadership as a failure I think
i've used that work the
governors use the words to
describe it as disfunctional was
a hard and harsh words but
we're taking my kids lives
it's hard not.
So I hope that mr gets back but
most important that we can do
better in what will be seen that
today we see people can do
better
thank you
thank you sure I got here one
o'clock
we'll get you that data here s.
Mr cherry would you like me to
introduce okay
our juvenile justice director
since i've been accepted I think
we've had two in the nine years
and mister bob people is our gs
director.
The.
Good afternoon
as as a and mister chair and
committee members is that the
deputy secretary pointed out
i'd basically came in with
secretary casadashsum during
that period of time that she was
looking at the cyfi and staying
with the governor's office and
down you know
she had it in her heart that do
what she could try to improve
the system in she asked me if I
would come back and do this
again in I told her I think
about it and I went to ireland
and I was unease goes through a
month and I came back and says
ok i'll do this again
in on compassion about these
kids in a in a few had looked at
the that some of the time that
our staff is been there
you know tammy over it the the
behavioral health of the case
manager eighteen years the big
guy that was in there he's like
eighteen years
that's jimmy the principle the
dedicated staff and we need to
do everything we can't give them
the support that they need to
provide the services that they
are and then keep in mind too I
mean
with the the deputy of the
facilities that net done she's
overseen the two reinigration
centers and the two correction
facilities but we also have
twenty nine probation offices
around the state and that makes
up our seventy two million
dollar budget I think that the
senator had pointed out ten
million of their costs right
into programming you know
behavior
j jack gc's youth mentoring and
done they were provide a lot of
intervention probation or
intervention services that it
linked to probation for all of
our kids we try to reach our
kids as early as possible so
that's my introduction in thank
you very much for having us
today
thank you
connect to some so I think one
of the challenges it's always
for me is this we heard we heard
today that you have.
A vacancy rate that you can't be
happy about it's not it's not
bad we haven't plenty of state
government vacancy problems
throughout our safe government
but but you still had a high
vacancy but number of positions
there even at this facility in
an in an ideal world and
III always
question myself because when i'm
critical of c y fd either in
committee or public
I realize that that they could
be argued that that is a
disincentive to you being able
to attract and hire people that
there is an enthusiast lack of
enthusiasm or that they feel
like they're put upon or maybe
that's why you have a new
director every year there is
they just don't want to have
that continuing beating if you
will have of a drum that's
negative in the in the same time
how do you how do we be
aware and unaccepting of the
circumstances as they are in
invoice that that this
dissatisfaction without harming
your ability to attract people
to the job and III try to use
that opportunity and i'll use
that now to do to
encourage the people that are
there and tell them we're very
proud of them and excited by
them and also trying to get the
word out there that you got some
great job opportunities in a
great environment everybody if
there seems so rewarded by their
job seems so rewarded by being
there and working with kids and
so we're gonna do a better job I
tell people we got some great
job opportunities for young
people to work out there to
teach to change lives and we
need to help you filled out with
those vacancies.
Mr chair members of the
committee someone did ask about
a reconsidery overall should not
justice be considering is twenty
one point two but in our youth
in our ycs positions which are
the positions in the facility
the arm vacancy rate is thirty
two percent
and we did were about to submit
our budget request and it will
be an increase to the juvenile
justice budget which has been
flat the last three years
we are asking for an increase
not for a position but for
funding to fill out a weekend
positions
as well as
contractual money to continue
with increasing programming as
well as our prevention contracts
to keep them currently were
there funded
yet i'm not financial with him
will hear from my senate
colleague who is but again the
fact that you've been asked to
keep your budget flat for three
years and then you've got a
vacancy and you've got new
directors every year
through the governor said it
write this disfunction and it's
a very definition of this
function
center trial thank you mister
chairman and thank you director
cleave all I I just want to say
like when one of the montress
when you're a division director
and agency head is that you
don't want anybody to know your
name you don't want anybody to
know
and and that means that you're
doing things right because the
legislature the governor people
know your name and call you on a
regular basis when things aren't
going and so the fact that
things are been going well is
attributed to the work that you
all are doing and and director
cleave all I just want to see
thank you you've been incredibly
responsive and made yourself
available
and we've had multiple
conversations and i've
appreciated it those
conversations I appreciate the
work that you're doing and that
you can back from ireland in the
east coast
I I just returned on saturday
from ireland so I I know how
hard that must have been um but
the work that you're doing is
important and quite honestly the
only reason that.
This is of importance at this
point is because we have some
crisis happening with our duping
ask and
you're not continued
interactions with the law and no
resolutions happening and so we
as a body have a responsibility
to look at that and the issue
came up during the last sixty
day session and many of us
didn't know
what was happening because
they're just you haven't been on
the on the in the hot seat you
haven't been meetings like this
because things have not been
broken
so again I just hope that you
can express to your staff are
gratefulness in seeing the work
that they did and the work that
they that they continue to do
and they're commitment to our to
are you but I just wanted to say
thank you I know you've been
sitting back there and I keep
asking you to come up and you
don't want to but thank you for
the work that you do
chair out senator bank thank you
very much
what I want share with you with
a rowed out to the facility with
the senator here she wanted to
show her test resell me on
electric vehicles after yeah
I told her when the way back so
wonder if the reasons facility
is so well round so impressed if
you're based on there's a submit
it's because they're the far
this distance possible from
santa fe possible so I think
that may have something to do
with just keep his hoy from the
palette ticks of the north and
just let us do our job well and
maybe there's a lesson in there
too.
Anyone else with me again thank
you all very much a good morning
for us I think
are we have our next
presentation at one thirty
believe it not we're ahead of
schedule which is unusual I know
but that's because we had set a
say time in the agenda for lunch
and I didn't want to like
offline but worked through it to
the fool and get called so we're
a little bit at a time and i'll
i'll just check and see whether
we're ready to go on to the next
one but I think maybe
what we're going to do is you'll
see on the next
agenda item this is an issue
that we've been talking about
already the detention facilities
being used by federal government
so I I had asked center city a
locus to set up the panel but
i'm gonna also ask
rips of channel and really
represent charges reverse of a
night I think was it with you
all told me a family whilst you
will tell me where our sponsors
rivers of romero so all up so so
all of all of you were sponsored
so if if a couple you is let us
want to come up here and start
the presentation as we get our
just coming in from elsewhere
and then we'll have the governor
presently what you're some
problem with some of the county
officials maybe here gather that
I did I did want to write you a
rips of challenger and our
cities to at least do two things
one is the committee probably
knows I I like very much to look
back at a pass session and
figure out where legislation
began where it ended where what
committees that went to where it
was amended and so forth it's
the older football player in me
i'm used to watching game films
the day after the game to see
who mister blocken who who
screwed up or who got it right
and so
I i'd like to start there a
start with them and discussion
about the legislation that it's
been interesting the past and
them
what became of it.
Thank you mister chair and
we are talking about house bill
nine and obviously related
issues and no doubt we'll have a
conversation about the
visit that took place by some of
the members yesterday as well so
mister thank you for
acknowledging the cosponsors on
house but mine element of
marianna
representative ramaro and also
represent rubio along with with
me
we're on the bill as it move
forward before I get to the the
bill itself and I just wanna
give you a little contact in
terms of where i'm coming from
on a bill and probably my
colleagues as well I don't think
there's a day that goes by where
we don't see in the news
pictures of
people being picked up I mostly
journal men wearing masks
sometimes in appropriate
uniforms sometimes not
in it's really unclear I think
to most of us from any of us as
to how it is that they have
identify these individuals for
basically rounding up
I think one of the common
factors is they tend to be
people a color
is not clear to me how they know
whether or not the person is
documented or not documented and
there have been allegations some
of many of which some of which
have been substantiated that in
fact people who are legally here
are being picked up because of
the techniques that are being
used to
decide who is going to be put
entered detention and I find
that very troubling and I think
many of us and society do
where it we are
a country of laws.
And we are seeing that in the
opinion of not just me on my
colleagues the courts are now
ruling against the practice
certainly there's been
racial profilings been an issue
and the courts are beginning to
way and and find that many of
the techniques that are being
used by these ice officials
are not proper eligible
so that as our background and
it's gotten worse is that we are
now talking about what is the
state of new mexico's rule in
this process and the role I find
troubling and that is
local officials you know local
governments few in the state
have decided to
work with ice two houses
individuals someone from my
point again may be here legally
and there's a process to have
worked that through but it's
just it's not right and it's
not constitutional so what house
bill nine does it say we and the
state will not be complicit in
these activities and we will
prohibit the extension of us as
a state that's local governments
as well as the state itself from
participating in those
activities and it would require
those entities and I think there
are three local governments to
terminate their contracts with
ice
at the earliest opportunity and
it also what would prohibit
other local governments or state
entities from entering into a
future contracts
so i've i've talked about kind
of the
one underlying issue and the
second for me and I think others
on the bill is what we have
found is where there are ice
detention facilities.
There tends to be more activity
by ice why obviously because
it's easier it's easier to pick
up people where you can move
them readily to a facility
within twenty miles or whatever
so that was one compelling point
that for me in terms of
supporting this bill I know the
activities when I continue in
the country I know that it's sad
but it's it's likely to happen
but we don't have to participate
in that and we can I think I
don't add some safety for those
individuals who are residing in
our state because
there will be less activity by
ice and point out one last thing
we apparently have five times
more beds per capital identified
as for as ice beds and
any others estate and in the
country so
we need to be stepping back mr
chair and that's the basis for
house bill nine thank you.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you for the opportunity to
present a different perspective
on our states involvement in
civil immigration detention
I also
represent a chamber acknowledged
a wonderful house colleagues
who've carried the bill but I
also want to acknowledge
senators momentous katy do hig a
firmware colleague gale cheesy
gerry tc pino in the late
senator bill neil who've also co
sponsored or carried bills
designed to stop government
collaboration with asus
immigration to tension
facilities
I think it's important to
understand what this issue is
about we have three private
civil immigrant detention
facilities in new mexico
corsific facilities located and
see below and torrents counties
and emtc management training
corporation operator a facility
in or terror county that's the
one that was toward yesterday
when an immigrant is detained by
ice and a decision needs to be
made about what should happen to
that individual pending the
relief that they seek until
recently ice would decide on a
case by case basis whether to
detained someone or to release
them unbond or parole
the only lawful purpose of
immigration detention is to
ensure that individuals
participate in in immigration
proceedings that's the only
lawful purpose but under the
trump administration discretion
about whether someone detained
his has been read at once that
there's someone will be detained
has been removed and very very
few individuals are allowed to
be free pending the decision on
their immigration cases instead
they are now processed and sent
to a detention facility
all three of new mexico's
immigration detention centers
are operated through a scheme
where ice can ice contracts with
the local county and then the
county awards a no bid sub
contract to a massive for profit
four profit prison company.
When I learned new mexico
counties began sub contracting
with private companies to
operate civil immigrant
detention facilities I
immediately questioned whether
there was an adequate oversight
of these facilities because the
skim means that ice and the
companies can get around federal
competitive bindic bidding rules
that would otherwise apply
ice is not required under this
contracting scheme to go through
the review of the private sub
contractors performance their
private their prior performance
and then the counties aren't
required to review their prior
performance either so in effect
the county governments just
serve as a passed through of
funds from the federal
government to the private
companies and unfortunately
counties have very limited real
oversight ability
prior to this point
administration I said already
received review after review by
government being been agencies
of the contractors incompetence
corruption and civil rights
violation but now during
president trump second term even
minimal federal oversight has
been taken away the immigration
detention ombudsman offers
has been
has been eliminated and the
officer civil rights in civil
liberties within dhs has been
guided
meanwhile it has become
increasing clear that ice under
this administration feels in
bold into further restrict
efforts for local monitoring and
oversight in the few cases were
access has been granted we have
learned that the conditions
inside these facilities are
substandard and that's saying it
mildly
when issues have been reported
through official oversight
channels they have not been
adequately addressed if at all
there have been reports that
food has been used has rewarded
punishment the facilities cost
cuts by paying civil detained
detainees a pittance seventy
five cents an hour to provide
generatorial services or to cook
the food.
Then they charge these same
people who are detaining these
village facilities for basic
services like phone or
commercially goods at exorbitant
rates
and who benefits financially the
outer state private corporations
who run the facilities for
example course civic is worth
nearly two billion it start jump
to eighty one percent after the
presidential election and it's
ceo make six million dollars a
year
the counties get a small
administrative fee and some
minor tax benefits and while
some argue these private
detention centers produce jobs
the reality is that many of
these jobs are held by out of
county residents and in some
cases out of state residents
I got my chance to visit the
detainees by volunteering to do
in take at course
at the corsific operated
facility in a stance yet with
innovation lab innovation law
leb which is illegal services
organization in my my role was
to do intakes the first time I
went to the facility the
internet was down and somehow
this meant that we could not
visit detainees who wanted to
see us we spent the whole day
waiting without the internet
ever being restored
it was interesting to me that a
multi million dollars facility
could not restore the internet
and did not have a back up that
day all detainees were deprived
of council and any other visits
that they might have had
that day the bathrooms in the
lobby were locked so they let us
use the bathrooms in the
administrative area the women's
bathroom smells like sewage and
one of my mail colleagues
reported feces on the floor of
the adjoining men's bathroom
I finally got to the entered
into the facility about a month
later the population of the
facility has jumped since the
trummet trump administration so
we were overwhelmed with about a
hundred and twenty people who
wish to do it in take with us we
were unable to complete the
intake in the time allowed it.
I was shocked to meet
individuals who had been in the
country for almost two decades
some who have worked permits
individuals who had been brought
to this family by the as
children individuals with
diabetes heart problems and
infections one with a john
infection that was really
upsetting who are not getting
treatment individuals who had
been in the facility for months
and told me they wanted to just
get that hell out of there even
if it might not remaining in the
US but they were not able to go
and each day I says I mean the
course civic is making more
money
when individual told me he
wanted to be deported anywhere
but his home country where he
would be killed will this sounds
like a good asylum case yet he
spents months and months who
knows how long you'll see up to
stay in a detention facility
with a good immigration asylum
case
I heard from some individuals
that the most they might get if
they reported a medical issue
with thailand all
they were very afraid of
retaliation and we needed to
repeatedly reassure them that we
are not connected with ice or
course civic in any way
the most wrenching situation for
me was meeting a young twenty
one year old man who seemed to
have some developmental issues
he looked at me with that eyes
she did not understand why he
was there.
His mother was in florida and he
wanted to go home to her he said
to me no mega stacky
in a childish voice that means I
don't like it here
my heart broke
mr chair committee members we
have a situation here where the
county has a contract with ice
and their sub contracts with a
private company but then has no
meaningful control over their
own sub contract we should not
be profiting from immigration
detention and we should not be
enabling out of state for profit
companies to make millions of
dollars from immigration
detention addressing the issue
of our public bodies acting as a
pass through and by passing
competitive bidding and standard
procurement procedures
particularly with the explosion
of detainees under the second
trump administration and the
growing lack of oversight is one
meaningful and important way for
us to act I want to introduce my
my expert here rebecca who is
that a constitutional legal
specialist in a lot of the legal
issues involved and we stand
ready to answer any questions
that the committee may have
thank you since the center to
deliver and then did you did you
have anything that she needed
president
**** she agreed to stand here
for questions I don't know what
you like to fix
ok shift alright good i've just
checked we believe we have the
governor's general council
better to appear with us as well
too
yes good morning everybody good
afternoon so
let's see what you want just a
second
yes.
Sure.
This.
Yeah.
The.
Intermit maybe down I was having
trouble with my computer mister
chair
we still streaming
mister street
then you all hear me I can see
it here you we've got you know
how
you can hear me.
Yes all right
let me introduce the committee
in the public who's here in
online to holly again general
council to the office of the
governor.
Mr chair thank you thanks for
having me here today I don't
them III heard a senator city
locuses introduction I only
heard the very very last part of
representative chambers
presentation but I I don't have
anything additional to add at
this point but I am here to
answer any questions that the
committee might have.
The reason I had asked you to be
a part of the discussion as well
as the the in the last one of
her earlier readings and read or
so
you had appeared with our
committee to discuss the subject
matter they may be expected on a
special session and this
particular topic was on one of
those that I I trust the there's
no and nothing new to report
from that meeting is that right
mr chair members of the
committee the agenda for the
special is still ongoing between
the governor in the leadership
so I don't have any additional
light that I can shut on that
for you all today alright thank
you for being available and
answer any questions so we also
have
worked when
we wanted to discuss topic I
asked that we have
representatives from the three
effective counties for the three
different facilities and I know
at one point then we had several
of you all that wanted to be
here for a terrible county and
them and then we have I think
somebody here representing for
torrents coming up we did reach
out to see county I believe
which is the other county that
has a facility I know as a flip
friday nancy we still haven't
heard anything back from them
and we have made repeated
efforts to communicate with them
and reach out
about their particular facility
no interest in discussion that
with us so let me take they just
in the word that we have them
have a jordan brill are you here
for torrents cutting the spread
come on up which all make some
room for mister borrella there
and then we have arbi nichols
otera county also yep
saw you back there.
And that mister borrell mission
nichols all recognize each one
of you for ten minutes for
whatever you'd like to discuss
with us and make the
presentation as you wish I will
go first to you mister borrella
and they'll be time for
questions.
Can you mister
jordan brellada county manager
for torrents county thank you
for the opportunity to be here
today I have prepared some
statements more than anything I
think this has been an ongoing
topic of discussion with
torrents county there's been a
number of presentations to solve
a rates committees uh to to
representatives of the media um
I I just wanted to to make sure
that we were present here today
to provide on some county
perspective we certainly not
turns county that the
immigration issue is a
significant issue not only new
mexico but across the the
country to
though coming from the
perspective of a small rural
county that has a low and
compapulation and not much room
for economic development the
facility itself
does mean a little more to the
county than solely detention um
it is the only operational
correctional facility and
torrents county it is also it
also functions as our county
jail and the economic impact of
that facility to the area
certainly significant the
facility employees about a
hundred county residents and
expends about eight million
dollars a year annually and
salaries and benefits
in in terms of the town of his
tonsia this particular facility
and makes up about two thirds of
the towns g r t revenue now I
came to drawings county about a
year ago from santa fe county
and so I was not around in the
area the last time this
particular facility closed but
in terms of having discussions
with individuals that were here
during this time um that was
very difficult time only for the
county but for the town of his
don't see any incorporated
municipalities are trying to
adjust to have to transport our
own detainees are extensive
distances and deal with the
economic ramifications of not
particular situation
so it's a without aa thank you
for the opportunity to be here
today and I hope to answer any
questions and same shines my on
the perspective of of the county
in our position.
Governor mr chair members of the
committee my name is arbie
nicholson county attorney for a
terrible county going to briefly
talk about some of the impacts
on the county and and
consequences the legislation
so
if this legislation worked to be
enacted it would cause the loss
of approximately two hundred and
eighty four jobs and no terrible
county plus hundreds more in
torrents and sible accounties
directly impacting families and
local unemployment rates
would result in a loss of three
point nine million dollars
annually in direct economic
contributions to state
tax revenues from the facility
operations it would lead to a
significant last of revenue for
the counties including funds
that support essential services
like public safety and
infrastructure
in a terrible county it will
trigger a default on outstanding
revenue bonds with the current
balance of twenty two million
dollars approximately
potentially leading to higher
barring costs for future
counting projects
it from our perspective will be
a violation of new mexican
statute ford us sixty two dash
six c which explicitly prohibits
any law that impairs the
security or payment of
outstanding revenue balance it
will spark litigation from the
effect that counties bond
investors and potentially the
federal government diverting tax
payer dollars to legal defences
instead of community needs it
will irreparably harm of
terrorist counties credit rating
and the mexicans reputation with
investors make it harder for the
state to finance other public
projects like schools are roads
it will create a public finance
disaster as seen in similar
cases where bond defaults have
lead to long term fiscal
instability and local
governments and states it will
allow the bond investors to take
over the facility and
potentially contract directly
with ice rendering the
legislation in effective.
While shifting control away from
local authorities that will
force the relocation of detained
individuals to facilities and
other states far from family
legal council and new mexico's
regulatory overseas although
it's limited it's still there
still some there
which would lead to potentially
worsening conditions for the
detainees
they will undermine federal
immigration enforcement by
disrupting established
partnerships displacing four
immigration court rooms and
judges leading to inefficiencies
and processing and increasing
backlogs and immigration
hearings which in some cases are
already ten years long it will
exact rebate the strain on other
states facilities potentially
increasing casts to us tax
payers nationwide as detainees
are transported farther and
worse and to worsening
conditions due to overcrowded
overcrowding
it will wrist the loss of
billions of dollars in federal
funding this vital to the
residents new mexico
so that's what it will do what
it will not do is prevent that
attention and processing of
individuals identified as the
illegal alliance as I will
simply redirect them to other
facilities across the country
it will not benefit
individuals identified as legal
aliens in new mexico her onstand
be detained to remote locations
like centers and alabama or
florida far from their support
networks increasing isolation
and hardship
it will reduce overall
immigration enforcement costs is
transportation and I will not
reduce overall immigration
enforcement cars as
transportation and relocation
expenses can exceed current
cost it will not improve
conditions for detainees send
some
help we won't have any any
opportunity for any oversight if
they're in not in the state
it will not address address the
route causes of immigration
problems such as border policies
or federal funding shortages.
Leaving the underlying issues
unresolved
it will benefit activists and
legislators seeking the claim on
moral victory without addressing
the practical realities or
economic fall out for a new
mexico communities they will
benefit out of state detention
operators who stand again you
can't tracks and revenues as
detainees are shifted away from
new mexico and political
campaigns will benefit that can
use the legislation that
symbolic went to rally bases
even if it harms local economies
have that mister chair members
of the committee I stand for
questions.
The.
The.
Use a lawyer's procedure why
don't we do that when we take
questions then allow each month
you know about five minutes to
close it all right
straight on my left
representative is
thank you mister chair
thank you to everyone who is at
the table please earning
have some comments that I want
to make first before I start
into my questions number one
yesterday we had a conversation
about the use of the word
illegal aliens
one of my colleagues brought up
the issue that that sir brought
up the fact that that's a very
humanizing term to use and I
also find it so
my family my community are not
illegal and we've been here
forever
the other thing that I wanted to
talk about to this is for
torrents county is to point out
you you made in your your in
your comments you you said
something about and I hope I
have the right county
is that at some point in time
it closed
and I don't know if you're
talking about the entire
detention center or if you're
talking about just the contract
with ice and I wanted to
differentiate between the two
because the legislation that was
proposed
does not shut down the county
and I think it's very important
for people to understand that
doesn't count shut down the
county and it doesn't interfere
with the county stability to to
transport it only speaks to the
contract that the county enters
into with ice so I really want I
wanted to make that very clear
the other piece is that I did
have a conversation with the
mayor
of a stance here
earlier this year about economic
development and he had some
ideas and I know that he was
working with the congressional
delegation to get some money to
address some of the issues that
we had that he had in terms of
the county being able to to
develop some economic
development and economic.
Sort of diversify and not
needing to depend on the
contracts with ice and so I
would encourage you to continue
to do that I don't know I don't
think that
profiting off of human misery
and suffering is what we want to
do a new mexico to benefit the
county or the economic situation
I think that there's better jobs
that we can that we can
bring to the counties for those
county residents I was able to
visit the torrents county
facility in this don't see a
last year
and I was able to speak where
some of the individuals who were
held there
they didn't have a whole lot
good to see and most of them
have been deported
they did not have a whole lot of
good things to say about the
facility one of the things that
stood out to me was you know
they did experience abuse from
the guards they talked about
this one guard specifically who
they said they were happy when
they heard that he that he was
going to be on duty that day
because he treated them with
respect any treated them with
dignity
the other thing that some of the
other things that we heard about
were the fact that they did not
have access to legal council
interpreters on the food was
horrible rassuage that the
center i'm spoke about it was
called that day they talked
about not having hot water
they talked about solitary
combine you know being put in
solitary combinate harassing for
medical care or for asking for
access to their legal council
they also talked about
it not being able to access
medical care
and then also we've heard about
deaths in these facilities
and some of them have been due
to the lack of medical care
I actually have also been
fielding calls from some of my
constituents whose family
members have been detained.
In these facilities and it's not
good
so my first question is around
the conditions what is the
county doing
to alleviate the conditions and
can you provide us with some
examples of you know what you've
done to improve conditions in
any of the of facilities that
you were you have ice contracts.
Thank you mister chair a
representative travelers as as
far as the facility is concerned
anytime an issue is not to the
county's attention that that
issue is addressed with the
facility directly
you know not to say there have
not been issues within the
facility as far as sewage back
ups
waters been a significant issue
in the town of astonish recently
as well there's been actually
two water shortages and with the
facility with the population of
seven hundred people that seem
that also has an impact on the
facility but in those issues the
county addresses i'm
individually for example we did
work with the town to address
that the water shortage to
ensure that there was adequate
water at the facility during
that time are subsequent a
couple weeks ago that happened
again and water was actually
hall to the facility to ensure
that the dent was falling in my
time access to that so those
situations are looked at on an
individual basis based on on
what the conditions are I will
also stay this far as oversight
of of the facility and
conditions of the facility you
know I have been there a number
of occasions to do tourists and
I can only speak to my
experience in those relate to me
through the county commission
because of course we are not
there every day but that being
said that the chairman of our
commission has been into the
facility multiple times our vice
chairman the same and our newest
commissioner linda had a mom
started her term in january and
she's been there multiple times
not only for tourists but to
actually eat in the childhool
with the detainees she has also
bilingual so she's been able to
communicate with the tenness
particularly those from that in
america and she's attended
sunday service with the
detainees and there have been a
lot of comments made about the
conditions i'm certainly we hear
those for every county
commission meeting where legal
out of it gets come on and they
do play you know tape recordings
of people detained in the
facility but I think in terms of
the county's position of
maintaining that contract up to
this point it has been because
the company commission has gone
into that facility and their
personal experiences do not
necessarily coincide with some
of those comments.
It's that have been made so
mister chair i'd like to direct
my my next question to
the panel that that presented on
the bill and so the question
that it's kind of a follow up
question to that shouldn't the
counties
be able to hold them for profit
companies that that have these
contracts accountable on for the
bad conditions because as I
stated when I was there they
talked about know how water and
it continues to be an issue that
continues to come up the sewage
community has continues to be an
issue so at the minnow it's
great that the county commission
went to visit but they're not
the problems are getting fixed
permanently so can you respond
to that
I agree that there should be
some accountability somewhere
all these complaints are made
and nothing changes my sense is
the county doesn't have any real
authority they can say all they
want they can address call the
course of person say need to do
this you need to do this but I I
understand that the ice contract
with the government is very long
but the contract with course I
think is very brief I haven't
read either of them I don't know
what kind of accountability
there is we're not seeing we're
not seeing any results I would
also like to turn that over to
my expert as well
thank you mister chair
representative this fill is
about closing a loophole in the
federal detention contracting
skim that has allowed for
immigration detention to
flourish in new mexico what
we're seeing is on the existing
contracting structure of the
county's do not have the ability
to do meaningful oversight
regarding the conditions at is
facilities ice contracts with
the county and then the county's
subcontracts through torrents in
tourist his case to cresivic to
operate the facility but the
county does not have meaningful
contr.
Trolls over its own
sub contractor the county is not
able to meeting fully controlled
her waste throughout an abuse on
the contract it is not able to
directly hold the contractor
accountable for a deficiency is
in its performance including
violations of ice ice's own
federal detention standards to
protect the health and safety of
people detained there what we
see is the county acting as a
pass through to allow for these
no bid non compete contracts
with see the county passing up
invoicing and handing down
reimbursements on the monthly
basis to the tuna of millions of
dollars a year and tax pair of
funds going to this out of state
for profit prison company and we
see ice cutting and county out
over and over again on dialog
with the contractor about issues
with understaffing with help
it's safety with the weather
shortages with other violations
of the conditions there i'm
sorry i'm gonna have to
interrupt you so we're about
eight minutes now and i'm gonna
have to recognize each member
three minutes i'm gonna have to
ask reps and job is to conclude
clear concluding you wish
thank you mister chair I do have
one additional question but
amount of time
thank you just but everybody on
here we're gonna have eight
minutes I should have been
outside to you had a time so we
have eight minutes for everyone
if we have smitched him will
come back to you I just as
reminder members of the
committee to I realize on you
all to cancel your eight minutes
as you wish so if the witness or
an individual is going on longer
with an answering of other
questions really on you day
interrupt them to get to a
direct answer to your questions
you can get as many of your
questions answers possible but I
don't want to be the one to
decide that for you so you'll
have a clear eight minutes of
representation you're next thank
you mr chair I too i'm going to
make some comments before I ask
some questions
mr chair I know as legislators
we are
very much discouraged from
questioning each others intent
yesterday I also know that I
accidentally spoke one of my
colleagues names and I
apologised for it.
But mister chair i'm really
concerned about the testimony
from the counties
because unfortunately we're
asking you to bring facts to the
people not necessarily political
opinions and so you just wanted
to point that out right off the
bad it really just credits a lot
of what you said
i'll keep going
yes
your able to continue operating
as a county jail under this bill
I do also think this is really
interesting that I believe the
county is weren't in favor of
grt removal from healthcare
providers so I would just hope
that you would also be in favor
of you know
making sure that we're not
having human rights abuses
happening within our counties
my understanding mr chair is
that
in terms of how close folks are
to families I understand is
we're actually a hold over so
it's not necessarily that it is
the people from new mexico who
are being picked up by
immigration that are going to
the facility were actually hold
over
from other states and from folks
who are from other countries so
I just wanted to dispel that
to me mr chair this is really
about oversight
to process it's about making
sure that we can actually uphold
our rule of law which is slowly
crumbling unfortunately
it's also about oversight of
course and so mister chair I
just wanted to read I am sure
many of my colleagues will
disagree with me and that's fine
that's what we're here for
but I want to read the
definition of a concentration
camp mister chair a
concentration camp is a prison
or other facility use for the
internet of political prisoners
or politically targeted
demographics such as members of
national or ethnic minority
groups on the grounds of
national security or for
exploitation or punishment and
so mister chair I just committee
to consider.
You know we are saying
it it in the face of having
true to date concentration camps
in our state we're saying but
jobs that is crazy if you put
this in a historical perspective
there's no way people would say
but the jobs
so to me amen straiter we've
we've done both before I think
about the energy transition
transition act in particular
it doesn't it this bill doesn't
prohibit
the counties from repurposing
the building
and mr chair has pointed out
there's there could be a cost
savings because of all of this
money that is going to be third
party contract so we can do both
weekend figure out a way to
transition jobs we've done it
before we can do it again
so that will conclude my
comments and but mister chair if
the sponsors and their expert
would mind addressing some of
the economic
and
the economic impacts that were
brought up earlier by the county
I I think we need a response to
rivers of a name and household
members when you have a question
would you try and target it to
his specific individual there
you just kind of draw special
out to the floor you're gonna
have chaos I think so looks like
rips of changes are once answer
your question
if that's acceptable
so yeah i'm i'm sure it's going
to want to answer every question
on that time pretty good
so thank you mister chair and
represent it for the question so
there was the assertion about
two hundred and eighty four jobs
would be lost that assumes that
the facility is not repurposed
there's nothing in any of the
bonding orders is that required
that ice beat in the in the
facility and instead there are
opportunities right now I know
when I terrible count the US
marshall services there there
are ways to explore other
options.
For utilization of that
detention facility either by the
state or through other contracts
so that's point one I think
that's a gross exaggeration of
you know this is a doomsday
scenario I understand we all
like to talk in during say
scenarios but they're not
realistic so that's point one
with regard to I think that was
it was out your only question
jobs is that representative I
don't want to also if if you
could speak
as well bonding yeah okay
so there were bonding or
intenses per untuck talking to
about the other one because I
thought so the ones i've looked
at most closely i've looked at
both contracts and where there
are bonding ordinances that
address these their revenue
ortensis so number one note tax
dollars shoe and I I was pleased
to hear the gentleman not imply
that they were
in this two assumes that nothing
else will happen in that
facility so revenues could be
generated through that facility
for other activities that would
would would service the bonds
mister chair and
representative
credit ratings all of these
things again presuppose no other
use for that facility and I
think that that assumption is
poorly as without foundation
mister chair
thinking mr chair thank you
the next we have a ribson and
you're not
thank you very much mister chair
I have a couple
clarifying questions regarding
oversight as well i'm gonna move
I can't see mr but I little okay
there
so we seem to have a lot of
dynamics at play here over who
has jurisdiction of these
facilities you've got civic
we've got.
And we also have the counties so
to clarify for me please mister
barrella mr nichols if you would
so who is responsible if and
when an ice detainee is hurt or
harmed inside.
Thank you mister chair
representative so so the
facility I and I would certainly
speaking for our facility ice
does have a degree of oversight
of the facility so there are
periodic audits in in terms of
the issues that have I brought
up recently specifically the
water issue on there was some
conversations with ice and and
to the degree of oversight that
they had they were ready to move
those detainees to a facility
and wax to access the following
day should that it should not be
addressed i'm so as far as the
detention standards are issues
that happen in the facility
arm those to my understanding or
monitor directly by the federal
government to
ok and mr nichols if you want to
respond to mr chair
representative so I I agree that
the federal government does have
oversight through eyes and then
independent inspector generals
have responsibility if they
receive complaints to do
investigations separately are
our contract is is not brief
with mtc forty pages and
it requires them to
meet oversight standards and
correction standards and prior
to that contract being able to
be approved it has to be
reviewed by the state attorney
general and the risk management
division and
and the fa
before it can be approved and if
the standards are not adhered to
that is reason for termination
of the contract and and seeking
a new operator
and over the past three years
when we've had these committee
hearing some during session and
out of session I have invited
any of the proponents of the
bill if they are aware of
specific issues
i'm open to talking with them
and going in and visiting and
investigating and no one is
taking me up on that
okay thank you very much mister
chair and gentleman for those
answers so it's.
Kind of a follow up then with
the way things are set at
present if a detainee were to
become injured
sue for mistreatment
who would be the appropriate
entity to sue can we sue could
that person sue everybody could
they see the county could they
sue ice could they sue course
civic like who and if they win
then who's footing the bill.
Yes miss chair representative so
everyone could be sued
and what is
how that would play out you know
it's going to be depend on
circumstances specific
circumstances but
mtc is operator and no terrible
county
has to cover or carry
pretty hefty insurance in the
case of that but if someone were
injured the immediate response
would be the responsibility of
ice and then if they were felt
failed to do that
and and something happened then
that would trigger various
reactions from from different
agencies that the federal level
we would also want to know
what's going on and
l m t c I think what to if
something of that significance
occurred
okay mister
did you want to add anything to
that or do you just generally
agree with that
movies chair present no I I
won't got anything in addition
okay I did see some commotion
from my colleagues so
mister chairfield promote me
church handler senator said deal
opens did you want to respond to
that at all I just whispered to
my colleague that
they get to ported and there are
no license that's why they act
with an impunity but i'd also
like to ask my experience she
has any
thank you mister chair
representative litigation is not
an adequate substitute for a
meaningful oversight and
overseas of these folks in
federal immigration custody
really can only take place at
the federal level not the state
of a due to fundamental
preemption doctrines but the
dication that has occurred to
these facilities in recent years
and new mexico has raised
extremely serious concerns.
About mistreatment about denial
of access to medical care about
wrong for deaths and custody
about first feelings for
individuals on hunger strike and
more it is correct that the
countries due themselves
potentially face to liability
ice does as well through the
narrow aperture out of the ftc
and the federal trick claims act
and the companies themselves
face potential common litort
liability but again due to the
deficiencies and access to
council it's not a meaning for a
substitute through comprehensive
federal oversight which has been
significantly hobbled under the
present administration
mister chair and expert thank
you so much and thank you county
managers as well for your
answers
you clarified something maybe
highlighted some gaps and cracks
that definitely need to be
addressed
thank you thank you for those
answers
you ripped the room
ripped eight minutes.
Thank you mr chair thank you to
the presenters we discussed
yesterday that we were on a tour
of the otero county I facility
yesterday and thought i'd just
share a little bit about that
experience I was the loan
democrat on the tour not knowing
if we'd have a chance to do it
again I don't want to think my
colleagues are for allowing me
to attend
it for me was a real challenge
in having a sort of a
opportunity to have a diverse
perspective while in the
facility it was the only one
asking questions really about do
process
legal representation i'm timing
in the facility etc it was clear
the mtc
really had
you know the this prison
facility handle well handled for
a tour
and as it proceeded you know we
we were able to to witness um
how it was mountage so to to
begin with I think what a few
things that were really hitting
me on the tour the data that
they had taken on that was
offered to us was that there
were two statistics that were on
a white board as we entered one
was that over a hundred and
fifty of the detainees were of
mexican desert and of an over
eight hundred were of other
uh
other countries it was stated
that about sixty eight different
countries of representation were
in that facility and had been
rounded up from around the
country so we they're not
necessarily from the local area
of that group as I understand
from the policies that were put
in place in january twenty
twenty five through the trump
administration is under a
federal law enacted in nineteen
ninety six that allows the trump
administration to basically
proceed and detaining
individuals
within the last two years if
they cannot show that they have
been in the country for that
long when they are detained
isofficials.
Border border
border control
and customs folks can
essentially allow them to
experience detention their
processed at that facility and
other and then immediately
supported if they cannot show
upon being detained that they
are that they have been in the
country for two years I don't
carry any sort of thing on my
person that can show that i've
been in this country for two
years I have no idea how that's
happening so that was alarming
number one number two is the
other proportion of folks that
were in the eight hundred plus
individuals that have been
detained there was a policy put
in place by the bite and
administration that allowed for
a pathway to asylum from
venezuela cuba haiti and gatagua
and the vast proportion that was
told to us about the folks that
were in that facility were in
those categories of people that
were being detained
basically then detaining folks
that had been part of a bite and
policy that allowing them to
seek asylum so just rounding up
the one point five plus million
people in both the mexican of
mexican descent and in this
other category of folks that are
filling these facilities are
these touted numerous times over
fifty five percent of the people
that were in that facility had
no criminal background they're
simply being rounded up based on
their immigration status we're
not talking about violent
criminals and they could not
speak to what the quote on quote
felonies were that the folks in
the
violent or or criminal category
were they were relying on their
judges opinion of a of some sort
of scoring system that they were
not provided to or could share
with us as to how folks are
categorized and indetention
this is happening in our
backyard I think when we talk
about what arm is.
When we look at it do process
rates and what is was is going
on there is that we're complicit
in this allowance of this and
and made those arguments alone
in this setting about what do
processes and what I believe our
constitutional rates to be
it was harrowing to think that
when we're trying to court on
could make moral arguments about
what our responsibility is as
new mexicans if we can get past
that and get to an economic
development argument I think if
we can unite around what we are
here to do and service to our
state and our country I cannot
agree with the existence of
these facilities whether or not
these there are squeaky clean
and you know kent out that they
provide health care you know
coach or meals or what have you
which was said to us that does
not take away from the fact that
they are taking the way do
process constitutional and human
rates arm from every day working
people who are being picked up
off the street every single day
i'll get to my questions mr
chair happy to also answer
anything about what I
experienced for members here
that didn't get to go i'm on the
tour we also don't have a
representative from siebel
accounting that has also had
wrongful death i'm a numerous
human rights violations
represented here today to
discuss the facilities
so for me understanding what is
happening right now with ace
facilities from the past to the
present and the change in
administration and both for I
think holly and folks are
here today in the county is what
is different now from what your
experience has been in the
change it administration what is
being reported to you and what
do you feel like you have been
either empowered to understand
as over sears of this process.
And and what has changed for
you.
Mr chair representative remember
in terms of of my direct
experience at the facility
that's only been over the course
of the last twelve months I will
say that certainly you can't
make an argument against the
fact that there's been an up to
compopulation at the facility
over the course of the last six
months
so that is certainly something
we've seen are under the new
administration
but in terms of changes that
i've seen at the facility during
that time you know in short of
an increase in population you
know that that's about the only
thing that striking as far as
changes are from the facility
from my perspective
mr chair representative as far
as changes
the population at a terrible is
has not changed it it has always
been around
the capacity because it's one of
the original processing centers
and his is always served that
purpose
is talking about meaningful
change
the warden I could current
warden nine this is is doing a
lot to
make it more
welcoming and not so spiral and
make it a
a place where while folks are
going through there they can be
engaged they can be productive
with their time and
and that
it's it's not just a a sterile
waiting to be processed and find
out where you're going process I
think that's meaningful and then
the type of things we want to
see and then we're pleased to
see that and we would encourage
more of that
mr terry just want to interject
on one point with the terrible
county I have noticed to you in
the word and herself it is as an
elpasso resident so new number
of these folks when we're
talking about economic
development as well or.
Our residence of texas so we're
not having about new mexican
jobs at the first of may many of
these folks as well just in the
context of other
does the increase in g r t
happened with the increase in
beds that are happening in these
other facilities where
populations are increasing
mister chair
mister chairman remember I mean
yes I just based out
transactions and of course there
are you know additional people
in the facility would increase
jerty
mr chair and maybe this is for
holly does does the
administration at all
communicate with our governor's
office about any of these
activities and increase in
volume and detainees happening
in the state
mr share representative
thank you mister terror might
last question is about any
weaster out interviews and
understanding that these private
prison companies are bringing an
additional folks and making
space
for detention operations do we
have any actual oversight of
within the contract contracting
relationship or anything else
for you to actually enforce any
meaningful policies on waste
fraud abuse
of these
contractors.
Mr chair represent
could you specify more on what
you mean by frog waste abuse
like what what you have in mind
so we we don't have any
oversight of detainees the
numbers how many beds there are
what they're
uh rights are if they're
violated or not can the county
do anything to step in on the
contracts
if there was an understanding
that they were in violation of
their contract or their presence
within your county
whatsoever mister chair
representative yes that that
would give us a cause
determinate the contract you
know which would
be punitive for the company and
we would seek another contractor
the the bed sir or set per the
contract
and both with ice and the
facility and the contract would
have to be amended to for any
changes like that
did you want to respond
mr chair representative I I
won't have anything in addition
to that i'm sorry s.
Senator city just wanted to
respond really quickly and i'll
conclude their I I think you've
made an exploit point I did not
understand how people who wanted
to get a hell out there
voluntary deportation were there
and months from let's
that seems really inappropriate
where's the oversight thank you
do you want to say something if
I may mister chair
representative two brief
additional points one is that
the lines of responsibility.
Thank you mister chair very
briefly the lines of
responsibility in the
contracting arrangements through
these detention facilities
empowers and not the county is
to engage in meeting for
contract deficiency review and
penalties but this is a policing
its own this is not a meaningful
and robust external source of
accountability for waste
frightened abuse I will also
note specifically on the revenue
bond for it otera county there
was a report issued earlier this
year by an independent other
that found repeat significant
deficiencies in the internal
controls at the county level
over the handling of the
revenues for the spot thank you
thank you we can serve brand new
thank you mister chairman mixed
during a calls i'm gonna address
most of my remarks to you as a
representative of terrible
county because that is the only
processing facility that I have
visited and so I can't speak to
the conditions of the other
facilities in question but I
certainly can with the terror
and that was the purpose of
having a yesterday's tour and in
fact along the same lines I want
to think my democrat colleague
who participated in the tour
because even if our accounts are
perspectives of of that tour may
be very drastically different
there's a profound respect that
someone would put their own eyes
on this and that the reviews in
remarks are their own and not of
someone else to thank you
mr nichols many of the accounts
that we heard today and the
opening remarks of why this
legislation is introduced
certainly doesn't apply to the
old terror detention facility
and we saw that yesterday one
the population is not busting at
the seams and fact it's still
operating at a constant level
that was made very clear
yesterday there's been no change
and a new administration to
population there
there was mentioned that there's
a increase of ice agents in a
region because of proximity to a
detention facility.
That's actually completely
untrue in this situation because
as it's been presented today
many of the detainees there are
actually transfers from other
units and different parts of the
nation with fifty percent
of the population there with the
criminal element most of them
violent so any offences in
addition to being a legal
immigrants and in the united
states
oh illegally but we can also
talk to you about the conditions
that we saw yesterday and I was
pleasantly surprised I said this
yesterday the cleanliness of
that facility
is greater than some of the
public schools in my rural
school district that's how
remarkable the clinton is with
their I specifically asked for
follow ups from ice because I
wanted to see official reports
they had one week notice that we
were going to make sure that
they didn't just mop the floors
and get ready for this visit the
office of detention oversight on
announce compliance inspections
did send their reports to me
last night
and in twenty twenty four a year
ago this specific facility found
six deficiencies
and environmental health and
safety facility security and
control and flood service it was
october of twenty twenty four
and in april of twenty twenty
five there's been one deficiency
with the complaints of a number
of and made to complain about
food containment having too many
carboar hydrates and one finding
because of that finding this
particular facility has
increased in a standard rating
from good to superior to be
compared to determination
facilities across the dation
this is a superior facility that
we are threatening to close down
if that's not a human condition
this comes back to this.
Ice will continue to operate
these illegal aliens will
continue to be detained we can
choose to keep them in a
superior facility that we have
had very transparent access to
where we can understand the
conditions and have some sort of
an influence or we can close the
facilities but these detainees
will be moved elsewhere
yesterday when we walked in they
walked up to the processing
portion of this in the very
first stop is in with the
medical facilities in which they
receive for filth physicals and
mental psyche valuations to turn
termin if there's any sort of
prescription needs there was an
on site dentist
and for any sort of uh
specialists there were ford
offsite with the standing
contract with dell soul medical
center their medical needs are
addressed immediately there's an
ipad in their dormitory in which
they can make it online
appointments to see the doctor
at any time should they have an
medical emergency in new mexico
our new mexico residents are
waiting months and months and
months to see a doctor
on site we had access to a
library that has a multi two of
the books in different languages
from all around the world to
make sure that they were
accommodating language barriers
in a new mexico or graduating
hundreds of new mexico graduates
that can't even read
we saw a kitchen two kitchens
to make sure that there are
making accommodation for jewish
and muslim detainees there's a
culture kitchen so their meals
are isn't crossed contamination
their badges are strictly
identified for any sort of
allergic concerns so if their
health needs in the kitchen were
met and standard this is meals
i'm gonna tell you the worst in
the state of new mexico let's
talk about meals rec.
Closing down senior meal sites
across new mexico left and right
and we have two kitchens
operating with those allowances
and that facility
the federal governments is more
responsive to the needs of these
detainees then state government
is of two new mexico citizens
and the audacity that state
government is coming here and
telling local and federal
governments how to run a
facility is absurd
that we think we have to high
ground to tell you and the
federal government how to
properly run a facility we know
what the bill won't do.
What it won't do is shut down
the mission of ice and so these
detainees are going to be
transferred somewhere else and
there are available facilities
nationwide with availability
today
we're gonna close down you can
in new mexico jobs
in the first week alone in this
month ice immigration opened up
their application and got eighty
thousand apple accounts to ice
in one week
so what did it work force is in
a problem out there like it is
in new mexico hard to find a job
here there's eighty thousand
applicants that want to be ice
to team using one week that I
sky there's plenty of places to
send these people and there's
plenty of oversight the fact
that new mexico doesn't want to
have oversight here is absurd to
me and we say the governor
called it I think compassion
in reality this is just an
assault new mexico on public
safety
and our economic stability but
steading aside setting aside the
reckless impacts of legislation
like this
I would like to ask you about
the probability of this even
surviving in court and so there
was a some specific court cases
and twenty twenty three the
ninth circuit
of appeal struck down
california's attempt to band
these in immigration detention
contracts i'd like you to
comment on that and I also
thought it was interesting that
was actually the bite and
administration who chose to
defend against that closure
because they said it remained at
a tool for national security can
you speak to that case in the
league gallery of us taking this
action.
Mr senator yes so there's been a
couple different cases and in
various circuits of the one you
mention in california was
specifically related to where a
private corporation owns the
facility and and that was found
to violate the because
california prohibited any
contracting with ice and so that
was found to prove
to be a violation of the
supremacy clause and so that law
was struck down
and then you have in the seven
circuit a case that it's more on
point to this where counties
were banned and
the seventh circuit from
contracting with ice and the
seventh circuit upheld that now
and new jersey last month
there was a case from the third
circuit where the new jersey law
prohibited across the board
whether it was counting
contracting ice or private
corporations and they struck
down that law
they specifically spend their
time on the the private aspect
of it but my reading of it is
that
that could apply to this
situation and then
you know I don't know what the
tenth circuit would do but it's
certainly enough likelihood or
possibility of of the law being
overturned that we would tee it
up
thank you for that mister
chairman it's interesting now
that we would want to pass
legislation I would like to say
that this would deter in mexico
law makers from passing bills
but new mexico legislator has a
history of passing laws that are
unconstitutionally legal and a
ten circuit knows that well
I I would say do you feel
confident that if this was if
this were to pass that there is
a potential for this to be
overthrown in court is there
enough case that at least
someone.
That the court system would
understand the absorbed and
trying to do this to interfere
with state government to
interfere between these local
and federal contracts
have been as well
mr chair center
I I do have confidence in it
being overturned but
not so much under supremacy
clause but under imperament of
contracts issue and and
specifically there's a state
statute on point and regard to
our revenue bonds
that any law passed that would
cause a default on the and on
revenue bonds would be found to
be invalid and I spoke with our
bond council today moderal
spurling at them in there
pretty reputable firm and and
they were very firm in their
position that this law would not
not pass muster.
The.
Thank you mr chair
senator brantley when a few
minutes over time because I sold
her a few of my minutes so uhm
be a little more brief but uhm
wanted to just kind of circle
bag just for my personal
perspective is senator brand we
did on the tour that we were
able to do yesterday I thought
it was extremely beneficial for
a variety of reasons I think
that's the two or the idea of a
two or originally came about
because all the most legislators
wanted to get an idea of white
one of these processing
facilities for the illegal
aliens looks like and so we went
through the channels to try to
make that happen and then fell
apart and we ended up having one
scheduled so we got to go and
take a look and I was pleasantly
surprised because I think the
news has made it appear as
though these illegal aliens that
are in our country and being
health in these facilities are
being treated in humanely are in
conditions that are
beyond our wildest imaginations
and while I can only speak for
the otero facility that is not
at all what we saw a senator
brand they mentioned these
the manner in which the facility
operator and ice have ensured
that the condition of the
facility has been kept was in my
opinion imagine it I expected
worse but was you know proved
otherwise the the programming
that these folks had access to
in their limited amount of time
at these facilities blow my mind
they've got the ability to be
engaged in coking classes
they've got the ability to
be in a law library they've got
four in up to five hours of
rectime every single day and so
to think that the folks that are
in here are in a detention camp.
Or a concentration camp excuse
me is force that is not as what
what's going on not at no terror
county anyways
and i'd also like to to say that
you know there was a common made
earlier that
the attorney for a terrible
county mrperiod nichols here
and mister borrell I didn't
bring any facts but I wrote down
at least fifteen facts I know
that are the mister nichols in
mister borrell it presented
today into think that they came
up prepared as foolishness both
of those gentlemen live in this
day and a day out they have all
the facts of how this impacts
their local communities and boat
their local counties
be in that are terrible counties
part of my district while this
facility falls outside of of my
district specifically I know mr
nichols and the rest of the
county staff are
constantly involved with what's
going on at this facility and so
I do have just a couple
questions primarily for you mr
nichols
can you give me and give us a
little bit of a recount on it
with your time with the county
what's been your historical
experience with the processing
facility in our terror county
good bad indifferent.
Mr chair center think you so
since i've been with the county
the county manager tours the
facility quarterly sometimes
more often
i've toured the facility with
the commissioners on more than
one occasion
we are in communication often
with mtc staff
and we receive complaints from
time to time
and mostly related to the our
other facility the empty c
operates but
and then that's a a prison
facility but we if if we receive
any complaints we take them
seriously and we speak with mtc
about them we and we find out
what is actually happening and
so far all the issues we receive
to ben handled to set our
satisfaction
we would not tolerate any types
of abuse and
you know we were willing to go
look at it if it's brought to
our attention
my my framework references as a
united states marine then
I not only went through entry
level training but I spent two
years supervising entry level
training and and the the
standards and conditions with
which this facility is run are
at the standards are service
members go through it entry
level training or higher one
specific moment yesterday was
the end processing where it
starts outside and I asked how
long are they out and they put
shade over it so that they're
not in the direct son and they
said no more than fifteen
minutes I know marines stand in
outside waiting to be processed
for five six hours in the sun so
that mr chair are a follow up to
that and
mr borrell if you have you know
an answer you'd like to share mr
nichols but specifically related
to the otero county facility.
Can you help reiterate the
impacts
or no terror county if this
facility was to close and in
addition to that you know when
we're talking about
you know the revenue bonds that
you guys have with them but
there's been mentioned that well
it's only two hundred and eighty
four jobs that's a lot of jobs
in my opinion they the fact that
we would put somebody out
because we don't want a reduce
these contracts or we want to be
in these types of facilities
impacts more than two hundred
and eighty four people as a
whole those you know families
for five people you're up to a
thousand folks that are directly
impacted by legislation like
this if it passes but what would
be the likelihood of finding an
alternate use for this type of
facility because it's not a
small facility in its own remote
part of a terror county and so I
find it hard to think that there
is going to be altering the use
found tomorrow should was
legislation like this pass
mr chair center thank you for
that question now so
first to address the two hundred
and eighty four jobs it is true
that the majority of those
positions are held by folks that
are not new mexico residents
there they're coming over from
el paso because it's it's much
close to all passes then it is
other communities and and new
mexico
but that's american jobs there
being lost none the less and
impacting families and and
there'll be an economic impact
not all the money spend with
businesses is
completely local but it is still
money going into the economy and
supporting the economy and and
yielding gratity for the state
in the county in terms of the
likelihood of being able to
repurpose the facility its
important understand the history
of the facility it was built
forward this specific purpose
everything is set up for the
specific purposes so any
repurposing will take money and
time.
Construction does not happen
fast or were talking
a minimum six months but maybe a
year or more to repurpose it and
and during that time no revenue
is being generated to pay these
bonds and
that's that's not gonna it's not
going to be in
lying with the terms of the
bonded and it's not going to fly
with the investors and so
they're going to
come after the county
and enforce us pulled our end of
the of that deal and if we can't
do that then that's a default
and i'm sure they'll pursue
litigation but they can also
seize the facility and
and there this laws are not
going to apply to them and so
they'll contract with ice and
here we are up and running and
the only
energy that loses out as the
county
thank you mister chair thank you
mister nichols so just to
clarify as well that if if
legislation was passed out
terrible county doesn't have
millions of dollars sitting in
an account that are ready to
service this revenue bond should
turn operations cease to exist
correct
miss share center and we don't
have the funding to repurpose
let alone
the bandwidth we need more money
for other projects that are
ongoing so we're yeah used to
begin and we have few revenue
streams and this represents one
of the few opportunities we have
for one
thank you mister chair thank you
mister nicholson my point was
just that these raw communities
that house these types of
facilities don't have infinite
resources to figure out
alternative plans and on top of
that these facilities are doing
what they're intended purposes
as to manage and handle illegal
aliens in this country and.
Facilitate their movement back
to their originating country or
to another country so thank you
mister chair for the time thank
the panel for their times well.
I grew up to nine minutes.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you presenters.
I I
when I leave the legislature I
hope that people say he was a
nice decent guy but I think i'm
gonna ruin th.
We put up with a very emotional
rebuke yesterday for not being
here in the morning to ring your
facility are the reason I chose
to is because
there is word that this will be
on the agenda and I wanted to
get my own perspective I don't
want to get a second hand or
you're from
somebody else I wanted to to
experience that
we were rebuked for holding up
the meeting because they
couldn't make forum
but I was looking at the voting
members and there were several
voting members from the other
side there were not here and I
wonder if those people received
a very public review like we did
it was also
kind of funny to talk video that
was put out
rebuking us talking about
we did it just for a political
point in them I was wondering
political points from home seems
like all we've done has gotten
rebuked
I found that curious
there's been a lot of talk about
human misery and concentration
camps and are very emotional
trigger words
but I wonder how much human
misery is looked at that are
imposed on the mexicans by the
cortelles
and I wonder how many
of these victims people on this
on this committee have talked to
we're already to talk to the
people better
or detained in these facilities
and we all want to be champ.
But how many people have talked
to
a victim like alicia and her
daughter who were held at gun
point or held up at gun point
and are now facing long term
counseling
I don't hear any talk about that
these are people that we serve
when arkinstituents are not the
people that are detained those
people are from other countries
that have entered the united
states illegally I know we're
not supposed to use the term
illegal but that's what it is
there you're illegally and they
want to you want to talk about
law
the rule of law in this country
eight US c thirteen sixty five
eight US c twelve twenty seven
eight US eight thirteen twenty
five talks about people entering
this country illegal refers to
them as illegal aliens US e
twelve twenty seven talks about
the classes of illegal aliens
that will be deported
you know i'm all four debate and
discussion
what let's let's not make this
just an emotional conversation
and let's not make this just
defending the people that are
hearing legally let's talk about
alicia and her daughter.
I've seen since i've been in a
legislature more defense of
criminals and people who wish to
do us horn
then actual victims of these
people who were entering this
country illegally we've seen on
tv
interviews with a families of
kids who have been murdered
do I see anybody defending them
do I see nonprofits being set up
to defend them or talk about
them
I haven't seen one
so let's let's have the real
conversation
I do want to ask some questions.
Mr jordan
there was talk about the backed
up sewers the issues with the
facility and torrents county are
these not being taken care of
because what I heard today was
these are just ongoing problems
and nobody's looking at it
nobody's taken care of I want to
hear from you as somebody who's
involved in it what is going on
with those facilities
mr chairman representative
martinez are so based on my
experience those issues are
being dealt with arm so you know
I I mean the facility itself is
a little bit older there are
infrastructure concerns but any
time something like that as
occurred one we've had
discussions with the facility
they do get tlc plumbing or a
contractor out there relatively
quickly for example when the
issue occurred with the water
situation in distantial which
was also a topic of discussion
the first go round and there
were concerns about water
restrictions in the facility the
facility was not necessarily
equipped with the infrastructure
at that time to hall water to
the facility subsequent to that
the facility actually equipped
all back slow valve on the water
tank and appropriate hook ups
and so when that issue happened
again we were able to pay for
and transport water to the
facility to ensure there was in
a shortage so in my experience
with those types of issues the
facility is responsive are not
to see maintenance issues do not
happen with the facility but I
have not seen those issues be
overlooked for an extended
period.
Thank mister
mrbrill I
do
fear that
these issues would not be taken
care of and I feel better that
according to you they are being
looked at the or being taken
care of as they pop up
mister nichols
I just heard
a common that
there has been mismanagement of
revenue according to various
audience would you care to dress
that
mister chair representative
I believe that was some
reference to an artic finding
that we had last year and that
was
in terms of the tracking of
irabis not this specific band
but
the
industrial revenue bonds that we
have that it saw with like solar
companies and we have one that
was like set up with the mine
and
it's just process we do not have
a process in place for
annually monitoring them we do
have our bond council though in
place that that is what they're
part of what the
responsibilities are to track
those and ensure so it was not
anything specific to these
revenue bonds
thank mr nicholson the thing
that the concern we want to
use of a phrase various audits
which to me would mean that this
is widespread and you're just
completely out of control
and what missure representative
I do want to correct
I believe there was
an issue with with the revenue
bonds and the.
Fight we're referred to county
manager she would know better
exactly what the situation was
but it was the payment
to the bank that is managing the
bonds
and so it's it's something it
was the technical issue that
required
a dressing it was not that funds
are not
going where they're supposed to
or that there's something
nefarious or unethical.
Thank you for that because the
comment made it sound like you
have just thrown money out the
window or not
aware of where it's going so i'm
glad to hear that
that's not the case we don't
have enough money in a terrible
county to do that
I bet that
to my last comment is
there there are phrases and
words I i've learned
i've been married to a lawyer
that words matter
and there are words that are
used not only in this committee
but other committees and end up
when we're in santa fe there are
I guess meant to target the
heartstrings of people which you
know what my understand that
this is a very emotional issue
I think we really need to be
careful about the words and
phrases that we throw out
because when we're accusing
somebody of
not following the rule of law
not
taking care of the revenue that
is coming in not taking care of
the issues in torrent county I
think we we need to be careful
and we need to really think
about the victims of the people
that are causing the real human
misery out on the streets
it just it really bothers me
that we're more interested in
attacking each other
then attacking the issues facing
new mexico
and that's what we're you for
that's what I was elected for I
mean I can answer for you for
anybody else
but when I ran I I told the
people at the front door the
first thing out of my mind when
they asked me what I was
running.
I said I was running as a
problem solver
I didn't tell them that I was
running as a certain political
party I wanted to deal with the
issues that those people were
facing and the the rise in crime
even though we've heard from
different administration
officials that all crime is
crimes dropping
we see a downtrend and crime
wall of course we see a
downtrend and crankers we faced
record crime rates
I would hope that those are the
issues that we attack instead of
attacking each other on tickpock
videos different things like
that it's just
absurd to me that that's what
we're more interested in
then then facing alicia and her
daughter
dinner afraid to go outside in
our facing long term counseling
just of that little girl isn't
afraid to walk outside of her
house
that's the thing that we should
be attacking not each other
not not first silly reasons
thank you representative
thank you for the time mister
chairman
representative block you're next
to nine minutes
thank you mister chairman thank
you all for being here precedent
so I guess I i'm just going to
begin
talking about what I saw
yesterday at the facility that
was toured by a bipartisan
delegation unfortunately we only
had one democratic member who
visited with us but what I saw
was a very comprehensive and
very well run facility which is
in my county I represent a
terror county in alamo gordo and
it's just about a thirty forty
five minute drive from me down
to this facility and this
affects my county directly
because I am in a terrible
county I p taxes the noterio
county.
And I also work to get capital
outlet from my county and when
it comes to our financial
situation it's shame for if our
bond ratings go down and things
hurt us as a county and it's
interesting we're not attacking
certain counties that do have
billions and billions of dollars
in federal revenue that comes in
places like the labs but we will
attack a tiny little county that
is going to lose twenty two
million dollars if this thing
closes and twenty two million
dollars may not seem like a lot
of money to a lot of people
but to a county that doesn't run
on a hundred million dollars or
a billion dollar budget it does
indeed matter so yesterday
during the time that we were at
the facility we saw the most
humane conditions I would like
in it to a celebrity rehab
facility it is that immaculate
and clean and I don't know if
some individuals are obsessed
with talking about feces and
torrents counting which is very
strange to me that someone loves
to say that effort feces
repeatedly in this committee
very strangely and unhingedly in
my opinion but what I saw were
outdoors short stated areas for
these people if they wanted
outdoor activities what I saw
were housing units that held no
more than fifty individuals with
lots of square footage per
individual I saw a lot of a
places for actual talking with
these people's attorneys they
actually gave the phone numbers
for pro bono attorneys for these
individuals to be able to
contact them they have a twenty
four seven phone and the phone
line has twenty four seven
services to translate to their
native language there are people
at this facility from all over
the world africa asia europe all
over the world and so this
facility mister chairman
is one of the highest quality
facilities I think anyone could
see for detention people go in
and out of the facility and
about sixty five days or less.
That's not a very long time and
so when there are accusations
that oh well this was a pre plan
trip was under brand she put
together this trip in days there
is literally no time to sweep
things under the rug when you're
processing people on a daily
basis to get to their home
country or to be released and
there is due process in every
one of these cases and so these
detainees that are there they
have like like was mentioned
allergy
sensitive needs are met the
kitchens are required to be
halaw and to be coaster friendly
so there are different kitchens
for different diets I mean on
the walls their pictures huge
murals of places like to heedy
and the maldives this place is
beautiful there is a hallway for
meditation center with a garden
and waterfalls if that is going
to be likened to a concentration
camp
which in my opinion is actually
an extremely antisemitic
and detestable statement for
anybody to make comparing the
suffering of millions of people
who died and had to suffer for
years in sub human conditions to
a beautiful facility in my
backyard
that has people who are eating
meals to their coaster diets has
people who have exercised for
four hours a day have people who
have access to a ps three and
two a lot library so that they
can defend themselves in
whatever language they so choose
or are from
that is not a concentration camp
and it's my opinion mr chairman
that this legislation is meant
to specifically target specific
districts were certain
individuals may not like the
representative who represents it
just so that they can try to
knee cap those specific
communities and maybe some
people need to send a letter of
the president.
To talk about other people's
communities who have very large
federal investments because if
they're going to target otera
county torrents county and
seeble accounting then maybe we
need to target less almost
county maybe when you we need
target burner leave counting see
what federal investments are
there and maybe ask the
president to reassess the
budgets because I think that
would be something that would be
extremely salient to the bottom
line of new mexico which is the
number one most dependent state
in the nation when it comes to
federal dollars
for the more we talked a little
bit about what else is that the
facility we have health care we
have dental we have a mental
health needs that are all met
and those are all very very
nicely met every individual
detainee gets a very very good
amount of time to eat their
lunch their breakfast and their
dinner and they they put a
thousand people who are at the
facility through the kitchens
and through the dining process
three times a day a thousand
people
and they don't in two hours each
that's an amazing amazing feet
in my opinion this facility is
something that is beautiful and
incredible and so mister
chairman
what it what will happen
directly if this does close is
just a little ways down the road
there's a place called the loan
star lock up in our passo it is
an ad hoc facility that has
tents where people stay tenth
okay this facility if we close
their terror county I guarantee
the sponsors that those
individuals will be sleeping
intense ten minutes down the
road now pass out and if that is
what you mean
and if that is a better
circumstance for these
individuals then those people I
hope they can sleep at night
knowing that they put those
people those migrants who came
from countries illegally who are
aliens pursuing to all those
different US c eight eleven oh
eleven or one thirteen twenty
four they will have to sleep at
night and look themselves in the
mir every day knowing that they
not only need capped certain
counties different budgets but
they also sent these migrants.
To go sleep right across the
border in texas in attempt
so remember that next time you
think about concentration caps
neither of these facilities are
going to be anywhere close to
that but if you're gonna be
pushing toward that then you
should send them to texas so I
guess the only question I would
have and i'm sorry i'm i'm kind
of going on a little rant here
mister german but the only
question I would really have for
the sponsors is
do you think it is ever
appropriate
to deport someone at all
and if so where should those
people be held while they wait
deportation from the sponsors
quickly please.
I'm happy to map mr mister chair
not with standing the question
of relevance misrechairman it's
very relevant I would just I
would appreciate a a direct
answer and this is my time I
would love to just manage it to
change allowed to speak he might
get an answer please please
manager to go ahead.
Up thank you mr chair
the deportation process is one
that is embedded in mar
and to the extent law is
properly followed I as a person
who police and following support
that process the question here
is
there have been many allegations
asserting that the law has not
been followed in how individuals
are being selected for retrieval
by ice and others other
circumstance so sure in cases
where the deportation laws have
been followed it is appropriate
for us to adhere to those laws
and people should be expect to
be deported that involves to
process hearings proof all sorts
of things are mister chair and
representative and the concern
here is many of those laws are
not being followed and that's
what that issue mister chair
okay thank you mister chair and
so I would just direct this next
question to maybe rb or mr berla
mr nichols rather and mr
brilliant so how many of these
violations have been recorded at
your facility that have been
substantiated that the facility
indeed denied somebody their
constitutional rights
mister chair representative I
did ask that question of
the facility yesterday
and see if there was something I
was not aware of and according
to the facility there have been
not been a substantiated
reports
thank you mister chair thank you
so much mister nichols so I I
think that that's a very salient
point we talk about
constitutional rates we talk
about trying to have hold these
individuals constitutional rates
and then we also need to talk
about while using the lies to
the best of their ability.
This individuals either overseas
visa they broke into the country
illegally they did not go
through a port of entry where
actual asylum seekers are told
to go
and that needs to be a part of
this discussion and I would just
urge the committee to consider
that when trying to pass a lot
to specifically target certain
districts
and certain communities because
twenty two million dollars makes
a a big deal in a terrible
county and may not burn a leo
county but in no terror county
those are jobs and that's great
that the state is actually going
to be losing out on about four
million dollars worth so thank
you mister chairman thank you
all for your presentation and
thank you so much goodbye.
Thank you mister chairman and
many we would brief I because
pretty much I I did the tour
yesterday I agree with my
colleagues on the tour I was
actually very impressed I
expected to see
what you see on tv and it wasn't
at all you know the images that
I had seen on tv was very
impressed with with the facility
and I think to get us on track
and I understand I mean I
thought the whole idea of you
know whether how we got to
visiting the facility or not I
know that something the mister
chairman wanted us to do was to
see what kind of conditions that
this facility was in and this
stuff is really happening if
there's a violation of
constitutional rises or
overcrowding is it dirty is
there whatever on the floor and
we just did not see that so I
want to also refocus in on the
fact of of you know what we saw
the facility and the main reason
for wanting to close this
facility is because of concerns
in those areas which is not been
verified by at least our visit
and lastly I just also like all
to remember that
we all did take and oath when we
became legislators and we
solemnly swore that we would
support the constitution of the
united states and the
constitution laws of the state
and that obligates us to support
the us constitution which
includes enforcement of valid
federal laws and acted under it
including immigration laws and I
think we need to remember as
legislators that we did take
that oath and what we may not
agree with the way president
trump is doing things or what
the federal laws are the fact
that an agency can deport
somebody without a hearing if
it's within two years that has a
lot we were dealing with and we
took enough to hold them and so
I I just would like to remind
the legislators that that's what
we all stand there and do every
two years and we take that out.
Or four years for senators
either way I just wanted to
remind us of that and said a
great visit to that facility I
one hundred percent agree with a
senator brantley and paul and
martinez that represented block
that it was not at all would I
expect it to see it was at well
run
top top nature in my opinion and
so
I just wanted to say that.
The.
But.
Thank you mr chairman thank you
for bringing this presentation I
don't want to sound like an echo
because that's what i'm gonna do
if I just state the points that
the senators and other
representatives already said but
I I only have viewed the one
facility and it was because if
we are making this legislative
changes I wanted to see for
myself what I was looking at I
will say that I do find it
offensive that somebody stated
that nobody else asked about the
timing that nobody else to asked
about legal representation so
they did ask those questions
several of us did that's how we
were given the answer of the
average time being sixty five
days that's how we were told
about the phones and the ipads
actually when we are doing the
tour there were four individuals
in a sound proof rooms they were
black telephone boosts that were
speaking to their attorneys at
that time and they were telling
us of that so just let you know
I I did ask those questions I
think those are important
questions to ask it was very
humane it was a very clean
environment i'm very worried
about the economic last two r
state not only that but it's it
takes time and investment to
switch out vacant facility I
think everybody in business
knows that it's not like it
couldn't just be done overnight
it's going to take people
relocating if they are
transferred to other facilities
I think we need to talk about
that so that is a huge concern
and I think the biggest point
for me was that over forty
percent of those individuals
just did that facility itself
were there and had committed a
violent crime to me that is
something that we should take
very very seriously we should
want to protect new max accounts
from violent criminals i'm i'm
glad representative martinez
stated that and I just want to
s.
They I was sitting there in oh
room in a trial in sentencing
with my dear friend sam be hill
with the attorney general when
his because his wife jackie v
hill was taken from us
tragically in our driveway on
her way to the gym and I do want
to remind people two of her sons
serve our state as state police
officers trying to protect this
community and that should be
what we are trying to do trying
to protect the community and
when you're looking at those
individuals again over forty
percent have committed violent
crimes if we are saying that
it's not okay for them to be
there we are not protecting the
community
that's all I have to say thank
you.
Mr chair committee thank you
it was he was enlightening to
visit the facility
I have good better and different
through your career thirty four
years in long forcement visited.
Correctional facilities in
prison throughout the world
i'll tell you right now and
bless them in american citizen
because we have the best there
is and we forget that
we pick it apart
we.
Bidded each other but were
fortunate.
Their facility I toured
yesterday
was incredibly.
Clean
efficient
are questions were answered.
It wasn't
staged
i've been in facilities.
As a former federal agent where
there is no notice we just show
up.
We did our interviews we do our
jobs whatever the case may be
so I made a few phone calls.
To some retired agents who been
in and out of that or terrible
facility for years
and it they said it's always
been a nice facility
everything else time down
mistakes happen
if you go into a prison if
you've never been in cook county
lock up
santa fe in the old days.
Short of the supermarks in
colorado which I doubt any of
you
people are going to throw fecal
matter each other.
They get mad at the guards
there's frustration
when a finding in the last year
can be that there was too many
car behind rates
that could have been written by
my wife about mading habits.
So
looking at this logically
weird debating on a stage here
as legislators
and we have to understand
that the consequences of our
actions are far reaching
emotions are fine
and I think emotions have a
place sometimes
but when we
put everything in the context of
emotion
and allegations
we make ourselves no better than
their countries these people
have tried to escape
so I don't really have any
questions I thank you for your
time both sides for your your
passion in your objectivity
towards your feelings
but it's you ever want to go and
see how prisons are run in other
countries
and then come back here you'll
have a hard time convincing me
how bad things are in this
nation thank you for the time
mister chairman.
Thank you mister chair and I
have some questions but I want
quick answers please so center
city lopez i'm wondering because
I didn't get a chance to read
the bill with this I hear you
talking about local governments
with this also prohibit state
government from because we're
we're gonna have a new
administration soon we don't
know who it's going to be but
would it also prohibit states
yes thank you okay and then
what about beginning and i'm
talking about half of my
community right now these are
some of the emails that i've got
does it take into consideration
what can't california has
apparently tried to do I was
trying to look at see if they've
actually done it to require and
I don't know what happened and
force it i'm not asking that i'm
just asking with this
legislation taken to
consideration requiring ice to
not wear masks to have badges to
have uniforms to have identified
vehicles and that they would be
prohibited from deputising any
of our law enforcement no thank
you okay that is a question and
and something that people in my
community would like to see
happened
the other thing is
attorney nichols you indicated
that there would be loss of
federal funding to the state
could you briefly explain what
you meant by that
I think you talked about maybe
three billion dollars or
something
mr chair senator that was in
reference to
assertions by the trump
administration
essentially to states that
are doing things contrary to
what they believe should be
happening they're with holding
federal funding and since
between twenty twenty one and
twenty
this year new mexico received
over six point five billion
dollars in federal funding.
So basically threats okay that
helps the other thing I just
want to point out is that
there's always a rest that the
county took that ice would just
stop doing this right so so the
idea that you were taking a resc
anyway
those bonds are at risk period
because ice could stop what
they're doing it any moment
I want to just point out that
my concern and I think even some
of my colleagues concerned is
not political it's more
and I do find it insulting back
my comments and my thoughts
would be called political rather
than moral and representing my
own community
I I want to point out that and I
don't very often look at the
kito institute but in this case
they're there document their
information shows that of twenty
fiscal year twenty twenty five
which started in october and
only through june fourteenth of
the two hundred and four
thousand two hundred and ninety
seven individuals that have been
picked up in detained by ice
three point seven hour property
conviction crimes six point nine
percent have violent crimes four
point five percent have non
violent crimes seven percent
have immigration crimes
for six point nine percent how
traffic crimes five point six
percent have other in sixty five
point four percent have done
that means no immigration crimes
no traffic crimes does no crimes
they then they've not been
convicted of any crimes and so
so this is not just about
individuals who have committed
crimes and I would just from a
moral standpoint hope that if I
was around in nineteen forty two
and president road is available
in the executive order to
detain.
American and non american
individuals in internet camps
for nothing other than the
reason that they were japanese
to sand that I would use to it
up and said something that's how
this feels to me because these
are not all criminals and the
large percent is not criminal I
hope that I would have stood up
and fought against the largest
internal camp in new mexico
which was a mile and a half away
from sat santa fe city center
I hope that I would have done
th.
Holy I have a real quick
question and i'm down to I got
five minutes which means I only
have four minutes left
I can't find any other state
that licenses prisons or
detention centers I know we have
a license in scheme for juvenile
and that is through cyfd but as
the governor's office thought of
a a scenario where maybe
regulation and licensing I don't
know but maybe they have a
responsibility to take on a
responsibility for licensing
adult detention centers
regardless of whether they're
used for
criminals or other activities is
that on the table have you
talked about that
mister chairs center I know
we're we're short on time not
that I am aware of i'm happy to
follow up with you after this
and chat about it more.
Thank you so anyway thank you
for bringing this information
forward thank you for coming on
behalf of your community but I I
just want to re iterate that for
me this is not about whether
there's revenue I think we've
found ways to ensure that
communities that lose revenue
get revenue this is human this
is human capital these are human
beings these are families these
are families in my community and
my neighborhood that are
terrified and in some cases they
have been detained they have
been picked up and detained in
other cases they're just
terrified in these are community
members that have been in my
community have been my neighbors
and and families and friends
from many many many many many
years and it's disturbing to see
that happening I do have some
family connection but I don't
want to mention it because we're
terrified that that could be
followed up on so i'll just
leave it at that but it's not
only my neighborhood it's my
family so thank you and thank
you mister chairman I did stand
or nine minutes.
Thank you chair thank you all
for the presentation
the author or counting
processing center is in house is
trick fifty three in my district
i've toured part of the facility
i've not been to the processing
century yet but I have met with
warden but the star and wording
reals I spoke at their
corrections awareness and
memorial week
i've met a number of workers
there and i've spoken to a
number of detainees there as
well
I think my colleagues all around
the table
i'll make
points and some of them are good
and I know that this is a
complicated issue
when I toared
the process to ah facility on
the other side that word in real
managers
I knew that there are people
with hopes and dreams on
all over the building people who
are there that are detained
people who are there who have
committed crimes that we don't
want to think about or people
who we probably never want to
see again there are workers
there who
don't get paid enough to watch
over them and give them
therapies and provide the
environment that they have um
and that's what I walked away
with during that tour
and
I will say that there are maybe
two people that live in chaparal
that also work at the facilities
and the community of chaparath
is also very split you talk
about grt revenue this is an
unincorporated community that
receives very little back from
both counties but from authento
county in particular
and I think my one of my.
Biggest concerns though is when
we allow private entities to own
institutions and profit off of
institutions that are meant to
keep us healthy and safe whether
we have committed crimes or not
but institutions I keep us
healthy or safe prisons
hospitals
utilities that in danger is all
of us and that is one of my
primary concerns
is that we are
and I would go back to governor
johnson on this like this is the
the rate the the initiating
history here of allowing private
prisons in our communities
and it puts our communities and
places like chapara and there
are people in chapera that are
here in this audience right now
it puts these communities in the
position to beg corporations for
the bare minimum whether they
work in those facilities
are detained in those facilities
or live near them.
And then we beg them to provide
us with basic needs
and on top of that as a
legislator I feel like one of my
needs in order to legislate into
my job is to have accountability
and transparency if those
institutions are to operate in
in the state and in the district
I represent
especially for a private
institutions and so at the one
of the things that I am looking
at is where is the transparency
where is the accountability I
know ice and cbp customs and
border patrol
act without transparency with
multiple state agencies with dot
when there's check points at
state highways there are no
agreements there that leave the
state liable where state trust
lands they are trustpassing and
there is nothing that we can do
as a state to stop them and so I
see this pattern over and over
both of these agencies and
private entities that at the end
of the day for me leave places
like chap arrive less and less
safe thank you chair.
Few moments too I think we have
we're going to rearing through
the first time we've got
everybody recognize alright
we'll go back to you
representative charges for just
three minutes please thank you
mister chair I just have a quick
question for the expert witness
we heard some testimony about
the constitutionality of this
proposed legislation and a
permanent of contracts can you
speak to that also thank you
mr chair representative this
bill is on strong legal
following it is narrowly drafted
to specifically with stand any
potential challenge when it
comes to either preemption or
impairment of contract what
we're talking about here is
public contract set the state
and local ever and the state of
new mexico is entirely within
its rights under the tenth
amendment to determine whether
or not it wants to participate
in and enable the federal
governments massed attention and
dependations scheme it is not
required to and these state has
the option to choose to no
longer be involved in contracts
with ice that get around federal
procurement requirements that
don't require a reviews of past
performance of these detention
contractors at the numerous
violations that have been
mentioned today and elsewhere
this is entirely about whether
it's within the control of the
state government is another
referendum on the federal
immigration system and it is not
a direct regulation on the ace
for its contractors is simply
about the involvement of the
state and it's so california's
in the immigration detention
system it likewise would not
impair existing contracts
because in each of these
instances for the three
detention centers that are
currently operating in new
mexico the parties have already
bargained for an agreed one
contract termination provisions
that require a mere notice thank
you
thank you mister chair.
Great as is my practice i'll go
last m one thing that occurs to
me here's the listening to are
the comments I don't really
believe that twenty mins are
going to be changed by today's
committee hearing or
presentation or by tours or by
any facts and it may seem that
way to most of you that no mines
will be changed
you'd be wrong
my mind may be changed
this last session house bill
nine is you all know came out of
the house and came through the
first senate committee and then
it sat in the judiciary
committee for a week I hold onto
it
and I explained yesterday some
of the reasons for doing so in
the chair and I of the house
sometimes have that very awesome
authority and responsibility to
maybe recognize that an issue
like this or topic like this was
not maybe yet right in in time
it in a in a so for those of in
the audience from the singing
that that meant that essentially
we didn't pass this bill in part
because we just didn't schedule
it in committee
can I have full responsibility
for that now own it.
In years past
this same bill came to the
judiciary committee in the
senate I voted I put it on the
agenda and it passed through the
committee even though I voted
against it but I purposefully
put it on the agenda so it would
have the chance to get to the
senate flooring and it got to
the senate floor where I also
wanted against it and and my
reasons for doing so the
arguments had been made here
today and and i've i've made
them before which is that I I do
better to have these immigrants
in a place where we as a state
are open to immigrants and our
contribution and and that we
could have oversight and assure
human conditions and I also
realize that if we shut down the
facilities here a b ship to
other places and at the time I
at the time I cast those votes I
didn't imagine for a moment that
those other places would involve
the sea cut prison in else over
where the the trump
administration pay millions of
dollars for them to take
detainees into a foreign country
against a court order which
ordered them to turn around that
plane and bring them back and
then put them under the control
a foreign government where the
president said he has no
authority over those individuals
that authority is residing with
a president trump in el salvador
in president trump said i've got
no authority for those the
authority belongs to the
president of el salvador
how do we get here how do we get
to this horrible place where our
country would be shipping
and pink people.
To denoinily
their rates shaving their heads
we see them crawling on the
floor you'll remember the image
how do we get there in six
months
and so my mind may be changing
and maybe the rest of may not
but I
when I cancel its I lived in a
different united states
where the rule of laws are
lawyer to me met something I
heard about the law on the
points of the law I heard the
statutes in the constitution as
a lawyer used to be really proud
of our courts as I always
thought they would be the
ultimate and now I see our own
supreme court in our federal
judges reduced really to
sometimes meaningless
and to me as a lawyer
embarrassing
rolls subject to an
administration that defies them
in this case to find them openly
putting immigrants on planes to
foreign countries now talking
about opening one time obay and
putting immigrants in cuba
why
to avoid united states oversight
to avoid courts to white our
rules of white put them in
country's word civil rights have
no meaning the largest prison in
in the americas in although
where again their government
said we know nothing about and
have no responsibility for these
individuals in the US says that
we have no responsibility for
these individuals.
The.
Consider true health talk about
wondering a little bit about
detention facilities in in our
past in history I I understand
very much representative block
your rejection of comparison to
the third right can I understand
how that can be perceived as
antisomatic and and can hurt for
the night I don't need to make
that comparison how to sell your
story when I was in college and
fell in love with don't put my
wife's not listening today I
found out whether young woman
from germany I was crazy but her
for a year she was a full bright
scholar at u and m and and the
one thing that I could never get
over with her and i'd ask you we
talk about time is how did your
parents and your grandparents
tolerate it off hitler had had
it how do that happen
in she was a forebreak scarch
was brilliant but she couldn't
explain that either and I
couldn't explain it either how
does that happen
and it happens in pieces happens
over time
and so i'll just say as I heard
the talk about enforcing the
laws and enforcing oath and
constitution I really urge my
colleagues too to be consistent
I think that's important for me
to be consistent and name I try
to do so I take that say moth
and I and I take that out but
remember something I don't just
upgrade to uphold the
constitution of the state of the
country but I do so to the best
of my ability that's the part
that really sticks with me over
and over again is I have to tell
myself over number when I do
things that are unpopular or
hold bills or kill bills or or
don't hear bills I I have to do
that those things to the best of
my ability and there sometimes
not popular
it in I recognize a bit but you
you have one mind here to change
and I haven't changed it yet but
should be pretty apparent to
that i'm open to change my mind
about an issue that matters
because I represent terrible
county and I realize and have
always thought there was found
fanciful in in naive for the
advocates companies say we shut
down these facilities ice will
be deterred because I I really
don't believe that but III grew
up in a country where were to
see masked men with arms
military weapons with something
at sea and waters.
When I go there and be happy to
cross back and my country
knowing that's not what we have
here and now of course in
washington DC that's exactly
what we have today
and we can say that crime is
down as the districts are down
washington and they see i'm told
that the violent crime rate down
there's thirty percent down into
the lowest it's been in in many
many years in washington to see
but that's where we have mask
men in in military weapons today
so where did we become this
country I paid sometimes don't
recognize but all i'll just
conclude to to let you know that
I am.
I wonder about the the notion
that we have to fight
this fire with fire i'll give
you another last example I
smarter the congressional
redistricting map you all
remember that I got a lot of
criticism for it I was told that
we were a jerry mandering and so
forth I see some of united heads
thinking that's exactly we did I
remember one thing about that
map that i've said consistently
that's true what that map did
was made all three of the
congressional districts more
competitive you can say no
representative block but that's
exactly what it did and you all
you have to look at the numbers
in the votes that redistrict
made things more more
competitive in all three
districts around the same
including this history and yes
the republicans may say well you
took away our seat but it became
more competitive and I thought
that was the right thing to do
because I saw the jerry
mandering I saw this this
process around the country where
people were picking and carving
their districts to make things
something that the the founders
didn't intend and so I thought
that was the right thing to do
and and now I see what's going
on in taxes and they see then
california's response and i'm
i'm puzzled that new mexico
hasn't yet said we needed to
redraw it redistricts because we
could take all of you out of
office right we could do it
and i'm looking at my republican
colleagues here we could take
all of the out of office and we
could assure that you're in
common congressman gave us cause
never has a competitive race
again we could do that we
haven't gone there and i'm
praying and hoping we don't go
there
because I I think that's
important for us to stay through
the constitution which is what's
the best of our ability and I
was the best my ability I just
want to end on one thing of of a
person who's I never thought
that i'd be quoting
and when I tell you who the cop
comes from you'll probably
understand why
this is from a speech in
nineteen eighty one the quote is
this our nation is a nation of
immigrants more than any other
country I strengthen comes from
her immigrant.
In her capacity to welcome from
other lands
including wrong reagan of
course.
Thank you.
Hope you all are ready to go
early
we have some folks here from
laws cruises police department
were pleased to have you too I
hope we have made some plans for
the evening and those of you
that particularly that are
traveling joining us from at a
town so we're going to have
dinner at five thirty hope
you've had a chance to sign in
it's important to the votes that
are helping us do this about a
good head count I hope that
we'll have a good evening
tonight at five thirty so please
make sure you've signed in for
that.
For those of you folks that are
here on the last topic.
We can have those of you that
are here on the last topic
please if you just take the
conversation either outdoors we
have a nice patio for you to do
so.
Thank you.
Thank you just
you're welcome though I am sorry
I get emotional but I sometimes
will I do when I feel like I
made a mistake
out
I know
okay.
Sony sheet oh
sit down there yeah amount of
internet okay joint.
German give us just a second
more
let's get everybody
back to attention here so
antenna
let's see it's good that back
crowd.
Philip it would you get into is
internet and the group back
there in the back of the joining
us are you joining us for this.
I'm sir okay I just wonder what
little way.
Got most everybody back in
chairs I am I regret sometimes
choking up a little bit with you
on
them
I don't ever like making
mistakes in life and when I feel
like i've made a mistake
sometimes I feel pretty hard on
myself and that's what usually
happens
and I know I feel sometimes
bligger on this issue that I may
have made a mistake
and that people are effected by
it
either german thank you you've
had people here for the less
several days chief story i'd
invited to be here today he had
another commitment and i'm sure
you would like to be here
himself I I want to tell you
just a few things cheap story
and I had lunch couple of weeks
ago with for an under merceus
week this at the first time
we've done that I encourage all
of you all to do the same thing
to meet with your chiefs of
belief in your district
attorneys when you have the
chance to do it I might hope you
get the same response i've had
from last year's police
department i've got to tell you
I sometimes brag about we all
brag about our local communities
as a word there I hope these
john we're going to tell us a
little bit about it but last
chris police is is really done
amazing things in my perspective
in the last few years I hope you
all are is encouraged enthusiasm
i've seen you just recently that
a lunch box program with some go
you know i'm not using the right
terminology I guess but you you
have you having open houses to
the community you're inviting
community command meet with you
all in a town halls and an
informal settings and that's the
same kind of thing that i've
enjoyed with the with your chief
to discuss the chrome issue in
initially when him and I got to
know each other a couple of
years ago for the first time it
really high I I think that he
wouldn't like probably a lot of
people in law enforcement
thought that we were the enemy
that the legislature was there
was the adversaries that we were
passing civil rights law so you
are could be sued and that was
not true you are were misled to
believe that there were various
other things that were done that
I think.
Began to make a thing law
enforcement body cameras as were
fielded that we were adversaries
and I I really regret that but I
I really do believe that working
with your chief here that is
something that maybe he
appreciates is not really the
case and I hope that's what
you're going to get added out of
the hearing today establish your
year i've assumed them
giving you a very broad topic
and we've got an hour to talk
about it I I call it the
revolving door but I I do
generally believe that that
we've demoralized in some
respects law enforcement are not
what willingly but we've do
moralize you all because you're
used to seeing people picked up
arrested charged taken into the
system and released and then
turned back around and doing it
all over again and I can
understand where that to be
would be demoralizing maybe
that's what you're going to tell
me maybe that's not what you're
going to tell me but that's what
i've assumed is the case and I
can understand it and and I can
understand that maybe
contributes to why we don't have
a retention that we like where
we don't have attraction to the
profession that we'd like
to do this is some peril a a
couple of weeks ago I was
driving beyond the speed limit
on my way to santa fe happens
unfortunately sadly well I went
up to it I was start by state
police officer young when when
she was by about thirty five
north of truth of consequences
and I
I talked her for some time after
a deal with my speeding issue
and
and I asked her while we just
had a presentation on resident
at white while we can't recruit
hold law enforcement officers
and ask why she thought that
might be and she said it's
because of the way we're treated
she said that that was her issue
so
I I thought that was pretty
telling and pretty legitimate so
we'd like to hear from you how
you treated how you treated by
us actually by the committee
and and the courts and why
perhaps from your perspective we
have this rebobbing door in in
crime and so the floor is
yourself
good afternoon mister chairman
members of the committee.
First of all i'd like to say
thank you for having to see your
day and give us the opportunity
to present and speak on this
topic my name is mark vintaria
i'm a sergeant with the last
cruise's police department i've
been there for about fifteen
years i've held a number of
positions in including
specialized positions within the
game unit and the metro cotton's
task forces in our colleagues
investigator currently on the
supervisor for the street crimes
unit so very small unit but very
dedicated teleted and a
knowledgeable officers to
dedicate their time day and and
day out on combating issues the
directly affected the safety and
security of our of our
communities additionally were of
federally deputized task for his
officers through the f b I we
were through the southern new
mexico safety's gang task force
initiative that gives us the
ability to conduct federal
investigations and charge
criminally at the at the federal
level
one of the biggest issues we
deal with is what we're gonna
talk about is juvenile crime are
specifically violent juvenile
crime my partner and I will get
to introduce himself here in a
second has very informative
presentation about it I would
argue that he's probably one of
the top minds definitely with an
our jurisdiction as far as
violent juvenile crime is
concerned and possibly within
the with the state of new mexico
arms alternative or to offset
burning.
Mr chair members need thank you
again for for having us and in
social benchman burning at the
end of the last christmas
department for about ten years
just like surgery that he has
said or the last few years a big
focus for us has been a violent
job in our chrome
with the amendment emphasises on
the violence all that we're
going to talk about today we're
going to give you guys are
perspective as law enforcement
in what is truly happening out
in in our communities it's not e
last crucial's problem this is a
state wired a nationwide problem
and I hope that this
presentation cannot helps shed
some way on on the reality of
the situation I apologize in
advance that I would say this is
probably not the most ideal
situation for the the power
point to be behind some of the
guys
we do have several videos and
things that I i'd like for you
guys to see as best as you can
arm so just bear with me on that
all right.
Yes sir you we have you said the
power points behind us but we
have the hand out with those
lights number one i'm noting
that they don't have page
numbers on them is kind of a
common problem we have here too
so if you're referring to
something if you could at least
the by the title or something
identified so we can keep up
with the okay yes mister chair
thank you
something to have my lovely
assistant here nancy she's gonna
help me with the the microphone
over here by the projector so
that you guys can hear clearly
the things that are being said
during the videos because the
audio is extremely important in
a lot of these cases
a quick disclaimer on this
presentation there is going to
be depictions of violence fires
and extremely vulgar language so
if your discretion is advised in
that regard
we've done our best to protect
the identities of the people
showing the presentation
but nobody is perfect
quick overview on a presentation
or and talk about the mindset of
the juvenile offenders that were
dealing with specifically down
here and lost cruises and again
this is a nationwide trend
the problems that we have the
current system that mister chair
you alluded to and some of the
frustrations that we have and
they were going to talk about
legislative solutions I think
that we can explore in the next
session to try and alleviate the
issue
so to start this is not an issue
with with kids being kids or
kids doing inaccuous things are
innocent things taking pictures
with guns for just trying to act
call this is an issue where kids
are killing each other killing
themselves and killing innocent
by standards and it's happening
repeatedly these are just some
newspaper clippings from just
down here in los cruces over the
last couple of years this isn't
going back this is not reaching
back very far at all people are
getting killed by these
juveniles and often do people
being killed are too vanilles
it's it's a crisis that we're in
down here and donate a county in
los crucis throughout the state
throughout the nation.
So
some of the exploit escalation
of behavior is that we typically
see any instances is it start
off innocent enough is kids find
going to not take pictures with
them after no come across those
guns by burglarizing vehicles
regarding houses stealing and
from their friends and their
family
and then posing with taking the
pictures taking the videos with
impossible on there on their
social media accounts which if
that was where it ended it would
not be a crisis right.
The next step in this escalation
typically is then they will
begin getting the arguments over
the internet right though
they'll start claiming gainset
still create their own games
they'll start affiliating with
games that they see their
parents associate with her there
there immediate family or their
friends
they're getting those arguments
over gang ties drugs money
those arguments over the
internet spill over into real
life now and also cations where
they're beating each other up
with bottles with brass nucles
sending people are hospital
causing great bodily harm
we start seeing videos of
increasingly risky behavior on
the social media accounts
because ultimately a big driver
of this is that social media
clout that internet clout they
dingster lifestyle that they so
glorifying glamories they're
chasing that and they can never
get enough they can never get
enough respect or street credit
to valid it themselves are
always looking for something
more so we see more and more
risky behavior and these
instances shooting in public
places shooting at parts
shooting from other vehicles
beating on people in recording
it posting it to their social
media accounts drive by
shootings these drive buys are
often in retaliation for these
alternations that took place at
a house party at a public park
or wherever that were being pre
proceeded by the arguments over
the internet.
And often somebody is killed as
a result of these drive by
shootings right
after times it's the intended
target
more frequently than it's
necessary to somebody that was
innocent I was caught in the
cross here's because as you guys
will see in his video are in
this presentation there is a
disturbing lack of regard for
anybody else anybody else's
safety or security and the
community
so again this is how it starts
with just taking pictures
posting them on their social
media accounts because they want
that that club that social media
credit right i'll take those
pictures or post them and they
want to look cool and again if
this is where it ended we
wouldn't be in the in the
situation that we're in right
now
posing with machine guns so it's
a glock switch there there's a
glock switch in the middle those
machine guns we just pass that
law and the last legislative
session you guys pass that long
the last legislative session
banning those weapon conversion
devices right and that's a
powerful step forward because it
in powers us as look a long
enforcement to it to deal with
that part of the problem.
Thank you.
That one actually doesn't have
any
big so here's a video of a young
man I think he's fifteen or
sixty nine the time this video
is taken shooting at young
archie and lost crucis this park
is surrounded on all four sides
by residence's apartment
buildings and a middle school
he is just shooting rounds with
again no do regard for anybody
else in that area those bullets
are landing somewhere this isn't
just innocent behavior those
bullets are hitting something at
the back end
now nancy sorry.
That's a video of a young man
with a glock switch to the
machine gun shooting out of a
car as it's driving around
downtown los.
Where is
the closest.
So in that instance they're
driving and lost cruises are
shooting at electrical
transformers they're shooting
across the interstate and the
northern night on the other side
of that interest in the
direction that they're shooting
is a bunch of neighborhoods.
Sorry this next this next video
is the same thing is they are
obsessed with shooting out a
motor vehicles in residential
neighborhoods again for for
retaliation for internet cloud
any any number of reasons but
there is no regard for for
anybody's rate to be safe in the
community.
This.
The.
That was in the middle of the
day in las crucials in the
middle of the afternoon
perfectly daylight plenty of
people around they don't care
they don't care who sees them
they don't care who gets hurt
there is probably about fifty
shell casings up recovered on
that scene because of the glocks
which that was used shooting at
the cars shooting at the dry
while shooting into the house
again i'll because of this
gangster life so that they're
they're trying to emulate and
glorify
and live up to
in this particular case kids are
also bringing guns to school
this is a organic high school I
think you're going to think it's
when I see
last august these kids product
goings to school as part of
their drug dealing that they
were doing flashing the money
flashing the drugs flash in the
guns that they're bringing we
are able to login these kids on
campus within fifteen twenty
minutes of them creating a
social media post and they were
charging convicted federally.
Here's the guns that they
brought both of them were loaded
well and the drugs in the money
that they were they were making
in the middle of the school
and this particular instance a
marked police and it was
burglaries they stall are going
out of there and was actually
locked up in a safe inside the
car
they still manage to break into
it still the gun and then
posting that they're ready for
war
this is a mobile gun battle
again downtown lost cruises
middle of the day between two
cars two ravel game members all
of them juveniles.
Shooting at each other in a
running gun battle in through
with connect through the
neighborhoods.
The.
The.
This.
The.
The.
The.
This next slide is a gill call
in this you'll call this young
man
is bragging about a shooting
that he committed ragging about
how he shot another child in the
back paralyzing him and bragging
about how the case was dropped
and how he wasn't prosecuted how
we got away with it.
And i'll start it over now that
we got sorry thanks
I can't keep the got dropped
actually such a studies out of
the space so fall committed from
the back window I shot
that when the back crash their
life ever his beach is like that
that did second what we're
talking
about you can look at up on the
part of the news
I don't
this is another jail call
fragging about beating another
child thinking that he killed
them because you beat him so
badly had broken hands broken
fee from beating another child
is that most would have worked
on a bottle
yeah is
killed
that's
jack
and my book on the
this is talking about shooting
another child with an air
fifteen five times bragging
about it laughing about how
funny it was from his body at
the floor after being shot up
and he started
played as a joke
yeah so I thought a laugh and
when I was listening and I was
she was not body job.
Foot is like
a
go to last chris committee to
what you hear that **** in the
video
looking
is this next one is a video of a
group of juveniles beating on a
growing man armed with rifles
the police pans down there take
a shoes it takes built and they
leave them they are battered in
bloody
posted to their social media
account again for that cloud.
I think this to them up of the
waste
aggravated a solid deadly weapon
tell me that she google them
everything she's going to tell
my turning all that
is there some messages that we
recovered during some search
warrants on social media
accounts and on cell phones
again demonstrating the
propensity for violence I should
for no reason I don't what
happened with that are of the
desirative in your eye socket
they don't the the prepensity
for violence that they're
seeking is it's outrageous and
disturbing this is how they feel
about the judicial system in
american new mexico so you don't
only get eight years at most in
new mexico for murder that's
nothing they don't care.
This next couple of slides
it doesn't show up great on that
screen and I apologize but you
can reference it on the hand out
this is going to demonstrate a
few cases in which case we've
dealt with the same given over
and over and over in new mexico
with failed prosecutions on the
state side
we were successfully able to
prosecute them federally and
have been able to hold them
accountable as part of that
process again that's part of the
the fbi task force that we're
attached to that is helped
facilitate that and this
particular instance this is the
child that was bragging about
shooting that kid with the are
fifteen five times laughing at
how point it was in his body
dropped nothing about beating
that child with a bottle
thinking that he killed him
he's been charged with battery
position to hang a negative use
of the deadly weapon aggregated
battery causing group only harm
attempted murder was a suspect
in numerous autofits robberies
and shootings at it welling
tried by shootings yesterday.
This.
When is make sure that it was
familiar with the the term noly
knowledge not being a criminal
way but no lays a decision by
the prosecutor not to try to
continue with the prosecution so
when you're intending by your
sign yes but that that's correct
in this particular instance
there was and will discuss
issues that are not
centric to the system on there's
there's a merit of problems that
we need to overcome
thank you mister chair
so again in this particular case
this child had a lengthy
criminal history a linked
violent criminal history we were
not able for a murier to reason
to successfully prosecute him on
the state side arm he was
charged federally for a crime of
cyber stocking when he
threatened to kill his
girlfriend
and showed a better doorstep
with a hand gun and threatened
to kill her and everybody else
inside we were able to
successfully prosecute that in
the federal side
and he was convicted in
sentenced until is eighteenth
birthday for increased ration
and placed on a term of
probation till it's twenty first
birthday so in this particular
case it was approximately three
years of encourseration followed
by an additional three years of
probation for that case
is next couple of slides are for
one child all with his cases
were
no lead because he was
incompetent to stand trial so in
mr chair talks about the
decision not to prosecute that
comes from the basis that this
child was found repeatedly over
and over and over not competent
to stand trial and that's one of
the holes that will discuss
later in the system that we do
have
so looking at this i'll give you
guys a second to to look at it
but unlawful carrying of a
deadly weapon residential
burglary unlawful taking for
motor vehicle resisting an
officer resisting an officer
criminal damaged property large
any of a fire battery
aggregated battery with the
deadly weather resisting an
officer battery on a police
officer escape from the custody
of a peace officer resisting an
officer
and another instance where he
was suspected by not charged oh
shooting at a motor vehicle.
Or out of the and when I see
suspect not charge that means
we're getting information that
they're responsible for certain
shootings but when meet the
burden approved her necessarily
prosecuted so that's not to say
that they're guilty of that but
given the totality of things the
shong evidence to suggest that
they are involved in those
things like those shootings and
those are offers
this is the child that one of
the children are product under
organizing high school last
august and he was charged
federally for that offense they
raised compensate on the federal
side he was evaluated through
the federal system found company
to send trial and convicted he
was sends to increase ration
towards eighteen birthday and
probation to twenty first
birthday
again the next couple of slides
you demonstrate a lengthy
criminal history for another
child
i'm off a carrying of a deadly
weapon autobergery auto theft
resisting an officer auto theft
aggregated as all burgery
resisting an officer shooting
from a motor vehicle causing
injury resisting an officer
aggregated a sort deadly weapon
shooting out a motor vehicle
causing injury or is this an
officer out of the resisting and
officer auto burglary where you
broke into a marked police unit
install a firm
this child in particular managed
to rack up twenty five filing
charges in twenty four mission
in your charges between the age
of twelve and seventeen and
every single one of them was
dismissed because he was found
in company to stand trial over
and over and over against when
we talked about a revolving door
this is that revolving door a
child is arrested his charged
and then they released with no
consequences no treatment no
alternative the released as if
nothing happened to re offend
and often that reoffence is an
escalation in behavior it gets
worse it does not get better
with time when we do nothing and
there are no consequences and
there is no treatment
forget worse and the community
is the ones that suffer because
of it.
So
that's the bet
that's the mindset of these kids
these children and decide every
child certainly not every child
but the ones that we are dealing
with most frequently from our
perspective
our problems they are the ones
that are creating this crisis as
violent crime crisis killing
each other in each other hurting
innocent people
so
will take a few minutes to talk
about proposal age saver
solutions now i'll prefer to be
saying I am not a legislature I
don't rate laws for living you
guys have some proposed basic
drafts attached to the handouts
as something at a jump off point
right i'm sure there is plenty
of things that you want through
all the committees and in the
way that these things get signed
into law
but I wanted to give you again
our perspective on a good jump
off point for some of this
update legislature
the number one hole that we see
systemically is the issues with
competency and that was a big
topic for house believe last
three the last legislative
session and I think there was a
lot of strides made in the in
the rate direction for that but
at all really pertained to adopt
in the language that we the way
that it was written they talk
about defendants not responds um
and that's particular to
children versus adults
so I think it would be a very
simple fix to update the
language but the language and
the children's code needs to be
updated so that the competitor
proceedings mirror that closer
to house built eight where it's
not just a finding of
incompensate follow by dismissal
there should be alternatives you
should be treatment options if
somebody is truly incompetent
they should be able to be
treated to competency
and then once they're treated to
compensate they should be able
to stand trial for the crimes
for which they are charged if
that cannot be accomplished if
they are so on well that they
cannot possibly be treated to
compensate there should be other
avenues for us to seek rather
than dismissal and releasing
them back them in the community.
To reoffend.
This is a child that's
discussing the competency
examination he knows is going
home he knows the case will get
dropped and he knows he'll be
out soon to go and do the things
that he does.
Once.
In speaking with my associates
my colleagues the people that I
work with that the use
attorney's office every child
that they have sent for company
to evaluation through the
federal system has been deemed
confidence as ten trial
number i'm not privileged the
information that is put out for
evaluated during these
evaluations i'm not a license
therapist psychologist for sick
interest but there is clearly a
discrepancy in the way that
those evaluations are happening
at the federal level versus at
the state bubble and there needs
to be a middle ground there
needs to be some something that
we can do that you guys can do
as the legislature to help
alleviate this problem because
this is a chineglering hole and
it's no secret for these kids
they talk amongst themselves a
discussion lingering that child
that was just on the jail call
right now talking about who is
going to beat the case is the
same one that had twenty four
fellow news and twenty five
missing in five years as a kid I
was found incompetent over and
over and over again in the state
in a mexico
he was found not only was he
found confident in the thorough
system he was found to be more
lingering in the federal system
meaning he was essentially
faking it playing down or
attempting to play done so that
he would be found in confidence
so that he could go home.
Some additional piece of updated
legislation that we think could
be helpful for us we had the
legislature passed this bill a
couple years ago and left or
sell a firing without a
background check.
Are basically this is a mystery
meter for a private party to
sell or transfer guns between
themselves without conducting a
background check I think
this update to this statute here
where you specifically prohibit
the transfer sale of farms
knowingly to a prohibited person
meaning I can a convicted felon
somebody convicted of domestic
violence any number of things
there's a lot of things that
people that prohibit people from
possessing arms and one of them
during the city to mexico is
being under the age of nineteen
when it comes to handons
I think additional penalties
should apply for somebody that
knowingly gives trades transfers
sells whatever to a prohibited
person and an additional penalty
should apply on top of that and
enhancement if that gun is then
used in the further it's of a
violent crime so if an adult for
instance say sells it even out a
hand gun and then going
committee drive by shooting a
person that saw the gun should
be held responsible in the same
way that recently the the statue
for negligently allowing a minor
to access a firearm rate which
was more tailored in in his
language and it's intent I think
for parents to lock up their
guns in their house to keep
their kids from stealing them
the same
where we're holding people
accountable for letting those
guns find the wrong hands should
apply here
there's a lot of text on this
page this is the the statute for
the unlocked possession for
hanging by person under nineteen
no I don't expect you
necessarily to read everything
on this page but this is the
list of exceptions where it is
laughable for a child under
nineteen to possess a hanging
and these are these make perfect
sense hunting competition
shooting target shooting under
the supervision of their parents
or grandparents in their own
home
those things makes sense
I think and update to this
language would be helpful to
prohibit children in the age of
eighteen from also possessing a
shocking or a rifle and I say
eating because once they're
eighteen they can lovely
purchase a shock on or a rifle.
But the logic is the same we use
this i'm off a possession they
hanged by a person in nineteen
daily throughout the state all
the time because these kids with
his guns are going and
committing crimes and if we're
able to
keep them from possessing on
except under all of these
circumstances there is plenty of
ways for people to locally for
kids under nineteen to lovely on
these guns
but this is not how they are
using the guns a kid that's in a
schemas driving around at
midnight with all of his friends
with are fifteens and shock guns
in machine guns and the backseat
of the car
does not fall under one of these
exceptions for this statute I
think it makes logical sense to
extend that to the shockings and
the rifles that they're still
using for the drive by shootings
and the murders
for anybody under the age of
eighteen there's plenty of up
exceptions for them to lovely
possess it
but I think taking that same
protection that we get from
prohibiting and promoting a
handon under nineteen logically
extends to prohibiting a hand on
under eighteen
a rifle or shocking or a longer
because here's the reality again
they're not just using hangings
through using rifles they're
using ak forty seventh are
fifteen shock and short billed
rifles are using all these
things in the middle of a
parking lot downtown last
cruises they're using these guns
to commit violence there's
plenty of ways for them to
lovely
possess those things but that's
not how they're using.
The.
I think it is helpful to explore
investing in in the powering
juvenile probation officers arm
as a part of the cfd initiative
I think
the system that we have right
now with you and operation
officers
being able to take enforcement
action is extremely inefficient
it lacks the ability to hold
kids accountable for one formal
probation meaning they've been
adjudicated of a crime and
they've been placed on formal
probation or kids that have been
informally placed
under the suprovision of a video
of an operation officer pending
their case but on conditions of
release but as it stands right
now it is a very slow
inefficient process for a child
who is on probation to violate
that probation and then for the
the filing of that probation
violation to occur essentially
the gpo will file a notice with
the district attorney's office
the district attorney's office
will make a determination on
whether they are going to file
charges in that case they do
they will have a hearing with
the children's court the
children's court judge will then
make a determination on the
weather and want to be issued
for the violation or of the
child if they're not in custody
already well received different
conditions of release conditions
probation or any other sanctions
that prices and it's quickest to
typically take at least one or
two weeks
if we look at the adult side of
things and again children are
treated very differently from
adults in the system and it
should be but there's some
things I think that concessions
can be made on when it comes to
trying to alleviate the violent
crime crisis on the adult site
if a person on probation is
found to be drunk for instance
they're violating their I mean
it would not yet a lot breaking
the law for them to be drunk
otherwise but if they're under
probation we find them trunk or
smoking marijuana or something
like that that would otherwise
be laughable except for the fact
that they're violating the
probation I could call their
probation officer directly they
would run it up there chain
within their office and a
restaurant or could be placed.
Essentially immediately
for the probation violation and
then they would be taken to jail
they would see a judge and then
a judge make a determination on
detention and I believe that
that would that price is
empowering the juvenile
probation officers to have
similar authority would be
helpful for this crisis because
again here's the reality in it
these next few slides are all
kids that that when these posts
were made these pictures were
taken these are kids that were
actively on formal probation
meaning again they were
adjudicated of a crime placed on
probation said don't do any more
crime
and they don't care because
there's no consequences or they
are posing with guns
posting videos of them doing
shootings at a dwelling in
residential neighborhood and
lost crucials posting numerous
guns machine guns glocks which
is stolen rifles
the child on the rate has four
five guns on his person right
there if you know who that child
is if you're as probation up so
you know where that child is.
That should be a very
immediate course correction
ideally in our opinion in my
opinion we should be able to
course correct that as soon as
that information is found as
soon as there is a finding of
problem because that this child
is committed violation of the
probation
the ability for a juvenile
probation officer to with
certain limitations and
restrictions that I think need
to be reasonable
is shown a rest worder take
their child before a judge take
him to jail judge season as soon
as possible within twenty four
hours whatever the reasonable
amount of time would be to make
a determination on detention
continued attention or release
with enhanced conditions of
release or conditions of
probation.
We need to go.
This is an under joke where
they're discussing basically the
lack of accountability from but
you have an operation office
he's talking about a watch is
discussing an income monitor he
says you can't do much without
watching really do anything
because you have that income
monitor on you
or
something
you can
watch
whatever
this is a continuation of that
same conversation how many times
okay
did you be on that
because
I don't feel like it's overall
back.
So moving on
an additional update to the
current statute for the
telephone occurred and this is
actually a bill that are
representative introduced in the
last session I got stuck on the
floor before the end of the
session it didn't ultimately
pass but updating the telephone
harassment statute to include
digital communicate digital
communication meaning texts
video calls social media content
I would in power law enforcement
to take enforcement action when
you have instances where
somebody is sending a
violent threatening
tesk text message video call
things of that nature that may
not rise to a established
pattern of conduct as mandated
by the actual harassment statute
the telephone christmas statute
is a stand alone it's a a single
instance could be charged for
the way the laws written
currently it is
pretty explicit about it being
related to telephone costs and
that's mostly because the
statute was written
many decades ago prior to
digital communication being as
prevalent as it is now.
Lastly I think it would be
helpful to enact sensing
enhancements for getting
activity and what this would
require would be defining what a
criminal street ding is
definitely what getting activity
is and then creating reasonable
sensing enhancements for both
the door to and you enough
because as I told you the
beginning of the presentation
the idolized and glamorized and
glorified that street dings
their lifestyle many of the
things many of the violent
crimes are committed are in
further ins of getting activity
they create their own games
seems they make a different dang
every week almost but they are
groups of these kids that are
committing these crimes and
further insists of those groups
they'll have common names i'll
have commentaging common colours
wait that they identify
themselves as as part of this
game and as if they were reading
it from me manual part of that
problem with or part of the
partner parcel being a game
members you have to have
problems with rable game members
and in those problems with those
rabbiting members turn into
fights and shootings and murders
so
I believe that finding ways to
disincentive buyers that kind of
a lifestyle would be powerful
for helping us to to combat this
this issue to his family crime
crisis
because again down here lost
crucials as well as throughout
the state we have gangs games
are a problem street games that
these kids see their parents
engaging in their uncles their
ants there is brothers their
sisters and then it trickles
down and they get younger and
younger and younger every year.
I want to take a brief moment to
highlight the fact that
no matter what they will always
be human failures there will
always be a parent that failed
in summer guard to raise their
child it'll always be a police
officer that failed to properly
to an investigation there will
always be a prosecutor that
failed to properly prosecute
there will be a presenting judge
that failed to make it illegally
correct decision or morally
correct decision there will
always be human failures
but I do believe that
we as a group you guys as the
legislature us is law
enforcement have an obligation
to
be imperfect humans working in
an imperfect system but we can
work to create that system and
improve it to mitigate the
issues of those mistakes does
mistakes will happen but if we
can find ways to medicate them
or they affect that they have
especially on the children
that is an obligation that we
are hold because again this is
not kids that are taking
pictures with guns this is not
kids that are not harming people
people are dying kids are dying
and so that's why it's important
so with that with standard
questions.
So.
Remember and others and charges
each hours
on my left anyone else on my
left so nope apparently.
In charges
a read
teletra here right
right
we've got about an hour gain i'm
going to recognize everybody for
arbitrarily
do everybody which should have
time for six minutes each so
represent remember your first
for six minutes.
I think you mister chair thank
you for the presentation
in compilation it's you know
with the headlines that you pose
and I think
when we heard the news about the
math shooting here in los crucis
everybody was terrorized by it
and absolutely horrible seeing
what I think many of us are with
the social media representations
of
kids carrying around fifteens
and other you know weapons of
war that are on the streets of
of our communities every single
day armon for the law
enforcement that are out there
on the front lines and more what
as we try to regularly
our way and to understanding how
this happens we've certainly
tried to figure out
how to target the weapons which
are her deadly weapons that
could
as we sought to extremely quick
damage to an entire community
that's one side of the coin the
other is as you bring up how it
is that we are able to
functionally am detain children
juveniles in these situations
that holds them both accountable
and maintains that day as miners
have rates and one of the things
that you brought up on
competency is this difference
between the state and federal
evaluation do we have any
knowledge mister chair about
what those differences are thank
you for posing that question is
something that we could follow
through on as to how that's
happened how that those
valuations are taking place and
have we had any comparative
study.
Does anybody know
mr
park representative
I I don't know I I am not pretty
any of the the information on
how those companies he
evaluations are conducted I do
know that done here in doing
your county.
For juvenile specifically i'm
not sure if they use the same
evaluators for adults as they do
for juveniles but I will speak
as for juveniles and talking
with the dears office from
companies compenses raised they
typically pick the up really one
evaluator that they typically or
use sometimes they have an
alternate but in nearly all of
the incidents is where better
that evaluation is raised the
finding is of incompetency I
don't know what the distinction
is if there is a distinction
that the at the legal level if
they're usually using different
criteria or if it's just a
different perspective from a
different person i'd like I wish
I could tell you I don't know
what the answer is for that but
it is clearly
an issue thank you mister chair
I think that something that I
this committee I think would
benefit from an understanding if
this is one of those arm holes
in the system for us to hold
folks accountable minures
juvenile's accountable I think
that's really critically
important if there is a
misalignment
one of the other questions is
your chair that were you
consistently try to ask is how
do these children get guns how
are they even
both exposed and or able to
obtain these weapons
understanding that if we're
looking at i'm awful cell of a
firearm with the background
check or those possessing
firehomes under the age of
eighteen we can keep raising the
age to any number of ways but
what is the cause of that those
crimes being able to be
persistent
throughout the state and the
nation perhaps because this is
not just us
mr chairman representative yet
so the way the primary ways that
they get their hands on these
guns as they commit burleries
unfortunately a lot of people
who own firms aren't always the
most responsible with them often
times you're left in their cars
up to the times you're looking
cars their unlocked it's not
always the case.
Often times the cars are locked
if there is a good in there
sometimes they will break up the
windows in and find ways in
there other times they will
steal them from friends or
family
if they go to a friend's house
and I know that the friend's
parents on guns that are maybe
in a case under their bed or in
a safe that the child may know
the combination to for some
reason
that's how typically they're
getting their hands on on the
was guns but I would say the
most common method is certainly
automated
if we could find a way to solve
that problem to keep people from
leaving guns in their cars and
the cars unlocked I think we
would see a dramatic reduction
and the number of guns that are
available on the streets
but that is an entirely separate
issue
I appreciate that think you
mister chair
you know we're we're trying to
find ways that make sense and
these just make my head spend
when we're thinking about how
these weapons end up in in the
hands of folks wanting to commit
these crimes and and you the
videos are super disturbing
I think I mean i'm really
interested in trying to figure
out how we can get some of the
the laws on the books and I
appreciate I call you with the
you know having these widely
exposed if it's clout too that
they're getting out of this too
that these things can be seen on
the internet these are minors
it's wild to me that this can be
on snapper
you know it's whatever it is
that's providing this
opportunity to build clout and
then of course when we talk
about the crime is committed I
mean
I know we have to need to fix
our juvenile justice to start
may think there's a lot of
proposals and I know we're going
to be discussing them at length
but you know there are all all
these different holes that you
go identify here that I think in
particular when we will get gun
safety something i've been
working on for years would love
to work on how to.
Had a tighten up these laws so
again we can keep these
mechanisms in place that that
allow for folks to be
accountable to again proper gun
use and storage
with that mister cherry I would
love to continue the
conversation about competency in
the future
hearing as well thank you mister
thank you
members I hope you will be being
heard again tomorrow a lot of
these topics that were
addressing here they are going
to resumed again tomorrow when
we bring back district dream
macias because I think he's
going to the prosecutors
perspective hope maybe all can
join us I know you've had law
enforcement here for a couple of
days but I i'm realizing they
put together to general I should
have had u paired with the with
the discretionary and with
judges frankly and so maybe
we'll find a way to do that down
the road representative
elementary choppers six minutes
thank you mister chair so I have
because you have a bunch of
questions
so you talked about
kids who have been deemed not
competent to stand trial and the
question that I have I mean you
you made a common about you know
treating them to cope and
disease and then basically then
they would be able to to stand
trial but my question is really
more around those kids who are
not competent and I think you
give an example of one child who
had been deemed incompetent a
number of times so why is it
there any kind of follow up
treatment something is not
going well with these kids
how we try to figure out what it
is that we do the to the
evaluations I don't know if
they're psychological
psychiatric evaluations how
those evaluations give it shed
any light in terms of what might
be some options for a treatment
for these kids
not mister she representative
again i'm not i'm not privy to
how these valuations are
conducted their simple as in
place that prohibited me from
being able to review the
findings a lot of these.
Evaluation especially because
their minors and because it
might position as a long worst
one officer i'm not private all
the details that the
prosecutor's office with a
defensive three or the judge has
access to
so I don't know if their
psychological
are psychological or psychiatric
evaluations necessarily
in terms of treating somebody to
compete and see or the lack of
follow up for that i'm not sure
what the cars is or what the the
reason for the lack of follow
through there is
unfortunately that's separate
from my rule as as a police
officer that would far more into
the perview likely under the
district is turning office and
under the children's court to
make a determination that there
needs to be followed through in
lou of outrageous missile
okay
so then you might not have
having information about the
other question that I have to is
in terms of you know what do we
know about these kids families
do they have any involvement
with
the foster kids that kind of
missure often times there is
sorry often times there is
history with cft
a lot of times I mean ultimately
excuse me ultimately the
problems begin in the whole I
believe I believe that the
problems almost invariably begin
at home in one way another
unstable a home environment's
lack of supervision drugs in the
home family violence in the home
those are all issues
and there are often two ft
referrals for child abuse or
drug use in addition to the the
actual the gpo referrals for the
criminal citations for the
children after that is the case
yes
and then the other question that
I have is you also spoke about
social media they use social
media to sort of like you know
brag about what they're doing do
you think.
That
it's possible or do you think
that prohibition prohibitions on
that kind of thing on social
media would help
mr chair representative to
clarify your asking do I think
prohibitions
related to social media
specifically or the platforms
are i'm not sure yeah i'm sorry
so do you think that laws
governing what social media what
kids are allowed to post on
social media would help reduce
what these kids are doing
I I would be wary of that and
i'm sure there is a first
amendment issue somewhere in
that arm so it and I don't think
that that would necessarily help
because ultimately when you
create a social media account
one of the things that they
always ask for is what you did a
birth of what's your each and
it's very easy to say i'm
eighteen or thirty five or
eighty nine when you're really
the routine or fourteen years
old and then the social media
platform has held up there into
the bargain they say well I mean
how would we suppose to do
background checks on everybody
that signs up for instant.
So no I don't think that that
would be a practical way to
combat that problem
and how many kills are we
talking about mister chair
how many kids are we talking
about we're talking about that
you come into contact with that
you talked about in your
in your presentation mr share
representative the the
presentation itself covered
maybe a half a dozen children
arm to ten children for the
presentation itself the number
of children that are engaging
this behavior here in los crucis
is easily in the dozens
arm I would suspect it's
probably closer to over a
hundred kids that are active
engaged in that type of violent
behavior
regardless of if they're
necessarily on my reader yet or
not.
Balance of last cruises police
department I want to echo the
the same cinemas as the chairman
you have made us very proud
especially in the wake of the
young park tragedy and your
response to that but lost
cruises police departments doing
good things and we see that so
thank you
I also appreciate that you you
arrived here and for this
legislative body and didn't just
present to us the problems that
are plagging your city which you
came with hard proposals
proposed solutions you worked
clearly laying down the
solutions at what you believe
what eliminate at least a living
alleviate some of these problems
that you're seeing and I
appreciate that my question
therefore may be more from my
colleagues and I so that I can
better understand this system I
appreciate representative
romeros question about
competency I too mister chairman
would like to see some some more
discussion on that to the co
chairs credit she did a great
job this last legislative
session increasing competence to
standards for adults and and I
think that we're going to see a
positive you know outcomes
because of that bill and if we
could mirror something like that
to address our use offenders i'd
like to continue this
conversations as well and
hopefully get something like
that restricting access to
firearms always gives me pause
now tell you I had chief had a
hard cell to me even on glock
switches because I would rather
target a criminal in the weapon
itself but you know I came
around if it's it's if the
destruction of such device was
causing that much harm in the
reality is since most law biting
citizens aren't using glock
switches
for a level of protection so
even on the hand gun proposals
that you're your
proposing here under the age of
eighteen I read the details and
find print to see how would this
infect my two daughters I have a
fifteen in a seventeen year old
traveling back today alone in a
vehicle with rifles coming back
from them
they be exempt from any of this
so are lab I didn't.
Even children youth hunters no
sports activities they'd be
exempt from this as well and so
this is something that I would
also equally support i'd like to
ask my colleagues senator read
if you can give a quick update
on the telephone telephone at
harassment did that die on the
house for before it travel to
the senate or after a passing
old committees no mister
chairman and and senator we
filed it a little late we
actually got through house
judiciary on it and see pack and
I think it was well received we
need to update the the digital
media part of it in the just got
stock on the floor ran out of
time so I I did have plan on
bringing that back again and
that will be probably filing
that very early I guess the
sixty days thank you yes thank
you mister chief chair and
representative and we have
legislation that's traveled
already through house judiciary
where worked out some kings here
if we can also hear bills like
that in the interim so that we
can fast track those solutions
through the next session I think
that's been official to assist a
priorities those bills and at
least to the areas that we think
that we cannot client agreement
i'd say the same thing on the
proposed gaining activity so I I
just want to thank you for your
presentation awesome today
earlier today we had an
opportunity to tour the john
paul taylor facility and they
proposed solutions you know we
talk about here we have failed
our children when they reached
the level of when they come and
interaction with you you
mentioned intervening through
cyfd calls from a very young age
that's where we can intervene
and get these kids off the
different track the john paul
taylor cite the staff there said
many times that increasing the
sensing we give them one year
and that's not enough time to
get these children on the right
are in the right path a minimum
of two years at the minimum
they'd like to see him three or
four they can actually have a
meaningful impact to change
these kids live so there's way
is that we can intervene very
early so that it doesn't reach
this level.
The meantime we have a criminal
element these two profenders and
we need to we need to attack
both sides of those and so I
will say this I think that the
the seriousness of the crimes
that you're bringing forward
certainly rise to the level of
addressing stuff like this
during a special session I would
say juvenile crime and see why
fd the crisis that we see why fd
and if there were ever a reason
for us to convene for a special
session these are the type of
issues that I think most in
mexicans would agree that that
we need to prioritize to thank
you again for your time in the
work that you're doing out and
our community
thank you.
Mr chairman thank you excellent
presentation at the graphics
really bring it home couple
questions how many
june else have you all been able
to prosecute federally
mischer representative within
the last two and a half years
between the beginning task for
the fpi gang taskers that were
part of a believe were at
thirteen children prosecuted
federally in natwest two years
which may or may not sound like
a big number it is a it easy big
number for federal prosecutions
especially for juveniles
and mister chair and so
you got thirteen prosecutor how
many how many slipped through
the system
mrperiod share representative
amy slipped through the six
system how many set through the
federal sita
let's start with the state
system and then if you had some
slip through the federal system
that that worked I guess I
should clarify the state system
thank mister chair
representative almost invariably
the the need for federal
prosecution is proceeded by the
fillers of prosecution on the
state level so I would say it's
some of them I don't have the
numbers in front of me and I
don't have the cases in front of
me but after talk my head are
almost all of those cases have
had a field prosecution on the
state level that required a
federal prosecution some of
those
prosecutions were for the glocks
which is prior to the state
statuting past in this last
session and they were charged
federally for that offense but
even in those instances there
was a link to criminal history
inner stating a mexican prior to
that federal prosecution
thank you mr chairman and I
will somewhat familiar with the
federal system where can you
just be interested on your
thoughts on mandatory sentencing
mr chair representative I i'm
not sure and qualify to speak on
mandatory sensing because i'm
i'm not a judge i'm not a
prosecutor I will say
that's probably helpful to have
more thought put into.
Specific sentences I don't think
sentencing guidelines are
powerful and your powerful
negotiating tool during the
agreements i'm not sure that i'm
for or against mandatory sensing
one we are another because
that's really not the part that
ideal with when it comes to this
my job is to investigate the
crimes and try and hold people
accountable at the at the front
end of it and then work with my
partners on the back end of it
and hope for the best outcome
for everybody
thank you and mr chair file
the the hammer to federal
centencing is the guarantee time
served on many of these crimes
and that's why
I didn't want to pin you down to
understand that's not your job
and I apologize it's an
uncomfortable question I didn't
mean to do that
I just when I quickly pulled up
eighteen nine twenty two which
is breaks down into the firearm
laws federally and I noticed
that quite a few the things
you'd like to see changed
are similar to those laws would
that be an accurate statement
often yes the the federal system
often has laws on the books
that we we need to rely on
because there is no such state
statute a procedures apply that
would be the the glock switches
the weapon conversion devices
prior to this last legislative
session up to that point.
It was
the fact that legal to own a
machine got in the city new
mexico because there was no
longer books prohibiting that at
the state level
very good thank you mister
chair.
Thank you mr chairman thank you
for this presentation and I just
really want to applaud the
chairman for bringing you here
to present this because I think
a lot has been san whether it's
in the media whether it's in the
committee or on the floor about
what's happening with juvenile
crime in the crisis that we're
facing but it seems that when
certain individuals say it it's
not credible until we hear it
from people that are fighting on
those lines and on the streets
every single day so thank you so
much these are great solutions I
hope that we take these
solutions seriously to try to
advounce them this session I
agree and I will echo what
senator brantley says about this
being a crisis and if we needed
a special session for anything
it's virgin crime it's for a
cyfd
that's what needs to be done
people are dying every single
day
and I think that we need to hold
these individuals accountable
and I don't know why we continue
to hold or try to hold the
weapons themselves responsible
for these crimes and taking
people's lives instead of the
individuals pulling the triggers
taking these lives and I don't
understand why
the word accountability is only
used when we're talking about
guns being in the wrong hands of
irresponsible tubernals instead
of holding accountability in the
hands of the juvenile committing
these crimes they need to be
held accountable
I think there was a question
with how many jumoniles are
doing committing crimes or that
you dealt with
how many does it take to care
how many lives taken are enough
I think one one life taken is
enough for me not how many lives
are taken.
Or how many people are this as
this affecting I think we're
failing juveniles when we're not
holding them accountable because
they're committing more violent
crime after violent crime and
they get a slap on the wrist
they're not held accountable and
so when they do turn eighteen
they think they can do the same
thing with the slap on the rest
but they are finally then facing
accountability and banner life
behind bars instead of two years
in a two and our facility or
four years in a juvenile
facility and seeing true change
you know I I hope and I would
ask my colleagues across this
table because I know that i've
seen now for a couple meetings
you guys are referring to each
other on working on legislation
on working on a dressing
juvenile crime but I know that
we and i'll say we the
republicans that have brought
legislation for a number of
years already forward haven't
been included in those decisions
and we've done a lot of research
we've talked to chief sweep talk
to share of sweep talk to do a
nile facilities
a lot for years and so I would
just hope that again we're
invited because legislation that
we brought forward has died in
its first committee hasn't even
been hurt in any committee and
so again I just want to thank
you for your presentation today
thank you.
Thank you mister chairman and to
see you again thanks for the
presentation and I was gonna
just kind of talk a little bit
about what I know about you know
competency and the problems that
I have seen over the years doing
this there just as an m you do
these evaluations and because
these kids sometimes are younger
often that it is the valuator
comes back saying they're just
not old enough to you know
comprehend this or that and you
know times are changing but
there's nothing whenever they
get dismissed because they're
not confident you're right
there's no there just dismiss
and the kids are just turned
back out on the street and then
it just keeps happening then the
next time they get a case you
see there are found in company
in another ebay get stud and I
think we're at a point now
mister chairman that we need to
start probably looking at a
provision that is similar to our
don't put provision if we can
prove that let's say they're not
confident and they're not going
to be confident for a while but
yet their dangerous and we we go
we have that route to take them
to a dangerous you know
dangerousness hearing maybe it's
reviewed every two years as they
get older they'll probably be
confident
and start looking at avenues
like we're treating adults and
and maybe treatment is somewhere
where we're not just throwing
him in the streets assisted out
patient treatment whatever it
might be we've got to start
taking to look at the times of
just changed and your absolute
rate these kids come back not
confident and they're just you
know turned at the street and so
I hope we can actually start
thinking about some avenues to
handle especially these violent
offenders because there's no
reason I always wondered why
there wasn't anything we could
do with them of why is there not
a way we can take them down the
dangerous route and and put him
in a youth facility and try to
treat him to confidence he in
the review that maybe it's a
year for a kid and that they're
competitive we go back and we
can now go to trial.
Or whatever we need to do with
themselves I like idea I think
that that's a big gap in her
system always thought it was so
i'm happy to help with that in
any way but we need to start
start really looking at that so
and again I I echo senator brand
leaves
positions saying that I love
that you've come with some
solutions because of a horse
looking for solution so get good
for you see soon thank you thank
you.
Thank you mister chair and I
will just reiterate it but I did
last time the
usually conversations start
within your inner circle and i'm
i'm pretty open to having
additional conversations have
never been part of an exclusive
club so that being said
because they continue to get
talk about that
I have a question though in
regards to I I some other you
think that we should be
suggesting that we should add in
gang involvement it seems to me
that the crimes of their
committee are already crimes
that could
sold in criminal penalties and
so i'm trying to figure out like
what is the gang relation what
would be the added impact of
doing that other than maybe an
enhanced center switch is pretty
limited the way that we have
already known laws written right
now so if you could just kind of
talk on why you think that would
be helpful
mister chairs ma'am center
in reference to beginning hands
and stuff I think it is
necessary to find a way to
disincentify get specifically
gained behavior you're
absolutely right the the crimes
are committing are already
crimes they already have a
punishment attached to them or a
potential punishment.
Finding a way to further
disincentify gang activity
specifically because that's the
route of a lot of these issues I
spoke about internet clout part
of that internet count is the
gang culture so they create
these games either be staff of
games that they grew up with
around their family that had
been here in the and southern
new mexico for for decades maybe
in some instances after times
they will create their own games
but they gain culture that again
they emulate and they glorify is
a big driver then you have
related violence where you've
got two games that have a
problem
for instance we had a harmisade
a couple of years ago where a
game member was gone down by a
rival gang and in the aftermath
of that we had a huge increase
in a number of drive by
shootings shooting at motor
vehicles gunshot victims all of
those things as retailer because
the gang on king violence so
finding away to
disincentivise that lifestyle as
a whole I think is necessary so
you're absolutely right they are
committing crimes that are
already on the books and those
crimes already have punishments
attached finding a way to put
the spotlight in
enhanced sentencing at which
again is you mentioned for
juveniles the options are more
limited but they are not zero
so gain counseling treatment
other things that are mandatory
as part of a gang enhancement
for a juvenile and then for
adults same thing we can do the
game cancelling you can do that
or there can be at a time based
on getting activity to train
alleviated or a disincentivised
from the older generation
working its way down
thank you I appreciate that mr
chairman
gentleman one of the things that
it is been proposed and i'm
trying to work through with
different district attorneys is
to increase the age up to twenty
five so up through.
Twenty five which would be
twenty four and three hundred
and sixty four days right.
Out right now I I think we're up
to twenty one up through twenty
five would give us the ability
to provide services for a longer
period of time
so i'm i'm hoping that that's
one thing that we can look at my
district attorney has suggested
that we add attempted so under
the youthful offender there's a
threw in
crimes that are already listed
through m crimes that are
already listed she suggested
that we add in an and that would
be attempted any of those crimes
that are listed what what are
your thoughts about that I mean
this you share amount of center
I I think that would be a
powerful step in the right
direction because
giving the courts the
opportunity or more of an
opportunity more flexibility to
impose adult sanctions and some
of these kids are
added for expertise can be
powerful
they know that in the children's
court under the children's code
like they they are not likely to
receive a long term of incressed
ration and that there is
absolute maximum under the
children's code that they cancer
like you said up until twenty
one and in most cases it's it's
far below that in reality I
think increase in the
jurisdiction of the children's
card up to twenty five would be
a powerful way to
like you said increase the
services
and try and keep them after they
turn after they lose to
restriction out of the truck in
score to prevent them from
becoming these repeat fenders
that we deal with on the adult
site over and over and over
again if there are case began as
an adult because they're out
there doing all of this drive by
shootings these murders harm
aside aggravated batteries
having that you're searching up
until twenty five I think is a
good idea
thank you mr chairman and and
gentlemen a
I think when we think about
cares and you mentioned this
earlier that if they're sixteen
in their committee and I drive
by shooting.
And
they've had potentially sixteen
years to learn that behavior and
six months nine months a year is
hardly enough time to change
behavior sometimes that kind of
behavior takes a lifetime to try
to adjust to so I my last area
of questioning for you guys as I
and again I want to say thank
you because when I was put
responsible for implementing
adult use canada's you guys
helped me get rid of the first
facility down here in los cruces
who were sell selling dots
before canabas was allowed to be
selled and pretending like those
dots could then be transferred
for animals and that they were
selling you think so thank you
for that you guys are really
instrumental in stopping that
but in my community chief joy
has
i've had a lot of conversations
with him in his staff
they are concerned is that we
don't have
enough facilities bets I hate to
see beds because it seems really
cold they don't mean it that way
but we don't have enough places
that juveniles can be detained
for any period of time so in
santa fe we pay for six bads in
san wine whether they're used or
not and what's happened over the
course of just a couple of
months the information I have
and that was brought forward to
this committee last month is
that we have multiple juveniles
that are involved in violent
actions including actions with
guns and there's not any
facilities for them to go to I
know you have facility here for
pre trial detention are you guys
experiencing those kinds of
concerns at all
yeah.
Mr chairman of senator in terms
of the housing for for kids that
are detained pre trial typically
no typically we are not running
into an issue where they the the
only on a county detention
certain which is the the center
down here is running into issues
for for lack of space
typically though it minor
sending is there's arrangements
with our password county and
things like that
where
at the worst case scenario
arrangements could be made to
move move people around if
needed
but I do agree that
if
we're working in the interest of
holding more kids accountable
that is likely to end up with
more kids being placed in a
facility and if we don't have
the room in the facilities it's
a more point currently my insane
right now is that we have three
real facilities albacurcy donata
and I will be parts may be for
for
new mexico a large geographic
steed don't think that's going
to cut it and there's going to
be I mean this is a multipassed
issue
is to chairman of center that is
going to require a lot of
thought and the infrastructure
behind it is going to be part of
the puzzle to solve
thank you my times up
representative and I am then
representative from
thank you mr chair thank you
gentlemen and in particular
thank you for the videos
unfortunately but I think they
bring a a pretty real
perspective to what's happening
and I I have some comments more
than questions
even thinking about really hard
about just now crime as a whole
in relation to one of an
experience that I had recently
with a young person in my life
but I couldn't help and think
about juvenile crime and while
watching these videos think
what's happening to our young
men and boys in particular
because we have a lot of young
girls who also experience the
same types of trauma the same
intersections with cif.
D could have the same access to
guns as well and so i'm i'm
really thinking hard about what
is it
that we're experiencing with the
young men employees in
particular so it brings me to my
today story with a young person
in my life
we are hanging out we were
playing with toys and every time
we were like I was trying to
pretend and I was like yeah
we're going to go to dinner into
every
end of each little seeing that
we were playing and it was
something really violent like
yeah and then I shot them or
yeah and then I stab there and I
was like well we don't play like
that when you play with the
money okay but I was really but
it was wild to me because I was
going what is going on here this
is while
and a line of way
this
child really has twelve
experiences from that you know
his household his parents are
super adamant about him you know
being tough at being strong and
essentially any time he does
something that is considered
vulnerable
it's equated to being a girl are
being familiar right so to me
i'm like what are we doing I
know this this committee in
generally politics talking about
gender but like what are we
doing to young boys that makes
them feel like they have to go
to this extreme to not be a girl
should not be feminine or to not
be vulnerable and I think that
something that you know you
can't legislate but it's
something that we should
consider
especially as we're talking
about
you know different types of
reintegration programs what does
it mean to teach help you
masculinity within those
reintegration programs
and so i'll stop there mister
chair but I just think that's
something that we have to
consider.
As we are talking about
reabilitating our young folks
after you know after their help
accountable they're going to
come back into society and what
does it mean to teach healthy
masculinity thank you
mastercard.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you officers for you know you're
concerted efforts on this issue
and.
My
I agree with you know having
stricter gun
enhancement sign games and
making sure that I mean we have
pass safe storage for guns
sometimes i'll still get them
but I don't think we are able to
reach you know as many people as
we need to are now but also
I think
with this age group also we need
to look at under each drinking
because in a lot of fire arm or
shootings whether they're adults
or children that that give some
the courage to do these rapid
things and so I think we need to
work on some prevention things
as well and the three teenagers
that were killed that young park
I know there had been videos
that we've seen of how
enforcement had gone there many
times and how we
need to
increase what we
how we support our enforcement
officers and I know it's hard to
recruit get you know people
trained but it seems like that
is part of the duty touring you
know they if young people can't
congregate well there were
similar people to but you know
if there's not a way to
congregate and have that kind of
expression with guns and.
Make sure that
they
understand that there is
enforcement and going back to
swift certain and severe to the
laws that we already have that
we won't have like this one
young man who know had so many
offences and
for us to work out the
competency but
also to make sure that we can
give the time necessary to
rehabilitate these young people
to get them you know so that the
judiciary are judges will you
know
a sign them to treatment and to
a facility where they are given
the time I met a young man who
had killed someone and after a
year he finally started
understanding what had happened
he was still under eighteen but
getting that understanding and
and changing his life around I
think is something that we need
to give you a chance and but yet
not to let them continue to
affect so thank you and I look
forward to working more on some
of these
suggestions of legislation thank
you.
Representative
nor know
thank you very much for him
chair and think you sergeant and
three and officer burling for
this presentation it was very
heartbreaking and but also very
I opening it as well I just
wanted to ask a really quick
question kind of expanding one
some of the
competency issues raised by
representative read and the
senator sorry representative
do know why with regard to the
case of this very young man
racked up with forty nine
charges in five years and was
deemed incompetent every time do
you know why the da did not
pursue and voluntary commitment
for that young person.
Would say mister chair
made a representative dear III
don't know I wish I knew I wish
I had the power of two
have influenced over those
decisions
I I don't I know there are
options out there for
involuntary commitment like you
talk about but it's not
something that I have seen
implemented i'm not sure the the
digitics behind it i'm not sure
what that the findings need to
be between the dears officer the
children's court.
For that to occur in terms of
this particular child it's a
clear example of of a systemic
failure for him I don't know why
and I don't know I mean they're
it it's possible that they're
there was an instance of
involuntary commitment at some
point over over his childhood
but it clearly was ineffective
based on how everything ended
up.
Thank you and i'll i'll be
honest with you and mister chair
I didn't really anticipate you
knowing the concrete answer why
but if ever there was an
instance where that would be
worth pursuing its definitely a
case like this then I just want
us to start thinking really
seriously about why
these children are slipping
through the cracks when if ever
there was one that needed some
really real intervention it
would be that one so thank you
very much for the time thank
you.
A senator city of office
thank you and thank you for the
presentation and thank you for
bringing solutions from your
perspective I always think that
legislation from the people who
are actually affected and have
to implement it is always is
always really great
the the it mean well and I guess
I did want to say something
about competency with children
that's so hard because
developmentally
I don't know it it's it's really
hard and I agree we have to work
on it but it is different from
adult confidency because I think
you can treat a child to
competency where often you can't
treat an adult competency but
you know just because the
passage of time but I actually
had a specific question about
one of the proposals invest in
an empower jpos
empower gpos to issue a rest
orders upon is showing a problem
because that a violation of a
condition of probation or
condition of releases occurred
doesn't happen doesn't I guess
i'm confused about what this
adds right now the gpo contacts
the judge and an and a warrant
is issued right
guess i'm confused about how
this works mr share madame
senator my understanding is that
be the do not
go directly to the judge they
will file a probation violation
the paperwork on their end
through jpl file it with the
districts attorney's office that
it's his attorney's office will
evaluate it and make a
determination of the will
proceed they will then present
it to the children's court at
which point they may seek a
warrant from a judge or the
judgment issue a bench but again
that that process is type it is
not a timely process and that is
the problem and that's what i'm
asking for what I think would be
helpful is that again on the
door side I can call a probation
upstairs directly they run up
their flag pool and within a
very short amount of time
usually with.
Within an hour usually
I can have an arrest recorrect
detail saying their authorities
for a detention based on a
finding of probably costs that
they violated the probation I
that I thought it worked that
way with children as well so
that I appreciate that
explanation because I did think
we'll wait I don't understand
how it was different
so just in the future they when
you're giving this the solution
what happens now versus what
could happen and why why does
the da need to get involved
again because it's
I mean was that the area of
getting the da involved again no
mr care madam center if I knew I
would have to do this
we wouldn't have to do I I wish
I knew the answer I do not know
again this it's how it said i'm
not sure if that's
written in in the the
legislature itself i'm not sure
if that's a policy thing here
and on your account I I could
not to but I will tell you that
that's the common problem into
it i'm not positive that's the
practice in burning
the times I did children's while
we represent it children
and my impression was that the
that the jpo could get him in
jail in a in a day but the truth
is that may not have been you
know I don't know if the day was
involved I don't think so but
but a generally but I agree with
you that should change it
doesn't make sense because one
of the things is you when
there's an action you would have
a consequence quickly
especially with his age group so
no I really appreciate the
presentation and it was really
upsetting
to to see that we don't see that
every day and I think it's
important for you to
share us chair with this what
you see so thank you thank you
I think we've been for everybody
on the list thank you for a good
discussion a couple things one
is tomorrow and i'm hoping most
of you can stay I know it's a I
know it's hard to do three days
particularly when you've come a
long way many view from.
I I know that part of the state
downsale but tomorrow will have
judged ran who is the judge who
hears most of the juvenile cases
here and will and we'll have the
district attorney back in front
of the messages with the focus
on looking at things like
confident and see amendability
and so forth so I think that'll
be a really good presentation
now one invite you gentlemen if
you can in the department can be
present again today or tomorrow
for some of that dialog in
discussions I think that's
useful they're in the will
naturally be some tension
between the judge and and the
district attorney on these
issues twenty that's kind of
what I have no I enjoy a little
bit of I attended the young part
going that the the shoes are
young park I attended the
hearing on motions to detain and
I went to that that hearing
because of course we've heard so
much over the last several years
but pre trial detention I want
to see how it worked in practice
and that happened when mister
muss is was relatively new as
the day and he did the hearings
he was the attorney who actually
did the hearings himself and
judged around was the judge on
those and she she detained those
individuals and it's in its
ensuring to me because when it
comes to detention we see to me
very disperate results from
different judges different
prosecutors in different parts
of the state very candidately
what's going to get you held in
hobs and eddie and carl's birth
can be different and well what
gets you held in burning okay if
you should add a politicians
house you're going to get
detained in those into that
individual did we ever down in
the valley shoots always ask its
circumstance back to work kind
of thing right so it it doesn't
it doesn't work it is make sense
in it and it shouldn't do any of
us so I I do look forward to
maybe talking to judge deren and
mister messages tomorrow about
this competency in the
determination i'm i'm naturally
concerned and always have been
that we have a different system
of justice in the federal courts
and that's part of the reason
why I asked you all to be here
today is that and we're in
talking with a cheap story and
and
matmer mission masses and others
the cases are going to be
prosecuted federal court because
they're getting the relief.
The venture think is necessary
from a federal judge where in a
federal system that they're not
getting in a state court and I
don't know where there's
different psychologists that
were using or some different
standard of competency but will
or find out where we we want to
get to the bottom of the extreme
clearly getting different
results
under on the subject of gun
safety laws
I I do appreciate this last
session I think I was getting
close to the apocalypse
and watching for the horseman
coming and all that because I
introducing home bill that
actually had republicans the
vote for it and I think center
brown he was referring to that
too and generally speaking for
example the background check
bill I was the sponsor of that
of the original bill requiring a
background check unfortunately I
think it was a party line vote
and I think i'm all my
republican colleagues voted
against it and I think my
democrat boards voting for and
it shouldn't be that way because
you're asking us to enhance that
war even a bit beyond the
background checks in it i'm
hoping we're going to get there
I i've always thought that the
way we're going to get to
sensible gun laws is by having
law enforcement take the lead
and i'll and I explain you all
go out in the streets every day
and you put your lives at risk
and I can't imagine that
sacrifice that you were asking
to make to you and your families
by doing that but I want you
know how much we respect that
and and the one thing that is
inconsiderable to me is that
you're out on the streets and
out mandate out gun
we would never let our military
go against an adversary and have
fewer arms and lesser weapons in
our adversary yet we do that
with you all every day when we
send you out in the streets and
your adversaries have better
arms and you do and more of them
and and them I open i'm looking
forward to the day when i'm
hearing a little bit from what
i'm here for you today was
protect us right protect us with
some sensible gun because that's
how we're going to get gun laws
and that's how we're going to
get over this part is individual
this whole notion that all any
going lies
democrat leading republican
opposed and so forth we we can
get over that but we're gonna
have to be smart and creative
and we're gonna need your help
and it we're gonna you guys say
we don't we don't want to have
those kind of weapons on the
streets and we shouldn't and i.
I'm i'm kind of in somewhat
happy to hear that maybe that's
where we can get get some of
this change to but pretty good
when you talk about age of
ownership and different firms we
don't have a sensible long that
right you can have a hand gun
which you can have what were you
can have a hang out with you
have a long gun under the age of
eighteen that or not under
nineteen dollars sense right
it's in your point that out
trust your your sheer facing the
other end of a shot gun just as
much as you're facing element of
a nine millimeter indeed what
difference is it mate right and
yet our law somehow
distinguishes between the two
and it really shouldn't so I I
look forward to these canada and
those discussions and really is
this committee hooks continues
to come together we had some
division today we'll inevitably
at times have some very
difference of opinions on things
but I hope that the the
participation here brings us
together a little bit the the
telecommunication will talk
about that i'm sure it's a I
appreciate you coming to us with
suggestions we should never look
down on any
suggestions and negatively i'll
tell you the gang activity
I I introduce the per gang bill
at the request of mayor marty
chavis that tells you how long
i've been doing this in
alberturchy a very long time ago
at by the end of that session I
thought it was a hazing request
because to you you've noted in
your slight how do you define
what is a gang and of course we
have a constitutional right to
protect association and so when
you protect the right of
association are you can't find a
gain by the closure where by the
caters you have or by the
anything you can't do those
things constitutionally right so
how to get there it becomes
really challenging we've had
some attempts recently on
definiting what again is and
they usually get shot down but I
I again I I think it's a real
problem we were
paul taylor today that was one
of my questions for the people
there is what is the gang
saturation at a jaypaul taylor
and they they assured me that it
wasn't significant but it's
there right now and we better
get to the bottom of all that
too.
I answered note from my
committee's benefit and again to
get me in trouble with the
executive brand sometimes but
none of the laws we've talked
about today you're proposing
where anything that were part of
the special session that was so
urgent last year or the frankly
I and others got so criticized
for not passing immediately
afterwards in our town home
looking at on a you and others
I appreciate you all but I was
there with the governor and I
took the the linking there and
then I had my own town hall you
all came to that to and and your
chief did as well do but but III
note that we've got to come up
with laws that really are going
to do something and and I note
that you're everything you're
proposing here would seem to do
something to me and an inching a
lot of things that we thought
we're so important last year I
have you gone a waste of
panhandling being one of them I
guess
the the mandatory sentencing is
an instinct issue i'll try and
put that back in here the feds
have mandatory sentencing in a
way that states don't in the for
as many years i've been here I
argued we should give judges a
lot of discretion
but sometimes we don't the only
going to area I think we don't
give judges very much discretion
is on DWI and out and incentive
on device I just really don't
have very much discretional and
I think there's there's a lesson
there why did we decide that on
dwies we tell in our statute
judge you cannot plead down a
certain version of the wiser and
defense as you can't you can't
plead down you can't reduce it
you can and and why do we do
that with jokers well the other
understand insurance well i'll
just give me a lot of troubles
ago who prepares in front of
judges all day long we don't we
don't we don't know that we
trust the judges to impose the
harsh and of sentencing so we
told him you don't have any
discretion on that and I got to
tell you when I talked to judges
a lot of times they're going to
happy that they don't have that
discretion there they kind of
like the fact that they don't
have to make that call on a dbi
because they sometimes realize
that it's somebody they know or
somebody that that are an
offense that could have happened
to them or whatever we so i've
i've had more than a few judge
say yeah we're kind of glad we
our hands are tight on this I
don't I don't know that's a good
solution but I I do I do want to
be careful with.
Getting myself in trouble with
the judges but
i've always argued for judicial
discretion and yet more than a
few times of late I wonder
whether judges have sometimes do
not reflect the the will of the
electorate and the communities
which they serve whether they've
lost a with that I think that's
true of some judges I think some
judges have last touch with what
the community expects in terms
of a safe society and a safe
community I say that would a lot
of
risk to myself
i'm not going to name names but
we would you all know who they
are we talk about him and then
we talked about a private the
background that's judge so and
so yeah slap on the risk judge
right or alternatively and our
system shouldn't work that way
our system shouldn't work where
you get the right judge on the
right day on the right near the
week or whatever that you're
going to get a different result
in somebody else is going to get
in a different circumstance and
we've got to figure out a way to
try and and do that because as
you point out the youth figure
that out right then they know
they're not going to get trouble
and and they take advantage of
it too so
I think that we have to
recognize that there is a
politics in criminal justice I
say uniting your head I see the
folks not entirely not your head
I hate to admit it but it's true
uh the composition of the city
council
changes the way that crime is
enforced and see lost crucials
the common position of the
county commission changes way
laws in enforcement last week it
has changed it has changed in
albuquerque the same in his
change in santa fe the same I
see my colleagues website of it
or based on their head but
nobody will say it but they'll
say it privately who your mayor
is who you're seeing council is
who your counter commission is
determined whether you're going
to have strict crime enforcement
or not
and it filters all its way down
through judges and that's not
going to be a popular message
that gets out there but for me
it's going to see it and I see a
lot of heads not in the
affirmative the set i've made
the point same state laws are in
hobs the roswell in eddie county
same state laws is.
It and yet it's right it changes
by days and it changed but that
state laws are the same and the
only point I make there is the
solution it's not going to come
entirely by changing state laws
cause we have the same state was
that you all do in your part of
the state and you have a very
different result
in terms of crime with the same
state laws so we need to be
recognizing that comes down to
you all comes out of district
attorneys comes down to judges
and so again I think I speak for
the whole community we
appreciate your service at those
of you their colleagues who were
in the room were not at the
table and who are back at the
office for you the people out of
the street every day we are we
appreciate your very much thank
you
anyone else okay thank you john
you're excused for now thank you
mister chairman and welcome you
to stick around for the coming
discussion we have a little bit
time not much a little bit time
to discuss amongst ourselves and
then I do hope that maybe you
can join us or send somebody to
join us tomorrow for a judge to
ran and mister macias again we
have dinner plans we show a five
thirty recess is a little bit of
time for conversation and sorry
we ran a little bit into that
time but i'd like to use maybe
thirty minutes we have a moved
and notified the folks that are
taking care of dinner there will
be there at six
the location is in the sea so
i'm hoping that all you can go
directly from here to there is
that going to be okay if
everybody says we're dropping
from here to there we can allow
a little more time for some
discussion on the folks would
rather go back to their hotels
to take your main thing i'll
i'll cut off the meeting now but
wishes of the committee anyway
anyway okay anybody need to
leave immediately we have thirty
minutes maybe okay all right
six clock in this year and it's
in itself it's not a buffet deal
you gotta be there on time
they're certain plates so please
be on time six plus
what's up
salute salute are we sitting I
should probably not.
I already earning went too far
committee members questions
comment starts anyone
know
anything I don't
think this year on anything I
don't know my wheels are
spending my coach that were
tired and and I want to know
that I think we are tired but I
really do believe it's because
we were pretty hard to day
between the tour the questions
of of those individuals the
presentations this afternoon
some tough issues some raw
emotion
hard work and I think that's
rightfully why we're turning
glad you'll feel the same way
represent remember I just had
one comment on the cloud idea
that was discussed today about
children being using social
media for this messaging that we
and it's not for the law
enforcement to have to do but
how we make hold accountable
in social media companies that
are allowing for these forums to
be used by children
for criminal activities
I know that regulating our
social media sites are are
extremely default due to first
amendment but we're talking
about kids here and i'm just i'm
really curious how we might
pursue those protections for for
yeah the public and and of
course for these kids that are
using this for current call
clout don't i'm really curious
i'm looking around for brandon
and i'll see him but i'm and
maybe keep oak philip we didn't
mean there was a bill introduced
wasn't there that allowed for
action against the
what's if there is a particular
site i'm not going to name a
room on broad broadcast the cops
would tell us but there's a
particular site where the kids
go in my trade guns and and the
question was with the etcetera
and I think maybe right yeah the
co chair she knows which one it
is but there's a particular site
and and you're right it'd be
good to to look at that and try
and do that too.
Represent a senate search for
him yeah and in that regard a
representative of their our
firms that are reaching out and
working with school districts to
sue social media for the impact
of the task so those that I
believe is class action is
really kind of getting some
traction
and they've been presenting at
school board meetings across the
state for a probably six months
or more
mister I wonder to the ages
office on a consumer
protection's piece to have that
something were participating in
as well
good ideas and things we should
present.
I think with so yeah on a
related thing if I can yeah
I wear it at the coffee at the
chapel taylor today the kids
went on their complaints was
they they said they spent too
much time just going to be
passive by tv you know they said
on the so when they said they
have hours where they're just
going to give it a tv and III
looked at the particular videos
they had there some curiosity to
see what they were what they
were watching
fortunately I didn't see what I
was afraid i'd see which is are
you all know I I raise daughter
is now this is a gender maybe
this has been inappropriately
gender specific but I raised
others there was no xbox in our
house there was no game boy in
our house but they had
boyfriends
and now I have a sudden law and
from what i've seen of those and
there's been many a time that I
wanted to come but an example on
the screen for you all over in
our committee of what those
games involved is what I see of
them are people with automatic
weapons killing as many people
they possibly can in the most
horrific ingredients protest
ways they can and we have I
think particularly young man it
may be unfair me to say that I
think it's probably true mostly
young men spending hours and
hours competing to kill more
people in the shortest matter
time possible in the most
protest ways with the most
horrific weapons possible and
they do that for hour and after
our I can't help but believe
they become desensitized to the
value of life and begin to see
it as a video game or something
less and i've been looking for
the right case for the process
i'm looking for the right case
in my career to find the
opportunity to try and and find
a legal way to go though the
people who profit from that
account let alone this way to do
it and haven't spent probably as
much time and worked as they
should but III have to raise it
I I employed parents if you've
got an end and I don't I don't
think it's in logical leap to
note that the mass skillers tend
to be mails of a certain age
group.
And so your parents out so I can
do this employer parents have
you got a next box in the game
boy your kids are playing video
games all day shooting and
killing people you may have some
responsibility for
their condit
in this is where they wind up
and i've always wanted to know
when the when we have these
young part killers to the
detectors go home and find what
what's what's on the xbox right
with something with sonda
machine and and as the kids is
any best kids I mean me hours a
day a week a month a year you're
in a lifetime you spent shooting
people for kicks
that's a little bit as a side of
yours but closer
other things even when talk
about i'm also now it's a good
time if not today tomorrow to
talk about future topics nancy's
and see ban inspector
with answered back over yeah we
we could get things about which
one on the future subjects we
try and take good note of that
and you all probably don't
commute to saying I hope you'll
probably not one thing that I do
it's a little different than
most committees went to water
natural resources last week want
to finance last week those those
comings will have in a given day
twenty five thirty speakers
presenting
ten topics or whatever maybe
you're only getting one or two
topics than afternoon or in the
day because I really prefer to
take again and and and dig deep
into that hope that's so working
for everybody here but you're
not going to hear a lot of
people and and I I kind of
considered some of those things
look like infomercials to meet
signal it comes what they're
doing how important they are
with what it make work to do and
then please give us more money
it's usually the way they go for
me so anyway that's that's the
the pattern but this is a good
time to tell us other things
you'd like to dig into so
antenna and then under
thank you mister charles tether
a question that and maybe you
you already discussed this is
criminal is that juvenile
justice reform going to be under
special session we know no it's
not so it's not okay good I just
because.
It's so complicated that we need
more time and I hope it isn't
a longer time thank you
center look at
it
thank you
yeah you know when the issue
that came up today recognize
that one first we're not going
to be able to answer is that
confidence the issue and I would
I would really like if we have
the opportunity to hear from
someone who could give us
information about why under the
federal they're getting
determined to be confident and
one hundred mexico they're not
because that seems like a root
that that seems like a real
first issue to resolve
with all of those cases
i'd like to know if there's
something we can do to fix that
yeah what we we see this III
think i've told all of you it's
an inching position to to all
the chair of this committee and
reps of chainer prior has the
same for for a many years I had
the disk attorney berlio county
in our age and I think I
but he call me and and push the
pretail attention and give me
reasons why and then the
government would do the same and
so forth and
what was it always insured to me
is that the that the district
attorney brilliant country was
was telling me outright that it
was put pursuing more cases in
federal court because of a
project predicting better
outcomes and better results
there and
I think you're talking to a
cheap story in the long person
they're doing the same thing and
that that's a failing of our
state I think I state government
if you will have to go to the
federal court to get a more
efficient more swift more
reliable results but
you're right by tomorrow and
happened just you must see this
can answer some of those
president and judge ranking
answer questions about
competency so over rips of
channel
thank you mr chair I have been
i've been talking over the
course really have several
months with the forensic
psychologists program that you
went out.
And I consulted with them when I
was working on the competency
though and they're expanding
their program and they would
love to come and talk to us
about that but it also seems to
me it might fed in worth
questions we have about the
difference between young people
and adults and competency that
all works and I know they were
interested in cut trying to come
and talk to us so perhaps when
we're a most limited which is.
Being tied into this
conversation and they can talk
about the work they're doing to
make sure we have people to do
the examinations because
remember one of the things is we
need the people doing the work
and they are training people
they'd like to explain.
Others
all right we'll see remain
tomorrow and nine they're very
okay with line and we will start
earlier.
What's that
well
I think i'm not hearing over now
cry for changing so we'll start
at nine and what what we expect
to have you out here by eleven
otherwise I just be talking to
each other.
Alright salute everyone.
