So yesterday I hadn't mentioned
everyone that we would have
judged iran here this morning I
got a message about five o'clock
yesterday evening judge round
was anyone to free upper
schedule to be here but we have
misconterral i'll explain to let
her introduce yourself with her
background a bit and we've got
been back and he's got some of
his people to cover the same
subject matter I think even
potentially maybe with a little
bit more
experience in the area in the
miscontinuous here on my left a
dear quick so now I have a seat
please
i'll let her introduce yourself
a cheap she came out at for
others with mr missus
recommendation when I talked
about the she said she would
have a far better grass with
their issues at a mike as well
too so with that explanation a
couple of other things too and
hope involves can manage to
stick around in order to long
drive to get on for many of you
all i'm i'm going to be very
committed to getting us down by
eleven o'clock on the outside
that even allows some time for a
discussion so I hope you'll be
able to stick around for that in
part because I do hope we'll
have some time to talk a little
bit about our next meeting and
with the agenda will be what
should be
that is is it interesting right
now that meeting will probably
be on the eve a special session
and i'm increasingly told it
then with that special such as
reliable and probably the first
week of october and things when
I mean total next meeting is one
of the data next meetings
you know for next meeting.
Twenty three and twenty four
okay so twenty two twenty three
twenty four another three day
and again I want to thank
everybody here for sticking out
three days three days or tough I
know for all of us at their
tough for me when i'm traveling
at a state to come see you so
the next one will be a three day
and i'll be like considered it
it looks like it's gonna be
about a week to ten days before
what we told us a special
session so we may be adjusting
that agenda again shortly before
handed accommodating last minute
changes in what the plans may be
for that again I appreciate and
then we'll look forward to maybe
it's been a little bit of time
after with the last couple of
days here maybe the end of today
you are telling us what subjects
you'd like to have followed up
on that way we may be open the
door to a little bit maybe
require some more exploration so
well with that and the other
thing too is i'm hoping you'll
notice when this is this best
late plans was if it works
there's there should be some
green chilly showing up here
shortly so
you may see the sack and green
chilly outside these stores with
a lot of baggies and I encourage
all of you to help yourself and
take it home it should be good
stuff so
no come
really really representative
you are from standard very hard
so
no we don't have a roaster
outside for you but
won't what you what you'll find
I think is that it's it's
actually I it's a lot of funded
by your neighbors over we do it
all the time like the neighbors
over and we rose screen chillin
drink beer and put it on the
grill and it's a good way to
have a good time so
suggested to and I am not and
for you representative remember
as for the mild.
Alright this continued thank you
got drafted here a late
yesterday I know and I
appreciate you doing so but I
would I like you to begin just a
humanist little bit your
background one of the things
that I think it's probably
issues and committee light is
that you were the superintendent
of jake paul taylor center for
four years and so we were out
there yesterday and we were all
very impressed by that crew with
the working on you also been in
district court judge and I
appointed by was that governor
martinez governor martinez so
that will make some of my
friends in the room happy
and and in addition to serving
on the distribute bench you've
served as a magistrate judge you
now at a retirement came back to
the district attorney's office
and your background is very
heavily
influenced by your work in
juvenile justice issues and so I
think that that's why them
mister macia is thought that
you'd be a a strong person that
had and maybe in his injudged
around step but take a moment to
tell us who you are introduced
yourself you all know ben and
and we're going to talk about
juvenile is justice when we talk
that's not we want to make sure
we get into the issues of a
menibility and and explain what
that's about hearing about it
and we also spend a lot of time
you should talk about competency
and and I told you that we would
like to talk more about a junior
competitor issues we heard last
cause the city police
for a very good presentation of
audio and video of juvenile
spoon were marking the system by
essentially knowing that they
were going to be able to avoid
prosecution i'm competency
ground so we'd like to know how
that competency process works
with with it with all of that no
caveat only due to lose yourself
and will turn over to you.
Yes all right now it is i'm in
terror and right now i'm a
deputy district attorney at the
third judicial district but
really my career started out
back in nineteen eighty and ill
annoy and I kind of dating
myself here and I
was a student at the university
of illinois and the clinical
forensic program and eventually
got a phd in clinical forensic
psychology
I started out as an internet as
a master's level doing
competency evaluations for the
court system and cook county and
into page county which is
chicago and the rest you know
surrounding areas and when I got
my phd I joined the department
of justice and the beer of
prisons and I spent the majority
of my seventeen year career
doing confidence the evaluations
doing dangerousness evaluations
doing presentency valuations for
the different federal districts
and this was nation nationwide
my specialty at that time I
worked closely with secret
service and my specialty was
threatened against the precedent
so we did have a number of cases
regarding that
kind of got channeled into the
widsec program in evaluations
for those and ended up the last
part of my career was working
with the f b I to some extent in
their behavior analysis unit i'm
looking at serial killers
disruptive groups particularly
prison games and I was in court
a lot and my best day in court I
was just having so much fun just
enjoying being there and I
thought I could do this I could
be enough to herning and and
that looks like fun so
went to last school and I
haven't really been disappointed
after that but I went to UNM and
I believe I did have this sedio
docath and in civil procedure.
And she was there I graduated in
nineteen ninety nine and
immediately went into criminal
law and spent was working under
susan martinez when she was the
district attorney down here when
she laughed at which was back at
the end of two thousand twelve
in two thousand thirteen I was
appointed as the superintendent
of chapal tailor center and that
was there for about four years
and I was appointed magistrate
judge but eight months later
appointed district court charge
and i've done other things you
know I I was the domestic
relations hearing officer still
participated in a lot of
forensic type of activities and
overseeing them
and then the funding ran out for
that position and I retired and
I catered retirement so I came
back to work so that's what i'm
doing now and currently I
basically coordinate and manage
the confidency program out of
the district attorney's office
they do the magistrate court
competency transfers to district
court I do civil commitments
every friday morning and I
review and help the other
attorneys when there is a
competency and sanity or
dangerousness issue that it's a
raised and any of the cases so I
act as a consultant and help
them so that is pretty much my
experience with compensate
issues and also with juvenile
issues and when I was back with
understand a martinos I was
doing children's court at that
time for a number of years and
then and currently engaged in
that now.
Oh thank you so with the
background tells how competency
works competency incantable it's
different in juvenile senate
adults clearly
when you have a juice and all
the issue of companies he can be
raised by either party either
defense or the state and more
often than not its defense
council raising the issue the
the child disreferred to
evaluator they had a value
waiter is on contract with the
department of health currently
and this is one of the issues
that we run into
i'm sure mr bower can can talk
about this too is that in the
state there's only for us only
two
evaluators who will do juveniles
and and and that's kind of this
heartening you know because they
have a look it's hard to get an
appointment because one of the
evaluate actually both of them
do adults as well and so they're
they're juggling time they're
juggling space and appointments
and usually we have according to
statute forty five days in which
to get the evaluation and have a
report produced to the court but
let's talk about juvenile so we
get a report back in and the
child this competent well you
know we go back to you know
working with that case and
trying to come to a resolution
of the case but when a child is
incompetent that evaluator has
in that evaluation has to make a
decision has to make a judgment
based on what they know is this
child in competent is he likely
to regain competency within a
year's period of time if it is a
felony offense and they would
make that statement you know
with the possibilities through
the what the child would need to
attain competency again if the
child is charged with the
misdemeanor that the statute
says the case gets dismissed
there's no treatment accompanied
see that's the ant that's the
end of the.
Case which is also kind of this
heartening because some majority
of our kids that we see our miss
demeanor level resisting ebay
and obstructing
possession of a hand gun by a
person under nineteen which
surprisingly is the misdemeanor
and so you know you've got those
concerning offenses but there's
nothing by statute we can do
because the statute says mister
meaner dismiss if it competent
if child is charged with a
felony there's also two ways
that that could go either he
could be treated to competency
within a year's period of time
so the case is kind of placed on
hold and the child can be
referred out to some treatment
whatever the issues are and
helping to attain confidency
before that year is up or back
and court to see where we have
where we at with this and
haven't really had that happen
very frequently but the other
side is that the evaluator says
a work here she won't attain
because of the nature of their
disability will not attain
competency and then we could do
a number of things that
basically where it were stock I
don't want to say stock where
we're kind of at a a stand off
here and and usually the case
sense of getting dismissed
however
cyfd and and very heinus kinds
of cases like criminal sexual
penetration are a sex case or
something like that will make
and take that child and and
refer them to a residential
treatment center all that's
another issue because we don't
have a whole light of him in new
mexico so what do we do we got a
priorities how much we need and
how much that child needs
rehabilitation and can we do it
you know my thought and being
and being the superintendent of
j paul taylor is you know we
talk about rehabilitation and
that's great.
But there's a category of kids
who haven't been hobilitated in
the first place so we have to
start from the beginning to give
them those skills before
something happens and then we
come in and reheabilitate so I
believe that perhaps what our
system may be missing is that
first stage the habilitation of
kids who get into trouble and
when we talk about confidency
and and someone being
incompetent it's not a global
term it's not like okay you are
fit the same the same shirt you
know it it can't incompetency
can be due to a number of
different things and we're
talking about excess one or so
called psychotic disorder like
skits are frenio or by polar
disorder or or is something
that affects their conditive
processes or talking
incompetency because of brain
damage in which case you're
probably never going to get that
kid to be competent because of
the nature and location of the
brain damage work could talk
about and I and i'm going to use
this term because this is what
the statute uses mental
retardation I think we call it
different things and
developmentally delayed or
disability those kids depending
on where their iq may never be
attained competency because you
can't change I it's an inherent
kind of thing we have other
developmental disabilities such
as feedle alcohols and drams
such as
you know some kind of adjustment
disorder that affects their
everyday living
and then we've got that little
category of kids who are
malingering and I just want to
say a few words about that
people I think we all live
millinger at some point calling
in sick and we're not after you
know not going to school or you
know whatever it is but
is it that big of a percentage
of the.
Competency evaluations that we
get returned to us and
statistics show that the test
that are pretty much standard
for all evaluators have a built
in validity and reliability
scale and evaluators can tell or
should be able to tell right
away by looking at test results
look they scored way high on the
fake in bad scale and that
brings in everything into
question or you have a kid who
gives a history and this and
then the evaluator checks out
that history and it's not true
they will say that in their
report they will say that either
an adult or a juvenile is
possibility of belingering and
then what we can do when we get
that we asked the court i'm
asking for another evaluation
this is really inconclusive and
you might think that we only get
one bite of the apple but we
don't if we can raise some
issues as the reliability of a
particular report we can have
the district court judge order
another evaluation to be done by
an impartial evaluator I have
had that done twice in the last
year with juvenile i've had it
done once with an adult
n and that's where we're at the
problem is that when we have a
child who is not competent and
either is not competitive from
the beginning or is not
competent after a year what do
we do with them because at that
point the courts last
jurisdiction and and there's no
programs here at least down here
and donate a county we are very
sparse on programs part of it is
a funding issue part of it is a
resource issue and part of it is
that our are mental health are
out patient clinics are so
booked with people
that it's hard to get an
appointment is hard to get a
regular schedule of of
assessments in.
At some point now my belief my
personal belief not necessarily
representing mr misses is that
we need funding to bring in
people who can do evaluations
who can provide that treatment
to confidence see whatever that
entails it's going to be
different with each child
depending on what their issues
are
so I don't know much more I can
say about that but
other than I have been in an
informal work group where
senator hickey and
representative matthews both
from alba kirky and we have been
meeting talking about the
competency issue we all happen
to go to this conference in
miami miami was not a pleasant
experience but the conference
was great and we got together at
that point and senator hickies
agenda what he wants to do is to
look to bring professionals into
new mexico that we don't have
enough to service the the mental
health needs of this state with
what we have now he's talking
about let's get let's get some
people here who can do the job
let's get some funding and let's
read look at the cut the new
competency statute because the
resolutions in the new
competency statute
can't be done at this point done
here because we don't have the
resources and and that's the
bottom line resources and money.
Thank you miss chair members of
the committee my name is bennett
power and the chief public
fender mister chair we have
a few other people from our
department who I called
yesterday afternoon and they are
here
and let me just introduce them
in the audience from our major
crimes division which handles
serious some of the serious
juvenile crimes that are our
serious youth fulfender or a
useful offender cases we have
told her mccormick and calmost
we there and
the head of our duties division
is lindsey back benetar and
mister chair if she could grab
to join me up here I think from
this discussion that that's
alright.
And
just how letter it selled into a
couple things to make you see if
there's some additional things
that miss benefit might want to
add to this discussion this has
been really helpful for me to
hear
as I may have mentioned you
before I
started my career's public
fenner but then spent five years
in santa fe as an assistant
district attorney the first two
years was in juvenile court as
it you can accord prosecutor
actually the ones were pretty
different back in the mid
nineties so if it's changed a
lot but I had a lot of contact
with juggles charge of serious
fences and as we're talking
about how to address these and
responding somewhat to the
presentation by the officer from
speech please department
yesterday
you know is really concerning to
see some of those videos and
here about what is going on in
this community and some of the
other communities I think in
speaking to people who work in
the juvenile field
of all of those things of course
all of the since we saw happened
those children are real some of
those attitudes are real but I
would tell you that I think
there's a consensus that's not
what's going on everywhere
around the state of new mexico
and I would caution against
creating policies based upon
those things they're real we
need to respond to them we need
to look at those case studies we
need to trace back and see
what's going on with those
children and what we can learn
but we can't make statewide wise
based upon those
so much of what you will hear I
think because it is prove is
that
the black of resources and so
many intercept points in the
court system really affect what
what we can do when it when a
child is found not competent I I
really like the fact that you
talk about rebuildation I think
but abilitation how are you you
put it I mean we're not.
Treating kids back to competitor
it's not like they were
confident and they were bringing
it back they have not developed
they just haven't developed you
know be social skills
the understanding of our
community of what is right in
what's wrong because they have
been raised on the video games
that we talked about before
they've been raising the
households where they're
parents are doing drugs parents
are not present parents are in
an out of custody and those kids
have not had much of a chance
i'm not making excuse for the
kinds of behavior that we saw on
the videos yesterday or what
some of our kids do
but as public defenders we meet
these kids literally where they
are go to their homes if they're
out of custom
you know meet them meet their
parents me often their
grandparents I think you know
whoever it is he's trying to
provide that community for them
and so really talking about the
kids of what's happening in just
criminal court is such a small
part what we have to do and the
funding for behavior health
services I think is we are
talking before one of the real
points is as that is rolling out
through however it's been
coordinated through a street
office that courts we can't
forget the juda part of this
it's not just funny for adults
services it's funny for juvenile
services to so
one thing I may want to ask this
benefit whatever comments you
might have on what was presented
here but also how many shooting
cases what the trend is in tuny
cases because again III want to
emphasize this is not
all over the community
everywhere you go it's real but
it's not everything so
it's been tour maybe if you
order this comparable know how
many shooting cases are with the
trend has been over the last.
I don't have any specific
statistics on on the number
just introduced yourself with a
little bit
yes i'm sorry my name is lindsey
mcdonald venetar i'm the
supervising attorney at the
juvenile division of the last
crucial.
Twelve years and i.
I've assisted in and some
serious useful offender cases
home and sites
so the
as far as the trend for shooting
recently we had the shooting at
young park
in my estimation after that I
haven't seen any other children
coming in that have been charged
with actual shootings and we do
you know possessions of weapons
of course but I see that a
downward trend I believe but i'm
asking terrible might have more
specific statistics on that.
A little chance to look into it
but before I differ to her I I
did want to just
talk about the issue of
milingering a little bit.
It's pretty much a hundred
percent of the time it's going
to be the defense attorney
that's raising confidence in the
case and this is absolutely not
something that we're doing in
every case and it's not
something that we're doing to
try and avoid penalties for our
client we have to have a good
fee to believe that the child
doesn't have a factual rational
understand.
Their defense.
The report that the evaluation
doctor generates it's not based
solely on meeting child as part
of the process we request
records from the trial school
district and so the evaluating
doctor is getting all of the
records from the schools that
exist I mean that can be from
kindergarten all the way to
however old they are and a lot
of times the schools themselves
have done I qthey've done
other tests with the kids it can
show their academic progress or
struggles
in addition to that of the
child's ever been in any therapy
or been any treatment center
prior we'll get those records on
the evaluator will have those.
I and I know that milingering
can happen but I I think that it
would be very rare the child
would have to first do their
attorney and the evaluator and
pretty much everyone over there
span of their school career too
so
there's a lot that goes into
making that determination.
In this chair we
could hear we'd have a
conversation about the number of
shooting cases that you would
brought up and if it's alright
mr chair for her to address that
and that's true we were asked by
the second judicial district
attorney's office to
give them a number about how
many cases we charged and
children's court from I think
january first two thousand
twenty three to the present time
which was I believe last month
through the month before and so
I went through every case and in
two thousand twenty three we
didn't have any gun cases I I
mean they were rare there was
unusual
maybe one or two but out of all
of the kids that we charge per
year that's nothing um the
beginning of twenty twenty four
again still didn't have a lot of
gun charges and i'm talking
about bringing a weapon into
school i'm talking about minor
in possession of a hand gun and
i'm also talking about drive by
shootings and shootings and and
and at the first part of two
thousand and twenty four didn't
really happen a lot but it
happened and then at the last
part of two thousand twenty four
into the present it has
escalated um we have had some
young park shooting is huge
we have had a couple little
drive buys but
we went from zero in two
thousand twenty three to a time
period of about a year between
june of twenty twenty four end
this year went up to
approximately seventy cases
sixty nine seventy cases and
that's a lot but it also
encompassed any crime any charge
that involved a fire are not
necessarily shooting and and I I
agree with miss bennett that the
actual shootings and the
killings and the
are are rare they're an enamely
we we don't.
See that so much and we can't
even say it's a gang related a
lot of the time
we rely on the screws this
police department especially
something that occurs within the
city to tell us how is this kid
gang affiliated is what what is
it what does he claiming and
more often than that no we don't
even know who is you know yes we
have some gangbergers here yes
we do um
ought to say that every shooting
that everyone with a gun belongs
to a gang up probably is not
very accurate at all and I do
want to say something about the
relationship between attorneys
and children's court and you
always think well you know
defense in the prosecution you
know there is an adversary all
kind of relationship and that is
true to some extent in district
court in a dot cases but and
children's court we kind of band
together to find the best
solution to take care of the
kids needs because the purpose
of children's court is to
rehabilitate the purpose as
treatment the purpose is to set
these kids off on the right foot
so we have a different
relationship in terms of
criminal procedure than then you
would see an adult court.
And if I could misread I think
there have been fewer shooting
cases since the wells park
I don't think we I think we
might have had one little drive
by the pop off shells when
they're going down the the
highway but no
no shooting cases no one was
shocked no one was injured in
terms of the children's court.
Thank you mister chair so I mean
clear clearly to problem by the
way that would that was park i'm
not sure how many i'm sure.
I don't know how many how many
children were charged but you're
for our department this is a
really major case because we
represent an individual actually
do we even get the represent
individual in house
okay so every every one of the
children represent his
represented by a private turning
on contract with this because of
potential conflicts and so this
is being for us it's I mean
there are evaluations being done
on many children when these
kinds of things happen it's sort
of it's a real tremor in the
force for our court system I
think both of prosecutions and
defense of mister thank you
when I spoke to last night they
were preparing witnesses I think
in connection with the same
cases that right with another
and last night when you only
spoke with the phone you are
doing witness preparation I
think for hearing coming up
that's correct I am call cancel
with mr merceus on the young
park shootings and so we have
been in the process of
conducting pre trial interviews
with law enforcement and with
civilian witnesses in it is
there hearing coming up on that
areas of trial dates and there
is a trial date set I believe it
is february second except for
ten days at this point off for
the the three children and the
one dollars
joined together now they may
stay joined they may suburb its
cases we don't know that yet but
that's going to be part of the
discovery process and they were
all detained by judge
the initial case was in front
when we had to charge them is
juvenile foot first the three
cause that's the process when we
realize what we had were
accounts of first agree murder
it's an automatic critics that's
a serious youthful offender and
they get indicted under first
degree murder the charges
there's three charges for those.
Um the first is the count one is
wilful that deliberate murder
her in the alternative depraved
mind murder and count two is the
same account three is the same
and when we recognize that what
we had in terms of a first
agreed murder we took those
cases to grand jury and um
judged iran was excuse by
someone i'm not sure and the
cases weren't over to judge
douglas drinkers
in in before we got a quick
quite a questions a couple
things that I won't touch on in
your presentation they don't
think we've talked about enough
yet because I think it's it's
hard for us to understand what
to understand and senator here
and i've been with spring about
it so you've referred to the
terms of you and use the term
suit serious youthful offender
and the uh full offender each of
those two terms have different
meanings in our statutes in our
law that's correct so would you
explain what the difference is
and what the implications of
somebody being defined as a
serious youthful offender as
opposed to just a youthful
offender because pretty members
may remember legislation this
last session which would have
increased that number of crimes
it would follow the category of
a serious youthful offenders
which explain the difference in
how that work well initially a
child is charged and would call
the jr petition that's a
juvenile charge doesn't meet the
criteria for anything and we're
talking about non violent crimes
we're talking about mister
meaner level things but if a
child commits a crime under the
enumerated list there's probably
I don't know maybe ten twelve
and we're talking armed robbery
were talking you know second
degree murder we're talking
shooting at her from a motor
vehicle
all all of those things which
are aggravated aggravated
battery great body harm
and those are things that we say
they're useful offenders and
what we do as we still take it
to grand jury because we need to
get that why are attached to the
case so it moves from being a jr
case.
To a why our case and then we
process it it's subject not to
children's court rules but now
to the rules of district court
they're kind of sort of
procedurally treated as an adult
although we cannot say they're
an adult but they're treated in
court as such the hearings the
timing all of that when the
child is convicted or pleads to
one of the enumerated offences
we go from there to anamen
ability hearing
that is crucial because now that
hearing is going to be
determined whether a child
should be sentenced doesn't
adult or sentence to the
juvenile and the key thing to
understand in that process is
the question the judge has to
answer is is this child
immediate
amenable to treatment as he
child in terms of what the
juvenile justice system has to
offer are their programs out
there that will take care of
this child's needs are the
programs that are appropriate
are there programs that are
going to further our agenda in
rehabilitation
and these could be things like
family therapy on the just no
level it could be
what we call multi systems
therapy and mst or whatever
whatever the child's needs are
determined and the court has to
consider a number of different
factors when they make that mean
ability decision was a weapon
used was anyone injured what is
the home life like what is the
you know what is the results of
any evaluation and they take all
that into account and make a
decision even if a child is
seeing to be a meanable the
treatment as a juvenile the
court still has a number of
options they can put the child
on probation they could put the
child on probation to leave
twenty one they could put the
child on a suspended commitment.
Till these twenty one or they
could commit the child to a
secure facility within the
juvenile just a sister meaning
he would go either to ydc and
alba kirkier he would be down
here at j paul taylor if a child
is seemed not to be a meanable
to treatment as a juvenile the
child is then sentenced as an
adult but there are limitations
on that sentencing let's say
second degree murder carries up
penalty of fifteen years in the
penitentiary and the court has
the discretion to santander to
less than that or to put the
child on probation or to do
whatever is in the best interest
of that child and and just kind
of getting them help and support
even though
I have done a number of
immediability hearings in my
time
probably one of the bigger ones
I have done with the the
currency make you case I don't
know if anyone's familiar with
that the high school athlete
very very prominent to the
community and basically cross
the state getting offers from
everywhere for basketball and
she attempted to kill her mother
and sister by setting it up as a
as a residential burger you gone
bad we went through the whole
process with her and she was
found of nat to be a meetable
the treatment and I have to do
with the child's age as well she
was sixteen at the time and she
was sentenced to nine years and
the department of corrections
and I could have been a lot more
for her given that charges
another case and and I know
people that from here aren't
going to know the rainbow bakery
case where we there was a
juvenile who entered into the
rainbow bakers and outlets store
down here
and he beat the woman almost a
death she ended up having
surgery lost a little more than
half of her brain because of.
So damaged now a very active
woman who was into competitive
dancing and all of that was now
in a wheelchair and and can find
there for the rest of her life
and we went to an immeniability
hearing on that case as well and
he was found not to you know
basically had no remorse but
there were other factors
involved in and he was also
sentenced as an adult
so there have been an and it
doesn't work all the time you
know sometimes people are found
a mutable the treatment is a
juvenile and we're happy for
that is like okay this kid has
some redeeming qualities that we
can capitalize on and we can
rehabilitate so you know the
state does this job defense does
this job and we hopefully will
come to the the best solution
to you've described the process
of a youthful offender but we
haven't yet touched on what is
the difference between the
youthful offender in a seriously
offender and why there are two
different tracks for the
a serious youthful offender is
charged under a cr case number
and that is only in the case of
first degree murders only we
can't charge I mean there might
be other charges associated but
the triggering event for a
serious youthful offender is a
charge of first degree murder
now let's say we go to trial on
that charge and they do not find
the child guilty of first degree
murder but they find him guilty
of second degree murder instead
now he moves from c r definite
adults no no I mean ability
hearing there to a category that
now we are in the position of
doing it I mean ability hearing
okay if a child is is a quitted
a first degree murder and there
might be other things that don't
even fit the definition of a y
are a useful offender than that
case goes from cr.
Back down to juvenile court and
he is sentenced clearly as the
juvenile with no immediability
issues into my understanding of
c r a serious useful offender
applying in the first remurder
cases there is no as you say no
amendability termination and
they are sentences and adult
that is correct in all cases at
all i'll cases that have been
convicted or pledged to first
degree murder thank you all
right questions reps let me just
see show me how through
the read
all
on my write so do you
worry
and on my left idea romero
silver
yes apparently okay we've got a
number of individuals questions
of all of you i'm gonna ask you
to keep your questions to six
minutes please watch your owns
for the time and be interrupted
about six minutes so represent
refers thank you mister chairman
I had a question we were tough
okay I think you're we're
talking about yesterday about
competency and am
what to do with individuals that
maybe are not competent that's
still.
Work to do with individuals that
are found not confident in the
juvenile system that may be
can't be treated to confidence
seen and I wanted to touch on
that difference between adults
and juveniles and it so for
example you're serious youthful
offender that sounds like the
case you have here as everybody
charged assessors under
so if that's the situation and
let's say something
is that echoing.
Okay that's okay.
So better
okay.
Okay so.
It's just
okay how about that.
Okay that's better so when we're
talking about serious youthful
offenders let's say it in your
case if and I understand that's
on the adult track no mean
ability hearing so what if that
person is found not confident
and not treatable to confidence
he what avenues in that
situation would you have like in
your case could that person even
though a juvenile but on the
serious youthful the federal
track be as sent to be treated
be found dangerous and then
treated to competency and then I
want to
talk about the youthful offender
too and and how that would work
if there there seems to be a gap
i've always thought in the
juvenile versus adult system
that you can't treat keep a
dangerous person a bit last
figures and then treat them the
competency and then review that
every couple years so what
happens with these youthful
offenders that are clearly
juvenile and made it maybe
dangerous and maybe need to be a
carcerated
or treated company in a secured
facility
or incarcerated in the sense
that you know you have a problem
you have that clearer convincing
hearing and then eventually
they're cars rated up to when
they could be a car street to is
an adult and then you review it
every two years and see if
they're confident then you could
go to trial what it would do we
have for juvenile so what
happens like in your case if
someone's charges are useful for
or seriously full offender and
they're not competitive and
they're not treatable.
You know
I can't in all the years i've
been in practice they have never
heard of that happening a lot of
times we know the kid before we
begin the charging process and
if we know this child has a
history of being found in
competent we could stay
proceedings that's an option we
have but if the issue is a rise
arises after the indicated
the criminal the children's code
does not cover that at all you
know they're too young to go up
the vegas
one for example one of our
children one of our defendants
in the young part case was
fifteen he's not going to go to
las vegas they're not going to
take them so I think your
question is well what do you do
with them that if he comes back
in confidence in the answer is
there's no place to new mexico
for him to go
you know there there just isn't
an again it is incredibly rare
that that would happen in an
adult case if they're found to
be incompetent the next thing
that happens is a dangerousness
hearing the court finds that
he's dangerous he goes up to
vegas to see if you can be
treated a competency within a
reasonable period of time we'll
get a report back in either the
answers yes you can be in which
case is up there until he could
be treated or something happens
and of no he can't be he comes
back down to the district court
now what do you do well you
could go to a one point five
hearing right and and I am said
I want to just for my time I
think we all understand the
adult deal as we did all that in
the last session but i'm i'm
more concerned about I I tend to
think it probably happens more
than you think as kids are
committing crimes of a younger
age and this is just a society
were living in so I guess what
you're telling me is there we
have no provisions for serious
useful federals or youthful
federals who commit at a very
dangerous crime.
And are not confident we pretty
much would have to release them
back into the public site well I
I think one option that we would
have and certainly mister bower
can speak to this as well is
that they can be placed on a
locked unit somewhere with in
terms of the residential
treatment center
with like two but I guess it in
my experience and i've been
doing this since nineteen ninety
nine that I have never had that
happened but I think a lot of
four thoughts should go into
before you decide to charge
someone as a youthful offender
kind of our hands or type maybe
and the serious youthful
offender but still there has to
be a pre analysis before you
take up your you know your armor
in merchandise jury you know
there has to be a consideration
thank you mister chair at night
I I just have had that happen
and there were no options for
them and it's concerning with
the violence that we have now
that we we need a procedure in
place I think to deal with these
types of situations in these
violent kids how many people is
compensated filed on her
juvenile's competitive filed on
and then they're determined not
confident can you have a
estimate number on that.
Mr chairman street I off the top
of my head I I would not have a
statistic for you are
but I mean again i'm handling
a vast majority of the cases and
done yet a county from petty
mister you know up to
second to.
It can very.
Just last like how many times do
you go to an aminability and I
know there is about seven
factors that the court looks out
and they're not equally way
there's you know if one could be
weighed stronger I guess I never
found a kid that's been
evaluated that they say that the
doctor says they're not a
meanable treatment
and it may be you you have but
what is the number of mean
ability hearings that you do
where the kid is found amenable
to treatment in a youthful
fender situation
estimate reset and just fine
I have had evaluations where the
child has been found not
aminable and typically what we
have done in that case is
reached a plea agreements
to
a juvenile sentence and avoid it
going to the minimum hearing but
how many time I mean to say if
you had thirty event of thirty
immediately here how many of
those kids are found to meet and
just all truthful dishonesty as
far as you know that's far more
and mean ability hearings and
i've even been in the
bed presented with but
I would say it may be i've had
two found a minimal out of like
ten evaluations okay
per is it because the judge is
finding them a meanable or what
are the value later saying
because in my experience the
valuators always seem to find
them I mean to try those those
findings would be the evaluator
or I get an evaluation done
first
sometimes strategically in the
defense side we want to know
where we're headed right so I
can have an evaluation for me
ability done ahead of time to
see what the evaluator
independent evaluator is and so
if they say not a minimal that
i'm going to
work more towards a certain
place.
Okay thank you thank you mister
chair.
Open up whistle
i'll talk very softly
couple of questions mr chair and
witnesses and whoever or both
can answer this
you mentioned we don't have
enough evaluators
if we were able to bring in
contract evaluators
with that help with that i'm
assuming it would help with that
forty five day limit that you
have in the second part to that
question is would it
be who anyone to extend that
forty five days out to maybe
sixty or does that create a
whole nother married a problems
mister chair or manager
well you know forty five days to
basically tour three over worked
evaluators
it's precious time and and I
think could we and we do extend
the time because we go back to
court and we say judge I know
that we only have until this
date but this is the problem we
have and the judge will extend
you will extend and i've had
cases where it's been extended
maybe two or three times because
the various reasons but it would
be nice if we weren't tied down
to this forty five day thing
if we were to get more evaluate
waiters in on a contract I think
that would lesson that the
stress in the burden that we
have on the three that are used
down here to to allow them to do
maybe more of an evaluation may
be more of a of a research into
this kid or adult then it the
currently they can afford the
time to do so and I don't want
and I am not saying that they're
overworked and not doing a good
job they're doing the best they
can we take what we can get from
that but it would help them if
they weren't so overburdened
with.
All the referrals that are
coming to them
and if I could
met manager and represent a paul
there's been a lot of
conversation about increasing
compensation and recruiting to
bring more contractors in the
people to do in the evaluations
now are doctors on contract with
with the state new mexico we
definitely need to get more
generally that means we have to
pay more and have people do the
job i'm always reluctant to
shorten timelines because of the
shorteses of personnel to do
things because then we need to
just sort of slept the whole
system kind of slips and doesn't
meet though so I I think we need
to be ambitious about these
timelines and when there's a
real need for an extension there
will be an except thank you
and thank you that's all I have
manager
senator city alopes.
Thank you thank you for being on
the panel and then thank you
also for the work you do it's so
important because you deal with
you know such
in such an important they are
future basically it is in our
children and it's great to see
you and see in here when a
wonderful career you've had
I yesterday's presentation had
this whole thing about
if it didn't if they were not
competent in state cork they
were they were transferred to
federal court with different
crimes
but you know and then they were
found confident and that
concerned me because especially
for children I understand what
it complex decision that is
because just the brain
development is hard to you know
you're talking about eleven year
old and I barely understand the
judicial system you're trying to
explain to
eleven year old how they're
going to have to function in it
and it ends
so my question is how does that
happen that you have different
competency findings different
evaluators or what's going on
and in my experience I in state
court have had someone found
competent than their case was
transferred over to federal
court newer found incompetence
up the opposite happens too and
I think it's an issue they have
a different set of evaluators
they have different
interpretations of the statute
that but basically it's all the
same do you understand the
charges against you can you
assist with your attorney do you
understand the penalty you know
we all know what the criteria
and and your own kind of
everybody has an opinion and
it just happens to differ now
certainly you can contest up
competency finding or
incompetency fighting at federal
court same as you can with us
but I can't say that it happens
all the time that okay we're
incompetent and their confident
over there.
The opposite happens to.
Madame chair center city locus
I think part of the
difference is that in federal
court it's the federal bureau of
prisons that does all of the
competency evaluations and
I mean you can you know there
may be some buyers there
I mean I can't say but that's
who is doing their evaluations
and in my even for understanding
they do typically find more
people competence
managers so even for children
they would be doing that federal
bureau of prisons would be doing
yes
I believe okay there could be an
explanation right there which is
actually problematic about the
federal system in my mind I
don't know just because you'd
want somebody with experience
with all the development to
issues with children well I I
think this is very very hard we
just dealt with the issue and
the adult context and it was not
easy
and so trying to bring in the
whole developmental issue with
children I think makes it more
complex and I really appreciate
your voices on this
because I I mean which you said
was really inspiring judge it is
and i'm sorry you were a judge
of
kind of
because yeah we want these
children to be reabilitated and
then rehabilitated that's the
goal and I think that's what a
lot of people this was very
upsetting the presentation
yesterday was just horrendous
what our children are getting
into now
and
it's it we need to do something
about it I don't know that that
and and this issue was
particularly
bothering up setting in this
presentation because the the
child itself was in other I can
find me competent that you know.
They they just were really
they seem to understand the
system better than most people
and they seemed at least in the
what they were saying to be
playing it and I also you know
really took hard in which you
said is or what you said about
you'd have to full your attorney
you'd have full but it looks
like these kids were based on
what they're saying
so I don't know if if you could
respond to that I don't know if
anybody saw the presentation
with but these kids were
uhm
you know they're just talking
about I don't even want to quote
it it was just awful when they
were what they were saying
the and you know it's really
hard to maintain incompetency
for a year I mean you really
have to be working at that and
that's why if someone is
referred to some kind of you
know to treat the competency is
a juvenile there that mask is
going to fall and it's going to
be seen
I may know one of the case
decided in there and this is a
kid who was always in trouble
doing this doing that doing this
and he goes to the valuation and
he's found to be a confident m
but the report was very
it was just
blah I mean it didn't really
tell us anything so defense
attorney not mispenator sent it
out again for another evaluation
which we said yeah this clear up
these issues came back and
competed again but again it was
really borderline so the state
asked permission of the court
will pay for a thirty foul you
know let let us pick someone who
is totally independent of this
contract process and and we will
have it that we will pay for it
and we did and it went to
someone who now said well
currently he's incompetent but
he will in should obtain
confidence he within a year now
that not.
Might not be the solution that
law enforcement would want to
hear and we've got to give it
that give the kid a chance but a
lot of this kids issues were not
that he was
mentally ill he didn't have
brain damage you know he didn't
have any other kind of
developmental delay but a lot of
his incompetency issues were
educational deficits could never
want to school up but is you
know how can he function under
performance I test when you
can't do numbers in his head you
can't do those things and if
you're not exposed to a proper
educational system or you choose
that to go your level of
abstract thinking is going to
sink down to a concrete level
and you're going to be given
very basic responses so you've
got to look at that in that
particular kid and I don't know
if he was somebody who decided
in there but the fact is it's
very hard to fool the season
devaluator they're very hard
because not only do you look at
the the consistency of the test
results but you look at his
behavior sitting in front of you
you do that in query into his
home life into a school life and
all of the documents that
defense council may send over
and you've got to make that
decision something is it right
here and and and when that
invaluator recognizes that
something isn't right he's going
to make recommendations to the
court for for the handling so
these kids don't just drop
through a crack they they are
dealt with
think thank you I really
appreciate those insights thank
you manager
okay mister mister chair
thank you mister chair and thank
you pail
I was wondering it
as you were just speaking about
the other issues on the social
emotional learning and the ac.
Is in the evalue are those taken
into account in the evaluation
for competency
I believe that they are but
perhaps misbenefit and press
that better because she sees all
the evaluations I only see the
accompanied at once
to terribly send a ferrari
yes I think in a sense that a
valuator does get what they call
collateral information so they
get the child's history from the
child how they report it and
then they typically will talk to
the family members as well
period
and get the social history
and you know find out whatever
trauma the child has been
through
the
overall travel of the family so
I I do believe it is taken into
account you know in a way okay
great thank you and also
when a young person is arrested
does the police force
test them bloods do a
blood screen or breath test for
alcohol or drugs if it is
indicated for example the by or
a crash or people kill our
homicide that's almost mandatory
you would get that kind of
breath test
now if the if the officer
and talking to a juvenile think
that he's drunk or hi
he's matna necessarily get that
test right then it there but he
would make note of it and he
would stop the interview because
clearly you're not going to get
anything from someone who who is
drunk or or high look and mister
chair and
deputy district attorney can
terrible
would that also go into.
The amendability you know if
someone was you know under the
influence in a lot of times you
thought to be able to do some of
these crimes
with day then how that taken
into account
yet so that they are considered
a ball if it could be certainly
and defense could bring that up
and and just because there's a
list for the judge doesn't mean
that any party can't bring in
other information it's just that
the court does have to address
the enumerated issues in the and
the statute but can you bring in
anything else sure you know this
is in a mean ability during this
is a kids life at stake
and it is if I could mister
chair and a representative that
there's a bit of a difference
here between if they're under
the influence at the time of the
act which can go to there level
of guilt and how you would treat
it in sentencing and competency
to stand trial which is how are
you
what condition is the kid like
during the process in terms of
making decisions for courts of
these things you're interlocked
actually very complicated but
certainly someone who's under
the influence at the time could
still be very incompetent to
face charges to stand trial and
also to be held account
I hope that helps I mean there's
several different concepts thank
you and then my next question is
about
mister chair while someone is in
a secure facility and
is there a periodic reporting to
the judges
and especially
for how the youth are doing and
especially before they're
their commitment time is over at
there there isn't any mechanism
for that if the judge were to
request give me a progress
report on john smith how she
doing then the facility would
comply with that and and they
would send a letter.
Also sending it to defense and
to the you know to the state but
is there a mandated procedure
for that no there there isn't
but again a court can acquire as
to a person that they have sent
it to a secure facility really
any time they would want to
and mr chair
my last question is about if
someone is a committed for one
year and then that one year is
near and how does the judge know
that person is ready to be
is rehabilitated or abilitated I
should say
but if i've heard that if
they're given a two year
sentence that that time can be
extended
actually representative it can
be extended in both cases and it
depends on their adjustment in
their behavior at while there is
a facility if you're on a one
your commitment you go before
the supervised release panel at
about the nine month mark and at
that point the judge really has
nothing to say about it because
technically they've lost a
restriction for resentencing
usually after thirty days now
can they inquire like in the
light yeah sure they can't but
they can't say keep them in
their longer and that is all
institutional factors and
adjustment and how the child is
done
if it's a two year commitment
again they get an opportunity to
go before the supervised release
panel but it's a lot longer they
have I think it's at eighteen
month mark off of a twenty year
cent are twenty four year twenty
four month sentence not years
and again a same standards are
applied you know what have you
been doing what if you
accomplished what your needs and
should we release you which
you're eighteen month mark
sometimes they keep them in
longer sometimes the child after
be kept in longer but again that
is the decision of the
supervised release panel.
And not the court now if the
child either are you one year or
two year commitment is is
incurring new criminal charges
like a battery or something
bringing and drugs or possession
of whatever at the facility then
can request an extension of that
time again whether it's a two
year or a one year and that
comes to court back in front of
the sentencing charge and the
judge will hear that to
determine whether she should
extend or he should extend the
commitment by a certain period
of time or not represent you my
time thank you
we have an extended here
six minutes they keep thank you
mister chairman and thank you
for being here to present got a
couple of questions in regards
to the competency you indicated
that the evaluators are housed
DOH and that there's only two
that are used are those the same
evaluators that do the
aminability or or is there an
another evaluators that do that
because I understand there's
also a shortage of those kinds
of evaluators they're they're
not housed with doh their
uncontract with them okay so we
have one of those valley waiters
who care in los crucials the
other evaluator lives in
illinois and does his
evaluations over tell them that
has this problems and cards and
you know
it it's
anyone has the ability to hire
somebody else as well and are
problem is and again I think the
spent a target say we really got
only to evaluate or the whole
state that are doing to finally
valuations in the third
traditional district
if by chance they both have to
conflict out for whatever reason
then they go back to we get
someone else.
But
really
there's three value waiters that
have served the third additional
district the third one only as
an assessity of the other two
camps can't do it thank you
mister terror and think you so
you answered my question about
do they do it can they do
remotely and I agree there's
some issues with that but
I just want to clarify
competency and I mean ability
there is a license professional
that's making those decisions
not just the judge into
consideration all the
information that is correct
thank you and then do you know
what license type that is this
is psychologist I address
counselor of it would be a
licensed clinical psychologist
okay so that's an empty okay
think it's a phd a peep well I
mean they're their house their
license under the medical board
correct yeah okay and then
I really like your statement
about
ability versus reability it's
kind of III mean I think we kind
of all think about those lines
that brains are not fully
developed until you're in your
twenties I mean there's there's
a standard eyes and not none of
us are standard already know
that
but but there's also drugs in
alcohol that come into
into play and then brains or
even delayed even further so
my concern about you know trying
to come up with the
law enforcement yesterday had
some great ideas about
competency and mandatory
treatment but two things come
into my concern is one we don't
have anywhere to treat them
we've got to coy up as the que
is a voluntary they don't take
care that don't want to be
treated their barely being used
so we really don't have anywhere
them to get some sort of
mandatory treatment.
But when you find a a youngster
who
as you said assistant district
attorney hasn't been in school
is there anyone responsible for
reporting to the school
districts for contacting cyfd I
mean school districts and see
why if you have some
responsibility when a child we
have compulsory education
through eighteen unless you
graduated from high school and
at the minimum you cannot drop
out of high school until you're
sixteen it's approved by your
parents approved by the
superintendent and you've got a
full time job and or you've got
another educational so how how
we involve in schools
no I know that the jpo the truth
and operation office works with
the school they make visits to
the school they talk to teachers
and this is whether a child may
be pre adjudication or or posted
judiciation that there is that I
think I don't know if if it's
benefit agree but I I sure would
like to see a closer
relationship between the school
becoming involved in and you
know the process at some point
the other thing is you know in
order to enforce some of these
things that the court is
ordering we do have a mechanism
called up adding the parent as a
party to the petition meaning
that the parent is responsible
for making sure all the courts
orders are followed and if they
are not not only as the child
looking at a violation or a
probation violation but the
parent is looking at contempt
proceedings because they have
not followed through so I I
think that on a global aspect
we're not
we're not encompassing everyone
and the ones that we have the
power to encompass not
necessarily being utilized to
where we could make a change or
have an effect thank you I
appreciate that mr during my
last.
Question or comment is you know
we we've got an assumption that
if if it if a youngster's not
confident and or charges are
getting dismissed because
they're not competent that
sending them back from the
environment they probably learn
these skills in which is
probably just functional to a
large extent is a positive thing
to do and so my question is what
are we doing because I feel like
we're letting kids down when we
just can let keep them going
along they're going to commit a
crime when they're eighteen and
now we've got a bigger problem
on our hands we have less of an
opportunity to reabilitate her
to hibilitate whichever what are
we doing to make sure that
kido's are going back to a safe
environment and that there's
going to be someone who's going
to make sure that they go to
school that they've got meals
that they've got close to wear
that they've got a safe place to
sleep
anybody.
Mr
chair
senator to you
you know once
the the case ends the child is
largely on their own I think in
some cases there will be a sky
report issue and so we try and
get see why a d involved but
that usually is not very helpful
honestly
in some cases the state after a
dismissal for not confidence may
seek to have the child's
involuntarily committed I think
they may have touched on a
client I had previously
yesterday
who's now better off a city but
he was civilly committed and
agreed to go to a residential
treatment center and actually
successfully completed it
unfortunately my time is running
now so I appreciate I I just
want to point out I think those
twenty four kids that we talked
about yesterday my suspicion is
that because CYFD s that they're
in the protective custody
rather than the juvenile justice
my suspicion that they're these
kids those with the kids that
are falling between their not in
juvenile justice and they're not
quite in CYFD protective custody
and twenty four of our kidos are
being sent out of the state
because we don't have treatment
for them thank you mister
champion represent.
Thank you mr terror
I was really really fortunate
this last year to be able to
learn alongside chair channeller
as the competency are adults
fellow as being developed
one of the things they really
appreciate about what you said
was
actually putting their
competency evaluation into
contact foreign but I also I
think a little folks think that
it's one and done you're like
you see this kid you evaluate
them have a good time here's
your results and so I really
appreciate putting it into
context especially in regards to
like an educational lifetime and
what's happening with their
social history because it is
really easy to watch the videos
that were presented yesterday
and think i'll be in like
they're just doing their system
this is why
but it it doesn't mean that both
things can't be too at the same
time but a child can be talking
about yeah this is what I dead
bragging about it and also be
incompetent
and so I just want to appreciate
you for that
building off of white center to
heal was talking about you have
two evaluators for juveniles is
that because of a difference and
training is it because of work
load or is it just because of
willingness
or I guess unwilling
representative and III think
that it's willingness more for
them to want to be on that
department of health contract
and says a little bit off your
question but one other issue
that we have is that what only
one of those evaluators speak
and he's the one that appears
from illinois and so we lean on
him a lot in this jurisdiction
so it would be helpful to have
more especially more spanish
speaking
thank you and so just to clarify
so there's not a difference in
training per se between adults
and juveniles when it comes to
the evaluation.
No these are these evaluators
also handle the adults as well
okay great
so I know there's been you know
different
options on the table what are we
going to do about this I just
wanted to get your thoughts in
particular about
what do you think about making
the
juvenile procedure can grow and
to the adult procedure with two
things that i'm thinking about
taking into consideration why is
that I my interesting is that
the da can pursue civil
commitment at the right now as
as written I know it was about
the same when we went through
competency generally that with
their adult bill as well but is
there any opportunity for the da
or anyone else to
make other recommendations even
if it's not several commitment
so I would just like your
general response to
one making their procedure
congratule and to what are the
other options that days have
right now.
Thank you
in terms of what do we do with a
care where do we do and that a
lot depends on the evaluation
that we get back they may
recommend certain things and
certain programming they may
recommend a civil commitment
that doesn't mean we're going to
get one you know it's just how
it is
we can if the child can be
reasonably treated a competency
within the years period of time
we will work with the court and
with defense council what is
available to help this kid get
to where the evaluator believes
he can be
so that that could as a grab bag
there could be different things
involved that could be simply a
group councilling or family
counseling or individual or
medication all those things are
or options that we would always
have now I could tell you some
of the issues about civil
commitments in its with adults
not juveniles as that we get a
competency evaluation that comes
in and the person's incompetent
he doesn't qualify necessarily
for a dangerousness hearing
because it's criminal by lent
and it doesn't meet the criteria
so you've got something and you
say well they were saying you
know all of these things are
going on with him will do what
we call a pickup order a
transport order to where we will
have the the adult transported
to memorial medical center here
in town they've only they've got
the only psychiatrist basically
who and they're not for profit
so that kind of helps the two
they get a value where do we
send him and again it's a
telemet type of assessment and
it's always not it they don't
meet the criteria so this person
then is released you know at
that point we have nothing we
can do except to wait till the
next time that they do something
non violent and and see then as
their history may accrue to have
them declared dangerous after
they have a certain number of.
Of offences that show that there
are danger to themselves for the
community so you know and a lot
of respects
it's it's the question of
resources is the question of
people out there who can help
her who can we recruit they get
a mister would you also mind
responding perhaps quickly I
have one other question after
this.
Sure mister chair and
representative I I just think
the civil commitment process and
the rams to treatment needs to
be really upgraded and and have
more abusibility to get people
in treatment because I I think
that it with a lot of these
people the criminal prosecution
and the limited resources we
have in the criminal system and
and you know literally how you
deal with them is really not
appropriate so we need to build
up that civil commitment system
kind of off ramp for these folks
I I think that's a really
critical part of looking at
behavior also thank you
thank you and mister chairman
last question
you are talking about
essentially really big jump in
terms of the number of cases
with firearms to me it was like
pretty shocking because you're
telling me nearly no gun cases
nearly no firm's cases at the
very end of twenty twenty four
there's like this huge jump and
so to me it's really interesting
because it's not like a gradual
build up of
you know this is something
that's trending right like
usually you can watch trends on
like a line graph or something
like that and see them slowly
building up so i'm just
wondering do you have any
thoughts on what the heck is
happening with this check antic
jump all at one time
I know in other cases like you
know they were backlogs from
covered I don't know if that's
the case or if these are just a
bunch of new violence
just your thoughts on the sudden
gigantic jump and thank you for
that
you know I I want to give all
credit to our loss crucial's
police department for being on
top of that they have caught
things that historically might
not have been caught
you know a kid walking around
with a hand gun not doing
anything but just having a hand
gun is at a crime yes and and
nobody noticed or hey you just
go home.
That kind of thing but our
police department has been
incredibly proactive in looking
at juveniles with firearm so I
think that's part of the
interested it's part of the
charging that's happening now we
also have the influence the
cartels here and that's a part
of it we also have parents who
may not be is diligent about
locking up their fire arms as
they should be and i've had
probably about two or three
cases in the last six months
where they've taken a gun out of
the house their sisters gone
there their dad's gun so it it's
and they're getting caught and
and I and that's a good thing
because that's our police
department doing the majority of
that work so I think that the
increase in these types of
crimes are coming from increased
scrutiny by los cruces police
who were doing a great job this
and the identification of the
main players
I know I
think that that the more you
talk the more you the find and
and I think people are reporting
it more often as well just like
the increase in child abuse
cases that that we had at one
point nobody reported that all
the sudden people became aware
and started reporting so are
child abuse staffs with way up I
might be the same thing I I
can't say but I believe that the
part of it
thank you and which all okay
thank you.
I'm thinking mr chair thank you
for the presentation today one
of the questions that was raised
was about again incompetency
that the competency challenges
between
the federal and and state
process one thing we still don't
quite understand is why the
evaluations end up differently
and what what it is about the
evaluators
that comes up with a different
ends and I think we still
haven't quite understood that
yet I looked like an actual
understanding as to why the
federal bureau of prisons has a
different process that leads to
a child being competent or
incompetent for for the
understanding of of how we're
going to deal with that with
when we get there so that's just
a comment the second question
that we have that I have because
we are trying to look at their
systemically and think you so
much for providing your
perspective well what i'm
understanding is that we don't
have any reliable or consistent
data collection about how these
cases are being on both
collected and processed who how
many like it's on sort of like
bibes as to what the crime is
out of control some days and
then other days were okay we
don't actually have the trends
sort of understanding as to
other than these blips in these
seventy cases they get fight
files in one year we just we
don't have any trend analysis is
there any type of information
that we have that you rely on
to to help us understand what's
actually happening
statistically.
And thank you representative and
I don't know if that there's any
data collection system happening
at least in the third judicial
district we do have a governing
board out of albert cookie the
administrative office of the
district attorney and they kind
of oversealc to the d's overall
of the judicial districts and I
think if anyone is collecting
that data it could be them
because they have the capacity
to go statewide if I were to do
something I would only have
access to doing it third
judicial wise so that might be
the person to talk to thank you
did you okay yet mr chair I
think for our ability to sort of
understand how we target the big
picture if we were not looking
at each of these districts and
kind of to what's actually
happening when we're looking at
statewide policy you know we
learned from competency that it
was four percent of all or seven
percent of all I can't remember
the the actual data of all cases
that were going through as
system and we focused on that as
it is a problem to work through
but again is that the same trend
for the amount of incompetent
you know juveniles that are
happening through the system are
we still addressing that problem
at the same levels statistically
again.
I think mr cheer and rips in a
romero
what I see with conference he is
that numbers are roughly the
same over a period of time over
the last several years about the
percentages and i'm not sure
that we keep track of it but I I
think our estimate is
you know party because it's
based by the children coming in
also court practices and you
know with the lawyers that are
looking at them and whether they
the lawyers train to raise these
kinds of issues so I I think
that's been roughly the same
with a competitive the numbers
of confidences or at least
percentages being raised in both
you've not adult system or
request
thank you mister chair and then
finally just on facilities I
really appreciate that
identification of the gaps and
where it is that we can purpose
additional resources and sounds
like a lot of personnel that
need to be hired to be able to
treat a lot of these issues that
we see and then the issue of the
the we whether it be adult and
now juven all the the
incompetent person that
is deemed either in state or
federal court that cannot be
treated and is is essentially
just left to their own devices
whether or not there's a
facility that exists another
state or a reciprocity that we
can have to help deliver those
services I think is something
that this committee might be
able to look at and if you have
any ideas of what that might be
for that person or people
we bought to here.
I
represent mischairman
representative of
yet if we can think of anything
relations I mean it's your your
you really under the heart of
the matter the availability of
professionals to do the
evaluations and then the
treatment there's just a lack of
it
even in albuquerque in santa fe
and as you know when you when
you get down here when you
especially under the rural areas
think about the corners of the
state and the lack of resources
in those jurisdictions it's it's
really sorted to sorting I think
that's why we have working
groups that are trying to focus
on that.
Thank you mr chair think well
think there are jokes being said
over here about trial lawyers
but
outside of that I really
appreciate their thought process
and I think to when we're
looking systemically and and
trying to figure out the
pathways for for these things to
be resolved I I really
appreciate the thoughtfulness
and and in the information
you're providing so thank you
mister chair
and you chair think you all for
the presentation a super
informative I learned a time in
and said a few questions the
chief buyer you said at the very
beginning of part of your
framing was we can't make state
laws are you warned us against
making state laws are based on
the instances we saw yesterday
and i'm also hearing we heard
from lcpd and i've met which you
story about additional state
laws that could help and and
hearing some competency issues
that we could improve so could
you
just be more specific on that
framing and and what you meant
thank you sure thank you and
miss chair representative I
III think the legislator's role
in creating laws which govern
the court system I I mean most
of the things that harm the
community are early against the
law
and so it's not creating new
laws as much is it's adapting
those laws which I think are
journal enough to address the
harms of juvenile's possessing
guides that's against a lot of
juvenile shooting guns
especially at people whether
that's a salt you know if they
miss battery if they hit them
the the laws are in place we
just struggle as a court system
to
being responsible for
addressing these things and
which is why I think we don't
necessarily there are certain
things that can be changed in
the laws I think every now and
then there's.
Some things that we the public
fenders office looks at it and
says you know what we're not
going to really actively oppose
this thing because there are
things changes in technology for
instance that you have to
address maybe it's you know the
harassment was where if it says
telephone maybe you need you
know if there's a different kind
of device that's being used to
harass somebody maybe that one
needs to be updated but
generally it's not changes in
the criminal code or the
juvenile code for the
legislature is how those things
are adapted to the change in
environment for a juveniles and
that can be done through see
wife d
and through you know treatment
processes in those things that
that's what my frame in this
address
I appreciate that think you do
can federal
and I agree with mister bower I
you know but one thing that is
always been strange is the
inconsistent application of the
laws through the different
judicial districts
they're gonna have different
agendas based on what they
perceive their problem is and so
you may have one day district
tools who was big thing is drugs
and possession and trafficking
and and you might have another
one who have a high percentage
of drive by shootings you may
have another one where child
abuses an issue and and so maybe
not to be specializing in in
what's important to your
community but going across the
board and having a consistent
application of the laws that do
exist now I don't disagree with
what lcp is proposing I think
those are good will we see them
in their life our lifetime I
don't know because we've been
trying to get the children's
code changed for a good twenty
years since I started working
and I don't know why it hasn't
changed but again that's not my
agenda.
I do believe in some of um mr
bregmans ideas if you were to be
elected governor but I also
think of he's not elected
governor you should continue to
parliament tick for those things
because I think his suggestions
are good I think you know I
don't know I don't know what
else to say you know I think
cyfid has to be a little more
accountable and and how they
deal with juveniles
I can tell you that when the
child is in in a secure facility
and turns twenty one hundred
twenty first birthday he's out
the door and and I can't tell
you how many times they've
turned to me and say where do I
go what what do I do is it is
like they drop off a cliff and
and to me that said because we
have had them in our custody all
the
you're done by and and I find
that somewhat reprehensible that
we will treat those children
that way even though is twenty
one so that that's just my
personal opinion and based on my
personal experience think you
chair and then
I want to smish these two
together but
i'm wondering because we've
talked a lot about lcp because
they brought a lot of data
is this one owns you mountain to
the county because you also the
third judicial court covers you
know a broader rural part of the
county how would you compare
what you're seeing with your
renewals out in rural places of
donation and county and the
third judicial compared to lcpd
knowing that lcpd is the one
that is you said there they're
doing maybe they're catching
more things is that sheriff's
office doing similar so i'd love
to hear that and our treatment
courts being fully utilized in
in your perspective thank you
from the days office you know we
do have a donate county share
ups all over the place they
don't necessarily work inside
the city.
In the city we find more
metropolitan cuts for crimes
auto burglary residential
burglary go maybe guns may be
drive by rarely but we have them
in the county it's more like
that what we're seeing is
resisting evading and
obstructing and we're going to
see more drug possession out
there and and I think that's
crucism in fact all of done yet
account he is always said we
don't have anything for
juveniles in here that's why
they're doing the things that
they're doing and that might be
in part true
but yet if the courts don't have
resources and and don't have a
support system then kid it large
doesn't either and that's for
sure we do have a june final
drug court and we are we do
refer people to that all of our
treatment courts in fact even
for adults are are being
utilized in operational.
Mrperiod chair representative
I I think that you're correct
that we are seeing more of the
gun issues here in the urban
center you're not we don't see
the same types of shooting
crimes happening at hatch or
sent to the race for example so
it is probably more local.
I wanted to to pive it back
really quickly to
representative romeros question
about what we can do before
these kids as far as treatment I
just wanted to mention that
you know we've been talking a
lot about kids that are at the
like the end stage like the the
they're out there the worst
moment but what we need are more
resources from like bottom to
top you know the the community
resources are the most effective
so if we can get the kids
earlier and get them in services
within the community before they
reach this point where we're
trying to find like oh what
treatment center can we send
them to what locked down kind of
facility
can we have we don't we don't
have a group home here we don't
have a shelter
we used to it's gone now
we don't have any thing hardly
that we need in order to help
the kids at the crucial moment
before we get to to this point
where we're dealing with
shootings so
I would like to see more
resources than the community
community services but then also
of course stateway
thank you
thank you
brand new six minutes thank you
mr chairman the the young park
shooting care was a high profile
incident and we've also liked
several times i've heard it used
as an example as to how the
process works because we are
thankful that the district
attorney I was able to detain
though shooters but I think it's
important to remind ourselves
and the community what lead to
that shooting
and so it that example is is is
what I turn to to show the
process doesn't work we had four
young man who were detained for
shooting fifteen
individuals killing three
I had a long li.
Violent history so in the
conversation between what
constitutes as a violent
offenders there are actions at
the legislators contact to
expand that definition to lower
the age that could have arguably
prevented such a tragedy here in
new mexico we failed our
communities we felt the victims
and to be direct we failed those
those offenders as well we had
as you know of the four all of
them pad an extensive criminal
background domestic violence
aggravated a smart assault the
smuggling and and human
trafficking case was her
horrific
it lead up to it from shop left
in domestic battery aggrevated
assault one of the the we had to
choose seventeen year olds and a
fifteen year old at age thirteen
one of the seventeen year olds
had already been charged with
rape
the fifteen year old aggregated
assault battery vantalism
another weight count sexual
assault fights robbery it went
on in on and there were never
any meaningful consequences and
so I think the mexicans are
outraged that these offenders
were able to violate and create
chaos and harm in a community
for so long until it elevated to
the to the point of a mass
shooting and the community
that's not something we should
brag too much about is that
they're detained is why the hell
were they out in the first place
the mother of that thirteen year
old victim would argue that
those were all pretty serious
crimes serious violent offenders
and so when we talk about the
steps that legislators can take
I would respectfully disagree
that there are ways we can
strengthen new mexico loss that
the number of offenses that
constitute a serious violence
offense needs to be increased
the ages need to be lower.
It is concerning and yesterday's
presentation
that it was reported every
juvenile defended who has ever
been previously found
incompetent numerous times in
the new mexico system was found
to be competent within the
federal system
all cases and I know you made
the point earlier that there had
been cases in which
state cases had been found
incompetent in the federal cases
found that competent i'd like
the same data if you could
follow up with this this
committee to prove that it's a
vice versa because that's a hard
statistic first directive
there's something that the feds
are doing right to hold these
criminals accountable that the
state is not and so I think
that's where we're having
problems on how power we not
getting these declared
incompetent I actually echo the
same concerns and scepticism as
my colleague here it's very hard
to watch a video where a young
defendant is up your bragging
about the crime he committed
bragging that he is successfully
able to manipulate the system
knows he'll be declared and
competent that's pretty
competent listening to that
phone call it's hard for us to
reconcile those that those two
things and so we need your help
in bringing solutions to
legislators on how we can take
action specifically what we've
heard we got really good
information from the last
crucial police department
yesterday but there are
actionable items for the
legislative body to take come
one is to update the juvenile
competency proceedings to mirror
much more like house bill eight
now one of those includes
involuntary civil commitment
options that has to happen
because as it was pointed out
earlier we don't have we don't
have treatment facilities to
send them to when the ones we do
right now under the law would
have are just voluntary we're
not getting in there there's
actually some funding and I will
tell you that I hate to hear
the.
Heat to hear when someone says
well it's a funding problem new
mexico is a wealthy state we're
sitting on what eighty ninety
billion dollars worth funding
out there and pots all over the
money all over the place and if
we talk about there's ever need
for a rainy day addressing CYFD
and juvenile crime should be
something that we should just
fund here adding to each b two
we need to find the evaluators
to increase the number
evaluations you could get
specific numbers on what agency
that would go to and an estimate
amount of how much money that's
something we can absolutely add
to the budget processing to
contract increase the number of
valuators also bringing forward
proposals for treatment
facilities what is the cost
where are they where the what
are the action plans to do that
mit mr chairman i'll tell you I
get frustrated as the legislator
because we're brought forward
proposals and actionable items
and then sometimes it kind of do
it just never happens and we get
back to legislative session and
so I think that probably after
this conversation this year and
when we talk amongst ourselves
is what are the actionable items
to bring back during legislative
session to take meaningful
action and not and not allow
these conversations to end here
look when the legislative body
wanted to legalize marijuana we
shut gun legislation out there
and funded it through a special
session if we want to get
something done for good mistakes
let's get it done but there have
been good meaningful action
while items that have been
brought to this legislator what
I hope doesn't happen is that we
adjourn today at noon and this
is not discussed moving forward
so I I will say that there are
there have been calls to actions
to this legislative body to take
path laws pass loss we can't
just put this on our judges and
so I hope we follow up on that
think you guys all for your time
today.
Just like to change it a little
bit first well thank you all for
doing this are again for
everyone they did some pretty
short notice when I heard from
judge trends office and then
mrperiod macias as well too but
he sent me this conterior thank
you mister bower in in your
staff always thank you at least
always their forest I I want to
my was really my comments where
is somewhat similar to set of
brantley's in the sense that
there's a disconnect for me when
we hear that the feds I don't
know where they've got more
evaluators I don't know what
they've got a lower standard for
what is competency or not I
don't know whether they've got
harder judges I don't know where
it is but but that's what we're
told in in the the problem for
us comes out in part when I meet
with chief stories lcpd they
tell me they're they're inclined
to try and prosecute cases in
the federal system in other
words when they get it when they
get a serious offense they will
pray and bring the charges in
the federal system because they
have a greater they believe
reliability that there's going
to be a determination of
competency as opposed to the
state and we have it be
mentioning to find out why
and again I think we're probably
all surprised by note that
there's only two evaluators in
the entire state for juvenile's
and adults and when i'm lives in
illinois on the phone
again kind of incredible and and
again it it kind of I was we're
we're making it will sny remark
I was making a signal remarkable
here that of course we hear
incersantly in the journal and
others that well we can't we
have doctors we don't have
doctors we need interstate
companies worth clearly we can
get a
in the in the country a second
or third additional psychologist
and the vice chair challenges
tell me or maybe it was you
senator you and me that has
programs were really graduated
students in these areas and
the fact that we can't even get
him out of state on the phone
this is a question we have to be
asking or so what's going on
white ways that i've been up
pain enough we're not making the
job attractive enough I i've
been told that that sometimes
the the can't live what we pay
him on a pro valuation is
enticing enough for them to do
it miscontinue you want to you
want to internet it's one of the
issues that I have previously
discussed with senator hickey.
As we have two major
universities here in the state
we have UNM and we have an msu
both of whom sponsor graduate
degrees in psychology and we had
been talking about why not like
we have in last school different
clinics that they don't d a
clinic and public defender
clinic why not get a forensic
clinic going at both of those
facilities and to where they
would be monitored by a licensed
professional but it would expand
the pool of people give learning
experience maybe give people
incentive to stay here in the
state and do that work but could
be done both that you and m and
msu if they have the ability if
they have the desire to do so
but that is one option that
could be considered not a very
good idea just again it's
incredible to me that we can't
find more than really what we're
saying too it's really one in
new mexico and in the entire
country we can find one over nil
noise they're just clearly a
disconnect you someplace the
always want to
uh
appreciate the fact that we have
prosecutor and
I would fender at the same table
that's always a great reaching
and I want to which one of my
colleagues on one of my sides
here whispered over here says
they both some very rational
reasonable
you know that that's the
thinking there's the that if if
you have two different sides of
an issue somebody's going to be
off
so so we appreciate that the two
vehicle doing that to the
the amendability issue will I
think we'll come back to us I
think the serious violent
offenders going to come back to
his contrary for to some of the
suggestions in the laws that
have been made by the
discretionary mister bragman in
in in the in the northern part
to maybe change them without I
think we'll come back to that
and it said it abroadly that we
do we do want to have action I
welcome you of course to the set
of judiciary committee where
you've been for a little bit of
time some of the some of the
suggestions are are all things
we want to talk about some of
them right away.
Is an attorney I immediately say
well that's probably not going
to go anywhere so when for
example the the the police
department reasonable as a lay
person would say well we need a
crime we need we need a crime
where if you sell a fire arm to
somebody else in that person who
buys the gun use it in the
commission of a crime the person
who sold it would be responsible
for that chrome there's the
constitutional problem they're
pretty deep one right which is
you have to for a week and you
see the prosecutors even though
they're so so what well intended
on the law enforcement but when
you get in the constitutional
issue can't really charge some
way with a crime where there is
not an intent to have committed
to crime yourself in lawyers
will have a latin phrase for
that men's ray and these are
some of the fundamentals of
criminal line I don't know
criminal but I remember enough
from the bar examination that
yeah that was never going to go
anywhere and so i've said a
brantley and I can I appreciate
your point some of these we have
to ask ourselves really whether
there's a a gonna be a
determination or two I I firm
heard today I think important we
hear it over and over again the
same laws in different parts of
state get a different outcome
and I heard the panel saying
that too and that's always made
my big real big concern is that
depending on the judge you get
depending on the counting you're
in to being on the district
attorney you're in you're going
to get a may be an entirely
different result on some of
these criminal cases and you can
have a very different crime rate
in different parts to stay at
all under the same lives and so
I know that i'm often
you all hear this from you
repeated him often misquoted or
or misrepresented to say I don't
want more laws you don't need
new laws but we have to be smart
about them and and that's not a
panel sea and again politicians
love to do that will pass a new
line and will get on the news a
lot in the papers and everybody
loves us and as it's on the back
but we're we're clearly seeing
the issues are struggle is with
the enforcement of the laws are
struggles with the
administration of the laws our
struggle is with the
accountability in in those in
those areas too and again this
used to work in inconsistent
application.
An inconsistent application loss
and and that should be troubling
so thank you for doing this on
short notice I think the
committee benefit a lot from
this I think we're gonna be
talking more about this a long
time it was regarded juveniles
and so thank you to the panel
very much
all right how about that we're
pretty close on time for eleven
o'clock we have a little bit of
discussion time I don't know
that we'll go anywhere near the
hour the reality for that not
come to you first ribs of
channel let me before I do that
let me think of as always he's
walking back there in the
maximum but all of our staff
nancy story with nancy you all
know nancy is is probably a
aging quickly
working with me on an agenda
that changes even last night so
and sometimes this is what this
is what happens this this
committee is different than
other committees I I think and
and I like that about our
committee
other committees
are pretty easy to go line of
bunch people who want to be
heard frankly and are begging
and what we have that I we
represent reason channel I have
people that are begging that
want to come present or
committee and and they're easy
to sign up and put on an agenda
though the harder thing to put
on general people who don't want
to be here right and sometimes
district attorneys public
defenders judges don't want to
be here law enforcement I want
to be here because we're going
to ask hard questions on hard
topics in that that sometimes
makes a little harder to to put
together a gender but I
appreciate your patience and
analy so please would be nice to
nancy and of course to shawn a
dominica in in the similar again
to all of them I I want to thank
miss ben still here to benly
then may have left already benz
been indispensable in this
meeting helping me put together
people and even bring in himself
in others here too to give the
public defender's perspective on
on issues as well too and and
then philip always are here to
help build me out when i'm in
trouble in and I step in a lot
you'll probably see me doing
that plenty
and in a required doing that I
would recard it taking risks.
Going up as far as on the edge
is like the possible account to
make things in life interesting
so thank all of the staff and
and then we got great on
forcement representation i'll be
down here from farmington former
achieved the state police and
other so we've had a great
representation here and I want
to thank all of you for
your decoram I know there
sometimes sometimes this
committee is going to testing
but again i'm not i'm not lining
up the people that want to come
in and and give you the
information version of of what's
happening in the world you're
getting you're going to get some
hard hard issues and we're going
to disagree strongly about them
and I I don't know about all of
your holiday on the other
countries I said and I don't see
much of that happening to those
of the committees it's usually a
lot of pleasant trees are not
putting the other twenties down
i'm just trying to say this is
the place where we're at a
confront the things that need to
be confronted I think so all
right represent channel you
wanted to talk about something
yet just a wellness is going
forward and agent item
there has been discussion about
competency and what needs to be
done and so on there is there
are issues associated with lack
of resources and providers
certainly that was something
that was known last year when we
are working on the confidency
bill and the intent of course
has been to fund through senate
bill three and other
mechanisms to develop the
expertise that we need to ensure
that we can follow through on
these things
so I do recommend that we try to
bring in the union for
group I think I mention mr chair
that I met with them while we
are working on the bill I have
met with them since the bill is
just a summer to talk about what
they're doing to try to work to
bring providers in working with
that health care authority as
well so I think all of us should
have the ability to question
kind of what they're doing on
the assistant day or mention
the need to develop resources
through university a hundred
percent I think that would be
nice to know what they're doing.
How and we can we can get some
sense about where they might be
going so just want to make that
recommendation again me for our
last learner's
meeting since it's relatively
close to
all the kirking and the provider
some of them could probably come
down and talk with us mr chair I
think you're observing I hope
you're volunteering yourself to
help me in nancy put that
together on agenda introduce
direct people to the power and
we'll do that at our next
meeting again i'm gonna
repeating but i'm gonna try and
leave a little bit of the next
agenda somewhat flexible that
given the fact we may be meeting
a week before a special session
and so we may we may or may not
have topics that we need to
handle them on this committee
but but certainly will have time
for some of up this in and our
next meeting so others with the
subject's topics issues center
brand way I would ask that you
would add the CYFD arbitrators
report back on the next meeting
that update is um
discussingly alarming and it is
it is addressed for directly to
legislators to take action in it
outlays exactly what needs to
happen so I would ask for a a
report on that as well
thank you that's a good idea and
want before going to the next
subject
in the arbitrary's report we
should well also look to have
some update from the attorney
general's office on their
efforts to try and implement
what we've kind of the authority
put on the damage and then we
should we probably need to hear
from the secretary as well too
but what they're doing to to
meet that that
really that the the plan that we
establish I think for them and
and let's be honest about it
that we we had a plan in place
that that came to the senate who
got pulled back quite a bit by
the amendment.
See wafting will do an update on
that are representative thank
you mister share I just wanted
to put another fine point on the
difference between a federal
evaluation and state evaluation
I think we need to understand
what those nuances are
and who what the credentials are
for the federal bureau of
prisons that's different from
new mexico as well if they're
able to perhaps in an emergency
help us with these I don't know
if what what other things we
might need to do to try to
figure this out if we are I did
it didn't get to tell me where
to crace this point but i'm not
quite sure either what does that
mean but I think it would be
really helpful helpful for us to
to try to look at what we might
need to craft by violeg solution
to meets any demand if that's
what's what's necessary
and a second piece and it was
recommended by
the district attorney or
assistant restriction attorney
that the governing board of all
judicial districts may have data
for us about
folks that are going through the
system we don't get to see that
very often with the courts and
when we're looking at how we
are prioritising our legislation
about what's necessary our
dollars etc I think it would be
critical for us to to see if
they have information for us to
look at the systematic issues
that we want to deal with
in this and I don't know if the
governing board has ever
presented to the c c j
o c we should see him she met
it's it's a o d yeah
that we if we could have those
you know for all three judicial
districts what we're looking at
what we're talking about would
be really helpful when we're
thinking about what
what what what we're looking at
are are they are we have annual
statistics are we looking at
trends I mean I I would be
really interested to try to have
interrupt your thought for a
moment
representative because I assume
you belong to you been
participant.
Yeah
something went with the a o d a
representative was talking about
maybe having a some kind of
presentation on their statistics
and in my general senses they
don't really do much tracking
statistically across the state
is that to an attorney or
michael
mr check all the down from every
case that is prosecutors entered
into the statewide systems they
can't want queries and you know
get you some statistics on some
stuff but I would be surprised
if we can put that on I will
tell you from my perspective
those numbers are manipulated a
great deal for political gain
and so when you have your in
your grain rips and reply
because it can you might it
might be dismissed but you might
have one count that was fled to
a fifteen dismissed and might be
like the first they dismiss and
they refile their she's so many
almost everything has to be
explained
you know so so for example I
father in glass election in the
first district santa fe very
contentious issues between the
two candidates about what the
dismissal rate was and and that
happened down here but when
mr macia's ran for distributory
how many how many cases are
being dismissed what's a
dismissal rate what's the
conviction rate of so with and
the da's can you all have
already heard me say this once
before you know there's i's down
lives and statistics right
apologizes are pretty good about
playing with statistics and that
happens not just in the first I
I know it's happened in the
second I know it happens here in
the third probably happens they
want you my guess I said mister
chair I would love to try to
figure out what the
legislature's duty in trying to
get objective data that isn't
politicized so that we know how
resources should be distributed
and funding should be
distributed about what our crime
situation is about what our
judicial system situation is I
don't know if legislative
council might be at the best
sort of filter for some of that
information or lfc perhaps if
there is a way for us to sort of
call upon.
Um objectively
conversation I looked at it
thank you mister chair everyone
asked the chair of senate
financial tell you how the
allocation resources should be
in one district of the state I
think that one district
attorney's office but hopefully
but won't get to politicize with
this committee mr
eliminate their budget entirely
that's why it's one way to
handle it
others would suggestions
comments questions about
anything we've addressed or for
a future means the senator here
thank you I too think that we
need to hear from c y fd but any
grounds will need to hear from
department of health they're the
ones who are in charge of
sequence and so court is really
established to provide services
for youngster you to have been
identified as having a mental
illness and from what everything
that i've heard and talked with
folks is that they only take in
you know clients who are or a
meanable to or want to be there
and so so we seem to really
clear today that there is a gap
there is a gap of services for
for these kids that are found in
confident
but yet no real place to be
I think that there's some
responsibility with cyft I think
there's probably some
responsibility with with
department and you know it might
be helpful to have the last
biggest folks who provide
services for adults at the table
maybe they have some ideas as to
how we can set up some services
for these years and I
specifically would like to learn
two things what are the
credentials I think that was
already product for the
individuals who can provide that
competency and is that a state
while that we need to change to
allow.
Those who may be considered to
have lesser credentials but you
know in their minds psychologist
and a psychiatrists are trained
in a lot of the same things as a
counselor sufficient with a
social worker be sufficient or
do we just have this high
standard
psychological psychiatrist that
we just don't have a number of
them and they probably get paid
better somewhere else and then
the last thing is I think we
need to get more information
about who those twenty four
youngsters that are set out of
state
I understood them and initially
to be part of the two when i'll
justice and then they clarify
that now they're in the
protective service and my
understanding is protective
services as foster care and so I
would just like to figure out
are these the kids that are
slipping through the cracks who
are they and why are we sending
them out
a good topics and in what what
i'm going to do that I don't
strike taking good notes on all
these topics but i'm i'm gonna
do what them would it's always
most effective for me which is
to ask those of you who are on
these topics to follow up with a
shortly after this meeting maybe
take some responsibility for for
targeting this so for example
the way it was by us the coyote
in department would help and
take about square they'll tell
me all kinds of great things are
doing and what a wonderful wife
is but if you have a specific
issues with the way they're
doing things we need to tell
them we're coming in on the
discrete issue right interest
rate specific issue be prepared
on that one and I I don't want
to have one of those will get
back to you meetings right so
let's when when when you that's
a specific topic wool will put
the topic that way on the agenda
same thing with you represent
remarry if there's a specific
data set that you're looking for
may be talking to represent read
and the two of you helping me
really define disgracely what
that issue is so we can have the
the days come in and do that and
you can you make a good point I
don't think you've had the day's
come to us
at all ever right and because
they're frankly.
From my perspective they're not
very cohesive
and I see represent mokey reps
at rebo is the person who would
could verify my understanding
but but it's an initiating thing
that the public defenders is
very cohesive because their
owners are central structure
right and they have a have a
chain of command rich that days
everyone's onto themselves and I
I thought hard and long about
whether that we shouldn't change
that on whether they should be
under some kind of a central
structure as well through the
they won't like hearing that but
but we've heard consistently
here there's a very difference
of performance in different
districts and it might be nice
and you've been there before
representative were you
satisface overwhelmed with the
baldwin case they've got to go
out outside those were that
maybe a circumstance where their
prosecutors and other parts
states could come in and help
step in easily and i'm sure that
probably happens
somewhat too much to be nice
that we have that kind of like
the pds i'm sure they cannot
feel in where they're where
they're needed when necessary
others are sitting on the locust
or so the eleventh
thank you mister chair
this is along the side of lines
of what senator to you and and
she would others have said and
that is you know how we're
having the
aoc
I guess what you can committees
under sp under speed three it'll
be very interesting to get a
report from them about what
they're thinking with regard to
services for children
in the juvenile justice system
especially
because this resource issue I
think
I think senator brantley really
said this is it frustrates me to
hear that a really frustrates me
to
and so I I think that that and
it could just be a very small
report by little smokes fault
part of the of the panel
and I guess the other thing i'd
like with that is then they
could hear what's being said
here
and that's administration thank
you.
Thank you anyone else
alright I was up to her
spreadsheet so.
Thank you chair
I think just more curiosities
than anything
and i'm new here but you I have
to feels ginormous
and I think part of
our kids getting last in it is
that it's just it employees how
many people are just thousands
of people and
if there were a way to separate
this out for the juvenile
justice end of it so that there
is more continuity like we're
talking about that might be
helpful and that's of some day
maybe conversation probably
and I think i'm curious with
this committee are if there's
any other
jelling of ideas like we heard
proposals from lcpd
it feels like this committee is
kind of going towards consensus
around competency and are there
other issues that people might
be moving towards in the uniform
way um so that's that's just my
curiosity thank you check thank
you like you like everyone else
there was a silver encourage
interview all that if you have a
specific topic you want to
really dig in too for our
committee approach me in ribbons
of channel and will help flash
that out for an agenda item in
in it work with you in your
context specializations to help
really flash that up we would
like to do it I am your your
your question is one that I
think we've all had for some
time which is seek to see why
too big to a management to will
be
we can have that later
discussion I don't know that
it's any bigger more unwilling
than the education or any other
things it all comes down to
leadership in my perspective and
and we heard that we've had the
what knowing directors in ten
years that tells me I need to
know about why you can't get
anything done and see what
and I can anybody and I I
remember the count that's that
we're doing how many.
Secretaries of education depends
on if you use rachel's count or
not I guess some some will use
at nine secretarians of
education perhaps arguably with
acting positions in in what
seven or eight years so you're
gonna have a tough time getting
anything done and should be too
big a surprise our way that
happens but but we see whether
he will remain a big issue i'm
sure for all this
there's no way I was talking for
those kids but asked
and see where the of course
executive branch others anyone
else
all right thank you I I didn't
see my children i'm sorry about
that my apologies I got a bunch
of plastic bags available
with tick plastic
but but will work on that in a
future meeting so thank you all
very much I hope you felt like
this could work in a really did
I don't know a lot of you had
been back to what j paul taylor
before and I every time I go
back there I feel good about see
and what they're doing there so
there are success stories there
as well too thank you all very
much we'll see the next week.
