anybody who was listening
all right good morning everyone
welcome again to our second day
before we start a digging into
the tour this morning I wanted
double check with folks
one of the members has advised
me that she cannot be here
tomorrow so should be with us
today but not tomorrow I want to
make sure that we're going to
maintain the corn at all times
for all the teasing that
yesterday we went through but I
want to make sure so is there
anyone else who's here today
who's not planning to be here
tomorrow.
And I think you'd mention that
to me as well too okay so it
looks like we're still okay
nancy we so gonna be good for
anything
but puts let's double check with
everybody make sure but
it will see some stragglers I
think still coming around here
let's see him trying to think of
nothing we'll still see some of
the members that can be joining
us a little bit later.
All right good so then good
morning the the agenda refers to
discussion of the arbiter's
report on the cabinets and I
spoke with the secretary
last week before we began and
told her that I didn't think we
that we would do it at this
meeting after all that of that
that would be better for
probably a later meeting so we'd
have some time that I just and
really dig into it and not be
rushed this morning I also
thought it was important that up
for a I know we have a number of
newer members the committee into
the legislature and some of you
have been not to the jaypal
taylor center two years ago but
I know many of you have not and
and I think it was important for
everyone where there are two
years ago to recognize that a
lot of us are very concerned
about deannes in the horror that
we see something some of the
more tragic stories but when I
was there a couple years ago was
really hard heartened by a
really exceptionally
encouraging facility
and a lot of young people there
who we had a chance to speak
with him in wanted to give them
encouragement as well too
in its facility I think down
here we can be proud of it's one
of the very few facilities in
the state that we have and so I
try to be useful for us to go
see some good news from see what
and particularly with the new
members and to get an update and
so forth of your will come up
and work our presentation this
morning is going to be
relatively brief so we can get
over there
and the only thing that may be a
little different than the last
time we were there is that the
the young people there are now
in school or eight mins so we're
going to have a little bit of a
challenge trying to work around
and not disrupt their schooling
at the same time I I do hope it
should get a chance to see that
as much of the facilities we can
under the circumstances of tell
us about jpa taylors.
Thank you for having us mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is valerie sound i'm the
deputy secretary at cfd I
oversee the divisions protective
services and you've not justice
thank you so much for having us
were excited for you to come
toward the john paul taylor
center
we have a very brief
presentation and then the
facilities about twenty minutes
from here and the tour will take
about a little over two hours
during that time you are more
than welcome to ask us any
questions when we walk around
our youth will probably be in
school there might be a few that
are working and the green house
or in another part of the
facility but they will probably
for the majority of school
with me also is my deputy
director over facilities and
that martinez
and so you all have a packet in
front of you of a brief
powerprint presentation will go
through and if you have any
questions are felt free to
interrupt me
i'm just a little history of the
john paul taylor center
it was opened as a private chip
not attention facility in two
thousand two the state of new
mexico c took it over in two
thousand three
since that time we've added a
cafeteria multiple room and
education and green house
building
coke at building a gym and
education building we currently
have construction happening at
the facility so if you have ten
issues you might want to change
before we head over
into the facility
and the capacity of a trumple
taylor is forty eight beds
client demographic is boys up to
the age of twenty one we do not
have females at john paul
and we have over ninety staff
and that's from administration
through
juvenile correction officers
that includes all teachers etc.
And we have a high school and
post graduate education
visitation is done in percent
and the assume and we have daily
program for our use each and
every day
we currently have forty two
youth at the john paul taylor
center
we have nine who are age sixteen
we have twenty five who were
seventeen and eighteen years old
and we have eight that are ages
nineteen and twenty.
The current length of stay for
the forty two that our house
twelve of them have up to one
year nineteen have up to two
years and we have useful fender
up to twenty one years we have
eleven clients currently
right below that is the current
charges for the youth that are
at the john paul taylor center
aggravated assault battery
murder firearm
related are robbery
stealing of a motor vehicle
trespassing resisting child
abuse possession of alcohol
criminal criminal property
damage all of those charges are
variety that make up the forty
two that are currently house
you've not just re embraced the
camp your model and that really
switches the focus from
confinement and punishment to
rehabilitation
clients still our held
accountable for their actions
but we we provide services
rehabilitation services
programming education all of
that to reintegrate them back
into the community.
Each dorm has a treatment team
that works together for that
youth it's a unit supervisor a
behavioral health staff member
and a case manager that team
wraps around that youth
throughout their stay at the
john paul taylor center
a minimum of two staff per shift
are required for each unit
while the youth are a week
during night time hours it can
be
one single staff for sleeping
hours
the programming and services
that we provide behavior health
programming which includes
individual group and family
therapy
we have a full medical team
located at the john call taylor
center which is nursing a
pharmacist on site we have
psychiatry dental hearing any
medical needs that the the youth
new need are located in the
facility
our educational programming we
have secondary vocational and
post secondary education
are general data deep program
includes group mentoring like
skills daily physical activities
as as well as multiple team
meetings for that youth
we have a cultural sensitive
programming if
we need that
lifequest which is ready for
life are juvenile correction our
community correction programming
we have religious services
sanity mountain center we have a
dance and center for the arts
and also artistic expression
outlets for a year.
I'm a normal daily schedule for
a youth six am wake up tours
hygiene check in breakfast as
that seven
seven thirty to eleven thirty is
education
eleven thirty to one fifteen is
lunch check out little bit a
lease your time
one fifteen one forty five is
additional education programming
one forty five to two fifteen
transition
two fifteen to five is mdts
group recreation volunteer
programs structured activities
and a check in so if they he I
really need something this is
the time they would recap reach
out to staff at the facility to
get their need to take a care
out
five thirty to sep or a five to
six is dinner
by seven is leisure time phone
calls recreation group and check
out seventy nine is showers
hygiene phone calls and clean up
of their rooms and prep for the
next day and lights out are at
nine pm all of them are in the
room until six am the next
month.
As I mentioned we have over
ninety staff at john paul it
includes administration support
staff and security stop there's
a list of all of our positions
that make up that nineteen.
Our education it's the as tech
youth academy
we have a director of education
her name is lisa hamilton if you
have any education needs in
regards to see right she is a
great advocate and a great
resource please reach out to her
I can provide her contact
information
we have a principle of denise
students academic transition
coordinator we are nine teachers
five of them our level three and
four of them are level to you we
have high school and post
graduate classes special
education services we have a
book education which includes
automotive prepare welding would
working for a culture
this last year we graduated
twenty two graduates six with a
high school diploma and sixteen
received their g e d we have a
graduation ceremony for them
which is very very hard worming
and it's a great experience to
attend that graduation
discharge planning we start
discharge planning the day they
walk in with us we know that
it's important some of them we
only have for six to nine months
and we know that it's critical
to transition them early so we
start the day that they come
we help them with time frames
whatever their time premiums
they need to meet placement
options where are they gonna go
after they leave the john paul
taylor center what services do
you need
post education how do you manage
your meds how to we teach them
to have managed their mets
behavioral health needs to
continue those services once
they leave channel
we help them with referrals to
community based services
what other supports do they need
in the community.
Like an image and it's a very
brief presentation just kind of
the history of john paul and
what our current population is
at this at this day to day we
probably have additional three
and takes that we're going to be
taking over the next two weeks
when someone is admitted into
one of our facilities they all
go to white edc for a full
assessment could be about thirty
days or so and then they've been
either why d DC to john paul or
the state white albert so
weren't anticipating three
coming to john paul over the
next week to two weeks so will
probably be up to forty five
forty five at that time
I will stand for any questions
that you might have before our
tour
will first well depend on
secretary thank you again for
being here and I think i've got
a choice to make so take a
little bit against from you
perhaps from the gridy one will
you'd be available for us to go
to the tour now and then come
back and then continue the
dialog with you back here do you
have that time with us today I
have until about one pm so if we
can
get it done so would you be able
to come back here from the
facility I think that that's
probably the wisest thing for us
to do is to proceed on the tour
and then come back with
questions as opposed to taking
the questions now unless anybody
has anything that they feel is
important to get
out before we we had over there
but I think that'll be more
constructed that taking
questions and going over and so
if you all have the time to do
that it's what i'd like to do
suggest that mr chairman
so i'm sure of course we have
their left hand twenty questions
mr chair and thank you
secretary my question is about
when you have so many twelve
that are there for up to one
year and another nineteen up to
two years can that's on
their not page needed sorry the
data.
But can someone
if there is an evaluation
can that be extended or is it
just by the courts to a certain
amount of time.
Mr chair representative
yes so that with the team has a
multi display team that's part
of their that follows them so
they have their therapist and we
can make recommendations for an
extension and that goes back to
the judge
technical determination if
there's an extension for their
commitments of their one year
they can extend six months if
there are two year commitment
that can extend up to a year and
and you can continue going with
that on the two years so if
they're not making the progress
and they don't feel that they're
ready to go we can make that
recommendation to the one
thank you.
Anyone else
yes said a brown thank you mr
chairman I have just a brief
follow up to that as well
right under those statistics it
says youthful offender up to
twenty one years you have eleven
children in there for that is
that a sense thing then so they
were sentenced to up to their
twenty first birthday to be in
this facility and then my next
question is then what
mr terror senator
so we try honor useful offender
clients we try to get them out
prior to their twenty first
birthday so it's up to the age
of twenty one so there's a
little bit of leeway for us to
try to get them services prior
to that so they may go into a
reintegration center on
supervisors release to try to
get them set up for services and
then also we refer him to like
jc programming and other
programmings that can follow
them up to the age of twenty
five so that they do have some
support but we are are hope is
you know that to get him out
earlier and get him situated in
the community prior to their
twenty first birthday thank you
mister chairman and the current
charges in here are from very
severe and violent charges
murder all the way down to you
know perhaps stolen property if
you have a let's see a sixteen
year old that is a non violent
participant or detained either
this facility
with a website nineteen or
twenty year old in there for
murder how are are they
integrated with some of these
violent offenders are hot how do
you how do you protect the non
violent offenders in the
facility so mister chair senator
we have four units at j politics
speaking about two point in
particular we try to
have them by age you know in in
their learning abilities
sometimes that plays into role
sometimes they are in the same
unit but we do our best to the
classification process is pretty
well that out.
And so we placed them in the
unit that we feel is most
appropriate but there are times
where they're in one unit okay I
look forward to the tour thank
you mister chairman.
Yes yes sir mister chair.
Yes
mr chair members of the
committee we have water for you
at the facility.
Mr chair.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
So i'm getting questions so you
can leave everything here right
we're here for today and
tomorrow so we're
the room
you're going out on interstate
ten west which right now there's
a lot of construction right here
through town and I don't know
where that I guess the best
ideas just to go through it
right sold you through itself if
you go down university is the
best way to go to the down
university here and your kit I
tend to go west right
mr chair I use google maps or
a similar I am dating myself and
very much ever assisted that you
don't directions.
You could you could do that you
could do that too catch the
interstate right
there are no pictures allowed in
the facility so you're more than
a complete refunds in the car
here okay so what will we be
expected to leave our phones in
the cars you won't take phones
in
we could put him in an office mr
if you need or
that's okay with your best idea
in the car
okay okay live in the office.
