Um, but it also leaves room for
another important event
happening tomorrow in the
Greater Albuquerque area, which
is the status on women's summit
happening.
I encourage all of you, if
you're able to attend that
conversation. Um, and since, um,
yeah, let's go ahead and get
started with introductions and
we'll start down there with you,
um, representative
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
good to be here today. This was,
uh, my old committee and, and I
absolutely love this committee
and got the invite to come today
and participate. Uh, my name's
Mark Duncan. I represent the,
uh, west side of Farmington out
to Fruitland. Good to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Alan
Martinez, represented uh
out of District 23 in Sandoval
County.
Um, always glad to come to the
economic Development Committee.
Good morning and welcome
everybody to San Juan County.
Right here is not my district.
right over there is my district,
so out those doors just right
out those doors. So I'm like
right here in the little corner,
now Steve Lin Aon and seriously,
if you guys need anything at
all, um, thank you, Doctor
Pinergrass for having such a
great venue for us, and we
appreciate it, but if you guys
need anything at all, please
contact Senator Sher. He'll take
care of it for you.
Uh, good morning, everyone, uh,
Madam Chair. Uh, my name is
Joshua Sanchez. I'm state
senator for District 29, which
is Valencia County and Socorro
County.
And it's an honor to be here in
Farmingennessee
some familiar faces. So can't
wait to get started. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Bill Sherrer. This is my
district. That's not, um, but it
goes west to uh the Navajo
Nation, and so, welcome to
Farmington.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Senator Nicole Tobiasin. I'm
from Northeast Albuquerque, and
I'm actually a country girl at
heart, so I'm really pleased to
be here this morning.
Thank you. Good morning,
everybody. I'm Jennifer Jones. I
represent District 32. It is the
southernmost district, so I
probably should get a prize for
coming the furthest. It took me
about 7 hours to get here, but
I'm glad to be here. Love this
country and, uh, and I'm gonna
make the most of it by um hiking
Mount Taylor on the way home, so
yeah,
good to be here.
Uh, good morning everybody. uh
Representative Rob Montoya, uh,
you throw a rock in any
direction and you're in my
district. Um, I go to the top of
the building, you can see my
house, so, uh, so based on that,
uh, uh, Mr. Mayor, I did not get
pulled over on my way here
today.
Thank you.
Uh, Jay Block, um, the most
beautiful district in the state
of New Mexico, uh, District 12
and, um, Rio Rancho in northwest
Albuquerque.
and um an honor to be here.
Thank you, Mr. Mayor, Madam
Mayor, County manager, and, uh,
Madam Chair, thanks for, uh,
picking this place. It's a great
place to be. So look forward to
being here and
thanks for the warm welcome, and
I was kind of hoping
since Senator Lanier owns like
87 Taco Bells here. We would
have some breakfast burritos or
something, but um apparently
that was a little too much to
ask.
Thank you
No thank you, Senator Block, as
usual.
Um, well, oh, I'm Senator
Charlie. I represent Senate
District 30, which is all of
these 5 counties below, um, and
I'm happy to be here. I'm happy
to be at San Juan College
because my mom actually
graduated from San Juan College
here. And so, um, and she's very
proud of that and we're very
proud of her. She went back to
school when she was older and so
she was a nontraditional student
who found a home here at San
Juan College. And um
I thank you for supporting her
and supporting our family. Um,
but with that, let's go ahead
and get started with our first
panel. Our first panel brings us
voices from across San Juan
County and the Four Corners
region. We'll hear updates on
local economies, challenges and
opportunities. So please join me
in welcoming, uh, Mayor Nate
Duckett from the City of
Farmington, a representative
from the city of Aztec Cara
Wood, and um
from Four Corners Development.
We also have a representative
from the town of Kirtland, and
Mayor Attenio from the city of
Bloomfield, as well as San Juan
County manager Mike Stark. So
thank you all for being here and
for setting the stage for
today's conversation.
We also might take it an
additional mic down there, so
are a couple of additional mics
so we're not having to share
Thank you, Erin. Welcome
everyone. Thank you. I realize
that it is a packed panel down
there, but we're excited to hear
from all of you. Um, let's go
ahead and start on this side and
then we'll go down and do
introductions and then, um, I
believe you all know that uh the
order, thank you, the order that
we're going in.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. My
name is Warren Unsicker. I'm the
director of economic development
for the city of Farmington. I'll
be uh the mayor's wingman today,
so.
Madam Chair, on the committee, I
am Mayor Nate Duckett here in
the city of Farmington. We're
proud to have you here in our
community and thank you for all
who've traveled all this way and
definitely uh check out the
sites while you're here. Make a
weekend out of it.
Good morning. I'm Cara Wood, and
I'm here to talk about Kirtland
today.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Cynthia Tentio. I'm the mayor
for the city of Bloomfield, and
thank you all for coming and
maybe you can get a burrito for
coming the farthest.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Mike Stark, San
Juan County, uh, manager. It's a
pleasure to have you up here and
San Juan County, the Four
Corners, as the mayor mentioned,
I, I think if you have the
opportunity to stick around and
catch
uh some of the sights and then
any cultural opportunities we
have here. It it would be well
worth your time. So, I'm glad
that you're all up here and, and
I appreciate having you here.
So
Good morning. My name is Andrew
DiCamillo. I'm the community
development director for the
city of Aztec. Uh, I too am am
honored to be here, uh, with,
with all of you as dignitaries,
um, and, uh, while you're here,
if you have time, come through
our historic downtown, uh, see
we've been doing quite a bit,
uh, we've just recently gone to
Main Street program and we're,
we're excited with uh several of
the projects that we have going
on that hopefully I get to share
here in a moment, so.
thank you.
And it looks like we're starting
with City of Farmington. Thank
you, Madam Chair, thank you so
much. We are excited this
morning to work with you all and
uh just bring you some updates
of things that are happening
here in the city of Farmington.
It's a great time to be in the
city. We just, uh, had a banner
year, uh, with our fiscal year
2025 coming to an end and uh
there's a lot of uh really fun
projects that are happening that
you all have been a part of and
we wanted to say thank you to
our legislative, uh, friends who
have helped commit dollars to
what we've called the
uh, the rebranding of our
community for the last 8 years.
So lots have happened, lots that
you've been aware of, many
challenges that we have had to
face. Do you have a clicker? Am
I?
clickerless
Oh, OK. Oh, go ahead. All right,
let's move forward. We're gonna
do some high level, uh, just
some high level information for
you.
Uh, City of Farmington is in
MSA, we're the 4th largest MSA
here in the state of New Mexico.
These are important numbers to
understand. We're considering a
lot of information that is put
out about our community. So an
MSA brings with it a lot of good
things and potentially some bad
things just depending upon what
exactly you are getting into. We
are a believer that the MSA has
given us an opportunity when you
drive through this town to see a
lot of national brands when you
go through our community, you'll
see a lot of, uh, big box retail
stores, restaurant
s those things because they are
trying to locate in places where
there is population centers and
that MSA gives us that
designation next slide.
Demographic overview of San Juan
County. San Juan County, of
course, is about the size of the
state of Connecticut. It's a
very large county, very rural in
some parts, but this demographic
just gives you an idea of
exactly, um, kind of what the
economic standing is for
different portions of our
county. Next slide. We are, we
pride ourselves in being an area
that is a business hub, a retail
hub for over 300,000 people here
in the Four Corners. You can
come here on a Friday afternoon
and you will find this town is
typically double its population
size. It makes Main Street kind
of a challenge, uh,
Representative Montoya
understands that aspect, uh, but
it is a key component for
economic development in our
areas we utilize those GRT
dollars that are being brought
in from all across the four
corners in order to create a
community that's not just built
for the 46 47,000 people who
were here proper, but for these
300,000 people who actually
utilize Farmington, uh, on a
monthly or weekly basis.
Next slide, uh, just some big
brands that we've had, uh, come
in or are coming in right now
into our area, uh, obviously all
Souths Maverick, they're doing
developments all across the
state. Burlington has announced
that they will be coming and
opening up a store here in the
old Joanne's building. Seven
brew Coffee is also, uh, got
their building popped up. Amazon
opened up a distribution center
last year, uh, and Michael's is
another recent addition to our
retail offerings.
Part of what has
uh fueled this, uh, what we call
community transformation and
economic diversification was a
0.25% tax that was passed in
2018. There's going to
strategically towards economic
diversification, um,
opportunities and some of that
would be catalytic projects.
Some of that has to do with
public safety. We've created the
alternative response unit. Out
of that, we've created a park
Rangers division out of that,
but we've also been funding
along with you, a number of
different very special projects
that are focused on areas of
outdoor
recreation, retirement
community, uh, location neutral
jobs, things that we believe
that are within the control of
this community, uh, to take
advantage of.
We always like to tout what, you
know, your savings here when you
consider places that you
determined to live or retire
obviously if people are on a
fixed income, they're looking
for places with low costs. We
have the lowest cost electricity
even after the challenges faced,
uh, at the time that San Juan
generating station was shut down
where we experienced a 20 to 30%
increase in price of electricity
for our customers. That has been
dealt with, uh, and we
appreciate the support that you
all have shown on that end.
but we, uh, we continue to have
the lowest electricity costs
here in the state and the
region.
Thanks time.
Clear Networks, another big
brand that's come in they're
putting fiber here in the city
of Farmington. This is something
we've been working towards for a
number of years. We've had a
number of companies who've
showed up, knocked on the door,
uh, expressed their, their
determined efforts to bring
fiber but clear Networks, who
was, I believe, working with
Amazon when they put their
distribution center in, they
decided to actually put their
money where their mouth is, so
we're proud to say that fiber
will be, uh, is coming right now
to our community.
River river water, water is what
has brought everybody here to
this area. We, we have 3 rivers.
The La Plata doesn't run very
often anymore, but we've got the
San Juan and the animus, uh, 60%
of the state's surface water
flows through this community.
Obviously it's, that makes it
critical, um, to the, to the
people here, but also to any
development that we're looking
towards the future and we've
been utilizing the river a lot
more if you, if you consider
this, it wasn't until 2020 that
we actually had a river guide
service here in Farmington, uh,
at
all the years that Durango in
Southern Colorado has been
taking advantage of their rivers
and utilizing it for outdoor
recreation. It took us until
2020 to actually see a a
business come in and uh they've
been very successful in doing
so.
Next slide
These are our targets, uh, when
we're talking about economic
diversification development, uh,
we've talked a little bit about
outdoor recreation industry, uh,
value added agriculture, uh,
county manager Stark, who's here
this morning, his son Carson
has, uh, got 5 acres that he's
farming and doing a fantastic
job utilizing our our local
resources, destination
retirement. We have a 55 and
older community gated community
that has uh got their, their
infrastructure in they've got
everything ready to go and we
would invite all of you to, to
move
up here, uh, when you're 55 and
older.
Location neutral film, obviously
we're trying to tie in with the
state's determined efforts to
create a film industry here in
the states. Obviously energy
will always be a foundational
component of what drives the
local economy, brings jobs in,
and, uh, quality of place in
retail.
strategic needs warn you wanna
you wanna hit on that?
Madam Chair and committee
members, uh, with economic
development, it's all about
diversification and trying to
stabilize our economy, and so we
have some strategic priorities
and needs that we are working
toward, um, with energy being so
critical to our area here, the
future of energy is something
that we are well prepared to
take on, whether it's hydrogen,
uh, renewable energy, uh,
looking at what new concepts
there may be for energy storage.
Uh, we're at the ready to help
with that. You're sitting in
the, the power
ho use of education around
energy as well, and so we have
all the key pieces to make
workforce, uh, really viable.
Speaking of that, workforce
retention and attraction is
critical. A lot of the projects
you'll see here soon that we've
been working on have been to
make Farmington a place that
people want to live and want to
stay, and that's in large part
to keep our workforce here and
draw new people in. I don't know
if you looked at the license
plates as you drove through town
today, but, um, it's very
diverse right now. We've got
people from all over the nation
that have moved to Farmington.
and are calling it home and
working here now. Um, and with
that, we need more housing, uh,
just much like the rest of the
nation, but we need all levels
of housing, not just affordable
or or attainable, but every
level to help loosen up the
market and make it more
affordable for everyone. Um,
logistics and distribution, uh,
I'm sure that, uh, Mike Stark
will be talking about a rail
efforts that they've been
pursuing with the Navajo Nation,
um, as well as Farmington has
recently, we'll talk about this
shortly, uh, expanded our
airports to add commercial
service again. Um, big thing for
us is sight readiness and spec
buildings, um, we as a state and
as a community just don't have
enough buildings that are ready
to go for the bus businesses and
companies that are looking
around the nation. They want to
be able to have a turnkey
operation. They won't, I won't
have to wait 18 months just to
start construction, um, and
likewise they're looking for
site readiness in the uh green
sites and so we need the
capabilities to achieve that.
And then uh destination making
through
outdoor wreck and the arts has
also been a key part of that,
uh, quality of place that we've
been working toward.
Next slide, go there
We're proud to announce last
year that SkyWest Airlines would
be flying United 50 seats, Jets
starting, this is a, a fantastic
development here in our
community. Obviously, Four
Corners Regional Airport has a
great history with aviation,
Mesa airlines. This was their
home home base for for a number
of years. We lost our our
we lost our commercial air
service back in 2018. So Sky
West had planned to come back in
2020, but we know what happened
in 2020 and it's taken us that
long to get their commitments.
So they are here now. There is
one flight to Denver in the
morning and a flight back from
Denver in the evening and we're
gonna continue to, to work that
in the hopes that that
profitability component, um,
starts taking shape and we can
get some additional flights
straight out of uh Four Corners
Regional Airport.
We are, uh, right now in
negotiations with an owner up on
top of our our mesa where the
airport is located to
potentially look at the long
term benefits of an industrial
park as Warren stated, those
site ready site readiness is
key. We want turnkey operations
and we want to be in the game,
uh, to be available for these
large manufacturers, industrial
components that are looking for
um 30,000 100,000 square feet of
space, housing, uh, I know this
is a critical
discussion that's being had here
today. We have had some recent
success with some zone changes
that the council has approved to
bring in some more, you know,
higher density, uh, what we'll
call attainable housing for our
workforce. Uh, we're hopeful
that with our 2040 comprehensive
plan where we have kind of
dictated land use and looked at
specific areas where we'd be
able to actually put more
affordable and attainable
housing they will continue to
see those areas develop Warren,
we also just recently, uh,
provided some because we
have an MRA here, we have the
opportunity to incentivize
developers in our MRA district,
which is around our downtown,
our medical district, and we
were able to uh help a gentleman
who was rehabbing some
apartments and making them a a a
much more beautiful and uh a
larger um complex.
Other major projects that are
happening here you can see right
across the street we are now the
home of the Farmington Temple
for the, uh, Church of Jesus
Christ, the Latter Day Saints.
We've also got a 47 $48 million
road project that you may be
familiar with called Pinning
Hill's Boulevard Extension that
will be open as I have learned
recently hopefully by the first
of the year that uh provides
another uh route across the
river, so we can connect into
the county and I'm sure Mike
Stark has some additional
information on that part.
We have a new hospital that's up
here on Pinion Hills Boulevard
right across the street. They
are slated, I think, to open
early next year, um, and of
course the Amazon distribution
center.
Major projects we've completed
with our community
transformation and economic
diversification funds includes
our complete renovation of our
downtown, uh, Bistai Bay Water
Park, which was once a flat
bottom pool, it's now a water
park. Tota Theater in
partnership with uh the state
and the county. We've, uh,
rehabbed that.
next slide
We've done a $10 million.09
million dollars upgrade to Penny
Hill's golf course. Again, what
top 10 municipal golf course
here in the United States. I
encourage any golfer here to
please, uh, make a weekend trip
and enjoy that wonderful
facility. We've also completed
the gateway as it is now called,
behind the Gateway Museum. It's
a permanent wave in the river.
You see the picture in the
bottom right hand corner. Uh, we
have to have the river flowing
though in order for that to work
as it turns out. Surprise, uh,
that'll be a great addition to
the spring and
summer and fall, or yeah, spring
and summer next year.
Uh, great pictures here by
Warren.
Gateway Park, uh, we've got our
Marketplace pavilion going up at
Gateway Park. That'll be a great
addition to our, uh, farmers'
markets and other events that
are happening here and it ties
into the gate wave.
This particular location where
our Farmington museum is at is
the closest point on Main Street
to the Animas River. We want to
make this a very special piece
of property, something that
attracts people to it and kind
of sets the tone for who we are
as a community.
Another amazing project, uh, is
happening up on Apache. This is
the all abilities park known as
the Boundless Journey Adventure
Park. It's 8 acres of accessible
playgrounds and other structures
for individuals of all
abilities, uh, exactly as it
states it's uh been a beautiful
project, a very important public
private project as well as we've
had almost $3 million of um
private funds come in to support
us as well as the great job done
by Warren and our staff and
going out for grants, state and
federal grants.
Upcoming projects, uh, that you
all have helped us with, we've
got the Juniper Basin Bike Park,
next slide, uh, Junier Basin
will provide different levels
of, of, uh, difficulty for, for
people who love mountain biking,
which has continued to be a
growing sport here in the area.
Uh, although I hear the e-bikes
are taking over.
One more back, and we're
continuing our mission to extend
our river trail all along the
Animas River here in the city of
Farmington, so there's another
portion of that that is slated
to uh hopefully break ground
next year.
and I will stand for any
questions.
Thank you, Mayor. We'll go ahead
and um hold questions for the
end and move to Aztec, yeah.
Well, uh thank you because, uh,
after you'd have gone down this
way, I would had nothing to say
now I can, I can tell about a
few things, um, that were
mentioned. First of all, we're
really proud that we're the
county seat. Um, and all the
communities here, I think we
work collaboratively together,
um, some of the great things
that are happening not only in
Farmington but what San Juan
County is doing really reflects
on all of us and the benefits,
benefits it's all.
So but uh one particular project
that uh I want to thank our
delegation for specifically,
which probably extends to all of
our legislators um is the
arterial project, uh, around,
uh, the city of Aztec as you
come in from the south, uh,
there is a, we
really don't want to say it, but
it's a truck route or bypass,
but we've we've coined it as an
arterial route, um, around the
city that connects to
the uh state 173 that heads out
towards Navajo Lake. That
project was 20 years in the
making.
It's, uh, it finally got the uh
rest of the funding that it
needed for it on this last
legislative session,
um, probably the last two, and
well, we finally got to be able
to commence construction through
a five-year process of trying to
get two construction, where as
you all know, costs continue to
rise when, when that happens.
Um, so the better part of a $20
million project that got
underway
this um earlier this year, uh,
is actually one year ahead of
schedule. And uh we're already
at paving the uh the road will
be complete by next spring,
which is basically just putting
guardrail and kind of doing some
finishing touches. So in, in, in
line with the thank you, also
the way we could thank you is
getting this thing done. And uh
and we're really proud that uh
with the contractor that came
in.
the resources that we're able to
pool, the coordination within
MDOT really, um, allowed us to,
to kind of move this thing along
and, and get it done. So that
opens up a huge opportunity for
Aztec and for, you know, really
the rest of the county, um, in
additional properties and lands
around there for, uh, economic
development, um, besides just
access, as you all may know, um,
or if you don't know that coming
through uh 5:50 and as you're
heading north
it ends there at Aztec, and you
have to go through our historic
downtown district, um, to
continue either north on to
Colorado or to, to head kind of
uh I guess that would be West to
to Farmington and um a lot of
times with the issues are is the
big trucks and uh that come
through, which is a good thing
because if we didn't have
trucks, we probably wouldn't
have industry and commerce. So,
but, uh, but that's really been
a relief. We're not done yet. We
have several
probably another two phases of
the project to to fully be
completed and then that portion
of 550 that runs through our
historic district will be turned
over to the city and we can, we
get to do some fun things like
Farmington has done with, with,
uh, with their main street. And
uh we're actually looking to
replicate a lot of what they've
done, uh, hopefully the success
that they've had will will also
follow. Um, and, in doing that,
we have applied and been
accepted and working closely
with the New M
ex ic o, Main Street
organization through the
Economic Development department.
Uh, we are kind of graduating
our way up to Main Street, much
like Farmington did, and I
believe other like 32 other
communities around the state
have done. Um, so in, in that
process as well, what we've done
is, uh, create the MRA district
that Warren mentioned that
Farmington has that really uh is
is an effort to incentivize
businesses and industry to come
in uh to that district.
Um, 2 years ago, we expanded
that district so that we can
include uh vacant land, um,
which answers the call to a
legislative, um, I believe
policy or statute that was
passed to include of vacant land
as, as part of MRA and tax
increment financing and, and
things such as that and expand
that whole uh program uh instead
of revitalization existing
downtowns and buildings, but to
incentivize new growth within,
within that, uh, uh,
Metropolitan redevelopment Area
District. So thank you all for
that as well because that really
gives us a great opportunity to
incentivize and offer up um some
public-private partnerships that
we weren't able to do or we're
limited to do uh prior to that.
Um, so, and some of the other
things that, you know, I'll
touch on real quickly, um, is a
retail specific is um the
community
development for Aztec, we, we
are looking at site readiness as
as Warren touched on, and I know
um that the four corners
economic development, there's
kind of a great effort for all
of us to to do that. And again,
the arterial kind of opens that
up for us to do that and uh
working with these property
owners so that we can identify
and even help out with getting
sites ready for, uh, you know,
an eventual, hopefully a data
center or, you know, uh, an
Amazon would be
great. But my primary focus is
retail. We do have a lot of
folks that come through the, the
city of Aztec, um, and the
effort is to get them to not
come through but stop.
Uh, so, uh, why we, we have an
emphasis on our downtown, um,
and creating those places for
people to stop or reasons to
stop. Uh, in addition is to
service our community in itself,
uh, the folks that choose to
live here, and again, um there
was mentioned that there's a lot
of, of folks driving around with
license plates from other
states. We're experiencing that
too in Aztec, um, that touches
on the housing need that we also
uh share and feel within Aztec,
um, for, um, a lot of folks that
really would love to come and
live in Aztec, but there's,
there's just, uh, a very short
supply for, for folks to come in
and, and move into, to a home,
uh, or even build with the cost
of construction, it, it makes it
difficult. So that, that, that's
a housing need, but what we have
seen, uh, with whatever, uh,
housing that's been available
has been gobbled up from
folks from out of town. Uh, it
seems like Arizona, Texas, um,
you know, um, we've seen a lot
of plates from, from those
places as well.
And uh uh last I'll I'll leave
with is that we, uh we just
announced that we're getting a
tractor supply. So for Little
Aztec, that's a, that's a huge
um win for us. Uh, we, we're
really proud and happy that
we're getting a big box retailer
to come in, uh, like, like track
supply. We think it's a great
fit. Um, we think it's a perfect
fit actually. We, we have, you
know, uh, a sea of agriculture
kind of around our our little
city, and so um we're really
proud to see
them come on. uh, hopefully
they'll be breaking ground here
in the next couple of months.
And again, you know, with the
success of our, our major
project, ah, for me to kind of
come full circle and close, uh,
we really hope that, um, our
legislatures take note of that
because I know there was a lot
of effort and a lot of debate on
having that amount of funding
and put towards a road around
the city when we know and uh I
know for a
fact with around the county
there's a lot of infrastructure
and road needs that need to be
done. I don't feel was
mentioned, but the Pinion Hills
extension, that road, which it
looks like is gonna be uh much
of a success is, is what we've
had. We would really like to see
that continue, and that that
we've showed that we can do a
project of that magnitude and uh
and hopefully when we come back
for funding for other big
projects like that, uh, we'll
have a bit of a higher level of
confidence.
instilled in you all that we can
pull something like that off. So
thank you for your time. um, and
uh
go to the next one. Thank you
very much.
Thank you and we'll go to uh Mr.
Stark.
Well, thanks again, uh, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, um, pleasure to be
here with you and to share with
you some of our, uh, priorities,
economic development, uh,
priorities. Some of our
successes on partnership with
the state of New Mexico and
other grand tours that we've
worked with and then just share
with you some of our outstanding
needs here in the community. Uh,
next slide, please.
Uh, I always like to start off
and share with you who, who our
leadership team is and who sets
the vision for San Juan County.
That's our elected
commissioners, and we actually
have one of those commissioners
here today, our chair of Protem,
Sam Gonzalez. We appreciate him,
him joining us. I don't think we
have anybody else, but uh uh
just to make sure you're
familiar with our, our team at
the top, uh, next slide, please.
Uh, what guides San Juan County
is our five-year strategic plan
and I think you can't see the
first year in 2022, but, uh,
but, but this was developed in
2021 and, and to give a little
background on this. Um, it was
developed at a time when we knew
the closure of San Juan
generating Station was going to
happen. Um,
and, and so what you can see on
this list of 20 different
priorities through 5 years.
It it interestingly enough, an
or
gan ically kind of fell into
four categories when this was
developed a ground up effort
with our team back in 2021. Uh,
economy place, uh, people and
relations, and so you can see in
red 8 of the 20 priorities are
related to the economy.
and trying to find ways to
assist and diversification of
our economy, knowing that in
September of 2022, we were going
to have our largest taxpayer in
the county closing its doors
and, you know, at the time, at
full production, that's 1500
direct and indirect jobs. A
major impact for our community.
It at the time when that
legislation was being discussed,
I shared with, um, legislators
at large that, you know, that'd
be like, of course it's a little
larger in terms
of capacity and workforce now,
but that'd be like Rio Rancho
losing Intel. That's the kind of
impact that that type of closure
has. So, so to be here today
with this group here of of of
folks, um, saying that we're in
a very good position
economically because of a lot of
these diversification efforts
that you're going to hear about
from, from myself and the rest
of the group here.
It's quite a, quite a milestone,
quite frankly, for our community
to say we're we're here today
and keep building on on some of
that success because there were
a lot of challenges in our way
to get to this point. Uh, but,
but similar to what the mayor
indicated, uh, from Farmington,
uh,
obviously.
I'll wait to go back
Uh, you could see a lot similar
priorities, and so that's one
thing I can and to is, is Mr.
DiCamillo mentioned, we are in
unison in terms of what
priorities are here, what are
some of the economic
opportunities that exist. We
don't have a lot of disparity
amongst governmental entities
and what's important and how
we're going to get to the next
level here in San Juan County.
Uh, next slide, please
Let me start off with uh a
success, um, and, and this, I
think if I could make the pitch,
uh, to, to the group of
legislators here and would
certainly do it at large is
that, you know, infrastructure
investment, I feel like is the
best way that the government can
help assist um economic
development and growth and um
and this project is a classic
example of that where we had
investment from the federal
government as well as the state
of New Mexico to upgrade our in
du s tri al park facility that
we acquired from BHP Billiton.
It was the former, their former
Laplata mine headquarters, and
we acquired that facility before
it was reclaimed or scheduled to
be reclaimed by the, by the BLM
and uh so we had previously had
a tenant and they're and that
previous tenant actually was
Pasco who occupied this facility
from 2010 to 2020.
And they left the facility
because there were a couple of
gaps. Uh, those gaps were, uh,
the lack of broadband
connectivity and the lack of
natural gas.
And uh but it's a, it's a world
class, um, industrial space,
50,000 square feet in total,
15,000 in office space and
35,000 square feet uh in in
industrial space with 50 ft
clear high span ceilings and,
and uh and associated gantry
cranes that really allow for for
diverse uh opportunity for a
number of manufacturers, and so,
um, as of September 1st, uh,
just a few days ago, they
occupied this facility.
and they'll be creating 84 new
economic-based jobs, uh, new
water treatment product line
that that's going to be
developed there. Uh, and of
course you can see the, the
average hourly wage and the
estimated payroll over the next
3 years. I'll go to the next
slide, and this is where I just
want to share with you all how
this, how this worked, you know,
it was a combination of some
federal funding, county funding,
uh, to make improvements to this
facility and then uh the New
Mexico uh Lita
grant. This, the, the, the
um installation of the natural
gas line, uh, to this facility
would not have been possible if
it wasn't for New MexicoIA Fund
specific for industrial parks. A
big kudos to, to Mark Roper,
who's
hung hung with us through some
uh inflation that's taken place
in construction relative to that
gas line and and the good news
is they're going to start
construction uh next week on
this project and have gas
service up to the industrial
park and, and then of course
we'll have a tenant in there for
a number of years to come. And
so that's certainly a big win
and I think uh
you know, an example of how that
infrastructure investment really
paid dividends for our area. Uh,
next slide please.
We also have some solar activity
that I think's worth
highlighting. Um, most of this
is in the
um northeast of of San Juan
generating Station and also to
the direct west of San San Juan
Generating Station, so there's
some backfill of these types of
energy projects and um renewable
type projects and you can see
the level of investment that's
taking place there, of course,
you know, they don't create the
full-time jobs, um, that, that
we'd like to see and certainly
not going to be replaced. We're
replacing what was lost with San
Juan Generating Station, you
know, for example, that very
first project, it's a
a great $550 million investment
into our community. We welcome
that investment we want to see
more of that investment, but
only 5 full-time jobs. So that's
the challenge for us is trying
to replace those 1500 direct and
indirect jobs that have been
lost and, and certainly, you
know, our approach at San Juan
County is arms wide open to any
type of economic development
opportunity. Of course our bread
and butter has been coal-fired
power and oil and gas activity
in the past, and we
hope that continues in some form
or fashion because it does
provide those
really important uh middle class
union economic-based jobs that
provide a really good quality of
life for our folks here, but
this has been very good and very
positive, uh, investment.
Another project that's looking
NG solar, I think it's cut off
at the bottom there. But uh,
there we go, $900 million
investment there
' re working on a PPA and so you
add up all the millions of
dollars, a lot of great
investment that's taking place,
but we also have some other
projects.
from fossil fuel-based projects
relative to natural gas that
have gained favor again and are
quickly developing in our area
and we're trying to promote
those as well because um we've,
we are an energy hub today and
we really do believe we'll be an
energy hub in the future because
we have the energy
infrastructure that's needed
here in San Juan County, whether
it's through electrical
distribution lines or whether
it's through pipelines. We've
got, we've got the ability to
move energy here.
Next slide
So this is a really important
project for San Juan County. Um,
for fellow municipalities here,
uh, the Navajo Nation and the
state of New Mexico and, and
that's to solve that big.
dot that's centered over the
four corners
and that dot represents what you
see here is a map of all the uh
freight lines, um.
that are, are scattered
throughout the United States and
we are one of the largest
metropolitan statistical areas
in the nation without a freight
rail line. And what does that
meant to to San Juan County?
Well, what that means is that we
don't have, we have higher
transportation costs for all of
our manufacturers that are here.
We have higher transportation
costs on the retail side. We
have the inability to recruit
certain companies here because
we lack
that type of infrastructure. 40%
of our nation's goods
are shipped via freight rail,
and so that has been a
tremendous uh tremendous problem
for us that we're looking to
solve in conjunction with all of
our partners here. Um, next
slide, please.
And, and it's really, really,
really important, um, to the, to
the Navajo Nation. So that's
been a critical partner for us.
Uh, what's allowed this project
to move forward into a
feasibility stage and now we're
actually moving into
uh, to, uh, a design stage of
this project, uh, is the fact
that we had a historic
memorandum of understanding
entered into with the Navajo
Nation in 2020, um, that, that
allowed us to to actually move
this project forward and in
collaboration in conjunction
with them. In fact, the chief
architect of the MOU is back
here, Mr. Arvin Trujillo, uh,
that was part of, of making that
a reality. And so this project's
been talked about for, gosh, 50+
years.
And it's actually come further
than in 50 years than it ever
has because of that
collaboration with the Navajo
Nation, and, and here's the
issue
Um, it's the impact of, of, of
what these the loss of coal
fired power means not just to
San Juan County, but the Navajo
Nation at large, um, you know,
they've, they've lost starting
in 2019. Uh, the Navajo
Generating Station in Page,
Arizona, subsequently, Escalante
generating station was lost in
the
the McKinley County area. Um,
San Juan generating station, um,
so what, what you're seeing is a
huge loss of these economic good
paying economic-based jobs, and
of course all the taxes and
royalties and and philanthropic
um donations that go with it. A
lot of folks forget about the
impact that those have. So you
can see here, um, the next
potential closure, although I
think there's some good news
that's been recently released
about the future
of Four Corners generating
station. It was slated to close
in 2031. Looks like that may
potentially change and we're
very excited about seeing those
jobs continue, but right now
that represents between the
plant and the mine.
31% of the Navajo Nation's
general fund budget.
So if that plant and mine closed
in 2031.
A third of their taxes.
and revenues are lost. And so
that's why they're so
intricately involved and engaged
with us and of course knowing
how that impacts the area at
large, not just San Juan County,
not just the Navajo Nation. It
really impacts the entire four
corners when it comes to the
economy, but those are big
numbers, and that's why uh
bringing freight rail to the
four corners is so important for
us to help diversify our
economy, to bring new
opportunities here, to be able
to check the box when a site
selector comes to us and says,
we've got interest in your area.
You've got a skilled workforce,
you've got the resources we
need, but we need freight rail
to be able to, to import raw
materials and to export finished
goods, and that's what we can't
check on the box right now is,
is that, and so that's why this
is such a critical project. Next
slide.
So during the feasibility study,
we've, we've had a number of
public input sessions to gather
feedback and 5 perspective
routes have developed during
that study, and, and you can see
those here. And so the next
phase of this project, uh, is,
is gonna allow us to divine one
route and engineer that, and
then ultimately our goal in 2
years is to be able to make an
ask to the federal government
more than likely because it's a,
it's a big ask. It's $1.6
billion to run this line.
approximately 90 miles from the
Gallup corridor up here, but we
think it's a very necessary ask
and a very important piece of
infrastructure, uh, for, for our
area. Uh, next slide, please.
Here's an example of, of what we
anticipate through the study.
uh of products that um would
would be shipped out of here and
then products that would be
shipped in and so of course to
have a successful rail line, you
need to have goods moving both
ways, and our feasibility study,
which was just completed in
June indicates that this project
is technically feasible and
economically feasible and so
that's what's allowed us to
move, uh, to the next stage and
and, uh, and design and and the
the Nipah analysis that we hope
to have completed over the next
two years. Our next slide,
please.
Uh, here's just an example of a
great collaboration that we've
had from, from top to bottom um,
you know, obviously the local
governments here that have been
supportive of the Navajo Nation,
um, the New Mexico congressional
delegation, all 5 members have
signed letters of support to
assist us in pursuing federal
funding. Our local legislators,
the state of New Mexico, New
Mexico Department of
Transportation Secretary Cerner
has been extremely supportive of
the project and all the way up
to the govern
or ' s office. Um, so I think
everybody understands um with
some of the challenges we've
faced here, uh, and I appreciate
that, that they, they see that,
you know, this type of
infrastructure is needed, and
they'd like to support the
effort going forward and so um
we we can't say enough about how
how appreciative we are of
having that level of support,
um, from, from all here within
the state of New Mexico.
All right, this slide was
touched on already, but
a really big, another big
important economic development
infrastructure asset here for
our area and, and, and
uh, more than half of that
project is getting completed
right now by the city of
Farmington. Um, that's actually
being done through a New Mexico
state of New Mexico, AARPA
funding that was made available
to us, $40 million and I know
some folks in this room were
helpful in securing for our
area. Um, initially it, it had
allowed 32 million for the city
of Farmington's portion of the
project and 8 million for the
county's portion of the project
and the county's portion of the
project, uh, the city will start
at the East
Main retail area and then finish
up it where it says future uh
Animas River Bridge, and then
the county's portion will come
up the canyon where the bridge
is located and then tie in to
County Road 390. That's a just a
2-mile stretch, but it, it's
through some pretty treacherous
terrain,
we've got it designed and ready
to go. Uh, the only thing we're
missing is
now, unfortunately, $29 million
construction inflation is real
and sadly that's where this
project is at. Uh, but what
we're hoping to do and have
tried on previous sessions is is
to see this project fully funded
because right now we don't have
a complete transportation link.
Right now, the link is running
from East Maine and then tying
into County Road 3000 and, and
that's not gonna be a a
productive link for our area.
It's not going to allow
us to properly serve the largest
unincorporated community, uh, in
our county, which is Crouch
Mesa, um, which a lot of
affordable slash attainable
housing is located, which would
be extremely helpful um for
developing our economy and our
workforce. And so that's why
this is such a critical piece of
infrastructure, um, as
mentioned, you know, the funding
split before the 32 and 8, what
ended up happening for the city
of Farmington to even be able to
award their project. We had to
the county give up our fun
ding which we're happy to do to
see the first phase completed,
but now we have uh the, the
second phase, which is critical
and necessary unfunded.
And so our hope is that the
state would be helpful and, and,
and seeing that project through
and the complete vision.
and need for our area. So that's
certainly something that's high
on our radar. It's our number
one project on our ICIP list
and, and we'll, you'll probably
hear from me again during this
next session about how important
this project is. Uh, next
session, our next slide. And
last, I just want to share, you
know, collectively all of us up
here. It was one of our
strategic initiatives, certainly
the cities here at large, the
city of Farmington's done a
fantastic job in developing the
outdoor wreck.
economy, but, but Aztec,
Bloomfield, Kirkland, we're all
part of that, um, and the county
is certainly the same and, and,
uh, this is another example of
of state assistance. We received
an outdoor
um recreation grant to, to have
a gravel guidebook produced, and
you see that in your coffee mug
that's in front of you. Yeah,
thank you. And uh, and, you
know, that just took, honestly,
the, the funding to have the
guide developed. We already have
the existing infrastructure here
which was oil field, primarily
oil field roads that we were
able to, to go and
and uh scout out and, and really
kind of highlight some of the
unique areas here in San Juan
County, whether it's the Vista,
uh, Badlands, or if it's the
historic Cedar Hill Bridge up in
the northeast portion of our
county, you know, um, created
some, some very unique loops,
you know, gravel, um, gravel
biking is the is the fastest.
growing segment segment of the
biking industry. And so we had
all the terrain here. We just
didn't have
a way to communicate to folks
where they could go and how they
could recreate safely. And so
this gravel guidebook does this
for us. We've been promoting it
heavily, of course, here
locally, but actually uh
regionally and and uh um you
know, across the four state area
because there's a lot of folks
looking for new adventures, and
we've got a lot of cool new
adventures here to offer on the
book, it highlights uh
um, you know, the, uh, alien
crash site, if you didn't know
Roswell wasn't the only city
that had a
alien ship land, um, that, that
happened in Nat just outside of
Aztec, um.
reportedly that happened just
outside of Aztec. Uh,
and then, uh, the best I bet, if
you weren't aware of the
predecessors of the T-rex, uh,
fully intact predecessor to the
T. rex was found down in the
Bisa Badlands and it's actually
located at the New Mexico
Natural History Museum, and so
we highlighted the best I beast
that was pulled from the bike
route that you can, you can take
on the right there. So uh with
that, I'll, uh, so thank you
again for the opportunity to
present some of our
priorities and, and pass it on
to the next speaker.
Thank you for that. Um, we'll go
ahead and move over to Mayor
Attencio.
Forgot to turn on the mic. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, first, I
wanted to say in Bloomfield
where um we're a little more
industrial and the school
system's probably one of our
biggest employers. So we're kind
of the opposite of Farmington.
Most of our traffic is going to
be during the week and on the
weekends we, we are fortunate
enough to have sports and stuff,
but you'll see most of the
people going into Farmington to
to get their needs done, but
we're excited to have coming in.
We're the only municipality in
the Salmon County area that
doesn't have
a McDonald's, so we'll be
getting one. It's currently
being built, and we have um
we're well, we're excited to
welcome gore nitrogen. That's a
new company that will be coming
in. Um, we're meeting with Four
Corners Economic Development and
New Mexico Economic development
to get them started and also
we're going to have um a pop
store, which is a drink store
that's here in Farmington, but
they're going to be putting one
in Bloomfield, and we also had a
new restaurant called Benny's.
It's a Benny's Mexican
restaurant that opened up. We'll
be doing a ribbon cutting
tomorrow.
And in this last year we had B8D
which is a sand mining operation
that opened, which has brought
jobs to Bloomfield and in turn,
um, had some of our marathon was
able to hire more drivers
because of the traffic as well.
And then also we've teamed up
with New Mexico Environmental
Economics,
I would say environmental,
economic development, um, they
helped us with the corporation
called Calgon Carbon, and
through their funding, um, we
were able, we're very, very
grateful for what New Mexico
economic development has done
and want to make sure that we um
emphasize that we really
appreciate you guys' support
with that because especially for
us smaller cities, um, that'll
help greatly with a lot of to
help incentivize cause we don
' t have the funds to do our own
incentives. Um, so we are
grateful for that. Bloomfield is
a member of the Four Corners
Economic Development Committee.
We do have a chamber of
commerce, and we've also um BAD,
the sand mining operation that I
talked about, um, has partnered
with the city and they are
looking at um gifting or selling
at a very low cost, um, a piece
of portion of land so that we
can do a new reservoir because
uh we talked to Farmington and
mentioned about
water being so important. We had
gone to the water commission,
which Mr. Lanier was on at the
time, and he's still on it, but,
um, to seek out money to
purchase land, um, BAD, they
actually outbid the city of
Bloomfield for the first piece
of land that they got, and they
didn't know they were bidding
against us. So in that they
wanted to say when they're done
mining that portion of it that
they would sell us at a low cost
or gift us the piece of land.
But again, because water, water
is life, water is gold here, um,
that
reservoir is very important and
um we want to extend that right
now our reservoir only probably
holds 4 to 6 weeks. We've had a
lot of issues on the Bloomfield
irrigation ditch, which is our
main supply comes off the San
Juan, um, and we are, we're
grateful again to the state of
New Mexico and the legislators
for offering money because what
helps BID helps Bloomfield and
like we've talked about here so
many times, what helps San Juan
County and Farmington, we all
know that we work together and
it helps all of us. We've also
worked on a River Walk project
We've cleaned up our River Walk
area, which is by our baseball
fields. I do want to invite you
guys if you are staying the
night here, we are having music
in the park tonight, um,
performing is badly bent at
6:30, and it would be a good
opportunity. You'll pass by our
soccer fields, our, our boys and
girls club, um, and by the
baseball fields to come on down
at the Verta del Sol. So Del San
Juan, sorry, um, that's the name
of our park, but it is the River
Walk, and I think
I think that's kind of, I know I
talk fast and I go fast, but,
but welcome, yeah you guys are
welcome to come out to
Bloomfield and like I said,
we're, we're a little different
because we're more industrial,
but we, um, you guys are welcome
and thank you guys for coming
down and spending some time with
us.
Thank you, Mayor and Miss Wood,
take us home.
I'm sorry, here.
I'm Cara Wood and my perspective
will be a little bit different
because I'm not in government,
um.
and I was asked by the mayor to
talk about Kirtland since he is
out of town, so I will be
referring to some notes because,
um, short notice, I don't have
this all learned. Um,
so prior to 2015, if you had
Googled Kirtland, you would have
seen that we were an
unincorporated community of
about 6500, um, and we are part
of the Farmington Metropolitan
Statistical Area.
And at that time, Kirtland or
the locals call it the Lower
Valley. That would have included
the community of Kirtland,
Firtland Water flow, and hogback
heading in towards Shiprock and
the Navajo Nation.
So in 2015, um, the town of
Kirtland organized and
incorporated and, um,
Representative Duncan was
instrumental in making that
happen. And what led to, I, I
think from my perspective, what
led to the desire to be
incorporated was that we, we
didn't have infrastructure. We
had no sewer system in any of
Kirtland.
And that has been um
we have some very densely
populated neighborhoods with
failing septic systems. So that
led to looking at how do we
address that. So in 2007,
Kirtland organized a sewer
district.
and then we noticed that um it's
hard to get funding if you're
not an incorporated town entity.
So I think that's really what
led directly to Kirtland
deciding to incorporate, um,
Representative Sharon Clutches
Chillid was our representative
at that time, and she helped
procure the money to get our
sewers started. So we're
grateful to her, um, today.
The sad thing is that funding is
still very tight and our sewer
system has not been able to
grow. It's still the size it was
in at the beginning. So I see
that as a need that, that
Kirtland is trying to address.
Infrastructure is a need. Um
so at the time of incorporation
the town of Kirtland took in one
main residential area and a
business trip along Highway 64.
So if you Google Kirtland now,
you will see that our population
is under 600 as compared to
before where it said 6500, and
that's because prior you were
Googling that um,
um, general area of Kirtland,
and now when you Google it,
you'll just see what's
incorporated. So we really
haven't shrunken people out
there, but the definition of
what Kirtland is has changed. So
I think our, our valley
population is probably about the
same as it was prior, so
probably 6500 people in the
rural area around Kirtland.
Um,
so back to infrastructure. We
are a, a
baby community. We've only been
incorporated for 10 years, and
it's hard to get started. I've
seen, um, growing pains, one
step forward and two steps back
as, as we've tried to organize
and progress, um
infrastructure, we were talking
about broadband, Kirtland Town
Hall has a very slow DSL line
because there's not the
availability
for faster internet, where the
town hall is, and I've, I've
watched our town clerk try to
download a PDF in 10 minutes
later, it'll pop up on his desk.
So our needs are probably a
little different than what um
what some of the bigger
communities are asking for and
um and Bloomfield, by the way,
is our model because they're
the, they're the ones we're
looking up to. We, we admire
their progress. So
we're watching what they do and,
and when I can corner Mayor
Attenio, um,
I sometimes ask for advice or
listen for hints on, on how to
help my community, um,
let's see
are
main employers in Kirtland, um,
probably our school district. We
have the largest geographical
school district in the state.
It's 3000 square miles. So it
goes from the Colorado state
line down to just north of
Gallop and from Kirtland, um, it
encompasses Shiprock, Oho
Amarillo, um,
Naschiti and Newcom. So it's a
very big area.
and only the Kirtland schools
are on private land. The other
schools are all reservation
schools, which creates some
interesting needs as far as
funding, um
and property tax allocations.
and then I think our district
was very hard hit by the loss of
the power plants, um.
and everybody who's talked about
that, how energy is so important
to San Juan County. Um, I think
it was
double important to the Kirtland
area because it was located in
our, in our school district. Um,
so losing
1500 or more jobs in a community
of 6500 is a big thing. It's a
big deal.
Um
I know when I first moved here,
I taught school at a BIA
boarding school and all of my
students, if you ask them what,
what are you gonna do when you
grow up?
They would say, we're gonna work
at the power plant or the mine,
because that's what the main
employers were and that's what
their goals were as far as
employment. So
that's been a big loss
and it's been a difficult
thing for Kirtland to start to
develop as a town
while experiencing economic
downsizing and losses. Um, but I
have, that said, I have a lot of
faith in Kirtland and in our
community, and we have a lot of
good infrastructure there, um, a
lot of the abandoned
infrastructure from the old
power plants are still there. At
one time we had a large gas
processing plant, so we have
main, major pipelines that come
into our town that are still
there and they're still, um,
active
So
in my vision, um,
and my background is in real
estate, 30 years and at Kirtland
Realty. So that's my background.
I'm also a founding member of
our Kirtland Chamber of
Commerce, which is also only 10
years old.
So, um
with that said, we're looking
for the opportunities of how do
we use the resources that we
have and what we have is the
leftover infrastructure from
decommissioned um power
generation
But I think that's a really big
deal
because
we have it in the other
communities don't have it.
So I think that puts Kirtland in
a good position to be a major
player in the development of
energy in our community.
Um, the solar array that, that
we talked about earlier is just
north of Kirtland, um
and we were very excited to get
that, but disappointed that it
didn't bring more than 4 or 5
jobs.
So, um, and that's another point
that I'm gonna bring up from a
different perspective, probably,
but um
it's shocking at how much land a
solar array requires.
So it's
4 to 7 acres to generate 1
megawatt of power under
under, um, solar panels
So if you're trying to replace
2000 megawatts from a
decommissioned plant.
You're looking at 8 to 10,000
acres.
to replace all of that power,
and that's huge, especially when
you're in a state in an area
where in San Juan County, um,
less than 10% of our land is
privately owned. So if we
dedicate that land to solar
panels, where are we going to
build the housing that we need?
Um,
so that's a, that's a personal
dilemma in my mind as a real
estate person.
Are we gonna limit ourselves out
of being able to provide housing
by covering that land with,
with, um,
alternative energy sources. um
that said, I think we need all
the energy we can get. We've
decommissioned so much and we've
not replaced it. So we've got to
start on that with our solar
development, um
I'm hoping that our community
will pursue other power
generation sources, gas-fired
power plants, um
and, you know, I think we all
agree that we want, we want
clean air, we want clean ground,
and we want good jobs. So we're
looking for that balance, how
can we have it all? How can we
have both, um
but I have a lot of confidence
in the state of the art, um,
energy production systems,
highly efficient, um, engines
that can produce electricity
using natural gas, uh, carbon
capture is still on the table in
our area. I think that could be
a good opportunity for us. Um,
options for using carbon for
other purposes for um greenhouse
growing, um,
nitrogen production, fertilizer
production. There are several
uses for carbon where we could
maybe use it directly and if we
can get transportation, a rail
line where supplies can come in,
products can go out. I think
that would be a huge step for
us, um, let me see here.
So in Kirtland, we, we did get a
McDonald's before Bloomfield
did.
And we were thrilled with it. I
was bragging yeah, yeah. We were
thrilled with it, um.
and only in a small town is
something like that really
exciting, but it was very
exciting for us. It's the first
business that's been built that
has sidewalks and landscaping
and, um, on a prominent corner
right by our only traffic light
So we're, we're, um, we're
excited with the little bits of
progress that we get, um,
but it doesn't fill the gaps of
losing the jobs that the power
plant and the mine lost.
So we're still looking for how
to do that. Um,
another big concern, I think for
us, um, in our school system is
that we graduate a lot of really
smart kids that go to college
and then they never come home
because we don't have jobs for
them to do if they come back.
So
we've lost jobs, we've lost
productivity, and we've lost
some of our workforce, and we've
lost our youth because they,
they have to go somewhere else
to use the degrees that they
earn. So my hope is that our
legislative bodies will
contemplate what can be done to
help, um, our communities hang
on to our, our youth, how to
provide more for them to be able
to stay and to want to stay.
And I think that's probably a
really good summary of Kirtland.
So thank you again for inviting
us and for putting up with me,
um, not being in government and
knowing the ropes here. Thank
you.
Thank you, panel. Um, for all of
that, we'll move into questions
and I'm gonna ask the panel, um,
move with brevity and our
panelists to also answer
briefly. Um, we'll start, start
with Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
I appreciate, uh, the panel
today. I think uh it was pretty
good, uh, representation of San
Juan County. Um, I, I, um, very
happy with some of the progress
that we're seeing
Uh, however, I, I did not hear
Mr. Stark, did not hear you talk
about or maybe, maybe
Representative Duncan will talk
about just how dangerous it is
to do mountain biking. I just,
uh, I understand that's a,
that's like one of the most
dangerous sports in in America
today, or at least in San Juan
County. Um,
I, uh, uh
and Marittensio, uh, just, uh,
I, I think you should try and
get a Taco Bell. That's a
suggestion.
OK, I just,
I mean those with the other guy
Well, that, that's stingy big
company needs to just pony up a
little bit,
so.
Um, that being said, uh, I, I,
I, it's, I want to say how, um,
I know we lived through what was
a major
disruption, uh, in San Juan
County, uh, for all of the
municipalities who had people
living in their communities that
had very good paying jobs.
Uh, that combined with Exodus of
some of our large uh uh oil and
gas, uh, companies that left,
uh, when it became less
feasible, um, and some of those
who are still here who move
their corporate, uh, uh
executives and engineers, uh,
out of state, even though their
company is still here, we lost
all those, uh, economic-based
jobs.
So, um, it is rather, uh,
amazing, uh, the way that the
county and the cities have been
able to respond and survive and
in, and thrive.
um
but the counties are one thing
I think one thing that uh
that uh
Miss Wood
brought up is what we've lost is
we've lost those economic-based
jobs. We are replacing them with
Taco Bell jobs. We are replacing
them with McDonald's jobs. We
are replacing them, and we have
replaced them with service
industry jobs, uh, sound, uh,
Farmington in particular relies
very heavily on the fact that we
are a regional
a draw for the communities
around us.
Um, uh, thankfully,
um
we have a couple of large
manufacturers that have done a
tremendous job. Pesco was CNJ
Manufacturing, despite our
transportation issues, uh, are
doing a tremendous job in San
Juan County in uh providing and,
and it's interesting, uh, both
of them have uh
are, are providing
uh
for meta and Amazon and all of
the data centers that are
popping up across the country
and hopefully here in New Mexico
very soon, um
but and also for other places
where the oil and gas industry
is still doing very well. Uh,
Um
but in particular
I, I, I just wanted to
to highlight
uh
uh
what
Kara, what you talked about,
which was the exodus of those
jobs, and, uh, and a little bit
of uh Mike about what you talked
about with
what was the impact?
to the Navajo Nation
What was the impact to Kirtland
School District.
and then thirdly, what was the
impact to the workforce. I mean,
we've replaced a lot of service
industry jobs, which are still
decent jobs. I mean, don't,
don't sneeze at a
$17 to $18 an hour job. It's a
job.
It's, it's, however, it's not
it's not as uh for the people
who've who've figured this out.
you make more money
on social welfare and benefits
than you do if you take a $17 or
$18 an hour job.
And as a matter of fact, I know
that our, our restaurants and
our service industry has uh a
very high turnover because at a
certain point, people who are on
social uh welfare benefits.
if they make too much money,
they will lose all those
benefits, so they have to quit.
or they have to do what we see
all across New Mexico, which is
an underground, a flourishing
underground economy
where people work and take money
under the table, and it harms
every other taxpaying business
across New Mexico.
That is something we have to
deal with. We've made it in New
Mexico, much more profitable to
live on welfare than to be
gainfully employed.
So I, I actually really
appreciate it when I see people
working in the service industry,
service industry, uh, and making
less than $20 an hour because
they could be making the
equivalent of $25 an hour or
more and not have to pay taxes
and receive snap and, and, and
healthcare benefits and housing
benefits and a paycheck.
that comes from all of the other
taxpayers. So, uh, that's,
that's something we've got to
address. Uh, for some reason,
uh, I, I hear it in committee
after committee where we are
patting ourselves on the back
when we say we are giving this
much money and helping people
who are poor.
What we're doing is we are
causing people to be poor
Um, we have done away with high
paying jobs. Uh, what, what I
heard today, Madam Chair, was
the high paying jobs in San Juan
County that just went away.
and
the, the main
groups that have been harmed are
first off those economic-based
job holders.
have either had to take on
multiple jobs or
spouses have, have and, and
there's no one home with the
children anymore. The kids are
being forced into, uh, when,
when before maybe they could
have had a parent at home
raising that child, that's not
happening anymore, or they've
had to move out of the community
Madam Chair, um,
but
we've lost those jobs and
replaced them with lesser jobs,
including the solar jobs that
have come in. Those don't pay as
much and there are not nearly as
many. Uh, it doesn't take that
many people to keep a solar
panel up and running as it does,
as it did to provide uh a ton of
coal.
Um, so that's the first loser,
but I, I, I put, I really want
to focus in on is central
Consolidated Schools.
and the Navajo Nation
Central Central Consolidated
Schools, um, and I'm talking
about this from
if you don't know, from a very,
very, uh, direct,
um,
line of information. I was a 32
year
um uh employee at the coal
mines.
So, uh, of the people who lost
their jobs were my friends.
Uh, the majority of those folks,
about 80% of those folks who
worked at the power plant or the
coal mine were Native American
So they were directly
targeted
with the ETA
Um, and the promises that were
that came along with the ETA
have not come to fruition, not
for this community, not what we,
not what this, not the bill of
goods that were sold when we
were debating, uh, the, the ETA
have not come to fruition.
and what we, what we have is
uh poverty on the reservation
has gone up dramatically.
In 2011.
I took, I, I worked, I was
working for Lieutenant Governor
John Sanchez. I arranged a tour
of the mines which all three of
them were still open in San Juan
County.
All of the power plants were
open, uh, including, uh, El
Segundo, including uh the, the,
the power plant there, including
the power plants in Kayenta or
outside of Kenta and the mines
that were there, Black Mesa and
Kentomine, the power plant
Navajo Generating Station out in
Page, uh, um
at that time when I toured a
lieutenant Governor.
the Navajo Nation from the
standpoint of incoming funds.
was doing very well
80% of the Navajo Nation's uh
non-governmental funds, funds
that were coming in from
industry were coming from, uh,
coal mines and coal-powered
coal-fired power plants.
Thank you.
I appreciate, I appreciate, um,
I heard 3 questions in there.
I'm going to ask you to wrap it
up. um, thank you, Madam Chair,
but once again, this is a big
issue. We don't get
uh, we don't get, uh, committees
coming to San Juan County
anymore, and when they do, we
lose a day.
So I, I wanna make sure that
this is the panel and of
everything that's on here today
that needs to be heard because
there's an opportunity here and
I want to make sure that the
promises that were made during
the ETA, we're not going to get
those things. But there are
other things that can help San
Juan County get back, Madam
Chair, those economic-based
jobs, the big one is the rail.
The big one is the rail, and
it's gonna take state
The Navajo Nation is on board,
and the federal government at
this point is on board.
and that will bring
economic-based jobs to where I
care about because my wife is
Navajo, is back to the Navajo
reservation
Jobs that are high paying jobs,
not just service industry jobs.
But, so I will go off of that
and I will ask a question, which
is, and, and Kara, this question
might be for you.
What
Tax base exists for central
consolidated School District
with Kirtland being the only
non-reservation land. What, what
is there to tax for the schools?
I don't have numbers for you,
but I can describe where our tax
base is. We have, um
4
service stations, convenience
stores. We have $3 stores.
We have, um, a commercial
greenhouse that provides that
grows and provides plants for,
for, um
wholesale and, and a retail
place. We have, um,
3 sit-down restaurants.
We have small businesses, um
my office, Kirtland Realty,
because I, I did not at the time
they annexed um
Kirtland, I didn't get annexed
in, so I'm still out in the
county, so I'm not part of the
Kirtland Town tax base.
um
it's very small
McDonald's, you know, I mean, we
have the fast food places. Those
are probably the fast food
places and gas stations are our
tax base.
and
um, it's a dilemma. It makes it
so the town can't grow.
and our schools are in a bind,
so, um, you know,
I'm, I'm doing all I can do from
uh citizens standpoint and from
a chamber of commerce person to
try to encourage some more
sophisticated growth and
development where we can get
some good jobs back, and I think
those are going to be energy
sector.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will,
I will end my comments here, but
I, I, I do want it to be known.
I, this is something I'm
passionate about because
I predicted everything that's
happened. When we were
negotiating, when Senator
Scherer and I were were
negotiating
uh with the NGOs about what it
was going to do to this
community.
It just fell on deaf ears, and
when we predicted that we were
not going to get the equivalent
of that back into the community
and it wouldn't provide the
jobs, uh, that is exactly what
happened. We have, uh, I'm very
proud of our county and our, and
our cities for being able to
find a way to manage what was a
major shortfall in uh GRT in
particular, but
the Navajo Nation Central
Consolidated School Districts
are still feeling the brunt of
the massive uh cuts to their um
to their bottom line and, and it
uh, the, the promises of the ETA
are not going to be fulfilled.
There are other opportuns. You
are now repeating yourself. I
appreciate your comments and
your passion. We're going to
move to Senator Black. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative
Montoya, uh, for bringing those
up. So, uh, very, very briefly,
real quick, um, and I don't need
an answer, but I would argue the
railroad is probably the #2
infrastructure project in the
state behind Passe del Volcan in
Albuquerque and Rio Rancho. So
whatever we can do
to support that, um, absolutely,
you get my, get my uh support as
well, being a Albuquerque Rio
Rancho guy. If you have robust
logistics, you're going to have
a great community.
Um, Mr. Mayor from Farmington,
the top 4, you, you talked about
Farmington being in the top 4,
but you forgot about Rio Rancho.
It's the 2nd largest city for
metro, so, um, I love your
brother, the slide's got to be
fixed.
Uh, because,
well, yeah.
Got it, got it. All right,
we'll, we'll talk offline, um,
but I appreciate everything
you're doing in Farmington. Um,
the, the airport I will let that
line of questioning and response
continue anytime we can put
Senator Black. Yeah.
Please,
please continue, Senator. Now I
need 15 more minutes. Now, um,
yeah, so the airport is very
interesting to me,
very quick, are you guys looking
at expanding, uh, the runway for
added commercial or cargo
flights in here? Yes or no?
We're landlocked, uh,
Representative, we have expanded
the necessary safety portion of
that runway in order to bring in
jet service, so it is expanded
for those 50 50C service as far
as cargo planes go, I don't have
an answer for you this morning.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, because in um
Bernna Leo Sandoval, while
Bernna Lee would get Double
Eagle, which is uh an expand an
airport that's expanding, and I
understand where the airport
because I've flown in there a
few times, um, on a Cessna. It,
it's a, it's a tough place to
expand.
Uh, lastly
uh, Madam Chair, the social
issues I'd like to hear about
regarding the shutdown of the
power plant? Have you seen more
alcoholism, more domestic
violence, more homelessness in
some of these communities and
with that all I'll yield.
Thank you, Representative, I
would absolutely say yes.
Unfortunately, uh, if you look
at what has occurred here over
the past few years. We're seeing
an increase in, in everything
you just mentioned. Poverty is
the number one issue that we
face when it comes to those
social outcomes. Uh, you're
gonna see the same thing
happening with our education
outcomes as well, and it's uh
Representative Montoya
mentioned, we absolutely
predicted everything that was
going to happen with the
shutdown of these mines, and it
has happened. All those negative
components have occurred and of
course our state stands strong
by this liquor
lo bb y that likes to put
alcohol or hard spirits in every
convenience store, which makes
it so accessible and turns those
speedway areas into desolate
areas that are overran by
individuals who are addicted to
alcohol. Then you consider the
amount of money that has to go
to the public services to help
individuals who are addicted to
try and get them back on their
feet and on the streets. It's a
very, very complex and expensive
process. uh, that we could
certainly use the state's
assistance on, but when you
decide to shut down middle-class
jobs, high paying middle class
jobs
at the extent that they've shut
us down up here, uh, yes, sir.
We have certainly seen those
negative outcomes.
Thank you,
Madam Chair. Any other mayor or
county manager have a issue as
well there?
We've always in Bloomfield, even
though, you know, we're probably
the furthest ones from the mine,
but we still had employees. We
have residents that work there
and contributed to the to all of
our things, and I agree, um,
we've, we have the homeless
issue. It's probably bigger than
it's ever been. What in
Bloomfield we've always had is
they weren't necessarily
homeless, but they came into
town to just spend the weekend,
but now we're seeing more of
those fluctuations of the
homeless people. Well, thank
you, Madam Chair, and I would
say that I'm very sorry the
state didn't listen
to you. Uh, very sorry, and that
shouldn't happen again because
that was a great clean plant
with great jobs, and I think the
costs, uh, outweigh, uh, the
additional costs of these social
issues outweigh this, the
ridiculous decision to close
down that mine. So with that,
thank you for all you do. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator Representative Duncan.
Hey, Madam Chair, um, I was the
mayor when the mine and the
power plant shut down. Um, I was
also, um, made aware that the
homelessness within the Central
Consolidated School District
went up 700% with our kids.
Mom and dad were chasing a job
elsewhere in the world, and, and
their children were homeless.
Uh, if they didn't get along
with grandma or grandpa or
auntie or uncle.
Um, we were lied to as a
community, the state of New
Mexico lied to us.
and they did not fulfill what
they said, and, and it is my
hope that as legislators that we
will force the state of New
Mexico to fulfill their
obligation and the best way to
do that is with rail.
Um, I have one question for
Mayor Duckett. Mayor, can you
tell me how the, uh, raising the
dam, uh, that study is going.
Representative, thank you for
that. That was one thing that we
probably could have added more
information on. It's just the
infrastructure projects that are
currently happening right now.
We're doing a feasibility study
to raise Farmington Lake, which
is our reservoir by 25 ft, which
would add about 75% capacity to
our water storage in our area.
Uh, in the meantime, we have
discovered that just by raising
the spillway by 5 ft for $3
million.03 dollars to $4 million
that we can add approximately 30
days' worth of water storage, so
we're pursuing that and we're
looking for support, grant
support from our water
commission as well as
uh, the state's water funds,
which we think would be a, a,
and just so everybody's aware,
Lake Farmington provides 49% of
that water is for the city, 51%
is contracted out and supplies
water all across this region,
including into the Navajo
Nation. So it is a, a huge
regional um
support system.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mayor, for that. Uh, one
last point, we've been in
meetings last, uh, I've been in
meetings last couple of weeks,
and they've talked about some of
the bike trails that went on to
the
uh, one of the pueblos between,
I think it's farming or between
Albuquerque and Santa Fe did an
incredible, it's a world-class
uh bike trail. I think, um,
Lincoln County's got one down in
Riodosa now as well. Uh, I think
Farmington and San Juan County
ought to look highly at that
with the other communities as
well. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all so much for sharing, um,
what's going on um in this area,
and I, I wanna thank you all for
um
being at the forefront of an
energy transition that we all
want to be successful.
Um, and because of what we knew
was contributing to global
climate change and to the global
community, and certainly being
at the front lines of that in
New Mexico is critically
important as to how we do that
responsibly. And so I really am
grateful to you all bringing
this to our attention as a state
and certainly what we haven't um
been able to do with economic
development and other um
important, I think, remedies to
what you are dealing with at the
front lines of that, um, in your
community. So I was wondering if
you
The economic development
department has had around
advanced energy and the advanced
energy economy that the state is
seeking to participate in,
whether it be through thermal,
um, um, geothermal production,
um, around how to be able to
convert these different
facilities and whether or not,
um, you're, I know that our
national labs are part of this
discussion, whether or not
you've been part of that, uh, or
felt, felt invited to those
conversations at this point.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Romero, uh, thank
you for that question. Uh, San
Juan County, we have, we've been
extremely engaged in all of
those conversations. We, we see
energy here and I, I think it
should be a national and
statewide policy that we need an
all and above energy strategy,
right? Um, especially as you see
in the advent of data centers
and knowing by 2030, 1/5 of all
electricity generated will be
consumed by data centers. just 2
or 3 years ago, that, that
wasn't even on anybody's rad
ar about how much power would be
consumed and and so energy
demand is only going to increase
and so yes, we were actively
engaged in the hydrogen
discussions and the wish
application um that I know the
governor was supportive of and
the
and the four-state um coalition.
Unfortunately, we weren't
selected uh for that
opportunity. We've been engaged
with New Mexico Tech as they're
exploring, uh, as Ms. Wood
indicated, carbon capture and
how that could assist in in
cleaning the energy stream,
whether it's natural gas power
plant, whether it's a coal-fired
power plant. Uh, you know, we
have
the bird's nest on the ground
when it comes to uh available
permitted uh transmission lines
here. And so that is a, a, a
feather in our cap that I hope
can be expanded on because those
transmission corridors exist.
Uh, you look at projects like
Sunsia
Uh, those were what, 15+ years
in the making just to get a
transmission corridor permitted
and so that exists here and so
our hope is that, um, as you see
these other energy
opportunities, um, to help guide
him and steer him to the four
corners because we have what,
what, what's necessary to be
able to develop those, those
assets on a long-term basis
here. And so to answer your
question once again, just to
summarize, absolutely San Juan
County and I think everybody at
this table, uh, is absolutely
interested in seeing whatever
op port un ities exist, where
the geothermal, hydrogen,
natural gas, carbon capture,
coal, etc. We renewable energy,
you can see that we've, we've
absolutely engaged in that have
and have have offered industrial
revenue bonds to the county
commission to make those
projects a reality. So we want
to do what we can to facilitate
all energy jobs and, and most
importantly, uh, to make sure we
have those, those great middle
class, um, high paying
economic-based jobs available to
our citizens that we.
did lose.
If you don't
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Romero is also
what's exciting is the
manufacturing of natural gas. So
some of the things that we're
learning that's exciting that
I'm hearing and seeing is uh
creating a synthetic oil from
natural gas and all the
byproducts that seem to be
coming out of, of what you can
do with natural gas other than
pump it out of the ground and
ship it out of here. And I think
that's really uh something that
I hope to see, um, mature to
where
we're not just doing that, we're
not just pumping out of the
ground and shipping it out that
it's pumping out of the ground
and putting it into a factory or
a manufacturer of some sort that
produces things such as the
synthetic oil, so that that's
really exciting.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Romero, um
you mentioned whether or not
we'd looked at conversions of
plants and trying to do
alternative opportunities. We
actually did look at that.
Unfortunately those plants were
not viable for those conversions
to natural gas production due to
the type of turbines they had in
them. They were, however,
capable of being converted into
carbon capture plant, which
would basically take the energy
and make it almost a byproduct
and turn the CO2 into a product
that could be used in industrial
use cases. Unfortunately, that
was not
allowed to run its course at the
San Juan generating station due
to the ETA as Representative
Montoy had mentioned. So I mean
that was an unfortunate outcome
that we were very diligently
pursuing to try and mitigate
the carbon production
while also keeping those jobs in
that production facility, so,
uh, just wanted to put that out
there as we, you know, it wasn't
for lack of trust. Madam Chair,
just on that point, um, I would
love to follow up with that. I
know that our state is engaged
in working with our universities
on carbon capture, um, and I
know that we just recently had,
um, you know, we're looking at a
study that was with New Mexico
Tech on on potential conversion
and how to be able to do that.
Um, if there is a way in which
there is a, you know, a means to
follow up. I don't know what the
nuance of the ETA regulation or,
you know, where the hurdles were
there, but if there was a way
to, to sort of look at some of
that we are interested in, in
following that thread.
Thank you
Thank you, Representative
Senator Linnier. Oh, I'm sorry,
were you not? I'm sorry, I just,
I didn't know that there was any
other commentary. One more
question, um, and just on the,
the question of, um
helping our universities and
colleges sort of pivot into the
this new energy economy and
figuring out both data centers
and and some of the other spaces
that we need, knowing that the
increase in electricity is, is
happening um at the moment.
Does, is, are there programs
currently here when we're
talking about converting to jobs
in our local areas. Are there,
are they currently happening um
in, in here in San Juan and and
in the area that we know our our
our available for
students to, to be able to look
at that
opportunity. Absolutely, and
like I mentioned, you're in the,
the heart of that, uh, effort,
and I believe Dr. Pendergrass is
up next to talk to you a little
bit more detail about that.
Excellent.
Thank you, Andre.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative, I, I apologize
again. No, no, no. Senator
Linnier.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
again, welcome to San Juan
County. Welcome to what I would
consider one of the oil and gas
capitals of New Mexico. I mean,
I know we have the southern
um, field down there, but, but I
want to commend this whole group
and, and make sure that
everybody understands that this
group right here is successful,
even though, um, our energy was
stolen from us. It's not a
transition
Everybody likes to call it a
transition into renewable
energies, and it, it really does
not feel that way to us
It was taken away from us. We
lost jobs, we lost population,
um,
when I retired school teaching
and Aztec, there was 1100
students there. Now there's just
a little over 600.
and, and that's why
So,
but what I do want to do is
recognize this group because
they all work together.
And it's, it's one of the
benefits that we have in San
Juan County, that the county,
city of Aztec, city of
Bloomfield, Kirkland, Farmington
all got together and go, OK.
they stole this from us. How are
we going to fix it?
We can't just lay down and die.
And so
you know, we've, we've done all
kinds of different things from
um economic development from the
bike routes
using our game and fish,
whatever we could do, we try to
attract people back, back to our
county so that we could survive.
So I want to commend them on
that
The railroad, that, that is a
big piece of that. Um, I really
encourage the state to get on
board with us again.
because
that can fix a lot of, a lot of
our economic problems up here.
um
not just San Juan County, but
the Navajo Nation as a whole.
it, it will help just a ton with
that.
Um, I do want to remind
everybody that, that we do have
water
up here. Uh, we don't have a lot
in the river right now, Mayor,
sorry.
But, but we host, depends on who
you talk to from 68 to 72% of
the water runs through San Juan
County.
So with that, we, we really
tried hard to use, use that to
our advantage, lease that water
out to different organizations
Um
and that's an important,
important thing for us
because that's our economic
development. Everybody talks
about quality of life, how do
you get people attracted up
here. If you don't have the
power plants to draw them in for
those jobs. How do, how do you
encourage people to come here?
And this group right here has
done a great job. Um, between
the river walks, the wave park.
um, all of that stuff
it, it does, it contributes to
the quality of life, because the
ripple effect that no one's
talking about is when you lose
population,
you lose doctors
you lose dentists
you lose veterinarians. All of
that type of stuff, and, and
that's what we lost. And that's
what's hard for us to replace
here.
with that. Um,
so I, I just want to make sure
that, that, that this group
right here is, is recognized for
the hard work that they have
done since what, 2018?
um, when all this started and,
in conjunction with San Juan
College.
This building right here is the
energy building and it was built
by the private industry coming
in and saying, hey, we need to
teach our young people what's
going on in the oil field.
and to keep them engaged.
Unfortunately, we lost a lot of
those to that southern patch
down there, but they will come
back. It, it's coming back.
So, so my only question today, I
don't want to sound like
Representative Montoya Toulon.
But, um, my my question on the
rail
uh, Mr. Stark,
what is the biggest hang up
right now?
with the getting the rail in
here.
Uh, Madam Chair and, and Senator
Lanier, uh, you know, we've got
the support
um, we've got the funding to
move forward with the next phase
of the project, and I didn't
mention this. This is another
kudos to the state, um, the New
Mexico Match fund was a
brilliant decision by you all to
create that because we wouldn't
be able to take advantage of
grant opportunities, um, federal
opportunities, so they generally
a 20% match. And so for this
next phase of the project to do
the preliminary engineering, uh,
and NEPA analysis, a $5 million
effort, $4 million
in federal funding, and then we
were able to apply for
thankfully a million dollars in
Mexico match funding wouldn't
have been possible to fund that
through our general fund budget,
so that would have been a missed
opportunity. We wouldn't have
been able to move the ball
forward without that. And so to
answer your question, Senator
Lanier, uh, you know, ultimately
it's just that the time to get
the next phase done, which is
approximately 2 years, so we, we
hope June of 2027, uh, the, the,
the
design and and NEPA analysis is
complete, and of course the big
hurdle is the the estimated $1.6
billion to actually fund the
construction of that 90 mile
line. Um, we've engaged our
federal delegation. They're
fully supportive. They're aware,
and it's just a matter of
putting the strategy together
through potentially existing
funding resources, maybe new,
uh, and to try to collaborate
with the state of New Mexico to
help put such a large scale
infrastructure project together
and
so that that would be my answer.
It's a matter of some time to
finish the next phase, and then
of course the big challenge of
actually funding it, uh,
hopefully come 2027.
All right, thank you. And I, I
do have one
one question for Mayor Duckett.
Sorry, I was only gonna have the
one, but I do have one for you.
Um,
on the regional airport
I get to fly out next week,
which it'll be the 3rd time I've
got to fly out of the city of
Farmington, which those of you
that don't know, we have to
travel all the way to Durango,
Colorado, in order to fly out
until the mayor worked so hard
and got us some air.
air traffic up here, which we
appreciate.
Is there any, is there anywhere
else we can expand at the
airport that might draw in like
maybe another airline or is it,
are we pretty much flattened out
where we're at right now.
Me a chair, Senator Lanier,
thank you for the question.
Essentially it's, it's, we've
expanded all we can. $25 million
federal dollars went into that
facility in order to make it
jetworthy. So it is, it is jet
worthy and we would love to see
something expanded on as far as
additional flights, uh,
fortunately, in the business
model right now, we need to see
this be profitable. Uh, we do
want to thank the state for the
raise grant that allowed us to
pay Sky West in order to fly out
of here, but uh we we're looking
for profitability before
expansion.
and I keep bringing that up, uh,
you know, when, when are we
going to see more flights? We
need more flights, but uh at
this point, you know, we're only
3 months in, we are meeting the
average uh capacity for regional
airlines already 3 months in, so
that tells me the demand is
there, which means we should
hopefully see some expansion
here. I'm gonna say next year
would be the earliest.
Awesome, thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, thank you and thank you
panel. Um, I just an
announcement for the committee,
we're going to do a working
lunch to get us back on track in
order for us to um finish out
some questions because we want
to make sure that you all feel
heard and we're utilizing the
space, um, to its full
potential. So with that, Senator
Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee.
I didn't hear anything about the
cleanup of the uranium mines. I
believe you do have uranium
mines in the air in this county.
Yes or no
Madam Chair, and Senator Pinto,
thanks for the question. Uh,
yes, actually, that, that's come
up from the Navajo Nation as
part of the freight rail, uh,
project that that, you know, as
you look at what, how, uh, what
industries could benefit from
that. What, what entities could
benefit from that, um, that rail
would be very useful in helping
uranium mine clean up, but there
are mines in this county. Oh,
certainly, yes, and so you know
how much land needs to be
reclaimed, how much reclamation
needs to be done?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
I don't have that number
offhand, but I can tell you that
just at our last commission
meeting, uh, we did celebrate
the passage of RICA, um, because
we know that there is a need for
uranium mine cleanup, uh, as
well as to provide funding to
those individuals who've been
affected by it. So, Madam Chair
and members, how long has that
cleanup been sitting there?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Pinto, I, I obviously a number
of years going back to to those
years that the mines have been,
had been inactive. So, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee,
So that mine and the
reclamation.
there is an economic
development, and I believe we
tried to put, I think it was
like 50 million got cut down to
20 million, but there hasn't
been much push to actually clean
it up. And yet we're actually
had a bill sneak in there and,
um, for to open up carbon
sequestration, but I thought
that was leverage for the
nations to try and push and have
these mines cleaned up before we
move forward with any kind of
extra mining or any kind of
extraction within the area, um,
because it just sits there.
And when you talk about the
rail, I think there's like over
50% of freight rail that sits in
the state of New Mexico, that's
abandoned and has not, it just
sits there, it's not be cleaned,
it's not cleaned up. It's um the
kind of like an eyesore in the
communities, um, throughout the
US, I believe there's a lot of
abandoned rail that communities
are trying to repurpose or do
something with um as they move
forward. Um, and I think this
route you have from
El Segundo, the Defiance, I
think that orange route, there's
already rail existing on that
already. So it just, just blues
section is the only part that
needs to be, um, completed on
that section.
Madam Chair,
and Senator Pinto, um, so you're
referring to the kind of yellow
color route that runs to the
west of Gallup, there's a orange
drought here. I'm talking about
that escalate the Escalante line
that runs from the paper mill up
into um
Houm, um, or is that this green
one turns into the orange. Yes,
no scalante. Yeah, Madam Chair,
Senator Pino, you are correct.
So there's existing line, uh, I
believe about 40 miles, um, that
it, that would, would tie into
that perspective green line and
then also to the west, the other
tie-in location uh has existing
rail 2 on the Fort Defiance
route. That's how that's
referred to and so both of them
to uh are utilizing existing uh
BNSF approved
uh points of connection, and
they're actually a critical
player in actually seeing this
line develop because without
their approval it members of the
committee. I just want to let,
to let the committee members
know in the legislature that
there are with this yellow line,
there are people that have, um,
along this line that are permit
holders that have grazing lands
in the area that have told me
that they were never approached,
nor um educated on this uh line
and there have been some
outreach, and they did
ask for the feasibility study,
um, paperwork, but they were
never given it to them in um
some of these chapters on this
yellow line of long high Highway
491. So I just want to put that
on the record and let you know
that because of that, I'm not in
support of it going up for 91 uh
because of that opposition, and
that's all I have, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. And again,
thank you, panel. If you, um,
could share the feasibility
study, I think we can get it out
to the full committee. Yeah, you
bet, Madam Chair and Senator
Pinto follow up to your
question. Um, we had numerous,
uh, public input meetings
located, uh, both on and off,
um, the Navajo Nation, uh, 8 in
total that were formal and then
a lot of informal meetings, um,
utilizing our consulting team of
Mr. Al Henderson and Mr. Tom
Chee, who visited um with uh
many council delegates in
chapter officials.
um, and so, yes, we, we
absolutely indicated to folks
during those meetings, we would
have the study available and and
good news as of June when it was
completed, uh, it's available at
the Project website of the
number 4 Corners
freightrail.com. Uh, the full
study as well as an executive
summaries available there, so,
uh, that's available to anyone.
We, we did a press release on
that, uh, KOB covered the story,
um, we've also sent that out to
all of our project stakeholders.
So try to do as much as we could
to inform
engage every member of the
public. Sure. And if you could
send it directly to the
community, we'll get it out to
the committee members. I'd be
happy to do so. Thank you. Um,
just two quick questions, uh,
um, and this is for maybe the,
the folks representing the
economic development portions.
Do you have any numbers on
unemployment rates, anything
that has rebounded, or the
fluctuation since the closure of
the generating mine versus now.
So we have seen ups and downs in
our uh
unemployment rates, but we also
have seen some influx of new,
uh, job opportunities, but
again, not at the same level of
the jobs that were lost at the
mine and the plant. And um
you'll see too that our
population rate in the county
especially has declined
significantly. We've seen some
uptick here in the city of
Farmington, um, but that is, I,
I think in large part due to
people coming in buying up
housing in in the area from
outside the state, um, some of
our more
expensive houses that we had
left over from the exodus that
we saw of a lot of the oil and
gas companies that took all of
their high pay, uh, engineering
jobs. And so we haven't seen the
influx of those high paying
jobs. We have seen a decent
amount of jobs, but now we're
facing an issue of not having
the high skilled workforce to
fill a lot of those jobs, our
hospitals a prime example of
having, I think, over 100 jobs
opened at the moment that they
cannot fill, um, because we
don't have
the um
just the attractiveness uh in
terms of housing right now for
those folks, um, but also, uh,
just the skill levels that we
need here for that type of work.
Um, and then again, you know,
you see, you know, a lot of
investment and employment around
construction, but that's only
going to be temporary. And so
that's where we're, we're kind
of waiting to see where that all
levels out once we a lot of
these projects are done. Thank
you,
thank you. And then Mayor, um,
any plans for passenger rail or
is this
or maybe Mr. Stark, uh, um,
going to be just freight in its
initial phases. Madam Chair,
initially it's it's planned to
be freight because that would
have the greatest economic
impact during the public input
meetings, we had a number of
folks ask about, um, the
possibility of passenger rail.
It's absolutely possible. Of
course, you know, what would
need to be analyzed there is the
possible demand for that form of
transportation. There are also
additional safety features. I
have to say I was
not uh a rail expert until about
5 years ago, but I certainly
worked to become one through,
through the work, uh, but there
are additional uh safety
features that get built into a
rail line to accommodate
passenger rails, so they're be
an added expense to do it, but,
but I don't think insurmountable
if it if the demand is there to
to to to cover that cost.
Thank you. I appreciate all of
this
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
add to, to questionnaire. So we
talk about unemployment. Uh, one
of the significant things that
happened is a lot of the miners,
the actual miners, they're still
mining.
There's mining in Wyoming now.
So they're just not here. So
it's not that they're
unemployed, they're just not
here.
Um,
a lot of the jobs that, uh, so
we've got
uh lots of people working, but
they're demolishing San Juan
generating Station or they're
building a solar plants out
there. Uh, so those aren't real
jobs for San Juan County, as
soon as that work is done, it's
done.
And so measuring the
unemployment is really difficult
because of that dynamic. I
appreciate that, Senator Scher,
thank you. Um, and thank you
again, panel. I'm looking for my
notes here. Um, I just wanna
offer a little bit of my own
perspective, that yes, the San
Juan generating station does
feel like the
ending of an era, but also from
your remarks and um just
information today, it feels like
a turning point for this region.
I appreciate your grit, your
commitment to the, to the people
of this region. Um, and your
spirit of innovation, you know,
to move from an industry
in this, in this region that was
tied to just extraction, and I
understand, you know, how hard
that is for the families who
depended on that, but you all
are asking a different question.
You're answering a different
question now, which is, what is,
what is the economic future for
generations to come, get to look
like. And what I really
appreciate is that instead of
extracting from the land, you
all are thinking about how to be
in relationship with the land
and the water and these natural
resources
And I deeply appreciate, um,
that spirit, uh, because that is
what is going to take us through
generations and future and real
sustainability for this region.
Um, thank you all very much for
being here today. I appreciate
your time and for staying here a
little bit longer with us.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, so we are going, like I
said, we're gonna work through
uh lunch, but next we're gonna
hear from Doctor Hopper Pen
Pendergrass. I hope I said that
right, um, president of San Juan
College, this, uh, college is
hosting us today, obviously, but
it's an anchor institution for
the region and a driver of
workforce development and
innovation. So we're here eager
to hear from you, doctor, um,
and how we can support the needs
of your
community and your students. So
welcome and thank you.
So, you'll, um, hit your
microphone, the little person
there.
There we go
Good morning, Chairperson
Charlie and members of the
Economic and Rural Development
and Policy Committee members. My
name is Tony Hopper Pendergrass.
It is my pleasure to be with
you. um, here this morning, um,
I'm a native New Mexican. Um, I
was raised actually in Aztec,
and I've just completed my 13th
year here at San Juan College. I
have with me, um, Dean of the
School of Energy, Alicia
Corbell. She is also
a native New Mexican, grew up
here in Farmington and has um
been here at the college for 16
years. Um, first of all, it's
important that we recognize that
San Juan College is located on
the ancestral lands of the Danay
people, the hickory Apache
southern ute, Ute Mountain U,
Hopi, and ancestral Pabloan also
have ties and stories rooted in
these lands and waters. We work,
learn, and live
on these lands
And to tell you a little bit
about San Juan College. Um,
we're serving over 9000 students
now on the credit side and over
4000 on the non-credit corporate
training side, and we're pleased
that we're ranked in the nation
as in the top 4 for granting
certificates and degrees to
Native American graduates, and
we have over 140 different er
certificate and degree programs
here at San Juan College. Um,
just to give you a census
from our most recent economic
impact study. We contribute over
$300 million to our regional
economy. Um, this is our mission
and vision at San Juan College.
Um, we really, um, work together
closely to make sure our
students thrive and we are dead
serious about providing a
world-class environment here at
San Juan College.
I wanted to share with you some
of our accomplishments from this
last year. Um, this is, these
are the five strategic
directions that our board of
trustees set for our five-year
strategic plan. It really has to
do with partnerships with our
K-12 school districts,
universities and employers. Uh,
next is creating, making sure
that all of our students get
into good family sustaining
jobs. The third strategic
direction is making sure we
maintain a high
quality environment in the
classroom. The 4th 1 has to do
with making sure that all of our
students are successful and
lastly, making sure we have the
appropriate resources to advance
student success.
So, um, first of all, with dual
credit this last year we had a
10% increase in dual credit. We
are back to our pre-COVID levels
of over serving over 2000
students. Um, one thing that we
do is students that complete at
least 12 credit hours, which is
basically a semester, um, in
high school of college credit,
we uh provide them with purple
cords. We had 259 students
throughout our community
that completed 12 credits or
more and we had 57 actually are
an associate degrees at the same
time they did their high school
diploma.
They were provided with
medallions to wear.
Um, we're really proud that the
San Juan College High School
that's located on our campus
that serves hundreds of students
is, um, has received the highest
designation from the public
education department.
Um, one thing we do is really
try and create a college-going
mindset. So we have we bring all
eighth graders, all 1600 of them
onto our campus each year to
explore two pathways and meet
with employers.
We
really work on working closely
with our employer partners. We
feel that we are a huge partner
in economic development and we
really host a lot of recruiting
events throughout the year.
We also try and make sure our
students are prepared to step
into these jobs through mock
interviews.
One thing that we're, that we've
also institutionalized at San
Juan College is we have a
national signing day that occurs
across the nation. We're a part
of that and 124 students, um,
indicated that they would commit
to a technical or care um
technical career this last year
in our community.
Um, these are two students that
I just wanted to point out to
you today. Um, the first one,
Cody Yazi, has been admitted
into the PhD program at Johns
Hopkins University in
biochemistry and molecular
biology, and then our dual
credit student John Parker,
who's still in high school, won
the National Skills USA
competition in diesel
technology.
Um, now I'd like to speak um to,
to all of you about our national
nursing shortage. We know that
that definite definitely exists
here within our state, um, we
partnered with San Juan Regional
Regional Medical Center and
starting this fall, we increased
our cohort by 50%. So in the
past we've served 64 students.
We will now serve 96 students.
They've provided the funding
for 8 positions, some equipment,
but, um, what I'm really excited
about is we asked them to
provide our students that are
all of our students in our
nursing programs with a $1200 a
month stipend so that the
students are not compelled to
work full time while they're
going to school. So we see that
it is our role to address any
shortages in our workforce.
They also provide them, um, with
a market disparity stipend. Our
new nursing hires, um, we pay
them in the past 2500, but
thanks to, um, support from the
hospital, we are now providing
every new nursing hire and
existing hire with a $10,000
market stipend annually on top
of their salary.
Um, this is a program that um
our dean for the School of
Energy started, um, in their
business plan, they predicted
that we would have 35 students
the first year. Um, when we
started the program, we had a
waiting list of 68, and they
ended up um serving 53 students.
This is a, um,
12-week program where they
actually receive over 50
different globally certified,
um, certifications. Um, one
thing
that's, that I mentioned that's
one of our major strategic
directions is making sure our
students get placed into good
jobs. So thanks to all of you
and your support from the state.
We have a lot of internships. We
actually had a 47% increase and
have over 700 students working
an internships. Um, these are up
to 20 hours a week making $15 to
$20 an hour, but you can see
that our community is partnering
heavily with us.
Um, we are a non-tribal Native
Americans serving institution
were extremely proud of that,
and we're also striving to reach
25%, um, enrollment in our
Hispanic population and as you
can see, we're currently at 23%.
This is a list of our capital
projects that we completed this
last year. I'll point out some
of them that that that are
related to economic development,
but we've upgraded our welding
facilities, which are rather
large. Um, we have a new student
health center that I'll talk
about more in a moment. Um,
thanks to one of our major
donors. He provided us with $4
million to expand the School of
Energy. Um, we have a um
a mountain bike park, um, on
located on our campus with a
pump track and thanks to the
state of New Mexico, we have
restrooms there now. You'll
learn more about our harvest
food hub this afternoon.
in partnership with all of our
local farmers.
Um, this last year we had a 5.3%
increase in enrollment.
Currently for the fall, our
credit hour enrollment is up
9.8%, so 10%.
Um, one thing that we do, um,
with our closest university
partner, Fort Lewis College, is
we do a business plan
competition and we're thrilled
to um let you know that this
year one of our students
actually won the grand prize,
um, in competition with Fort
Lewis, which is supported by our
foundation, which they receive
full ride scholarships, and also
$10,000 from Four Corners
Innovation, which Alicia
is our CEO and they received
$10,000.
Um, one thing that's really
important is we survey our
students about their different
insecurities, and we know that
food insecurity is a huge issue
within our state, and one thing
that we did, I'd like to point
out as we opened up a trailblaze
cupboard this last year, which
is basically a store, but
students just go in, scan their
ID and help themselves to
whatever they want, and we have
eggs, beef, diapers, blankets.
shampoo, conditioner, whatever
they need. We just ask our
students to, to help themselves.
We also have a greenhouse where
they're growing food as well and
um we've received a lot of
support from the state through
grants, through our foundation
and through our employees. And
we're also a site for the
Roadrunner and Echo Food Bank.
Um,
I was asked as part of this
presentation to talk about
challenges, um, I, I think this
is a good challenge, but, um, we
were able to build our first
phase of housing, and we have
150 beds, but our problem is, is
that we have long waiting lists,
um, about 2 months ago, we had
to cut off the waiting list
cause we already had 90 fully
executed applications on, um,
the waiting list.
So we are, we would like to
build a phase 2. We know that
there was a bill introduced by L
Lentte this year that I think
was vetoed, but it was House
Bill 449 to support the um
building of the medical school.
also thank you for including
student housing in that because
there is um a matching um
opportunity there. So we're
interested in that, that bill.
Um, we also opened a student
health center, um, this year to
help with our, our students'
health, um, needs. We co-located
both their physical and mental
health needs through this
facility and we're tremendously
grateful to all of you for your
support.
Um, one thing that we did
through Four Corners Innovation
and in partnership with the
city, the county, and Four
Corners, um, innovation is we
were able to get a company to
relocate to our Quality Center
for Business that was located in
Silverton, and they produce very
high-end off-road, um, RVs,
trailers. Um, one thing that I
just wanted to point out that
was recently shared with us is
that um when you compare June
2024 to
2025, um, the city was ranked
number one in job growth.
Um
I'm just going to share just a
few pieces of data because I
know I stand between you and
lunch, but, um, we had the
highest fall to fall retention
for our first-time students, um,
ever in our history, um.
in the kind of I need to
probably change some of these
colors, but the kind of the
off-hi is our peers here in New
Mexico and then in blue are the
colleges that have won the award
for the best community colleges
in the nation. It's called the
Aspen Award, and you can tell
we're right within that band.
These are our performance
indicators. I have 2 pages of
these. I'm not going to go over
them in detail, but anything in
green shows an increase in our,
um, performance indicators for
what we're measuring. These are
leading indicators that lead to
lagging indicators which are
higher graduation rates
primarily, and as you can see,
we've had substantial increases
in every 9 of the 10 indicators
this past year, and we've
already hit 5 of the 1
0 targets, um, and this plan
goes through 2027.
If you'll look at this next page
of strategic planning, key
performance indicators. You can
see that we've already met, I
think, 6 of the 11, and we had
increases in every performance
indicator, but one, I'd like to
point out, especially the
graduate employment, 89% of our
students have graduated,
transferred, or are continuing
their education.
This um
slide just shows that each and
every year we set a target to
increase our number of graduates
by 5%, and we have increased
our, um, we have surpassed our
targets for the last 15 years.
Um, wallet Hub, um, some of you
may have heard of them. They,
um, typically help individuals
improve their credit rating.
They ranked um the New Mexico
Community College System 2nd in
the nation.
out of all of the systems, and
they ranked San Juan College
25th out of 650 in their study.
We're happy to entertain any
questions you may have.
Thank you very much. Um, we'll
start with Senator Pinto. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
all the work you do, especially
for our students. um
and I think this is more of a
maybe a favor or uh wondering
because you're talking about the
medical school, and I know you
guys got the nurses stuff going
on.
But we hear a lot about, well,
the doctors are leaving because
of malpractice insurance, but I
think in different areas of the
state, it's, you know, the, I
think there's ways we can help
them.
and I've been taking a deep dive
into it. So I don't know if
that, I know nurses do have to
have insurance to, to an extent
or have some kind of clean, um,
as far as background check or,
or moving forward. But in that
sense, I think there's other
ways for us to
I guess, um, bring that
insurance rate or that premium
down, and I don't know if it's
more training or how do we, um,
but in this region and as we
move forward, um
if you're able,
especially if you're going to
get into the medical school
aspect of um
how do we initiate or how do we,
um, supplement in other ways
instead of trying to put a cap
on it, um.
in, in that sense of that whole
medical line of how do we, how
do we, where is it in there that
we as a state can, um, I guess
poke our nose in there and help
them with that premium instead
of trying to do some kind of
legislation. Um, it's just, it's
one thing, um, but thank you for
all the work you do and uh if
there's anything you come up
with, it's that there's uh, you
guys have people to study,
especially in this four cornered
area, let me know.
Thank you so much
Um, Chairperson Charlie and
Senator Pinto. Yes, I know it's
a difficult, um, complicated
issue and it's my understanding
we have the 2nd highest, um,
insurance rates in the nation
behind Alaska.
So.
yeah
Thank you, uh, Senator Block
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Thank you, Madam President, for
uh representing San Juan
College. It so wonderful
institute that we hear about
down in Rio Rancho a lot, um,
just real quick, I'm looking
through your um
science and technology degrees
because I'm on uh the science
and Technology Committee as
well.
Are you guys looking at doing
anything related to um
with uh associate degrees or
certificates in AI or Quantum,
and if so, um, are you, you, if
you're not doing that, are you
partnering with like the Sania
do Sandi Los Alamos, do they do
any programs with you and um
lastly, three-part question. Do
you feed into New Mexico Tech on
some of your geology and other,
uh, degrees.
Um
Chairperson, um, Charlie and
Senator Block, um, yes, so our
entire focus of our fall
convocation, which is a week of
professional development for our
employees focused entirely on
artificial intelligence. Um, we,
we currently do not have any
certificates or degrees in
artificial intelligence or
quantum physics, but where
you're certainly pursuing what
opportunities may exist for us.
Um, we have
done a lot of work in the
cybersecurity space. Um, we are
a center for information
assurance by the NSA. We have
that designation that we worked
hard to attain in cybersecurity,
but we're certainly open to
pursuing other opportunities in
um artificial intelligence. Um,
we do work closely with our
labs, and I will let um and New
Mexico Tech, and I will let um
Dean Corbell respond to those.
Chairperson Charlie, Senator
Block, yes, we were at a very
close working relationship with
Los Alamos National Labs in
particular, mostly with respect
to energy in terms of water,
because we are the center of
excellence for renewable energy
and sustainability. One of our
areas of focus is water and
Sandia has been very helpful in
that regard. New Mexico Tech, I
was on the phone with them this
morning and again, we
collaborate with them
extensively.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So are,
are you a feeder school into New
Mexico Tech? Would you, would
you consider yourself that? Um
Chairperson Charlie and Senator
Block, yes, we were actually
told by um the dean for the
School of Engineering at one
time that our students, um,
outperform the students that
start at New Mexico Tech once
they transfer. Awesome, thank
you. And then lastly, uh, Madam
Chair, your graduate, you
graduates, uh, what percentage
of them stay in the
I'll say local area, the four
corners area.
A large percentage. I don't have
that off the top of my head, but
we do survey every, each and
every one of our students 6
months after they've graduated
to ask them about their
experience, how much money
they're making, where they're,
um, but I think it's in the
upper 80s is if I was to take a
guess.
Dean, you're good with that too.
Not in energy, energy that they
don't but we're a small school,
right? Um, and that fluctuates
really widely per year, but we
do always take a look at that.
And depending upon the program
in the School of Energy, CDL is
our highest local employer
program, um, but honestly, we've
had uh all the majors still
support us, even though they
don't have assets in our
community, and they have made
some very
attractive job offers. So we do
have a lot of our graduates
commuting out of the area.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Romero.
Um, thank you so much, um, for
connecting the dots on um the
training programs that you're
providing and, and how they
translate into jobs that's um my
line of questioning is, um, on
that front with when it comes to
graduation rates and you see
that sort of disparity. Um, one
of the things I know we've
invested in is, is that, you
know, the, the stipends that you
were talking about and the
bonuses for completing
coursework, um, Madam Chair, did
those happen to keep people in
school longer. Um, are we seeing
that the disparity of graduates
are because they're, you know,
maybe not, they don't have those
incentives or what do you
believe is the reason why folks
are, are not completing their,
their studies and graduating.
We've, um, madam
Chair, and Representative
Romero, um,
it's a difficult question why
students do not complete, um, it
is, it is of our opinion. It's
usually beyond our control when
they do decide to drop or not
complete. Um, they're usually
external factors that are
occurring and that's why um we
have worked so hard at San Juan
College to try and address um
housing insecurity,
transportation incur, food
insecurity, and really provide
those
wraparound supports, um, and we
require that every student visit
with an advisor before they drop
because we might be able, even
through our foundation to help
them solve an issue that may
just be sometimes we joke that
students are just one flat tire
away from dropping out, but we
want to solve those problems. We
have many of our employer
partners provide gas cards, all
sorts of support so that they
can continue. Um
I'll let um Dean Corbell also
responded to this because they
do a exemplary, extraordinary
job helping students.
Thank you. Um, as a small school
and cohort-based, our
instructors really get to know
our students quite well. So we
are able to intervene in many
instances. I would echo Doctor
Pendergrass's comment that when
a student stops out, it's, it's
life.
and it's things that we can't
overcome. If it's material goods
or issues, we find a way to make
it happen.
But, um, our completion rates,
gratefully, uh, typically are in
the mid to upper 90s in this
school.
That's excellent. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I know that
student, um, food insecurity is
a big issue that we face as a
state and um any way that we can
continue to help build on some
of those programmatic needs to
keep people in school, I think
is, is critically important. So
I really appreciate all of your
attention to that. Um,
and then just going back to, I
think the line of questioning
with Senator Block and and
understanding the translation to
jobs. It'd be super helpful to
us to understand how those folks
do translate. I know even 6
months out, can take that long
to even apply for a job
sometimes or take a little
break, maybe after you um
graduate, hopefully, um, but,
you know, that, that time frame
of, of how we sort of understand
where folks get employed and
also so that we're not telling
necessarily like anecdotal
stories because I know, you
know, when we think about jobs
available, um, uh, you know, a
number of my classmates went to
big cities because that's where
they wanted to go as well. Not
only were the jobs there, but
just a change of pace, etc. So
we'd love to understand a bit
more about that nuance if, if we
can provide, you know, resources
with higher ed to, to figure out
what that translation is for how
folks find jobs and hopefully
stay with them and what
incentives we can have in place
for folks to stay locally, um,
you know, to keep that, them,
them regenerating in
community would be great, um,
and so it's good to know too
about uh you said CDL is the
largest community employer, um,
from that education standpoint,
can you just, what is the
acronym? Is that commercial
driving licenses. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, and so, yeah,
just wanted to, to try to see if
we can follow those threads
about what happens post
graduation to help us
understand, you know, what, what
we can do to keep folks, um,
local. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Chairperson Charlie
and Representative Romero, um, I
just don't have it with me, but
we, one thing I'm really proud
of that San Juan College is we
know where every one of our
graduates are. We sign them up
through LinkedIn, and we
actually do a scattergram that
our executive team reviews that
shows the high wage, high demand
jobs, low wage, low demand,
because we are not afraid to
sunset a program that is not
providing ample salary for our
um constituents or
community members. So we do
analyze it. I just don't have it
off the top of my head. That's
super helpful. Thank you, Madam
Chair. We'd love to see it.
Thanks
Thank you and uh Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Dr. Penograss, uh,
um, I'm very impressed with
the school. I've, I've come to
several meetings here over the
years and I'm always, I'm always
impressed. I was having a
conversation
um with a retired general last
night, and he was commenting
about
how uh
every time he's come to the
Farmington area, he always makes
a point to come, so, uh, like I
said, I'm very, I'm very
impressed with, with what you're
doing here. I do have a, a
couple of questions on
page 9, the top slide on, on,
uh, you're talking about placing
students in internships,
apprenticeships.
student employment and service
learning opportunities.
What companies are you working
with to get those
apprenticeships?
Um,
Chairperson Charlie and
Representative Martinez, the
very next
the, the below it, those are
some of the companies that we
are working with.
So it, it looks like
maybe half of those are service
industries
Um
are there any
uh
I know with the loss of, of
uh,
the energy sector here in, in
the four corners.
Are there other
high dollar employers around
here?
that you, that you're able to
tap into.
Um, I know that we have Intel
Are you working with Intel to
possibly place students there.
Yes sir, we are
because it's, you have, you have
700 students
Um, it looks like a placement of
700 students.
Um, so I was just
I was, I was very interested in,
in, you know, you look at
internships leading to
major employment in a, in a
high-paying job.
Is, do you see that happening?
Is that trending here or are
they
finishing the internship in and
moving.
Chairperson Charlie and um
Representative Martinez, it just
depends on their their major and
what they're interested in. Um,
you know, if possible, we try,
you know, I think the upper 80s
that I quoted earlier is how
many stay in New Mexico,
probably not in the general
area, but what I recall is
within the state, but as um Dean
Corbell mentioned, we do, we do
work with major, um, energy
producers such as Chevron,
Conoco, Ox
y They, they usually work in the
southern part of the state, but
they're commanding over six
figures and most of those, um,
programs, so, um, within our,
when within our area, we also
have um other um energy
companies that we work with. And
then also in our health
sciences, the students command
good jobs in our health
sciences, in our DSO program, in
welding. Pesco's a major
employer that was mentioned
earlier
Um, so we do have good family
sustaining, um, jobs. I know
that it was discussed earlier
about um
the, the average salary for
those that were laid off during
the in the coal mines was about
87,000. So it's difficult for
students to start out at that
level, um, but we've worked to,
as hard as we can to find good
paying jobs with as many
companies as possible.
Thank you for doing that. I, I
think that type of support in
the community is
extremely important, um, and
you're obviously doing a great
job. I, my, my last question is
on page 14.
Again, the top um slide
uh metro scorecard results.
You're, uh, uh, I guess I'm
trying.
I'm trying to
get your presentation in line
with the presentation that we
had before you.
Um.
so you're talking about
employment growth.
a 5%, 5.5% job growth.
in the metro in the Farmington.
area.
Um
I, I guess
I'm trying to get those two to
come together because
it, I didn't get that feeling
from the, the presentation right
before yours.
Um
can you kind of guide me through
that?
Um, yes, so chairperson Charlie
and um Representative Martinez,
um, this is a report that was
recently, um, we were made aware
of, and it's my understanding,
and we can have Dean Corbell,
cause I know that she's drilled
down and looked into this in
more detail. Um, most of the
growth has occurred in
governmental jobs and as um
Warren Unsicker from the city
referred to temporary
construction jobs.
So from some of those solar
fields and so forth. That's
where the growth, um, has
primarily occurred.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Doctor Pendergrass, I wonder if
there's been a study, um, to
look at the actual
job market
um, because like you said, a lot
of these are temporary jobs are
going to last year, 2 years, and
then they go away. But
sustaining jobs, I think, would
be
a report that I'd love to see
for the area.
How many jobs are, are being
retained? Are they, are these
jobs enough to raise a family
on.
um
so I, I, I don't know if that
study has been done, but I'd be
real interested in seeing
something like that.
Chairperson Charlie and
Representative Martinez, um,
yes, we subscribe to a um
similar to that economic impact
report that we paid for to be
reproduced. It was produced by a
company called Lightcast, which
was previously called Economic
Modeling, but they kind of lead
a lot of economic development
studies, and we subscribe to a
um a service where we can
analyze when we're looking at
starting any new new program, we
can
deter find out how many jobs are
in the area, what they're
paying, um, are they
sustainable? And then we can
look across the board at any
anywhere in the nation and
determine if we should start a
new program or not, or are we
offering the appropriate mix of
programs here at the college
that meet our community needs.
We use that a lot, that that um
service.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Doctor Pendergrass.
would it be possible to
to um
drill down and get a report that
shows the sustainable employment
in the area.
Yes
Um, I, Madam Chair, I'd like to
get a copy of that because I
think that, that gives
I think a, a, a more
a truer picture of what
employment looks like in this
area.
Um, and it shows, we could see a
trend
Obviously, there, there, you
know, you'll show the big drop
off
uh, once the energy sector took
its hit. But if we could see a
trend, where those
opportunities might be, um, I
would love to see something like
that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Doctor Pendergrass.
Thank you. Um, um, closing this,
I will be Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
this school is a jewel.
and I will tell you how long
it's been around. I was a
student body president when we
named it the Suns.
That's how long the school's
been here.
um It was '91.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, one of the
things I appreciate about Doctor
Pendergrass and, and, uh, Dean
Cor Corbell and and the whole
staff here is how quick they are
on their feet.
Uh, when we were looking at, uh,
you know, when, when Senator
Sher and, and uh others uh uh
we're going through the ETA, um,
they were very quick to shift
and say, OK, we can educate and
we can do everything we can to
make sure that these folks get
somewhere wasn't interstate for
the most part, but at least they
were help able to help folks
that lived here and call this
home until they had to move to
find a different make a living.
So thank you very much, Dr.
Pendergrass. I appreciate it
Thank you, Representative. You
actually answered one of my
questions, which was, what is
the mascot? I was trying to
figure that out. So, thank you.
Um, I just one question. I'm
really curious about where the
funding for those stipends and
the nursing program comes from.
The hospital is providing the
entire funding which this year
is about $980,000. Incredible.
Thank you.
Um, and thank you both for being
here and for hosting us again,
um, and for inspiring all of us.
I don't know if you were in the
room earlier, but I shared that
my mom came to school here and
so she had a great time when she
was here. Um, thank you. And
then committee, we will, um, as
we transition into our next
presentation, which is all
happening, um, on Zoom or
online. I'll ask us to go grab
our food and then settle back
down and then we'll bring those
folks online and get us back on
track.
Thank you. Thank you.
Nice weekend
Yeah,
let's kind of my presentation. I
can do it in my sleep.
I'm sorry that
I just realized uh-huh.
So
she worked in
I
I
Uh
I
Hello, could I get one of the
presenters to just give us a
test, yeah.
Sorry, can we try that one more
time?
If
Uh,
Mary Ellen
one of our next presenters could
give us a hello. Hello, this is
Mary Ellen.
Thanks, Mary Ellen. Can you turn
the sound up a little bit?
Absolutely. Can you hear me
better now?
Is that better?
It, we're just trying to
configure it in the room a
little more. I completely
understand.
I heard something about Kashi on
the microphone, but not what he
said completely.
OK. Uh, I think that's good,
Mary Ellen. Thank you. Thank
you.
OK.
All right, everyone, thank you
all. Is there another microphone
on now? Maybe it's the feedback
from the
All right, everybody, we're
gonna go right ahead and get
started. For those of you still
grabbing lunch in the back,
please do keep the conversation
to a minimum and low. Um, our
next discussion is gonna focus
on a on a critical lens for
economic development.
I feel like a teacher when I
have this.
OK.
So we are going to um move now
into our next presentation, um,
that's gonna focus on a critical
lens for economic development,
which is survivor-centered
policies, as many of us here
know economic strength is not
just about jobs and
infrastructure, but also about
safety and stability and
opportunities for people who
have experienced harm. We look
forward to learning more about
the this perspective, um,
and with us we have Cynthia from
Freeform Alexandria from the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs and Mary Ellen
from the New Mexico Coalition of
Domestic Violence Programs, um,
and we are gonna start with a
presentation from Free from.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
for having us and members of the
committee, um, I know we're,
we're, you're having a working
lunch, so we really appreciate
the opportunity to speak with
y'all about how supporting
survivors, long term financial
security can strengthen New
Mexico's economy.
Before we dive into some brief
intros, uh, my name is Cynthia
Mezcuasamudio. I'm the state
policy and advocacy manager with
Freeru. Freeru is a national
nonprofit working to end
gender-based violence with
survivors by building safety and
economic freedom and through our
direct programming, we work with
survivors in every state,
including New Mexico. And I'll
pass it to Alexandria. Thanks so
much, Cynthia. Good afternoon,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Alexandria
Taylor. I'm the
executive director here at the
New Mexico Coalition of Sexual
Assault Programs. I apologize
that I couldn't join you in
person in Farmington today. We
were launching um the 1.5
million we just granted out to
communities all across New
Mexico for violence prevention
programming, um, and so this is
an important day for us to talk
about sexual violence prevention
and intervention services, um,
in my gratitude to chair Charlie
for centering that survivor
policies
are absolutely economic
development policy.
have this conversation with you
all today, and I'll pass to Mary
Ellen.
Thank you, Alexandria. Thank you
both, uh, Cynthia as well. Um,
thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Mary Ellen Garcia. I'm the chief
executive officer here at the
New Mexico Coalition Against
Domestic Violence. I would also
like to echo what Alexandria
said, the grace to be able to
participate via Zoom as we
operate statewide nonprofits,
and we are also very busy um
in our communities to be able to
participate virtually is, is,
um, incredibly uh a beautiful
thing. So thank you for that and
I do apologize for not being
present in person. As I was just
there on Thursday with our
intimate partner violence, um,
providers up in your area
talking about the critical
needs, and I want to uplift the
work that's happening here
because um as Alexandria said,
as you'll hear over and over and
over again, economic justice and
economic stability is a survivor
centered um issue
and it should be part of every
policy conversation that we
have.
I'll pass it back over to
Cynthia who I believe is gonna
get us started in the
presentation.
Thank you, Mary Ellen. So I just
want to start off, uh, first by
sharing a quote from a survivor
that they shared with free from.
I'm still very overwhelmed by
the debt my abuser slash
ex-husband created and left me
with. This journey is long
because I am the sole provider
for my children. Their father
will not pay child support. I
have very little disposable
income to pay debt collectors.
And this quote really captures a
common experience for survivors
and in the next few slides,
we'll explain why this
experience is so common.
So as we can tell from the
quote, gender-based violence is
financially devastating for
survivors.
And before I go to uh too much
further in, I do want to clarify
the multiple terms that we're
going to be using and that I'm
already using. So we IPB
intimate Partner Violence,
that's specific, you know, to a
partner or a spouse, and so, uh,
that refers more specifically to
those types of dynamics.
Gender-based violence captures
intimate partner violence, as
well as TV as well as other
issues such as human trafficking
and stalking, as well as others,
and domestic
violence, um, when we use that
term, we're referring
specifically to, you know,
household members, most often
thought of as partners, but it
can be used to capture other
relationships within a household
as well.
So, um, just to get into what we
know. Thanks to the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs and their leadership,
there was recent research that
was done, and as you can see in
the New Mexico Crime
Victimization report, 40% of
respondents reported being
subjected to these four specific
crimes. So 40% really conveys
that this is a pervasive
problem. At 40%, survivors'
financial experiences will
impact the entire economy.
And the CDC has already
estimated that the lifetime
costs of gender-based violence
is at about $104,000. Part of
these costs include costs from
coerced and fraudulent debt, as
well as medical costs, lost
income, and others. And in our
own research at FRIR, we found
that survivors had an average of
$5000 in coerced and fraudulent
debt. So this really starts to
clarify why gender-based
violence is so financially
devastating.
We also know that economic abuse
is almost always present in
these situations. And so
economic abuse includes many
tactics, such as the two listed
here, but it can also include
preventing a survivor from
accessing their own money,
taking a survivor's money and
others. So we found it free from
that 90% of survivors had their
ability to obtain or maintain a
job disrupted
and 73% of survivors lost a job
or income or a career
opportunity. As a result of the
gender-based violence they
experience. So taking these
statistics and remembering the
40% figure from the last slide.
It's clear that these issues are
impacting many, many workplaces
across New Mexico. And so
providing survivors with the
support they need will
strengthen the workforce in New
Mexico.
So after learning all this, it
shouldn't be a surprise that
survivors' financial well-being
is in the bottom 10th percentile
of adults in the US. So this
really reiterates the financial
hardships that survivors are
subjected.
Free from asked uh survivors
about their most urgent needs,
and this is what survivors
reported. They need cash to
spend as needed. They need
credit and debt relief, and they
need mental health services. Um,
this is all captured in the
handout we provided, but I do
want to note there was a typo on
the handout. It says debit
relief, that should say debt
relief.
So,
uh, survivors reporting that
they need cash to spend is
consistent, as well as the
credit debt relief from the
financial hardships we just
covered.
So we also asked about the top
costs. So essentially how
survivors would use the cash,
they say they need, and it's for
the basics. They need the money
to stay housed for food and for
their, and I'll pass it to
Alexandra to dive in further to
the New Mexico crime
victimization. Thanks so much,
Cynthia. Um, and I'm so grateful
because this is an example of
how a national organization like
Free from that survivor led and
a statewide organization like
NMCSA
can come together and have our
data, um, support each other and
so as Cynthia mentioned, um,
rental assistance is the primary
emergency funding request that
we receive at an NMCSA by
survivors. 90% of the emergency
fund requests that we receive
are for some kind of housing
assistance, including rental
assistance, but also for those
who are able to maintain their
home that they own, um, after
a separation due to violence,
um, sometimes needing mortgage
assistance as well. And so over
the past two years, NMCSA
commissioned the first of its
kind, um, in New Mexico, crime
victimization survey that
surveyed actual people living in
New Mexico for their experience
of violence, and 67% of
respondents reported being
unhoused as a major risk factor
for experiencing violence, and
we
know that this is a cyclical,
um environment, right? And so
being unhoused puts you at
increased of experience sexual
violence and other forms of
violence, and the experience of
sexual violence is a risk risk
factor for becoming unhoused.
And so housing is a stabilizing
force in in responding to, but
also preventing violence. 49%
reported significant problems
with their job after the sex
ual assault. That was either an
issue with their boss and their
employer.
or their coworkers or their
ability to function on the job,
and 51% reported significant
problems with their job after
domestic violence. Again, being
able to access services or go to
court and maintain their work
schedule, issues with
co-workers, issues with safety
on the job.
So we want to dive into some
policy recommendations we have
for y'all, and these are all
also included on the handout we
provided.
So first on course and
fraudulent debt relief. This is
an area where more and more
states are adopting and
considering these policies.
Texas is one of the states that
that has had this relief. They
were one of the first to adopt
them. In Nevada and Illinois
just passed some this year.
Um, for the, in the interest of
time, I won't get into the
specifics of them now, but happy
to dive in further if there's
any specific questions, and as I
said, they are included in the.
rental protections is another um
issue area where uh we, we have
a lot of recommendations because
we see rental protections as key
to keeping survivors' house and
allowing them the flexibility
that they need.
I've included here a policy that
New Mexico has already adopted,
so I did want to include that
New Mexico does have an
affirmative defense of being a
domestic violence survivor and
uh in the eviction proceedings.
I also want to add a note that
credit scores are severely
impacted for survivors for the
reasons we covered earlier. So
credit scores, we're learning
and see that they really become
an obstacle to financial
securities for survivors. It's,
it becomes a huge barrier to
re-establishing um financial
security in the long term, in
the process of rebuilding.
Paid family and medical leave
can also make a huge difference,
and a lot of the policies that
we recommend have already been
adopted, but a key one being the
guaranteed paid has not, and I
believe Alexandria and Mary
Ellen can share more about the
legislation that has, uh, it's
trying to get this uh policy
adopted.
I'll also, uh, quickly add safe
workplaces. There are several
policies that we can recommend
to address how gender-based
violence impacts survivors at
work, um, and again, I have
included the one that New Mexico
has already adopted.
So that's our brief overview.
Um, we're happy to take any
questions, go back to any of
these slides or address these
policy recommendations more
specifically as well. Thank you
so much for your time.
dealt with
Would you like for me to take
that one or would you like to,
Alexandria?
You can go ahead, Mary Ellen.
OK. Uh, Madam Chair, uh, uh, uh,
Representative, uh, thank you
for your question. I did work
for the Crime Victims Reparation
Commission for about 15 years
and was their bureau chief until
I came over here to the New
Mexico Coalition Against
Domestic Violence. One of the
things that I want to really
clarify is that victim
compensation is reimbursement
for expenses related to the
victimization. So, I wanna
really highlight that, that it's
reimbursement for expenses
related to the victim
ization And often what we're
talking about here in economic
stability for survivors, um.
debt relief is not an allowable
or eligible expense under state
statute or federal statute. And
so coercive debt is not
something that can be supported
with victim compensation. So
even though a survivor of
intimate partner violence or
sexual violence can be deemed
eligible to receive victim
compensation, it doesn't mean
that the expenses that we're
talking about here, such as paid
family medical leave, um, the
ability to terminate leases and
those sorts of things can be
supported with the victim
compensation.
Victim compensation typically
reimburses for the medical
expenses that are incurred and
other, other additional
pecuniary um expenses, but again
they're reimbursement and a lot
of the issues that we find with
survivors is that is not in fact
an eligible expense under state
and federal statute. And it
wasn't until recently that um
uh arrears, so debt that has
been incurred as a result of um
rental assistance was only
recently eligible under federal
funding. And so one of the major
causes, and I know Alexandria
is, you know, shaking her head
because 90% of the emergency
funds that goes through um their
organization supports survivors
in many of those.
Madam Chair, do you mind if I
add to that?
Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, that's a phenomenal
question. I just want to add to
what Mary Ellen said, which is
also important. The other thing
is, is that the rental
assistance that is available
through crime victimization is
often one-time assistants, and
I, prior to being at the
coalition, I was the director of
the Domestic Violence and Rape
Crisis Center in Valencia
County, a rural community
under-resourced because people
assumed that everybody in
Valencia County should just come
to Al
bu qu er que for services. I'm
sure you understand that from
Sandoval, and that is not true.
People need access to services
in their community, and one of
the things, um, I learned at
while I was in Valencia County
is we actually ran, um, a
transitional housing and rapid
rehousing program through our
our shelter, and that was HUD
funded.
and people need ongoing rental
assistance, mid to long-term
rental assistance in order to
reach stabilization in the
housing land and when we're
trying to address homelessness,
we know that sometimes only
providing one month rental
assistance is only delaying
someone becoming unhoused
because we are trying to support
people and identifying the
supports that are necessary, not
only for them to remain in hous
ing but to be stably housed for
a long period. And in all of the
conversations about housing,
even though victimization is
such a primary source of
becoming unhoused. We have not
talked about how to provide
ongoing mid to long-term housing
supports. 12 to 24 months of
housing supports for survivors
so that we're not just paying
one month's rent and then
delaying how they're going to
pay next month's rent.
Families need stabilization, and
that's not something that's able
to be provided through the
reparations.
Duncan, thank you for the
question. Um, so what we've, uh,
heard from survivors is that at
times, uh, landlords will not
want to, uh, Larent out in a
unit to them because if they
find out they were previously um
experiencing domestic violence
or some sort. There might be
some prejudices there that the
landlord might have, um, as well
as in other, uh, you know,
perhaps flexibilities or
assistance that the landlord
might offer while the uh survi
vo r is being housed. So we've
just heard from survivors that
they do experience some
discrimination from landlords,
um, and mostly we hear about it
in the stage when they are
applying for a unit.
Madam Chair Representative
Duncan, um,
I, I believe they're, you know,
the uh usual kind of means for
um, you know, seeking immediate
assistance from, uh, you know,
law enforcement in that type of
scenario. Um, if you're
concerned about safety, I'm not
sure if that's your immediate
concern. Um, but in terms of
you know, uh, we don't want to
punish survivors for the actions
that another individual caused
and, and so while we do
understand the concerns, um, the
default right now, you know,
survivors having to, um, you
know, bear those costs, um, and
face the long-term ramifications
from it is, is, you know, 11
issue we, we think is important
to address, and I'll, I'll also,
you know, a pass it to
Alexandria to add.
Yeah, Madam Chair,
Representative Duncan, it's good
to see you. I would say, um,
during my time at Valencia
Shelter Services. We housed
hundreds of survivors of
domestic violence in our rapid
rehousing program and the former
representative Alonso Baldonado,
as you know, is a property
manager and landlord in Valencia
County, um, worked with many,
uh, landlords and property
managers in Valencia County, um,
and I can, I can tell you that
the number of times that that
scenario that you just offered
actually played out, um, with
very few, if I can recall even
one.
because what happens when
survivors have access to safe,
affordable housing, is that they
are beginning to build
protective capacities that
separate them from the person
that has caused them and their
children harm. And so, for
instance, former Representative
Baldonado, he uh used to be a
little hesitant about
participating because we had
housing vouchers, right? HUD
funded housing vouchers, um, and
after building a relationship
with him, he actually became
the top property manager that we
were able to work with because
he understood that um the people
that were working with us had
access to regular ongoing
support, had access to mental
health treatment. We're actively
working to build a different
future in life for their
families, um, and actually in
Valencia County our program was
the top performing HUD rapid
rehousing program, meaning we
have the highest
number of clients every year
that maintains permanent housing
after no longer receiving our
support. Um, and so I think when
we're talking about violence, it
happens in a community. It
doesn't happen individually or
in a a silo, and I think our
landlords are actually important
partners in supporting families
in gaining the safety and
support that they're seeking
through these pot. Sure, thank
you the answer. I guess I'm the,
uh, tending, um, a young lady.
I'll move
prohibiting, uh, credit scores
on.
We recommend, Madam Chair and
Representative Duncan, um,
having a, the policy that is
available and covers all because
what we've seen is that when you
ask survivors to identify
themselves, um, some survivors
are, you know, maybe in the part
of the journey where one,
they're not aware or seeing the
situation in that way, um, or 2
may not have, uh, the
appropriate documentation
required, and we do recommend
flexible, uh, proof
requirements. Um, so we find
that, you
know, asking survivors to
self-identify, uh, does often
mean that all the folks that are
intended to be served, do not
get served. So, um, in terms of,
in so that it reaches as many of
the folks that it is intended to
benefit. We do recommend it
being available to to all and uh
I'll pause there. I'm Alexandra
or Mary Ellen would like to add.
Absolutely, I can, I can echo
that sentiment. I, Madam Chair,
rem uh representative. One of
the things that we find is
credit scores are often deeply
impacted by coercive control by
those who are those who cause
harm. And so often survivors may
have the income necessary um
independently to obtain housing,
however, due to the impact on
their credit um from course of
control, they're not able to
access safe housing in their
communities. I can
give you a personal example,
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
as a widow when my husband
passed, I had an 800 credit
score. When he passed, I went
down to a 450. It had nothing to
do with anything other than the
impact on my credit. So it was
an arbitrary, uh, arbitrary
representation, and we often
find that with survivors is that
it's an arbitrary representation
of their ability and when we can
support individuals to get into
housing
and more effective and efficient
way, then we're able to improve
safety measures across our
communities. Um,
I will not support this, um,
because there's far more, um,
individuals out there that um
have bad scores, and I will not
support it. If you will take
that, those survivors, uh, that
small portion.
that can be done. I will support
their far more out there that
will do landlords that are
trying to rent and may have
inherited.
what they are right there. Um,
would be, I'm curious how you're
going to
work with the credits, 3 or 4 of
them out there. How do you, how
do you work?
basically hide the credit score
differently.
One of the things is passion
was it passed SB 1 and 3. Madam
Chair, Representative Block, I'm
trying to see you. You're like
half on camera, so I'm making
sure I'm saying the right
correct senator block. I'm
sorry. Um, that's a great, great
question. So we work with AOC um
in different regards because at
the coalition and all of our
local programs across the state
work in a multidisciplinary
fashion. I have been following
um
Senate Bill 3 and what's
happening with the housing
dollars rolling out from that
and trying to be at the table in
our local providers encouraging
our local providers to be at the
table at the regional planning
meetings because it's essential
that when we're talking about
housing that we include
survivors in that. And there are
um specific considerations that
need to be made when we're
talking about housing services
for survivors. So again
I go back um to the program that
I administered in Valencia
County. When you're running a
HUD funded housing program that
is a survivor program at a
victim service agency, we have
specific um requirements under
state and federal law to protect
victim confidentiality, um, to
protect
confidentiality in general, but
privacy of our clients. And
again, the point is to try to
allow people to have access to
safe and affordable housing that
allows them to focus on, um,
their families and feel safe.
And so participating in
coordinated entry systems and
coordinated assessment systems
are barriers to survivors
because it puts all of their
information out there and
restricts what we're required to
abide by
around survivor confidentiality.
Um, and so we are actively, uh,
I don't know that thinking about
the specific needs of survivors
related to housing, um, is a
part of that conversation just
yet, but we are working and, and
could use partnership and
knowing when those regional
meetings are happening and
knowing and having stakeholders
like you at the table saying,
how are we funding our domestic
violence and sexual assault
programs,
you brought in the policy
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, thank you so much. Yes,
I'd be happy to explain. Um, so
when it comes to cos that, uh,
that's talking about
specifically debt that was um
taken out uh under duress,
harassment, or other sort of
intimidation, um, fraudulent
debt prefers more specifically
to instances where the debt was
taken out using the survivor's
information without their
knowledge. Um, so as you can
imagine in a lot of these
situations, um, where, when
folks are experiencing economic
ab use it means that the
harmdoer has um perhaps is
misusing their Social Security
number, other personal uh
personally identifying
information and is able to open
accounts, um, take out credit
cards, loans in their name
without their knowledge. Um, and
so, uh, fraudulent debt I think
really mirrors, uh, the, you
know, the structures and
frameworks that we already have
around identity theft, so it
really mirrors closely, uh, to
that uh the National Consumer
Law Cent
er does have model language, um,
and we are also at, at this
point where several states have
adopted, can are starting to
learn best practices from what
states have done. Um, so there
are the policy recommendations
that I included are kind of some
of the key components that we
see included in multiple of the
statutes that have been adopted,
uh, and some of the key relief
to have, for example, um, one of
the in and besides the debt and
having to go
through collections and
repayments, um, one of the
long-term impacts from course
and fraudulent debt, right, is
the credit, the harm done to the
credit score?
And so a lot of times we'll see
that relief on this debt
includes um having creditors
update any adverse information
that was provided to credit
reporting agencies. Um, so that
survivor's credit score can no
longer be impacted and, and be
really kind of inaccurate in
that sense in terms of their
their creditworthiness. Um, so
we, there is model uh
legislation that I would be
happy to share as well as
examples from other states of
how they have
approached it and um what we're,
what we're learning from, from
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, um, if I'm understanding
your question correctly, um,
other examples that we have
seen, um, of policies attempting
to help folks rebuild their
credit and uh when it's been
impacted in this ways, uh, what
we've seen as a common is, for
example, expanding what it gets
considered um as uh reported for
credit to the credit reporting
agency. So for example, um,
there are times where, you know,
utility payments or rent
payments or other things like
that haven't been considered,
but, um, individuals have been,
you know, pretty reliable and
consistent in paying those and
so I think there have been just
efforts in terms of expanding
what is considered um when
determining the, the credit
score and um I'll pause there.
I'm not sure if Alexandra or
Mary Ellen have other examples
they'd like to share. No,
Cynthia, Madam Chair and
Representative Romero, I think
that's a great example. And also
it that
becomes a beneficial package for
survivors, especially if they
have access to supportive
housing and rental assistance
because often that type of
program can also assist with
utility payments. And so when
we're talking about mid to
long-term housing supports that
I talked about for survivors,
that means that also a part of
that process is a 12 to 24 month
period where that's helping to
build their credit when those
sources are um considered in
order to have
a positive payment history and
so it all becomes a nice
supportive package.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Romero, uh, we have seen
multiple strategies used, uh,
some focus specifically on some
states have, you know, opted
for, uh, relief specifically for
those who are in collection, so
they are, their case is before a
judge, um, and then at that
point, uh, there's procedures
for the uh the judge to um find
that the debt was coerced and,
you know, the relief come into
play, but there are also options
to include relief for when
somebody
is the debt is in trying to be
collected on pre uh pre a case
being filed. Um, so for example,
a lot of states and the model
legislation includes a procedure
for a survivor, you know, a
debtor to notify the creditor
that the debt was coerced, um,
and then including specific ways
of and improve to include, um,
we advocate in the model
legislation, the standard is to
include an
option for a sworn statement,
um, we recommend from a survivor
what the norm and what I see
across states is um including a
sworn statement from a qualified
third party. So for example, if
somebody is seeking services
from a counselor or another um
organization that is able to
draft a statement on their
behalf to include in that
notice. Um, so that, so that in
that way somebody can get relief
uh before the case ever goes to
court, which
can be in a very, um,
intimidating and difficult
process, and that relief um also
sometimes comes hand in hand
with creating a liability for
the um harmdoer who pours the
debt. So it gives the creditor,
someone else that they can uh
seek to collect the debt from.
So, um, that's something that we
see that goes hand in hand. So
Cynthia, where are you gonna go?
Um, I can, I can follow Mary
Ellen if you'd like to start.
Um, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, thank you for
the question and I think that
speaks to a larger conversation
around what accountability looks
like in our communities. And,
you know, often what what I have
seen in my almost 30 years of
doing this work is often we
don't put in the protective
factors to assist survivors,
assist those who are being
harmed because we, we go down
these rabbit holes of
accountability. Well, what is
accountability look like? And
often that happens to be very
candid on the backs of survivors
who then cannot access the
services needed or have access
to affordable housing, um, be
independent, right? And so there
is a level of independence when
a survivor is going into, um,
you know, in Alexandria has
spoken so eloquently about
Valencia's Delta Services, which
is one of our model programs
across the state that has really
shown the impact of when you
assist survivors and meet them
where they're at and ensure that
they are protective factors in
communities that there are
resources in communities that
there are resources in
communities that can be an end,
right? An and to holding people
accountable, not an or. And so
when we can create this, what
we're asking is, let's make this
end. Hold individuals
accountable, like Cynthia was
saying, when somebody has
fraudulently used somebody's
credit or had um coercive
control over their debt.
Let's create policies and
procedures and practices in our
communities that can transfer
the debt, can transfer that over
to the individual who should be
held accountable, but also
creating spaces and places and
safety nets for survivors so
that they can have a place to go
for that to happen. So it needs
to be an end, and I, I often
want to, and I appreciate from
the lens of accountability, um,
this conversation of at what
point do we, do we stop
utilizing
state or county or community
resources, but survivors and,
and violence is woven into who
we.
is woven into all that we do in
every system, in our jobs, in
our schools, and in our
communities. And when we can
build in these protective
factors and create spaces um
where survivors can have
economic stability, then we
decrease violence in our
communities, and we decrease um
the impact on our landlords. We
decrease the impact on um the
burden on our healthcare
systems. So this has a rippling
powerful effect. And so I
caution us to say
you know, this or that. It needs
to be an end, uh, and holding
individuals accountable.
To my colleagues on, on the
panel.
Madam Chair, if I could add,
thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Jones, um, as
Mary Ellen shared, I was going
to, um, once again, you know,
point to the policy options like
creating liability um for the
harmdoer for having created the
course that, um, but I, along
with what Mary Ellen shared, I
would also stress that a lot of
these policies that why we
recommend around rental
protections and safe workplaces,
uh, they really are aimed at
ensuring that
um survivors are able to remain
financially secure, or at least
have an option to um seek
financial security in the long
term, which then it does end up
um impacting the economy of New
Mexico and and our entire
country. So when survivors can,
uh, you know, have flexibility
around their housing, right? And
so one of the rental protection
policy recommendations is
eligibility to terminate a lease
early without penalties. Um,
that really gives survivors the
flexibility to seek safety, um,
continue uh seek other housing
opportunities without starting
at a deficit, right? Like having
lost the security deposit or
having to had uh to pay for an
additional month's rent, um, and
all of these things really uh
make a difference for keeping a
survivor employed, which allows
them to continue to have a means
of sustainability for
themselves, um, and whoever else
they're supporting.
So a lot of these policies, um,
will really just enable
survivors to con like.
be able to continue with their
careers, be able to continue
contributing to society, and so
that's, and that's I just wanted
to emphasize the the key aspect
of supporting survivors so that
they're not being punished, um,
and that they're getting some
flexibility where it's helpful.
I have also forgiven debts, see
in all of this is we're focusing
on 11 issue
But the the credit the credit
report says, did you buy?
Nothing else in, in your green,
purple, nothing matters. And
it's also not a uh a weapon.
When he was presented with,
well, wait a minute, these,
these are opportunities for
guaranteed income for this
renter problem. There's this
other programs and, but
So now he's in, well, wait a
minute, OK, that's, that's
great. So, so their credit score
may be lower, because that is
their incomes.
hourly wage for being a welder
or whatever, OK, for a law to
You know, I can't buy my own
food. I can't.
So
gladly work with you on how
credit reporting works right
now, if there is a fraud of any
kind, you report it. So you, so
you can report. Wait a minute, I
didn't buy a new car and he
haven't been to Georgia, so I
didn't buy a car there or didn't
buy whatever, didn't.
I think part of what we can do
is work with
I said, did that. OK, this is,
this is broken. This is how you
fix it.
OK? It's not that hard. Somebody
that I'm not allowed to use a
tool, I offer a service to, to
just talk through the credit re
A secret visa card she doesn't
know about, and I use it only to
purchase pros.
two things that would clearly
But there are still things that
she could do about that after
she, uh, this isn't mine, OK? So
sorry, are bad. Well, they make
you so I'm concerned that we're
reading a law
but I can also look at the
credit report and say, OK, so
you currently have
Well, maybe this is something
bigger than that, OK? That one
event, when, when somebody ended
up in the hospital, they got
this huge bill to pay. That's an
So
I'm willing about some of these
other things here. So safe
workspaces, requiring reasonable
accommodation, bare I can look
like, cause, but I will.
And, um,
thank you to our presenters. I
just have oneins questioning,
Cynthia in particular.
Madam Chair, I, I'm not sure. I
haven't come across uh that type
of policy, but I can follow up
um with you and do some init
some research on that.
up here
All right folks, we, um, to our
next panel present, um, of the
art stiff acting secretary of
the Tourism Darvey, Director of
High oh there it is. Michelle
Laflammechild's, uh, executive
director of New Mexico Arts in
the division of, I mean, in the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
And we were created by stat.
I've been with the Economic
development years, and I have
gotten community development
areas and excite for this first
slide. I do have a little bit of
a video.
That's OK. What this video is,
is kind of a recap of our
creative rap. It took place from
March 25, and we worked with
several other departments we put
together workshops, live
discussions, and we sponsored 5
different creative economy
events throughout the entire
state and connected with over
19,000 people through those
events that we were able to
sponsor. And that what I'm
talking about in the background
here is a little bit about, um,
how creative tends to get meshed
together
which are, um, tends to be
separated from traditional
economic development and
industry, and it's looked at as
a separate initiative. We think
about cultural tourism and the
arts and performing arts, and
typically that's looked at as a
separate.
part of economic development and
the message that I have been
trying to share with doing is
that really creative economy
work is not separate than trend
so much of our creative and
cultural.
what we do best is in the
creative economy, so it's not a
separate than traditional
businesses. So, our mission in
the creative creative
entrepreneurs, small businesses,
as well as local government
communities, and we do that
through providing workshops,
grants, connecting people to
different trying to pull
together all of the different
programs throughout State be
programs that are within
Department of Tourism, New
Mexico Arts, uh, New Mexico
Finance Authority, Senate, uh,
so that's a little bit about.
So typically when I talk about
the creative industries
division, there's kind of a
mindset that goes directly to
performing arts. So I just
wanted to list all the creative,
uh, industry areas that we are
tasked with supporting Ming
visual and literary arts, but it
also extends out to
entertainment, media,
broadcasting, architecture,
museum and gallery professions.
And it all motion in marketing
and a lot of culinary arts,
crafts, and other practices, so
that can be anything textile,
culinary arts
uh, woodworking and glass, and
when we had a contract 24,
there's actually 90, sometimes I
call them the six clusters, and
that's denoted by kind of the
for our constituents in our
communities, a lot of that
because economic overview, a
little bit of data about New
Mexico's creative economy. It is
only captures a slice of the
cra, without a great
representation of full
Different practices within find
Throughout all of those grant
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for giving me a chance to talk
to you about the New Mexico Arts
Division.
of the Department of Cultural
Affairs and the work that we do
to ensure access to the arts for
all New Mexicans in their
communities. As I said before,
my name is Michelle
LaFlamchilds. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Arts. I
was appointed right before the
pandemic. So that was fun, but I
had been with New Mexico Arts
for 7 years prior. I've also
spent many years in the private
sector arts, and then in
marketing for profit sector. So,
um, have a broad range of
experience in a lot of different
areas.
s I am going to read from what
I've written only because, and
you will see, New Mexico Arts
does a lot of work and if I let
myself range freely, I will
never get to everything. So,
New Mexico arts is the smallest
division in the country's
largest Department of Cultural
Affairs. The New Mexico
Department of Cultural Affairs
is home to 8 museums and 8
historic sites, making it the
second largest museum system in
the nation after the
Smithsonian.
As a result, the museums and
historic sites are divisions
that are most associated with
the Department of Cultural
Affairs. However, DCA does have
4 other divisions that provide
deep statewide work to serve New
Mexicans in their communities
and New Mexico arts is one of
them.
So New Mexico arts is New
Mexico's federally authorized
state arts agency, uh, or SAA as
they're sometimes called, all 50
states and 6 US jurisdictions
have a federally authorized
state arts agency. So there are
55 other people just like me
across the country.
Almost all of them were
established by their state's
statute in 1965, um, as the
official SAA for their state, um
and those statutes follow on the
heels of the 1965 creation of
the National Endowment for the
Arts, as the SAAs were set up to
be the state government agencies
to channel uh receive and
distribute the NEA part, what
they call the NEA partnership
funds, and a quick clarification
because NEA has been in the news
a lot, so I want to
differentiate gets versus the
money that 40% of the NEA's
budget is set aside by federal
law for the state arts agencies.
The remaining 60%, and they call
that the partnership program.
The remaining 60% is designated
for direct granting to um arts
organism directly from the NEA
across the country.
So when you saw in the news
about the canceled and cut
grants that affected so many
artists and arts organizations
across the country. That was
that 60%. Uh, at this point, and
I don't know if this table's
wood, but knock on wood, that
40% partnership funding that the
state arts agency are receiving
from the NEA that we are then
turning around and using to
support the field has been
stable.
Um,
our total division budget is
split about 65%, 35% between
state general fund and NEA funds
respectively, and also a quick
note, the NEA requires a 1 to 1
match of their funding with
state general fund, um,
appropriated directly to the
state arts agency, which you all
in the New Mexico legislature
have consistently done for six
decades, so thank you.
New Mexico arts was initially
established to use those federal
NEA funds to support arts and
culture programs and services
that benefit our New Mexico
citizens. For 60 years, we've
been making grants to nonprofit
arts organizations and local
governments with the mission of
ensuring New Mexicans have
access to the arts in their
communities. Then in 1986, the
Art in Public Places program was
established by state statute,
giving New Mexico Arts another
major program area to provide
New Mexicans the opportunity to
experience and engage with
art in their community public
spaces. As you can see on the
slide, we also have a host of
other regular programs that we
either manage or partner on
every year, many of which.
in fiscal year 26, we're
piloting a bunch of new
initiatives and engaging in some
new projects, and I'm proud to
say that not only are most of
them in partnership with other
DCA division, state agencies,
and or local community partners,
but almost all of them serve our
rural community. Um, in FY 25
with a total grants budget of
not quite we funded arts
programs and services at 200
nonprofit organizations, local
governments, universities, and
public K through 12 schools
across the state
and 33% of that funding went to
rural organizations,
organizations in rural New
Mexico.
You can see by the stats on this
page the significant impact that
our million dollar plus
investment had across the state.
More than 4 million people
benefited from the programs we
funded. Almost 1400 jobs were
supported, nearly 150,000 hours
of volunteer time was donated,
and ultimately those 200 grant
recipients leveraged their New
Mexico arts grants, which are
not large.
into a total of more than $40
million in cash expenditures.
In our other major program area,
art in public places,
affectionately known by us as
AIPP. The public art team
successfully facilitated the
spending of almost $2.8 million
in FY 25.
which is in the form of 335
individual art acquisitions. So
that's 335 procurements.
for public buildings across 22
New Mexico counties, 19 of which
were rural, and additionally 21%
of the art was purchased from
artists and tribal communities.
As I mentioned before, we do
have many other programs in
addition to our two main
statutorily mandated ones. And
you can see some highlights
here, a couple of things to
point out that are not on this
slide, the New Mexico Epic poem
Project, which is mentioned in
the top line, was actually a 2.5
year project started in the
summer of 2023 and reached a
total of 29 out of 33 New
Mexico, uh, fiscal year 25 was
actually the third year of our
rural artists and residence
program, which has been a part,
the first year we supported
two DA artists for six-week
residencies at Bosque Redondo
Memorial at Fort Sumner Historic
Site.
and in year two, we hosted two
artists for six-week residencies
and finally our New Mexico
poetry out loud state champion
Caitlyn Lubega, who is the
person in the bottom, the right
hand side of the bottom picture
there, a senior at the time at
United World College High School
in Montezuma, New Mexico came in
3rd after winning the state
championship, came in 3 at the
20th annual National Poetry Out
Loud Championship in DC, which
is higher than anyone has ever
placed from New Mexico in the
nationals. So we're pretty proud
of that.
Because Madam Chair and
committee members, you are
policy committee. Here's some
quick stats about arts and
culture sector and its
contributions to New Mexico
economy. These are older than
the numbers that, um, Shai
showed you, so they won't match
up, and they're also from
different sources.
Um,
and I had a note because I
thought I was going first that
undoubtedly Shawny was going to
give you lots of good
information there and she did.
Um, but just a few data points
of interest. The graphic on the
left is from the 2022 Arts and
Economic Prosperity 6 study,
which is a national study
conducted by the Americans for
the Arts, and then they have
state and local partners and New
Mexico was a local partner, a
state partner that year.
Um, the $740.9 million in
nonprofit economic activity,
clearly demonstrates that when
we invest public funds in arts
and culture, we are not
investing in community
development at the expense of
economic development. Rather,
we're investing in an industry
that stimulates the economy,
supports local jobs, supports
the arts, uh, and contributes to
building healthy, vibrant, and
more livable communities. When
we support the arts with public
funding, we are investing in
both New Mexico's economic and
community well-being. It's also
worth noting that that 740.9
million, only includes data
provided by the New Mexico Arts
and Culture Organizations who
responded to the survey. That's,
so that is an incredibly Um,
also, those spending per person
per event numbers that are below
in the bottom of that slide. I
know the text is a little hard
to read, but, um, those
represent money spent by attende
es at arts and culture events,
um, across the state. So there
were live in-person intercept
surveys happening at nonprofit
or government, arts and culture
events across the state, uh, to
gather data for this survey, and
that money, that, that per
person spending represents
things like and that doesn't
include ticket price, right? So
if someone went to see uh a
theater performance in Elmogordo
for example, um, typically they
didn't just spend money on that
theater ticket. They spent money
on gas to get to the theater.
They spent money on a babysitter
to watch their children when
they went to the event. They
might have spent money to go out
for dinner afterwards. Um, they
might have spent some money to
have some ice cream, and in fact
we have one story somebody said
in their survey since they were
in person, that um they paid
somebody to watch their horse so
they could go to an event. So
that's that accounts for all of
that spending that people are
doing in addition to what
they're paying to go to the
event, and the interesting thing
about those New Mexico numbers
are the top number is slightly
less than double the national
average and the bottom number is
more than double the national
average. So New Mexicans are
spending a lot of money or
people going to artistic and
cultural events in New Mexico,
uh, more so than
The graphic on the right is
showing data from the US Bureau
of Economic Analysis and the
National Assembly of State Arts
Agencies, the Arts and Culture
sector in New Mexico represents
almost 3% of our total
workforce, resulting in
compensation of almost $2
billion. And then finally the
key social impact stats at the
bottom are from those hundreds
of surveys taken in person at
those events across the state,
and they give us a sense of how
important access to arts and
culture activities, um, are to
our citizens
especially
In conclusion, Madam Chair and
members of the committee
the New Mexico Arts Division is
squarely focused on serving New
Mexicans, New Mexicans in rural
communities across our vast,
astoundingly beautiful. In a
quick aside, I'd like to
acknowledge that the man in the
image on this slide is Ken
Kepler, who recently passed
away. Ken was a veteran and a
fiddle maker. He and his wife,
Jeannie McCleary were known as
Bayou Seco. They participated in
our apprentice master program
over the years and they're
excellence in the arts, which is
something we manage, um, and
they were instrumental in
helping to bring the
old traditional Hispanic style
music from New Mexico legends
like Cleopas Ortiz, a violinist
from Bernal, into the main
scene. And finally, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for giving me the
opportunity to talk to you today
about New Mexico arts, um, and
about the important work that we
do and thank you for providing
us with the resources to do this
work. I stand for questions now,
or you can reach out to me
directly, um, or our DCA
legislative liaison, Jessie
Greenspan
with any questions or if you
need more information, thank you
all for your service to New
Mexico and for your ongoing
As we try to go through that.
So, um, first of all, I just
want to really thank um
you know, the partnership, uh,
that we have it's been really
important uh for us uh to, to
work together. And so, and I
think we have done that and, and
Shawny just being a year on the
job has been
engaged, working with us, asking
questions, trying to really, uh,
thoughtfully build a, a, a
program, um, so
I'm gonna uh go through this uh
presentation about our
department briefly and then also
just I'm going to try to speak
to it through the lens. I think
of, of the creative economy
because there's so much. OK.
So, um, to, to start out, um, I
wanted to just level set about
the economic impact of tourism
in the state of New Mexico.
So, uh, we've really been on an
upward trajectory, uh,
notwithstanding, um, I think
when you look at, um, especially
over the past, you know, 3 or 4
years, we're seeing growth in
visitation and growth in
spending. So, you know, you
people have sometimes asked
asked when we talk about our
spending numbers, was that
economic factors? And I would
say they're included. However,
we are and in spending. So I
want to really, you know, focus
on
you know, this year, about 44
million trips, um, taken within,
uh, uh, New Mexico resulting in
8.8 billion of direct visitor
spending. So that's up 200
million from 2023.
Uh, we get these reports, um.
typically around summertime each
year. Uh, so this is the 20,
2025 if there's any ever any
questions about your community.
We have a research shop and
there's other metrics we can
look at to see where things are
tracking. But just so you know,
our cadence, um, is, is
typically about a year behind,
but very, very happy to have
that uh record-breaking year.
You can see the jobs that are
supported through the tourism
industry. Again, a lot of
overlap. We're very proud of
this, the, um, you know, the
amount of dollars returned
in state and local taxes, uh,
uh, making an impact and, and in
terms of how we're doing that
just to kind of give a structure
of, of the way in which we look
at things at the tourism and
apartment. There's really two
complimentary, um, charges, uh,
that, that we see. Uh, the first
is to drive demand. So that's
that marketing piece that is
about um making a promise about
adventures steeped in culture.
We've had the New Mexico True
brand for 13.
Um, but we do make a promise. We
make a promise about adventure
stupid culture, make a promise
about authenticity of your
experience, we make a promise
that this is a destination of,
of sight doing and not just
sightseeing.
And so these are all things that
we do through our, our marketing
efforts, which I'll speak to.
Additionally, we have to deliver
on those promises that we make
to, to visitors by providing
quality amenities, attractions,
and access to those. So that
really is um what our tourism
development division is tasked
with doing. Always being
informed by this sort of
feedback research director and
an economist, uh, there were
always, uh, working with to
inform both our marketing
strategy and what the economic
um with respect to this uh topic
in creative industries, um, we
definitely
see, um, within this tourism
ecosystem inclusion inclusion of
artists, musicians, filmmakers,
um, you know, uh, performers,
all of these folks are
very much in the DNA of, of what
we do at with New Mex apartment.
Um, I also just in terms of the
success we had, I'd be remissed
if I didn't say a sincere thank
you.
Uh, we've been able to remain
regionally and I think
nationally competitive, uh, in
tourism, um, because of a very
strong brand, uh, which we don't
take for granted, um, and we
sincerely. So kind of going from
that um model and looking at
uh and looking at the different
sort of sides of the equation.
So I wanted to first talk about
the drive demand and, and touch
on. You look at this as sort of
a funnel. We do our national and
international marketing to
provide awareness of New Mexico.
Um, that's done through, if
you're ever, you know, at DFW
Airport, miserable because you
missed your flight. Look at the
beautiful images that you'll see
around you, um, because we, we
have a huge presence at DFW, uh,
in, in the Southern California
area, we've really made a big
play there. Um, we can speak
offline about all of our markets
we're in, but we're really heavy
domestically, um, within our
region with California being a
strong expansion market.
Additionally, international has
been something we've been, um,
we've been looking at over the
past couple of years, specific
centennial, as we do see a large
international um draw, um, for,
for that event. Those are sort
of this, this top of funnel.
Then we have cooperative
marketing grants that we work
with our communities to say, OK,
you've heard of New Mexico, why
don't you bring? And so then we,
we work with our communities to
do these, it's a 2 to 1 match
program. Um, and we work on
advertising under the New Mexico
True brand, so it's still a
cohesive brand, but to do those
cooperative marketing um efforts
sort of in tandem, working, uh,
you know, lower down, I guess
you would say the funnel. So
going from that awareness to
this consideration. So now
you're in this consideration
phase, tier C seems like a
great place to go. You know, as
we're going uh further down the
funnel, I'll speak to our travel
trade, I think is kind of a, a,
a cool play at the very bottom,
but additionally, we have earned
media activities. We have a um
Nicole Barker is our media
relations specialist, and we
have a team that really works
actively on getting stories
pitched to travel writers. We've
had stories featured in National
Geographic and travel and
leisure. I think many people had
saw recently Santa Fe was voted
the top destination uh by travel
and Leisure magazine, um, which
is a huge, I mean, a huge deal.
Um, we were in 2nd place, 3rd
place, just perpetually. Um, and
to get that first place is, is a
big deal because there's a lot
of earned media opportunity
there. Um, there's a lot of work
behind the scenes, um, to make
those things happen.
Um, New Mexico magazine, if, if
you don't know, that's a product
under the New Mexico Tourism and
apartments, the oldest state
publication. It was also the
winner of Irma's Magazine of the
Year. Last year, which is
another huge accolade, Best
National, um, uh, publication,
uh, state-run publication. And
then we see it as a great
marketing product for us.
Mexico Tru certified, and we're
talking about creative economy.
We have almost 500 artists,
artisans, and producers now that
have, that are under that New
Mexico certified products are
made, sourced in New Mexico.
We're not endorsing quality or
smell or taste. We are endorsing
the fact that it is, you know
a lot of opportunities for
marketing to support our small,
small businesses through that
program.
And then I, I spoke briefly
about travel trade being that
sort of bottom of the funnel
that we're working at.
We've been going direct to
consumer for years, strategy
that has proven itself. But
there's also another space in
travel, and that has to do with
selling New Mexico product
directly to tour operators, uh,
travel agencies and travel
buyers nationally and
internationally, because that's
how a lot of, especially on the
international market, that's how
they travel internationally.
They work with a group who
packages all these products,
packages the hotel, the
experience, and everything
together. And then that's how
they make their trip. We have
not really been in that space.
We're
engaging in that space again.
Getting more New Mexico product,
you know, on the inventory of
our tour operators so that then
when they're meeting with their
clients, they're packaging tours
within the Southwest, within
four corners that include New
Mexico, and don't go right from
the Grand Canyon and they just
fly right over us, which we've
seen happen.
Um, so excited about that, that
travel trade program. So the
other side of that funnel
and when I talk about delivering
on the experiences or making all
these, uh, you know, these,
these promises about what you
can expect from New Mexico. How
are we making sure we're
delivering on those.
So a couple of examples, we
spoke about events, we see
events as being huge drivers of
tourism in the state.
Uh, they really provide a, a
reason to come. They put a
there, there, the people are
more incentivized to say, OK,
this is a poignant. We also have
some of the most incredible
events in the entire world in
New Mexico, which certainly
helps. And so we've invested a
lot of uh of money and time and
just supporting events, events
that feature our chefs, and so
we'll continue to invest in that
program because we see it as
important to tourism there.
Destination forward
and we're talking about the
built environment and
infrastructure. How are we
making sure that we're
developing our product?
We have about $1.9 million. Um,
that we were appropriated. This
is a very proud of this, but
Destination forward supports
tourism-related infrastructure.
You're looking to renovate
historic sites, historic
buildings, you're looking to
renovate visitor information
centers, visitor centers, create
a public art, community murals,
um, landscaping, outdoor
recreation, and for sake that we
can talk about as quality of
life are also um
they're elements that, that
provide an incredible experience
for a traveler. And so we look
at those as being Mexico clean
and beautiful, another program
if you're not aware of, I would
encourage you to speak with your
communities. We are involved in
sort of the, the beautification
space. So litter cleanups,
again, um, community murals and
those beautification projects
working a lot with youth.
um, and so,
if you're unfamiliar with any of
these programs, please come,
come talk to me. Uh, we have a
strong and mighty staff behind
them. Um, and just to finish off
um with, with, you know, just to
kind of level set. So again, 13
years of strong success that
we've had with this, with this
brand. Um, we don't take it for
granted. We don't take the
investments for granted. And
we're always looking at data and
looking to sharpen the sword and
continue to improve. But 40
million annual visits on average
billion in average again
beating.
almost 500 businesses, uh,
participating in New Mexico
through certified program, um,
45 co op participants. So those
are those communities that are
advertising with us, um, under
our brand, um.
you know, promoting their
destination.
And then lastly, I just want to
kind of provide a little bit of
um just an aha moment I had last
week. I was at a
a uh a conference with all the
states told everyone, and they
had 4 audience segments, you
know, please pull, please rate
your, your top, uh, market, your
your top audience segment, they
were, uh, luxury, outdoor
experiences, family and arts and
arts and culture.
Well, 48% of all the folks in
the uh
pull outdoor experiences. So
she's great. Every, I mean,
outdoor recreation's great. It's
great in the region. Only 18% in
the room, myself being one of
them.
put arts and culture. And I
think what that shows is that we
have a competitive advantage
within the state of New Mexico,
Culture. And I think working
with with my counterparts here
and I think it's only going to
provide more benefits to our
industry, uh, to our economy,
Our operational budget for the
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, there
is, um, a model for doing this.
There are only a couple, uh,
companies, vendors in the
country that do that. Uh, one is
called Tourism Economics. They
are who we work with. We have
the full report that I will
provide to you that has all the
backend data for how we get to
this. Essentially, we're, we're
looking at activity at hotels,
retail that are outside of a
certain uh certain mild
understanding is that there's an
overnight trip.
that is taking place. So I can
get you that. It's um I believe
it's 60 miles. So we have,
there's a, there's a combination
of the out of state travel. So
the out of state travel in our
markets, but there is an element
in there to instate because
there is travel, you know, from
one county to another and that
economic impact kind of spreads
out. So, but I will, I will, uh,
Senator, I can get you that
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you
for the question. Uh, we engage
with the tribes, with our tribal
liaison in
definitely in compliance with
the tribal Collaboration Act.
But in addition to that, what I
have charged our team to do is
to increase tribal participation
in every single one of them.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, we can
provide information on how much
we are granting out, uh, to the
tribes and so we can kind of
look at growth there. And then
with respect to tourism impacts,
what we would probably have to
look at is the county level.
It's a little bit difficult to
get
too far in, like too parochial,
That of shared senator. It's a
captive audience at the
airports. I got you.
I would say that and get it out
to the Yeah that's way to drive
some economic growth.
Yeah,
Madam Chair, Senator, that is a
program that was initiated just
before the pandemic, um, and it
has evolved into a, it's not a
hugely funded program, but it is
general funded program, which is
wonderful. Um, and it has
resulted in at this 0.1 of the
grantees, which is the Southwest
Writers Conference has now
published two books of stories
generated from workshops they
held with veteran and active
duty military personnel
and their families and
caregivers, um, and it's, it's
one award, the book has won
awards. The first book has won
awards. It's, that's just one
example of the incredible things
that are coming out of this
program. The programs are $2000
apiece, and that is making a
Um, the, uh, let me get to that.
So the top number 4 event is
spent by local attendees, so the
immediate area. The lower number
is non-local, which by
definition in this survey meant
outside the county. So it could
be outside the county or outside
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Diaz, you know, why would you
come? What are your concerns?
Madam Chair Representative, it's
a great question. It's something
we're always looking at, whether
it's wages, whether it's
housing, um, you know, we, we're
understanding that there are
hard to making sure that we're
securing a workforce that is
fairly compensated that can be
housed. And so, you know, as, as
far as our mission
our mission is, you know, to, in
Mexico's economy through
tourism.
And so our conversations we work
with association of counties. We
would work directly with, you
know, with local government
leaders to Santa Fe, you know,
would be different than a
Demming would be different. Um
you know, it's not necessarily
within our wheelhouse to make
those policy decisions. However,
we see, we see again um a staff
that's fairly compensated that
could be housed within the
community that they live, um, as
being incredibly important to a
sustainable, uh, tourism
ecosystem. And you know, I, I
think that go again goes with
the, the inner aging thing from
Department of Finance to
taxation revenue, and we're
talking about issues. So I think
we, we have those connections.
We know kind of
where our place is within this,
but we're also, we always try to
be very mindful and cognizant of
the impacts that we're making.
We also look at visitor to
resident ratios. When we're
looking at different communities
so that we can kind of look and
say, hey, are we, you know,
potentially getting to, to a
spot here where there's a
problem. Um, we haven't
necessarily seen it, but we're
looking, we're always looking at
those, we're respectful to our
citizens as we continue to grow
the economy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yeah, I
think that's super great when we
think about some of the
challenges to, you know, one of
the uses we hear often about is
like vacation rentals versus
long term places for people to
stay. How does that affect the
work that you're doing as well,
and, and I think those questions
on on housing, affordability,
all of those tie in together
again, how do you um create
these authentic experiences for
folks to endure and then also
have the the folks who are
putting all
of this incredible show on for,
for tourists and for those
coming in, um, to also have a,
a, a, you know, a thriving
opportunity in that situation as
well. So, yeah, the more that we
can learn about how to sort of
help with that as we're
continuing to grow these
economies of scale and and
preserve a lot of culture,
tradition, and um education
around the arts, um, you know,
wanna just figure out how we
can, you know, support that with
the ecosystem that allows it to,
to persist and do well, whether
it be
for housing or, or what have
you.
Madam Chair, represented by that
too. We, we spoke a lot about
events, right? And I really
think with a lot of the art
markets that we have, um, not
just within Santa Fe, Bernalilo
Indian Arts Festival, Fiesta
Latina down in Silver City. I
think there are huge
opportunities, uh, not just kind
of on the wage side, but on the
on on the artist side that if we
could do our job right, and we
can, we can bring folks that are
interested in coming to town and
spending their money. Um
I, I think that that's another
element to that we're, we're
looking at is how do we, you
know, how do we leverage these
events to really support um
those artists and artisans and,
and which, in which that is
their livelihood, right? Not
necessarily wage, but, but still
something. So just, just outside
of the wages, it's another thing
that's important to us to make
sure we're supporting um our
small businesses.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks
for, for looking at all of that
for us and for continuing this
great work and look forward to
what you guys do next as a
beneficiary of all of that as
well. Appreciate you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. A couple of quick
questions. Acting Secretary, um
Adams.
and the data that is are we
utilizing geo
geo tracking data. Adam, it's a
great question. We use it, uh,
but we don't necessarily use it
as a, we don't use geo-targeting
for, for example, our, our
larger economic impact. Well, we
would look at geo-targeting to
say, for example, we have the
Roswell World Championship air
races happening next week. It's
going to be a huge deal. It's so
exciting, equally um I'm pretty
nervous just because it's like
such a huge undertaking. Uh, but
we are geo-fencing kind of that
area, right, to see, OK, and
then what's kind of this, this
baseline you're gonna look like,
and then we can kind of look
year over year at a point, it's
sort of a point, a geographic
point. So focusing on maybe
events, focusing on, you could
focus on Santa Fe Plaza, you
could focus on, um, you know,
uh, Deming Main Street, you can,
you, you can geo-target these
places and kind of look at year
over year, and that's
instructive. And I think
informational for local
governments and for event
organizers and for communities
to understand, but as far as our
large numbers, those aren't like
necessarily geoarge
ed numbers. We use them as more
instructive for how was a event
or a community or a specific
tourism product performing
because we could geo target um
get geo target around Cliff's
amusement park if we wanted to,
but we can, you know, that's the
typically the way that we would
do that.
Thank you. Um, and then have we
ever entered into any
conversations with um like an
Airbnb. I think about
experiences when I'm out
traveling and at what a unique
opportunity New Mexico has to
tap into our cultural events on
a more local level, um, and
engaging artisans directly to
share their craft with.
Madam Chair, um, are, are you,
so you're asking about Airbnb
specifically? Sorry, Airbnb or
or anything similar. So I'm I'm
talking about Airbnb experiences
versus um
rentals
Uh, mad I'm sure it's something
I'd like to speak with you
about. I, I don't think we
really have done maybe a lot of
that engagement, um, but I mean,
I know, I know we are, but I,
I'd maybe want to get a little
bit deeper into your question.
Madam Chair, if I can speak to
your question, um, experience
economy is such, is one of the
future focuses and opportunities
that we're looking at in the
division. So as people get more
in-depth with the new digital
age, looking at immersive
experiences and experience
economy really has a huge
opportunity for New Mexico, and
we're grounded well into that
already with several of our
assets and, and, and programs
throughout state government, and
I think part of the work that
we're going to be doing as we
embark on doing these NM
creative
cons across the state, uh, many
convenings throughout the state
through some of our smaller
communities. We're going to be
talking about what those
opportunities are for artisans
and smaller scale creative
professionals who can list those
kinds of services in that way,
um, on Airbnb, so that is like
one of the topics that we have
been addressing because we know
that cultural heritage,
innovation, and experience
economy are growing and it's
what younger populations are
looking to do. They, you know,
we're younger generations are
spending more money on the
experience in the
moment. They want to make
memories. They're not waiting
and and saving for that later
day. So we have a lot to offer
in that realm, including, um,
outdoor recreation, tourism, and
arts and culture experiences. So
we are um working on presenting
that information to creative
professionals and entrepreneurs
so that they can get ahead of
the curve with what's going on,
um, nationally to create these
opportunities for themselves.
And I think oftentimes that's
where the creative economy comes
into play as we think about
short term rentals, but if
there's a way that we compare
creative and cultural tourism
and artistic experiences in
that, that is true creative
economy work because we're
taking traditional industry and
creative industries and putting
them into space together where,
you know, where, where the,
where the magic can happen.
I appreciate that and thank you
for giving me the language
Experience economy. Um, all
three of you, thank you so much
for joining us this afternoon,
very insightful, great
information, exciting
information, um, and then we're
gonna go right ahead and
transition now into our 2nd to
last panel presentation for the
day. We're gonna get an update
on New Mexico state parks, and I
would like to welcome Toby
Velasquez, the director of State
Parks division, Ener, and then,
uh, Kram
er Wilmington, program director
from Arrowhead Center at NMSU.
Wow, that's a drive.
Oh, OK.
Oh, that makes easy, that makes
good sense because that would be
a really long drive.
Um.
and would rival you
Representative Jones, if they
I was saying if, if, if our
presenter was here in person,
they would have rivaled your
drive-in today. All right.
Thank you for being here with
us. Um, we'll go ahead and start
off with uh NMSU since they're
is this their presentation
that's up and ready to go?
Yes, it is. OK. Yeah, let's go
ahead and start there. So, Madam
Chair, thank you for having me
here. Um, I have Doctor Kramer
Winningham participating with us
virtually. Uh, we're doing all
this together. It's one
presentation. He'll take the
first part, I'll take the last
part. And so, uh, can we make,
is doctor uh Winningham on?
Yes, I'm, I'm here. Can you guys
hear me all right?
Uh, will you see something
again, doctor?
Can you hear me?
We need to work with our volume
on our end.
OK.
Could you say something else on
the microphone? Yeah, can you
hear me now? That's a little,
that's a little better. We'll,
we'll work with that.
OK
All right. Well, thank you, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thanks for having
me. I appreciate you guys uh
letting me do this, uh
virtually. It, it's a pretty
long drive from, from Las
Cruces. Um
this presentation is about a
study we did for uh state parks,
um.
looking at the economic impact
and contribution of the state
parks, uh, from 2019 to 2024.
Can everybody see the
presentation up here is that
coming apart
You're good
Great
All right. Uh
uh, the purpose of the study was
to estimate the benefits of New
Mexico State parks, looking at
uh the impact from expenditures,
the associated visitor spending,
which is the largest impact for
the parks and um social
benefits, uh they are sometimes
measured in, in other
state park impact studies. So we
included those as well. And we
wanted to do uh trend analysis
that we looked at 2019 to 2024.
For the economic benefits, uh,
the primary benefits are visitor
spending and expenditures.
We use two techniques to measure
the economic benefits. We did an
economic impact analysis and an
economic contribution analysis,
and I'll explain why we did both
of those. The economic impact
analysis looks at new activity,
economic activity associated
with the, with the new project
or, or basically new money
coming into the community. Uh,
for this approach, we only use
that uh activity from out of
state sources. So that would be
uh federal funding, uh
coming into the state parks or
out of state visitors, attending
the state parks.
For the economic contribution
analysis, we considered all the
spending and activity associated
with the state parks and the
purpose of that is to show
um
the important role of New Mexico
State parks in the communities
throughout New Mexico. And so
this is to capture people going
county to county to uh go to
different parks so when they,
they wouldn't have done so
otherwise.
And any impact and contribution
analysis, uh, the key factors
are output that you can think of
as a business sales or business
revenue.
The value added component is the
contribution to GDP.
and then out of that is is labor
income and so that's mostly
wages uh that goes to employees.
The impacts and contributions
are measured based on economic
activity occurring in counties
in New Mexico, and then we
captured the spillover effects
to see how that affected the
entire uh you Mexico economy and
we presented all our figures as
a whole, except for some of the
tables that do break it out by
counting.
Um, getting into the
contribution and impacts, uh,
these are the job contributions,
uh, from expenditures with, with
the parks, so of everything
spent by New Mexico State parks
from all sources, uh, supported
uh, these are the total jobs and
so that includes the direct, uh,
indirect and induced, uh, to get
to the total impact there, going
from 258 in 2019 to 464 in 2024.
This chart shows the same thing
in the economic contribution
from expenditures, um, we have
labor income here on the bottom.
uh value added and then total
output. So going from 31.5
million in 2019 in terms of
output.
to 68.7 million in 2024.
For the impact side, so this is
again only the out of state
funding sources. Um, so this for
jobs went from 7 to 87, uh,
mostly driven by, uh, federal
grants that the uh state parks
received.
They see a similar trend in the
economic output figures are from
1 million to 17 million.
in 2024
Uh, the dissertation, so this is
the biggest impact of the parks
and, and I think this is
important to note that um the
bulk of the impact from the park
and
based on our approach, uh, is
from visitation.
Uh, we estimate a daily visitor
spending at $60.61
the report in the methodology
section talks about how we got
to that number, but basically,
that's the number that you used
by the National Park Service,
and it was um in between numbers
used in Texas, a study of Texas
state parks in Arizona state
parks. So, uh, we're pretty
comfortable with that number in
terms of spending.
Um, the chart here on the right
shows uh total visitation, which
is 4.7 million.
in 2019
rising to 5.2 million in 2024.
So these are annual
uh visitation numbers, uh, the
top line is all visitors. Uh,
this lower line here is the out
of state visitors. And I've got
an asterisk here because it's um
the only, only the ones that we
can count
um, based on those that book
through the online reservation
system. So I'm pretty confident
that this is a a undercount
because it's not counting people
that were from out of state and
went under somebody else's
reservation, or anybody that
wants to parks, uh, for daily
use, uh, would not be captured
here, but still, you see uh this
growing out of state, uh,
visitors going to New Mexico
State parks was 111,000 in 2019,
rising to 265,000 in 2024. The
job contributions from visitor
spending, uh, from all the
visitors that attended the state
parks, um, supported 4100 jobs
in 2019, rising to 4600 jobs in
2024.
And these numbers are, are quite
large here. The uh total output.
So think of this as business
sales supported in the state 394
million in 2019, rising to 441
million.
in 2024
Uh, the job impact from visitor
spending, um, and so this is
just the out those out of state
visitors that both directly
online. That rose as well, going
from 79 jobs supported in 2019
to 191 in 2024.
And the impact, um, rose from
8.9 million in 2019, up to
34.8 million. Again, this is
just from the out of state
visitors.
Uh, moving on to the non-market
and social benefits. Um, these
are a little more, um, abstract,
um, but other states have
included these in their impact
studies. So, so we did include
them.
Um, basically, non-market social
benefits were measured using
Ponseral Conservation value
estimates for various land
types, pollen conservation.
and consumer surplus for
recreational use values. So I'll
explain these a little bit more.
The conservation values
basically maintaining nat
natural land se and
conservation, provides many
benefits such as supporting a
clean water supply.
flood control and wildlife
habitat preservation. These
benefits generally do not have
price tags, however, they do
have value. The conservation
values outlined in the report
are based on a study that
considered individual
preferences and the cost of
replicating similar services
using conventional equipment,
uh, to quantify the value of
various land types held in
conservation.
So the conservation values
represent the dollar value of
benefits from keeping various
land types in conservation and
in their natural form. These
benefits include clean water,
flood production.
protection, carbon storage,
wildlife habitats, societal
well-being, all provided by the
ecosystems located in wetlands,
forests, shrublands, and other
land types.
Conservation values are
calculated based on New Mexico
State Park's acreage by land
type.
and Ingram Foster's 2008 study
of economic value of ecosystem
services, uh, provided by the
various land types cell in
conservation.
The second non-market benefit we
measured was recreational use.
public recreation spaces such as
parks and forests provide
significant benefits to
individuals and communities. He
access is often free or low
cost, making their economic
value difficult to quantify.
Recreational use values attempt
to quantify these benefits of
enjoying recreational activities
at at parks. He's just values
are based on a wide variety of
studies that investigated
individual stated and revealed
preferences for many different
recreation activities. They're
typically used to assess the
economic significance of
recreational resources.
These use values represent the
dollar value benefits people
experience from
enjoying outdoor activities on
conserved lands in their natural
form. Benefits include the
excitement, mental well-being,
satisfaction gained from
activities such as hiking,
biking, camping, fishing, skiing
bird watching all enabled by
ecosystems, forests, land,
lakes, wetlands, and other
natural landscapes. But these
values were estimated based on
2016 study that valued the
weighted average of recreational
activities in New Mexico to be
$76.2 per day.
In $2016 so we uploaded those to
$20 to $24. So 99 $99.82 per
visit in $2024.
But we look at these two, on the
bottom is the recreational use
value.
So this is $474 million in 2019,
rising the 528 million in 2024.
And so this varies with the
visitation.
And then the conservation value
is constant throughout at 188
million. So this is a very large
number, but uh it is an
intangible number, um, uh, but
it is an attempt to, to quantify
the benefits, um, provided from
conserving the lands and then
also the consumer surplus of
people attending state parks
Total impacts and contributions.
So for job contribution,
considering all the in-state and
out of state, uh, 4400, uh, jobs
supported in 2019, rising to 5
to 100
in 2024
426 million in output, rising to
510 million.
by 2024
And the job impacts are just
from the out of state visitors
and out of state funding, 87
jobs supported in 2019, rising
to 278.
in 2024
Yeah, the economic impact of the
out of state versus 31.5 million
in 2019, rising to 68.7 million.
in 2024
Uh, for the tax impacts
uh, on the contribution side,
um, it translates to 68 million
in total taxes in 2019 going to
79 million in 2024.
And from the um
just the, the out of state ones,
1.3 million points to 4.4.
million
So in summary, in all your
studies, studied economic
contributions from New Mexico
State parks were significantly
higher than the state park
expenditures.
due to the fall-on effects
resulting from visitor spending.
And so that's the significant
one, the, the very significant
one there. Uh, New Mexico State
Parks also delivered significant
non-market benefits through
recreation and
conservation uses. In summary in
2024, economic activity
associated with New Mexico State
Parks supported 5100 total jobs
in New Mexico.
Um, a 266 million contributions
to the GDP, so that's the value
added production.
$511 million in revenue to
businesses in New Mexico. That's
the economic output. 162 million
labor income and 40 million in
state and local taxes.
in New Mexico
And here's a summary flyer of
the 2024 highlights.
and I'll go to the last slide
that uh Toby will talk about.
Now they're working
OK. I'll try not to get too
close.
Madam Chair and committee
members, wow, that's loud. Um,
Madam Chair and committee
members, thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
this afternoon.
Um,
can you hit mute, Doctor, on
your end, or can we mute them? I
have a feeling that's where the
feedback is coming from.
I'm, I'm muted. I'll mute again,
yeah. OK. Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members, thank you. Um, I, I'm
happy to be here this afternoon
and I, I really appreciate
Doctor Kramer participating with
me on this. He's been a great
partner to work with. Last year
at this time when I presented
this committee, I sat right
here, I believe, and I mentioned
to you all that I was working on
a new project and that I was
going to reach out uh to uh NMS
URohood Center and do an
economic study on the value of
state parks to come and convince
you and all of your uh colleague
legislators, how important it is
to invest in your New Mexico
State parks. And so I'm here as
promised to follow up with that
presentation, and Dr. Kramer,
thank you for your, your, uh,
support with this process. Um,
investing in state park
preservation, but also about
improving our quality of life.
uh building healthier
communities, fostering
sustainable economies across the
state.
Uh, for example, based off of
the study which you have, I
provided it to Ms. Bond. You
have the study as a take. Um,
when you get into the full
study, you'll see that included
the COVID years, by the way.
We were closed during those
COVID. The local the local
economic impact by county and
Sierra County, for example, was
23 million over that period of
time in San Miguel, 7 million.
In Colfax and in right here in
San Juan County.
7.1 million
Uh,
that was with COVID built in on
table 7 in the study, you'll see
that it demonstrates consistent
visitor engagement even during
COVID. Sierra County, 7.1
million. Sura County
San Juan County, 3.7 million.
Quay County, 2.5 million in San
Miguel County, 2 million. Who
knows which county has the memo
state park.
No guesses, OK. San Miguel
County has 4 state parks alone
in San Miguel County, Villanueva
ecos, conchas, and Story Lake
State Parks. Can you imagine
what that means to them when
they're seeing uh these
investments in state parks. A 9
shows daily spending by
visitors, $61 per person per
day. Think about what that route
of travel means for someone
leaving Farmington to go to
Navajo Lake.
for someone leaving Las Cruces,
El Paso, to go to Cabao and
elephant Butte.
Someone leaving Albuquerque to
go to Morphy Lake State Park in
Mora County.
Think about that, dissemination
of money across that route on
their way to and then back.
What does that mean for Walmart,
McDonald's gas, gear.
tires
Think about what, who, who's who
spent time in the outdoors? I
do. You know how much it costs.
It's not cheap, and if you do it
well, you have the best. If you
don't, you might struggle a
little bit.
People spend money to get to
their state parks.
and it's a value to our state
Table 14, but more specifically
to San Juan County, uh, senator,
uh, this is an important one and
representative for San Juan
County over that period of time,
436 jobs, labor income of 11.7
million value added based off of
the presentation to 20.2 million
with a total output of 20 bin.
On slide 35 and 36, 35 was a
previous. I won't read that
slide. It shows the massive
economic impact that Steve Parks
has for the state of New Mexico.
This slide I'll leave as a
reference as I continue my
talking. We are a fiber of New
Mexico where people want to
admitted or tenure.
We operate 35 state parks in 20.
We do it through 41
decentralized sites, 35 state
parks, 5 region offices, and a
hit. We only have 191 full-time
FTEs.
We hire 136 seasonal temp staff
every summer, uh.
mostly college, high school, and
return to work, uh, uh, retired
return to work, work, uh, folks
And then we use volunteers
We're an enterprise agency,
generating approximately 75% of
our own annual operating budget.
You from visitor fees,
concessions, targeted state
taxes, and federal grants from
something that I believe all of
you have responsibility and
authority over.
the general fund appropriation
That's 25% of our subsidy to
operate.
I have said for the entire years
I've been almost 27 years of
this division
and when I took this role as
director into the next
generations of use was to
increase.
the resilient rate 75% of your
own revenue.
As soon as gas goes over $3
guess what?
People don't go
If there's fire restrictions and
they can't have a campground
fire.
if there's an economic downturn
of any type. If there's a
pandemic.
if there's everything that you
can think of right now at Elf
and Butte and Kavao Lake, we've
seen historical lows.
Not far from here, east on 64,
we see at Heron Lake, a
historical low. Every time the
waters drop
so do our revenues
We have to build our resiliency
as an agency to be able to do
better for people, even through
the hard times
And we need your help through.
Over the last 20 years, General
Fund's support is say it again,
for the last 20 years.
annually.
With an average increase of only
2%.
and FY 26 our general fund
allocation is just 12.
It's still lower than the 13
million we had in FYO9. That's
surprising. I hope that's
surprising.
And I'll, and I, and I'll, I'll,
I'll tell you why in the, in the
11, the last 20 years, general
fund support
has fallen below 10 million
ele in 11 of the last years, in
3 of those years, it dropped
below 8 million.
Since 2008, visitation has
increased by 24% from 4.2
million to just over 5.4.
During that time, we've also
expanded the system with several
new state parks and land
acquisitions like Mesa Valley.
like Pecos Canyon
uh acquisition at Cooty Creek.
We've added to the system
Meanwhile,
inflation has risen by more than
50%
In that time, we've gone from
245 full-time FTEs in 2008.
to just under 190 of the 22%
reduction in staff.
Yet we've added parks, added
acreage, are doing more with
Our current vacancy rate across
the system is 27%.
With law enforcement vacancies,
I have 79%
just like the San Juan County
Sheriff's Officers, Farmington
PD, same scenario.
39% vacancy rate.
It is tough to manage State Park
and a law enforcement officer
vacancy and still make sure that
the visitor and that we are
there to rescue and recover.
It happens here at Navajo Lake
as a senator understands, and
Representative Telein Butte.
Our officers are critical in the
operations of state parks, as
are the other
engineers. We have architects.
We have everything that you can
think you need, in many ways, we
run like a small city. We do our
own trash. We do our own CDL
operations, heavy equipment,
semis. We're a small team that I
think punches up.
Over that time, we've expanded
access by offering free day use
and camping to foster children.
Here's the bright news. Here's
the great news.
Foster families and CYFD staff
caring for those changes, and we
followed your lead on January
1st, we implemented a revised
fee schedule.
Our fees had not changed for
both registrations, and I, I
tease, teased the senator here
since 1984.
The annualized cost to register
a standard motorboat in the
state of New Mexico prior to
January 1st was $9.
We increased our basic schedule
of fees.
and even after that, raise our
fees are some of the cheapest
across the country.
So it was a reasonable and
modest approach.
We also did something that is
not heard of.
We made New Mexico State parks
free.
from October 1st through April
30th to every.
And everyone will say, well, why
not during the peak season?
I'll tell you that the best
seasons are the seasons that are
happening here right now. The
fall winter season, free
snagging at even here in Navajo,
not on the river. On the lake
free snagging at heron, the
color, the fall colors, spring,
Easter, free for New Mexico
residents in 92 years, that's
never happened. But we did it to
their state parks because we
know it's value added to the
economy and its value added to
their quality of life. We
implemented House Bill 161.
and I have to, uh, share with my
staff and the Department of
Veteran Services and this
legislature, 161 in just two
months after creating Roommate,
we worked with veteran service
to, to evaluate the bill, to
determine how we're gonna move
forward.
Sera and I took the, the, the
leap together in 2 months we had
rulemaking and by July 1st,
Mexico resident veterans.
Right now, as of today, I even
get a little bit of goosebumps
when I talk about this. 3,901
veterans.
have been registered for their
eligibility for a lifetime bet
up to over 1500 nights of
camping in less than 60 days.
right?
And thank you all for that. That
was a great bill, and it's great
to we follow through. We follow
through, we make it happen. And
that's not uncommon because we
did it back in the, in the late
2000 well
So, um, that, that those are
great things. Uh, capital
improvements, you all had your
faith in us and gave us 20
million in AARPA
That was a record breaker for
us. Never had that much.
We spent it, we proved that we
can move this monature across
the state. These funds helped
renovate and replace aging
facilities.
We've already spent over 62% of
the FY 25 million.
And we've already started to
program the 40 million that you
all supported us with a large
percentage of restrooms. I will
tell you, when I was hired as a
law enforcement ranger at Coyote
Creek State Park. My manager
then, he said, you could res
her.
But if those restrooms are
dirty, they'll call you about
that. You'll never hear anything
else.
And he was right. He was the
best advice I could ever get.
because the creature comforts of
going in the and we're going to
invest $30 million in outdoor
restroom facilities, but that's
not just for the visitor
experience, it's natural wealth,
because we're giving visitors
the opportunity
to be responsible with their
waste.
And what we're seeing, Madam
Chair and committee members
across our natural public lands,
national, federal, county is an
irresponsibility
by people and hats off to San
Juan County, by the way, uh,
they're, uh, illegal dumber
state.
satellite lossom
I hope everybody
but in state parks, we want
people to be responsible. We
want them to improve their
quality of life. In closing,
I've probably er I've probably
served, I started as a, a junior
in high school when I was, I
needed a summer job. It was my
first job. It was the job that
my dad let me leave the ranch
because I was working for free
there.
uh, in Mora and uh went to
college, worked there, worked
the Forest Service, fought fires
of the forest that I needed to
do, to be a natural resource
professional.
but I came back to state parks
after graduate school.
Started as a ranger, and made my
way through.
Some of you have worked with me
in different, uh different times
during that career.
It's the best career I could
ever ask for. I'm gonna
challenge you all. We need help.
If you have a network of people
who want to work in the natural
resources field
We have jobs across the state.
We're begging people
literally begging people, give
us a, give us a try. What better
than get a Ranger truck
and a boat
and go out and be in the
outdoors, be on Navajo Lake,
patrolling all online.
What better than tough and law
enforcement is tough. And if
operating budget does not
improve, I can't.
They have to compete with
everybody as well. I can't
compete in all these other areas
And I'll tell you where we used
to make hay in rural
communities, Mora, Colfax,
Raton, I mean, all these other
hatch.
They're, they're, they're,
they're looking and saying, OK,
if I'm going to be in law
enforcement, I got to do all the
things to be in law enforcement.
I'm going to go where I get paid
the most.
This legislature made New Mexico
a really tough spot.
So what are we doing? We're
selling the lifestyle.
We're gonna pay you well, you're
not gonna be rich
but you, it's a lifestyle that I
believe that you and your family
around the state, thank God my
my wife was in public education
and it worked out for both of
us. We have to sell the
lifestyle because it's tough for
us to compete with the salaries,
with the recurring costs,
operational costs, the capital
has been awesome.
and it's the most capital we've
ever seen, and I hope it
continues, uh, from this because
that's how you will start to see
genuine improvements above
ground and below. Remember, we
have to deal with infrastructure
below as well. Right now at
Navajo Lake State Park at Crush
at Crusher Hole, uh, Campground,
one of the popular places for
camping as well as angling on
the San Juan River. We will open
new ADA facilities and a shade
structures and picnic sites. We
are investing capital across the
sacity.
Uh, our capital was 1.6 million
just a few years ago. We all
know and probably hear from
other agencies our contract a
lot of capital money, uh, to go
around, which is a good thing.
Thank you so much for this. We
really appreciate your support
My hope is that New Mexico State
Parks stay on the top of your
mind, uh, as we were doing great
things not only for the parks,
but for the people who love and
OK, great.
Thank you.
I'll be, I'll be coming out
there.
Yeah, no, um,
In a boat
It's never been a question
I was wondering if the, the
program, Madam Chair, and, and
Representative, thank you for
bringing that up. We just signed
our first return to work retiree
from law enforcement through
that bill last week. Uh, that
person will be the new park
manager in Long that's an
Thank you, Madam Chair. Toby
Toby Toby Toby.
We've worked together for
for a little bit of time here
now and I Iinus was saying
we are, and I do attribute
tribute.
Senator Block was not in the
room when you got to talk about
so on his benefit, I wanna say
thank you for that. Um, it's the
only thank you I have gotten at
Navajo Lake. So I, I do
appreciate that and I know that
that's a program that's gonna
carry on and on and on. Can we
help you? We were talking about
the sheriff's department here,
this way we can help you without
just, uh, Madam Chair and, and
Senator
I don't know I'm gonna say that.
I was gonna say unfortunately,
I'll just say, based off of
state personnel office board
rules, which we don't have the
ability to do stip the confines
of state, uh, personal office
board rules. Uh, so really the
one longevity pay, you know, and
you all are aware of this, uh,
there's certain administ when
you get them, usually they're
behind anyways. So it's really
trying to make sure that we, we
start them, but it, it really,
that's the biggest tool we have
right now. And then selling
really the fact and really
getting finding folks who want
to be in the outdoors and are
part of the outdoors. Uh, when I
was in college, you had to wait
for someone
to die, uh, in, and, um, and now
I'm hoping that there's a
resurgence of. Thank you. And
Madam Chair, my, my other
question.
we got it where the retirees can
come back and in my opinion, as
a retired.
it, it's nice to have something
But
the uh
what about reserved officers. So
like San Juan County, we have
reserve officers, they go
through the academy, they do all
Um, uh, Madam Chair and, and
senators. So again, we fall
under the DPS
allowances there, but also we
have a very special jurisdiction
with state parks. We only have
the law enforcement of a vested
police officer within the
jurisdiction of the park.
and not out of it
And so, um, it, it gets a
little, it can be a little
tricky, but it's something we
can look into. We've looked into
it in the past. Maybe, maybe
things have changed, but it
really wasn't an option because
of our limited jurisdiction.
Now, we have full jurisdiction
over all navigable waters in the
state of New Mexico through the
BOAA. So that's, that, that adds
another dimension of, of, of,
uh, complexity there, but uh
it's something that we can try
and shake every tree.
Well, thank you very much and if
I can help in any way, please
let me know. Please let us know,
because I know and, and, and I
retired, so I haven't been able
On some of that, Madam Chair and
Representative, so I'll start
with law enforcement, with law
enforcement, it's the, the law
enforcement prerequisites,
right? If you ask people, it's
kind of like, you want to be a
teacher, like, no, you want to
be a law enforce officer? No.
They, they, for whatever reason,
there's, there's not a lot of
interest in these public service
positions right now. Um, so then
you add the layer of, you have
to logically evaluation, the
medical eva uh in a rough way
for about, uh. Like, ah, I think
I'll pass
And so there's that, right?
There's just the law enforcement
piece. The other positions are
impacted because we are in very
rural areas
and housing is an issue. I know
this is a subject you all have
on your plate, uh, but think
about trying, and I'll, I'll
challenge Senator Lanier here to
find it. You can't eagle nest.
can't Mora.
They're either Airbnbs or the
rent is, or they don't exist, or
the rent is super high. Um, so
housing is a piece. Um, I don't
believe that for the non-law
enforcement positions at the
South, a lot of hay, as I said,
in rural New Mexico, ranching
farm kids, they're not there
anymore. They're moving their
fairs we do indeed, we do
LinkedIn, uh, all the, the
hiring to try and get them early
before they think about
something else. Um, and, and so
we're, we're shaking every
treat. We even have 46 state
homes.
residential houses that we
provide as part of the job, and
they pay their own utilities.
And so that's, it, it's a mix of
a lot representative, um
but it really has to, I, I, I
fall back that it has to be
about the lifestyle. You have to
love the work and then the pay
and everything else comes after
that, uh, and, and then being to
have the mobility, for example,
in Conchas, New Mexico,
Far East San Miguel County
um, there's no schools
there's not much of anything
and so a spouse or a friend or a
partner is going to have to
travel for gas, for groceries,
for a job, probably 35 to,
there's challenges built in.
Fenton Lake Steele County
Have you ever been to La Cueva
It's remote, and most of it is a
a resort setup.
So it's, it's, it's all of that
built in. But we're, we're
building new homes. We're
improving the homes we have, uh,
and, and we're trying to work
with community to find places
for family members, spouses, and
When I grow up, maybe, maybe I
Um, and director. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'll get my uh
presentation started here.
Can everybody see that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Members of the committee, my
name is Jason N. I'm the
division director for the
marketing and Development
division at the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture, I'm
pleased to be here today and
talk about uh meat processing in
the state.
See here
How can I advance my screen?
Go down.
You see those little, there's a
triangle going up and a triangle
going up. There you go. Got it.
Thank you.
OK, so we started, um, really
diving in to meet value chain
coordination in 2021 as a result
of the pandemic, and we received
some one-time funding from the
legislature with the goal of
supporting and developing a
resilient meat value chain in
the state. Um, with that, we
were able to hire a staff person
and engage our industry and
stakeholders face to face. Um,
our staff has been in every meat
processor across the state. Uh,
we know them
very well, and we've been
providing technical assistance
and marketing and support sense.
Um, through that, there were
several, um, federal grant
programs that were deployed
using AARPA funds. We work with
some of those processors and
help them with their grants, uh,
and applications for some of
those federal resources, and we
coordinated support through our
membership of the American
Association of Meat Processors
or Amp. Each year since we've
invited and supported a cohort
of our small meat processors to
this convention and trade show
where they mix and mingle and
network um with
like-minded business owners and
operations from across the
nation. There's a lot of
professional development and
technology sharing and of course
they get to view um new meat
processing equipment and
technologies and, and since
then, um, we've, uh, we've
succeeded and in a state level
Amp uh organization uh we're one
of our uh
uh, even one of our meat
processors in the state is now a
board member of the National AMP
Convention. Um, so we're
definitely on the map. Um.
we've, uh, really worked with a
lot of our local uh processors
and uh producers as well to um
become integrated into our New
Mexico grown program. Um,
that's, uh, opening up the
opportunity to market our local
um meat proteins into our
institutional markets, whether
that's schools, or food banks,
senior centers, early childhood
development.
In the annually we've promoted a
B2B or ranched institutional
Market summit where our
producers, uh, our suppliers,
our sellers of local meat can
actually meet and promote and
market their products to our
institutional buyers. Um, since
then, we've, we've, um, we were
the last legislative session,
um, we were successful in a
large part by the New Mexico
Cattle growers Association
championing um uh legislation to
get
a $3 million grant
for a state meat processors,
specifically to address some of
the um byproduct and disposal
challenges that they were
running into, uh, just a little
bit of background on that, um, a
lot of our processes we're
relying on um a company, a
rendering companies across that
would actually come by and and
their operations and and pick up
and dispose of their offal, uh,
a lot of the byproduct that was
coming out and that that
business discontinued their
operations in the state
And so, with that,
we were successful and, and, and
getting that $3 million and,
and, and focusing on helping
them address that.
that challenge
Um, next page I just wanted to
present, give you a little
snapshot of uh of our uh
cattle industry in the state,
um.
just some key stats that just
wanted to make you aware of and,
and, and the number of cattle
and animals and, and, and the,
the, the cash receipts and and
value that they produced for the
state, on the left-hand column,
you'll see there that um
uh
livestock and and livestock
products uh represent 3, a
little over $3 billion. Um, now,
our total cash receipts for all
agriculture is almost 4 billion,
and so you're gonna see that
animals and, and, and animal
products is, is a little over
3/4 of our cash receipts that
we're producing in the state.
Uh, cattle and calves, is their
number one cash commodity
producing about $1.7 billion
annually, followed by uh milk in
our dairy industry at 1.23
billion. Um.
just the livestock production
and processing represents 2.7%
of our our state's total GDP.
Moving into the right, just beef
and dairy. Um, we, we have about
1.28 million head. We're down
about 10,000 head from the
previous year. Uh, meat cows
decreased 4% for the previous
year were about 240,000 head
right now. Uh, beef cow
inventory is unchanged, about
450,000 head, um, gross income
is 19 billion up 10% from the
previous year, and based on our
statistics, commercial slaughter
is about 59
0 $0 which is up from the
previous year.
Um, we have a small, um, sheep
and lamb industry in the state.
There were about 75,000 head,
uh, which is, which is unchanged
from the previous year, and
total value from from that uh
it's about 16.2. 16.2, and we're
slaughtering about 5200 hit,
which is a little down from the
free this year. They were very
small um hog and, and, and pig
industry in the state, with
about 1700 head, and that
produces a value of about
330,000 men and we're
commercially slaughtering about
29
head annually there
In the far right, just wanted to
give you a little caption of, of
our ranking in the US for, for
all agriculture generally, uh,
speaking, chili, of course,
we're, we're number one in the
in the United States or pecans,
#2, uh, cheese production, we're
number 4, we're home to some of
the world's largest cheese
plants, um, and, uh, onions, uh,
we produce considerably amount,
especially on our summer and
non-storage varieties were
number 5 in the nation. Uh, milk
right now we're, we're number
11.
and B for we're number 22
And you could find all these uh
stats and more, um, uh, New
Mexico Department of Act
produces uh agricultural
statistics bulletin annually in
coordination with the USDA NASS,
um, that's online. You can find
it on our website, but uh we're
actually printing some and we'll
be mailing it to all of our
legislators here shortly.
Next caption I included was just
to kind of demonstrate what beef
prices are, uh, right now, um,
this, this graph demonstrates
ground beef, uh, right now we're
over $6 a pound for hamburger.
That's just a general 80/20
blend. Um, Fed steer prices are
at record highs, starting in
late 2024 to 2025 and, and even
now we're seeing a strengthening
in the market. Um
and largely that's, that's
supply and demand issue uh with
the market for for beef is, is
extremely high.
in in the supply is, is, is
waning, and that's large parts
because of our forage
conditions, and that's just not
a New Mexico issue, but drought
and and grazing conditions and
high-end foot costs, general
economics, um, have, have really
uh tightened the market up and
so, uh, cattle prices and, and,
and, and, and the, the beef
prices from there are
are growing and increasing and
that's great for our producers
who are selling, you know, if
you're buying fetal cattle,
well, that's, that's a different
matter altogether. Um, and, and
that supply constraint is is
even higher right now because uh
a lot of the feeder cattle that
come over, um, from Mexico, uh,
are no longer occurring because
of the uh the hole for the New
World screwer.
Next slide uh demonstrates uh uh
the, the, the number and, and
location of our meat processors
in the state. Right now we're
tracking about 30 meat slaughter
processors, um, 8 of these are,
are, are USDA inspected by the
uh uh food service inspection
service, uh, two of those
facilities strictly focused on
sheep and goat only, but all
these products that come out of
the uh federally inspected
plants are retail ready and and
appro
ve d for public consumption. The
remaining 22 are what were
classified as custom exempt,
meaning that uh the owner of
that livestock, uh, can take it
in um for processing, but that
goes back to that owner for
immediate consumption. It is not
for public sale.
Uh, we, prior to the, to the,
the presentation we, we, we
surveyed a number of our, our
meat processors and kind of
summarized a lot of the
challenges that they're facing
right now. Obviously,
agriculture in general requires
a large capital commitment and
in our meat processing uh
industry is, is, is not immune
to that. Um, right now they're,
they're facing really big
constraints on their their
warehousing and cold storage
capacity, um, typically it's, it
' s preferred to age B 14 to 21
days, and they're struggling to
do that. And I also having to
share some of their cold sports
place with their byproduct
before it's uh disposed of. A
labor shortages, um, both
skilled and unskilled. A lot of
our
meat processors are, are, are,
you know, trying to pay a
competitive wage and, and, and,
but at the same time, normally
they're having to train their
own meat cutters and and labor,
um, and that's just been a
struggle since since the get-go.
And um limited uh federal
inspection capacity, you know,
we're we're eagerly waiting, um,
our statement inspection program
to come online and, and hope
that the under the the the
leadership of the New Mexico
Livestock Board that will be
able to fill those gaps
left by our federal inspections.
And lastly, uh, regulatory
compliance and, and, and
specifically right now, which is
is the the highest priority is
by product disposal and
wastewater.
Um, the next two slides are,
are, are kind of
follow that, that regulatory
matter, and that's right now,
um, and, and I've got to lead
into this. Um
the
the rule on this was actually um
declined by the, the, the EPA
administrator. So we were, we
were facing some significant
changes in our affluent
limitation guidelines. Um, there
were 3 options that were on the
table. Um, really more or less
number 1 and #2, 3 being the
most significant, and um, so the
latest news, and they rolled on
this just a couple of days ago
that the administrator is not
long going to make any
changes to these effluent
guidelines. So, uh, risk
avoided.
So
but this is again another slide
leading into what was the
impacts of that EPA flow rule.
This slide here has
opportunities for growth and
opportunities and investment,
uh, mostly, we're really focused
and and and invested in
expanding state meat processing
this state with that, we really
need to focus on workforce
development, um, value-added
product as diversification, um,
we're right now with that uh $3
million grant, um, the, uh,
that's going to help address a
lot of the challenges on the
byproducts, uh, disposal of
wastewater that we're, we're, we
were facing and, and then um
launch of our our state level um
amp processors.
Following on the up on the um
the $3 million appropriation
that were received, um, we, we
titled that grant, New Mexico
local meat processing grant or
LMPG.
Um, the, the focus of that was,
uh, to, to address the
challenges of meat product
disposal and wastewater
compliance. Um, that's a
one-time funding, um, through
NMDA, uh, the RFA, uh, or
request request for announcement
and a proposals went out, we
received a total of 14
applications totaling $5.5
million which was significantly
oversubscribed. A lot of very
good, um, project requests, uh,
the
committee, uh, convened and
we're going to be funding um uh
10 project applications, um,
and, uh,
and so right now we're in the
process of completing our
sub-awards and then deploying
those funds here in the next uh
few weeks, if, if not less than
a month for sure.
The common funding needs
surrounded really 3 areas, which
was wastewater and septic
systems to bring them into
regulatory compliance,
composting equipment, and
value-added product equipment
and logistics. So taking some of
those byproducts and, and, and,
and taking the processing and
the value-added product that
could be um things like full
bone marrow broth, pet foods,
um, uh
allo, a number of ideas, and,
and also for those meat
processing facilities that that
maybe didn't need those
wastewaters thatcosystems or
already had, couldn't because of
the location, putting composting
systems actually just simple
logistics and improve um safety
means to actually transport some
of their byproducts to landfills
that will accept that.
Expected benefits are improved
environmental compliance, um,
innovation and product
diversifications, reduced
landfill waste, and increased
processor sustainability and
ultimately job creation.
With that, that summarizes my
presentation to you this
afternoon and uh stand for
questions.
Um,
just hang out online and we'll
get to questions at the end, but
let's go ahead and move to Erin
Ortigoza, um, to take us into
our next presentation.
Mm
Thank you, Madam Chair
Good afternoon. Um, let's see.
I share
OK
Are you able to hear me and see
me all right? Yes.
Wonderful. Well, good afternoon,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Erin
Ortigoza. I'm the food hunger
and agriculture program manager,
um, for, uh, in the New Mexico
Economic Development department,
and I'm pleased to talk with you
today about our program and some
of the focus areas for this
coming fiscal year.
And
so the program mission uh start
out with this, um, the Food,
hunger and Egg program, um, is
really designed to support the
intersection of economic
development in the food and
agricultural sector with
increased food security for New
Mexicans. It was um created as
part of the Governor's Food
initiative and prioritizes the
development of um tailored
financial tools and technical
assistance for small and
mid-scale food processing and
agricultural businesses, and
some of the focal area
s um that we look for um as
we're, as we're working with
companies, are those that are
seeking to um provide more
access to food for historically
underresourced communities, and
we also work with um, you know,
workforce development challenges
through creation and retention
of jobs. Um, a key area is
strengthening and diversifying
instate market channel access
for small and mid-scale food and
egg operations, and we work very
closely with the New Mexico
Grown Program that has evolved,
um
uh immensely over the last
decade to create that
circulation of food all around
the state. Um, we focus on, um,
uh, it augmenting food safe
storage and aggregation
distribution and transportation
networks, um, which I'll talk
about in a little bit here. And
um key to all of this is
supporting um increased food
production and regenerative
agricultural practices. There's
so much growing demand for
locally grown, um, culturally
preferred
food and to meet that demand,
we're we're very interested in
supporting those producers that
are invested in creating the
supply. Erin, the uh the slides
aren't moving with you.
They're not moving with me?
OK,
your opening slide.
Oh goodness.
Let me see here.
Um, did that, OK, OK. I
apologize for that.
OK, so this was the program
mission slide, and I believe it
will also be printed out in your
packet, and apologies again for
the technical issue.
OK, and so, um, one of the
things I'd like to start with is
a huge thank you, um, and
gratitude for the funding
support for the Healthy Food
financing Fund for FY 26. Um,
this will be our 4th grant cycle
and um applications will be
opening this fall. We'll be um
honing in on projects that are
uh pre-production, um, like
regenerative agriculture
projects, food production, food
processing, really focusing on
staple food processing,
aggregation and distribution,
which um is, you know, often
when we, you know, the work of
the food hubs in the state and
food retail. And we will be
offering grants between 50,000
and $150,000 for this current
cycle, and I will talk more
about the Healthy food financing
Fund a little bit later in the
presentation.
And
another uh emerging focus area
for our program is the New
Mexico Food Pathways. Um, this
was initiated out of a USDA
grant that New Mexico received,
um, we were one of, um, I
believe 16 projects throughout
the nation that were selected to
implement a um the Healthy Food
financing initiative from the
federal level. And so this
particular program is very
focused on helping local food
businesses
um get uh SNAP authorized, so
really focused on food retail,
but also there is work with
technical assistance on food
enterprises that are feeding
into that overall supply chain
to get to the food retail
businesses. And um through this
program, we're offering no cost
business consulting, um, the
lead on this grant is Vitamehor
Capital, and so they've been
doing technical assistance with
their initial cohort of 10
projects and um the project, the
program also offers access
to capital through grants and
low interest loans, um, looking
at um incentivizing
uh loan access and creating more
relational lending opportunities
for some of these businesses
that have historically had
challenges in accessing
traditional loan programs. And
again, there's um there's
support with any of those
businesses that are seeking to
become a snap certified.
in the grocery stores
OK. We're also um continuing
work on the resilient food
system infrastructure pro uh
program. And this is a
cooperative agreement between
our NMDA State Department of
Agriculture and USDA, um,
agricultural marketing Service.
We're, um, a sister agency with
the implementation and currently
involved in implementing 18
projects statewide. This program
also focuses on enhancing
financial tools and resources
and technical assistance really
specifically for the project
implementation. These are middle
of the supply chain uh project.
So it's post-harvest all the way
to the back of the retail store,
and um they really do focus on
um in amplifying access to cold
storage, um, aggregation
transportation and food
processing,
all helping small and mid-scale
operations access emerging
markets in our state.
So one of the next um upcoming
projects that we're going to be
working on in our program is a
feasibility study. Um, we're
going to be doing a sustainable
local food transportation route
study for rural frontier, tribal
and urban regions of New Mexico.
And New Mexico's local food
system, it faces persistent
transportation challenges, um,
small scale producers, food
hubs, cooperative grocers,
institutions, even committed to
the local food procurement,
often struggle to access
affordable and reliable
transportation services, um,
traditional distributors, uh,
sometimes avoid rural and
frontier routes, um, especially
beyond the I-25 and I-40
corridors due to high costs and
low delivery volumes out there.
But there's an opportunity to
study um
nodes of aggregation, um, like
critical anchor points
throughout the state where
there's demand in concentration
and potential aggregation and
redistribution opportunities
that can continue to support
these smaller scale distribution
networks that are critical to
moving food equitably throughout
the state. Um, food hubs are a
nonprofits currently providing
some of these rural services
through a more informal and
grant dependent delivery
networks, um, but these models
sometimes lack long-term
financial sustain
ability So this study will
really look to evaluate the
transportation logistics and
financing options for serving
rural and frontier communities
um using these anchor points as
potential market hubs or
identifying where a public or um
philanthropic investment could
be also um uh very useful.
And the um last focus we're
going to be um working on this
year is the community of
Practice for a food distribution
and retail. And so through
communications with a lot of the
food retail projects um that
we've worked with over the years
through the Healthy Food
financing program. There's a
strong interest to create a more
formal statewide framework for
networking amongst food
retailers and food distribution
organizations. And so, um, we'd
like to support developing um
shared understandings of the
variety of business
models and management and
marketing, um, approaches,
inventory access, and even
startup protocols where there
maybe isn't a food retail outlet
currently, but they would like
to have one. So to support these
conversations and mentorship
amongst the retailers, um, our
program will be, uh, will be,
um, contracting with a
facilitator and providing an
open container for these um food
retail community practice
throughout the rest of the year.
And so, a little bit of a recap
on the healthy food financing
fund to date. Um, we've had
over, we've had 41 grants so far
successfully funded over $1.7
million administered through the
program, uh, thanks to, um, the
support of the economic
development department and the
investment provided through,
through the legislature. Um,
we've been able to target these
investments to um projects that
were very impactful in their
regions to am
pl ify ing our regional food
system's capacity, um, investing
in critical equipment and also
infrastructure needed to address
some of the challenges I was
just speaking about, um, this
year we'll be adding to all of
these different project maps,
and again, a big focus of our
healthy food financing program
is to support networking amongst
our um project beneficiaries.
This is um Capital Plus
relationships. It's really
focusing on the ecosystem level
of our, of our food system in
the
state. And to date we have um
some outcomes that are pretty
notable for a lot of these
catalytic grant investments with
our food retail processing and
aggregation distribution grants,
um, all of the beneficiaries
have reported growth in their
sales through their final impact
narrative reports. On average,
they're purchasing from about 12
different local vendors, which
is, again, it's back to that um
focus on supporting in-state
market channels
um strengthening opportunities
for in-strate market channels,
um, you know, with vendors able
to sell to potential grocery
stores or food hubs or, you
know, not necessarily just at a
farmer's market, but there's a
diversity of markets emerging
now. Um, there's product ranges,
you know, there's a whole
lot of different ways the
products are being bagged and
packaged and sold, and that's
also been diversified and
amplified through the reporting.
And over 80,000 clients have
been served through this, um,
through the work of our, of
our businesses that have been
the beneficiaries of this
program.
And then we have our food
production and value-added
production projects. Um, 80% of
the beneficiaries have
established 6 or more new
connections. So again, this is
very exciting at an ecosystem
level, helping folks link up and
um share resources and and work
together to move food around
more efficiently in our state.
Um, 183% increase in food
production was reported, and an
80% have reported diversifying
the range of crops that they
produce and also 80%
report increased food and sold
in new communities, um, making
the food more affordable and
also increasing the diversity of
stable healthy foods.
So I'd like to um wrap up my
presentation with a spotlight on
three of our projects. Um, the
first is bamboo microfarms LLC
in the northeast area of the
state. Um, they are a New Mexico
grown approved supplier and um
this is a really critical part
for our food production
projects. We, um, it's a
criteria that they either are
New Mexico grown approved
suppliers or are in the process
of becoming an approved
supplier. This is again to
support the amount
of food moving through these um
food safe market channels into
our institutions and um you
know, the school's senior
centers, early childcare
facilities are all purchasing
through our New Mexico Grown
program, and more and more each
year are are joining it. And so
we want to be continuing working
with farmers to join in on the
program, if they're interested
in supporting them to scale up
in their production to meet the
needs of their regions. Um, so
their award was um really aimed
at
scaling up and it has doubled
their production, really the
cold storage chain, um, was part
of their um equipment
investment, and it's reducing
the spoilage of food. Again,
it's getting more food to people
and allowing them to offer the
microgreenss at a more
affordable price. And they've
also with their increased
capacity, been working on new
market development. Um, so in
that area, they've been
contracting with Ogallala
Commons, which is a food
aggregator, distributor,
food hub, and um they're working
on a creation of a farmer's
market in the Villanueva area.
And the next um business I'd
like to spotlight is the B
Street Market in Mountain Air.
This is a grocery store. It's a
full service grocery store, um,
really an anchor point for that
community. Um, their project was
um all about expanding their
cold storage and um upgrading a
lot of their display and
installation of a cool bot. So
they've got a lot more capacity
to hold hold product on site.
Um, the kitchen expansion was
another
part of their project. They are
doing value added food
production on site and are
increasing their purchasing
power from 11 local farmers and
ranchers and reported selling
over £16,000 of local food to
their community. Um, and again,
this is increasing the right of
fresh produce, um, it's
supported retaining the existing
jobs and it's overall
strengthening the regional food
supply chain.
And the last um project that I
will spotlight is a current
awardee for FY 25. This is the
National Center for Frontier
Communities. They're located
around the in in Silver City,
but work in the southwest of the
state. Um, they have a vast area
that they cover with their
distribution capabilities. Um,
they distribute food from over
45 farmers and ranchers to all
sorts of markets, to schools,
food pantries, um, throughout
the region and their, their
project is again focused on
expanding
their infrastructure with more
cold storage access, um, and
other um other components to
their transportation services.
And
that concludes my presentation
for today, and thank you very
much. I'll stand for any
questions.
Thank you, Erin. Just hang out
for a bit and we'll get to
questions after our final two
presentations. Um, let's move
over to uh Project Echo.
Thank you so much
I'll be back.
Thank you so much, uh, Madam
Charter, for having us today. My
name is Perla Gething, and I'm
the associate director at
Economic Council helping others,
and I'm here with my colleague,
uh, Tammy Jenkins. She is our
food bank director. So, I will
be going over our programs at
Economic Council, helping
others, and a little bit of the
history and then, uh, Ms.
Jenkins will go over the food
bank, uh, programs a little more
in-d depthly and then how the
federal cuts have impacted
us, or I should say our
community, not just the food
bank, but it's everyone here. So
Economic Council help helping
others has been around for 58
years, and this is on page 1. We
are a community action agency of
New Mexico. We're one of 6, and
this, uh, action aggencies are
more than just a food bank. We
have wraparound services that
alleviates the causes of poverty
in our communities and across
the state. Um, our mission here
at Economic Council helping
others, uh, is to provide
resources and education to
individuals and families on
their journeys to improve life.
And our services, I'll say right
now are offered in San Juan
County specifically, these wrap
around, and I'll talk about
which one specifically is
offered in Bernalilo County when
we get there. So the next page,
the next slide, page 2, the
first program I'll talk about is
our Aztec preschool and our
mission there is to provide an
affordable, caring, and safe and
secure learning environment for
the children in our community.
Uh, the preschool can hold up to
63 children, uh, between the
ages
of 2 and 12 years old. So the
preschool directly, their
curriculum is for preschool, but
then we offer after school
programming as well as summer
programming. They are four-star
preschool and offer a work with
New Mexico Pre-K to make it
affordable for children.
in the community, and then you
can see some of the different um
programs that they offer there,
um, I will go to the next
program, which is on page 3. Our
emergency program. This one is
also offered in San Juan County,
and we provide both financial
and practical assistance to help
residents navigate through
difficult times. So we're
talking about annual rental and
mortgage assistance, utility
assistance, and then other
programs such as funeral
assistance, hygiene and diaper
kits, back to school c
lo th ing over the summer, we
distributed over 4000 hygiene,
hygiene kits, books, jackets,
toys, etc. on the Navajo Nation
in San Juan County, as well as
um Farmington and other
communities. Um, this program
specifically is funded by the
community Service Block grant,
as well as private donations and
grants.
Our next program on page 4.
is the food bank, and the food
bank is our largest program, um,
that we offer here in San Juan
County.
We gather our food through store
and distribution or through
community distributions to
support low-income individuals.
We obtain food from local
farmers, distributors, grocers,
food drives, and then, of
course, um, national Free Bank
Networks, as well as local ones.
Um,
so there are 7 programs here
that I will go over briefly and
then Ms. Jenkins will go over
the, go over the ones that are
being affected right now. So our
emergency food box program, uh,
is for any family that's in
crisis. They can just walk in
and receive a feed box. The next
program, the emergency food
assistance program is offered
for low-income families. They
can receive boxes twice a month.
This one is federally funded.
Our next program
is the Kamara commodity
supplemental food program,
otherwise known as CSFP, and
this is free food for seniors.
So we offer that here in San
Juan County. We also are
contracted with the state to
offer that in Bernna Leo County.
And so this is for uh seniors 60
and up, and it is also federally
funded. Our food and nutrition
program, the FANN program,
provides a special diet box for
those who have special diets,
uh, such as diabetes,
gluten intolerance, things like
that. And then on page 5,
is our, our next three programs.
So the agency surplus program,
we all know it takes a community
to really make it impact and um,
so we offer
food to items at or below cost
to other food pantries and
churches and such throughout the
community. Um, and then the next
program is one of our favorite,
although they're all equally
important, and it's our meals
for kids backpack program. So we
work with 35 school districts
throughout the community, and
it's growing each year, um, to
offer food assistance for kids
to ensure no one, no kids go
hungry. And we work with social
work teams in there and they
really identify the children,
and we give the backpacks and
then the social workers will go
and take those to the children
who need them, and we have like
ready to eat meals in them
during the wintertime, we see it
increase of need for this
because of the winter breaks and
then over the summer, we also
see an increase, and so we give
out meals throughout the summer
as well. And then the last food
program, um, is our supplemental
nutrition assistance program,
otherwise known as SNAP. Um,
this is super important, uh,
because
we offer, we contract with the
states, uh, with the healthcare
authority and offer application
assistance, recertification.
There's a lot of people who do
not have um transportation or
the um internet access or
different printing tools to be
able to apply for this. So we
will actually go and help people
where they're at, or they can
come into our office. So these
are 3 major programs. I know
that's a lot of information, um,
but that's overall what we're
what we're offering an Economic
council helping others, and I'm
going to have handed over to Ms.
Jenkins to talk about the
numbers as well as, um, just
how these federal cuts are
impacting the sleeping at this
time.
Thank you for having us.
Sorry
There you go.
As you can see, our year to date
numbers.
uh, we have helped
a lot of people. Will you speak
into the microphone so sorry
about that.
No, that's OK.
Well, on the nervous side.
Um
our emergency programs have
helped
assist 7000 individuals and 3000
families. The food bank, year to
date we've given almost 2
million pounds of food out.
for our just little, our little
community here in Sanin County,
um, backpacks, the meals for
kids, we've given out 10,000.
We've given out 45,000 meals to
7000 households and our seniors
we've given almost 28,000 meals.
So we've, we've been a little
busy.
So this is a uh
our the yes, um, the
the reduction in funding from
the federal government has
really the community can't see
it, but we can see it.
The RCCC funds were cut 16% in
the spring.
which comes out to almost
$90,000. That is
that is 15,000 meals.
that we've had to somehow come
up with and supplement what was
what we expected to be there.
Um
we are not expected to have any
funding for
for the physical year of 2026.
which comes out to about
$551,000.
which also comes out to about
450,000 pounds of food.
which
that is actually uh the next
slide will actually show that
that it um
that is actually the 1st 7
months of the year.
is what that is
Um, the,
it affects our ability to get
eggs, milk, and protein. We've
had to supplement
quite a bit of money
to
to provide that for our
community.
So I compared the 1st 7 months
of the year to last year and
this year, we are at 10% for our
TFAP.
program, which is strictly the
San Juan County.
We are up 16% for our seniors.
We are, as you can see,
TFAP last year we received a
little over 500,000 pounds of
food. This year we received a
little less than 400,000 pounds
of food.
As you can see, we
we do, we did, we do try to
utilize all of the New Mexico
grown.
We try to make sure that we
purchased
local to us. We've tried to make
sure that we purchased within
inside the state to make sure
that
we're helping out other
communities also.
as you can see
um
the difference between the two
of them are
about 125,000 pounds.
which comes out to 104,000
meals.
So we
it's a a very large impact to,
to the community.
Our before I, before I end, I do
want to bring up something that
isn't in
the brochure. We did sign up to
do
uh software with Viberry, which
will actually get our, our
resources out there.
It'll help
um
people that aren't on Facebook,
people that aren't that don't
actually use um
that don't actually use the
internet, internet that much,
but it, what it'll do is
actually put our tailgates out
there, so we go monthly out to
the reservation. We go out to
the other parts of the county
and, and distribute food, and so
we do have a piece of software
that we're gonna, we're gonna
implement that will actually
help us get us out there a
little bit further, see if we
can't get some more people that
are struggling to come find us
and get some food.
Um
once again, our, we're, we're,
we're gonna have to do
fundraising and whatnot in order
to, to fulfill that 450,000
pounds of food that we're gonna
miss.
And we thank you
Thank you, Miss Montoya, and
we'll close out with San Juan,
um, Community College and the um
harvest. Thank you, Erin.
Harvest Food Hub and Kitchen.
Hello and thank you so much for
having me, Madam Chair and
committee. I am very honored to
be here and be able to present
what we do here at San Juan
College and Harvest Food Hub.
So I'd like to start with
telling you a little bit about
what we do and what our mission
is.
The mission of the Harvest Food
Hub and kitchen is to grow and
sustain the capacity of our food
system and depositively impact
our economy by connecting the
community to accessible, fresh,
and healthy local produce, food,
and artisanal products.
So
with that being said, I would
like to focus on our role in the
local food system. Our
aggregation and distribution has
many different opportunities.
Our storefront relocated
downtown at 310 West Animas,
just up the street from Echo,
where uh we have an online
platform for custom orders and
then a Farm Box program, which
is similar to ACSA, um, so it's
aggregated all locally within
our community, sometimes we do
go into southern Colorado or
southern New Mexico, but I, we
also often serve those
same communities as well with
partnerships. So we help our
entrepreneurs with marketing and
sales support for growers. We
have education programs for farm
and food safety, partnerships
with schools, institutions, and
community organizations,
including all six local growers'
markets.
I think it's always important to
support the folks that are at
the grower's market because
that's really the boots on the
ground and where they're
starting, and the only place for
them is to grow it.
So why local food matters? We're
supporting small farmers and
ranchers.
keeping money, food money in New
Mexico and our region, increases
access to fresh, healthy food
and strengthens food security
and resilience. This slide is
quite important to us because if
you notice up in the top right
corner we have Farmington
Growers Market, who we supported
both by providing produce to
them and allowing them an
opportunity to spread the word
across the community on the New
Mexico grown and purchasing, uh,
which we all know for Farmington
is very big and a huge advocate
for the New Mexico
Grown program and beating our
kids healthy.
Impacts on produce impacts on
producers, 150 businesses
supported through food and farm
safety trainings, allowing them
to sell to institution and food
banks, which that includes
getting them on the New Mexico
Grown program or to take the
training so that they can take
the next step to get on the New
Mexico Grown program. 175
businesses supported through
marketing and sales trainings,
and this is over a period of 3
years with our annual growers'
market trainings, which we go in
and we provide different uh
material every year to help
them sustain their businesses
and grow their businesses.
48 producers supported through
sales and distribution. Those
are ones that are working
directly through San Juan
College to sell their produce to
institutions or to the
community.
And if you'll notice that's a
very big difference in the ones
that we work with as the ones
that sell through us. Um, often
small producers
get a little bit intimidated
going to that next step of
selling to institutions, so we
often have to foster those
relationships and get them to um
understand they definitely have
the capacity and that that we're
there to support them.
60+ producers supported through
one on one mentorship, and that
includes at least a 3 hour or
more different sessions, working
one on one with these producers
to get them through their
business goals or understand
where the market for them could
be.
$600,000 in revenue paid to
producers through programs
executed through the San Juan
College Harvest Food Hub. Impact
on our community, uh, 280
students supported through
subsidized farm boxes increased
food security with healthy
produce.
That's a program run through um
San Juan College in partnership
with the foundation and other um
private funding agencies to
subsidize our box, which is
normally a $25 box, and students
can get it for $10. Um, with
that also being said, we do
accept Snap and part of the
Double Up program. So if someone
uses their Snap card in our
store, they're getting 50% off
on all produce.
as long as it's grown in New
Mexico
900+ community members supported
through free produce
distributions supported by San
Juan College Foundation.
This is very exciting and this
actually just happened yesterday
was the first one of the season,
and we served roughly 600 pounds
of produce worth a little over
$700 which is a great price on
the from the local farmers, so
we're very appreciative of them.
And we were able to serve, um,
they roughly estimated around
105 students came through, but
they're, they haven't gotten the
exact number to me. So that's
really exciting. And again, the
first one of the season, and we
have at least 2 to 3 more to go
depending on how far we can make
our budget last.
1200 families served through
holiday boxes that included
local produce and beef. We are
very, very fortunate last year
to get quite a, a nice donation
of beef from a local rancher who
we were able to put um ground
beef packages and roasts in the
holiday boxes in which students
and staff could take home and um
have for their families over the
holiday break.
100, or excuse me.
150 community members served
through Harvest Health bagg
programs that promote and teach
healthy eating as to at-risk
youth and bariatric patients. So
this was a pilot project started
last year in partnership with
San Juan County and San Juan
Regional Hospital, and this year
it grew from just one group of
patients in 4 class cohort to
two of those same class cohorts
and then we're including um risk
students through Boys and Girls
Club and other programs. So
that's very exciting as well.
And
then of course, um, 70+ jobs
from four New Mexicans through
internships, seasonal
employment, and year-round
positions in both farming and
food processing.
One of the programs that we get
to do every year is a grower
buyer meeting and we have buyers
and growers, um, institutional
wholesale buyers come to the
table and have conversations on
what the demand is, what the
cost is going to be, and how
they can help arrange
sales directly to producers or
to buyers from those producers,
and within that we bring in San
Juan College, Career Services so
that they can help foster those
internship programs with our
students and local businesses.
So the future impact, um,
we are in the process of
completing our commercial
kitchen. We actually got to
start construction yesterday,
which is a very big milestone
for us. So we are very excited
about that. It is only supposed
to take 5 weeks, um, and with
that, we will be able to support
local food businesses with
training programs, job creation,
and of course a place to produce
their products. Um, uh, we would
like to grow rural partnerships
to strengthen collaboration with
farmers, schools, organization,
and rural communities. One of
the things that we deal with a
lot is the the distribution and
the distance
between farmers and buyers
within our area. So we're
working on fostering um
buying from farmers that are in
close proximity to institutions
or um
a lot of senior centers that are
not getting served because of
their location. So we're hoping
to be able to pick up from
producers and drop off within a
few hours at the same, um,
within the same area to buyers
to get them access to those
fresh local goods. And then
continue to support community
organizations in sustainable
food practices and access to
fresh and local goods.
So we have challenges as well,
um, and some of them are
infrastructure, cold and dry
storage. We never have enough
cold storage, um, and just to
give you a little bit of context
on that about 3 weeks ago, I
received my shipment of beef and
it filled up all three of my
freezers. And then 2 days later
I got a call from a rancher who
was struggling with finding
space for our storage for his
own beef that was just processed
and picked up.
Please excuse me, and it was
really hard because we were
trying very hard to try and fit
as much beef as we could into
these freezers, but there's only
so much space.
So it was um
just a very clear example on
the, the infrastructure
challenge.
Distribution capacity, I think
is um Aaron Ortigoza also
mentioned.
um, New Mexico is suffering from
not having enough distribution
resources to help get them
across the um the state.
And again, we do the best we
can. We have one van that we get
to work with. We also have a
trailer when we have a truck to
pull it, that's increased the
capacity for distribution for
us.
Um
we work with other food hubs
across the state to also help
meet each other in the middle so
that we can help still continue
to um distribute to the
communities that need it the
most.
Again, consistent funding to
sustain staff and grow programs.
Oh, thank you all so much. Thank
you, thank you.
And then, of course, policy
support for institutional
purchasing. Um, I think the
the lower amount of New Mexico
grown for K-12, the schools is
impacted locally because last
year we had something almost
almost $250,000 in schools
across the entire county that we
were able to serve and then it's
drastically decreased, um.
estimating around $75,000 or
more or less this year for just
our county for K-12 schools. Um,
so not only is that taking um
away from our farmers who have
been able to benefit from that
opportunity and grow their
businesses, but now we're also
not being able to feed our kids
or our communities as well as we
have in the past few years.
And I would just like to again
say thank you so much for um
supporting our local food
systems, and I appreciate the
opportunity to be here and speak
with all of you. Thank you.
Thank you, everyone. Um,
committee, any questions? Yeah,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'd
like to go back to the meat
processing industry.
They're still online
with this
Director New, are you there?
Yes, madam Chair, uh,
Representative Duncan, I'm here.
Can you hear me
Yes, can you hear us
Yes. OK. I can't hear you.
I stand for questions
Thank you. Um, so my question is
how many local producers are
able to, uh, bring their beef to
market and are we, uh, how many
schools are being able to
purchase or other uh um um
folks that need that are able to
produce that uh to buy that from
our local producers.
So, um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Duncan, thank you
for the question. I, I couldn't
say right now how many producers
are actually um
selling to these institutions
and markets like specifically
schools or um how many of our
processors are, are, are having
their, their, their, their beef
or their, their livestock, you
know, locally processed. I don't
have those statistics readily at
hand. I can say it's significant
um, as some of our panelists
actually alluded to today. I
mean, uh, uh, at NMDA we, uh,
were a part of a cooperative
agreement with USDA and the
local uh local purchasing
cooperative agreement, which is
basically a farm to food bank
program and 50% or maybe more of
those products that are going
into our food banks are coming
from local meat processors, but
um
I just don't have those
statistics readily at hand, but
it's, it's significant.
It's uh, it's a lot really
allowed, you know, having a, a,
a, a strong local meat
processing industry in the state
is
is, uh, is really benefiting a
lot of our producers and being
able to direct market a lot of
our products, you know, um,
according to the last census,
you know, our farmers and
ranchers, uh, direct market
about 10% of their product, um,
and that's going into, you know,
value added products and retail
and farmers' markets and
whatnot. And that's, that's an
uptick from the previous census
was only 6%. And so having local
meat processing, getting that
product into retail,
getting into the restaurants and
food services, getting in our
institutional markets. It's,
it's definitely been a game
changer, you know, during the
pandemic, we really saw a lot of
challenges and a lot of
producers and and then the meat
processing crashed. We, we, um,
and consumers wanted uh product
and we couldn't get it and
having, having this meat
processing instate has really
changed that. Demonstrates the
need for us to enhance that our
meat processing industry in the
state, and grow those or the
number of processors in the
state enhance the capacity for
our our producers and our
processors to sell and market
locally grown uh beef, lamb,
swine, you name it.
But uh
Representative will try to get
those numbers to you. Um, if I
can find him, I'll follow up
with you.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Madam Chair, we were at, uh, New
Mexico State recently and we
went through their um uh their
program there that uh they
graduate and I'm trying to
remember the exact number they
graduate from their meat
processing plant and what a
great thing for New Mexico as
opposed to New Mexicans raising
beef, sending it to Texas, and
then getting it sent back so
that we can then sell it to our
schools and other institutions.
Uh, we need to do it homegrown
locally, if at all possible. Um,
Echo Food Bank for you folks
real quick.
Do we have any local ranchers
that are providing
for you?
Uh, not
directly to us
Uh, we purchased through um the
Little Colorado Meats, which is
in Arizona. They actually take
our er they took our New Mexico
grown beef and they process it
over there because we didn't
have a USDA.
inspected facility to process
it, so.
Good, thank you. I hope that
changes, uh, soon.
So thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate it. We went so far,
my family and I went so far as
to um build our own processing
plant for our family's needs,
uh, both, um, cold and dry and
uh because some of the same
situations we're facing here
and, and in the states. So, um
thank you for what you do and,
and I worked very, very closely
as a mayor to uh get our uh
our uh our program to be SNAP
approved uh for our local
growers and, and, uh, our market
and it finally did it and it was
a good day, so thank you, thank
you, I'm sure. Thank you.
Interesting fact, Representative
Duncan. Um, Representative
Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you all for sticking with
us, um, here at the end of the
day. Um, just curious because
we're, um, the news of this
special session was released
today, um, that we'll be going
in to look at some federal
budget cuts, um, to our and, and
we know our food banks have been
hit. I know in Santa Fe County
and our regional areas have been
hit extremely hard. So thank you
for sharing with us what some of
the impact would be. I just
wanna be sure that both with um
NMDA and some of the other cuts
that we saw um
through the recent federal
legislation, um, that these are
for consideration or that you
have been able to discuss some
of the budget issues and
implications for our special
session going in.
Um
if you've had any chats with
whether it be department heads
or um I don't know who you would
be liaising with, but
if we're gonna be considering
that.
Thank you.
I'm sorry, our CEO is out of
town, but I know that we have
been networking with other food
banks across the state and and
speaking with um
uh oh my gosh, the name is lost
me, but um we have been working
with like Roadrunner Food Bank
as well as other ones, and they
have been speaking on our behalf
as well as I know our CEO has
reached out to talk, uh, to
discuss
are the budget cuts overall.
So I think there is an ask out
there, um.
and I'm sorry, I just didn't
bring all of that information,
but any other specific, I think,
uh, any other specific
information you would like that
I could maybe
figure out. Thank you, madam. I
think just and being able to
follow up and make sure that
while we're considering all of
this, that every touch point
with our, you know, every corner
of the state has a chance to be
able to make their proposal for
what we're trying to, to look
at. I know it's SNAP benefits, I
know it's um food bank funding,
um, and then other rural
programs like um what NMDA might
be going through as well. I
don't know if anyone online
wanted to speak.
to any of that. Yeah, Madam
Chair, um, um
members of committee, um, you
know, I, I commented on the um
LFPA program, a local
procurement assistance program,
which uh was locally known um in
state as Regional Farm to Food
Bank, um
that program, uh, awarded 6.3
million um started with AARPA
funds, then CCC, and um it's uh
we had uh originally planned for
an extension under the past
administration, like it was
roughly $2.8 million which, um,
um
was, was canceled by the current
administration withdrew, um, and
so we're, we're basically
winding down those original
federal funds, um, where we
partner with uh the Food Depot,
the New Mexico Association of
Food Banks and the Mexico
farmers' marketing program on
their cruise supplier program,
which they assist a lot of our
local producers and processes to
be able to get the the
credentials and certifications
to sell into the institutional
markets, but the food depot
has been largely the one that's
actually doing the procurement
and the distribution through our
food banks and food hubs. Uh,
that program was, was, was.
very popular, um, um, and, and
definitely utilized to its its
potential. And unfortunately, we
didn't get that extension, which
was called LFPA 2025. I
understand that there's a House
bill um in the works right now,
um, for basically a very similar
program, um, but I, I don't
really know where that stands
right now on the federal side.
But uh yeah, basically this
December that program will be
sunsetting and it's, it's, it's
gonna be complete until we see
any other federal programs, and
I, I know there's been some
discussions, um, to get us some
state funding in the next
session, um, through maybe DFA,
uh, but that's very it's infancy
stages. I think the request was
just recently drafted up and put
on file. So, but a very
successful program, um, about
half of that was meat prote
in s and it was distributed
statewide and, and really was uh
an economic shot in the arm for
our small um socially
disvantaged producers.
Thank you for saying that, um,
Madam Chair, I don't know if
there is an opportunity to, to
sneak it into our special
session in the sense of what
impact you might be having
before then if it sunsets in
December. It is alarming that
that would discontinue and we've
just heard about how hard folks
work to um expand their
production to have these larger
institutional um
providers. So I think that would
be a huge detriment to, to try
to see that, um, go away,
especially when it's, it seems
like it might be very doable
with what our budget looks like
in moving into the next
um session or what we might be
able to prevent before,
beforehand. So I, I think if we
can follow up with that, Madam
Chair, it would be a really
important program and again, it
feeds back into the broader um
food security initiatives we
have in the state. Um, so thank
you for, thank you for that. Um,
I think that's all my questions.
Thank you, I'm sure.
Thank you Representative, any
more questions, pal?
Committee? OK, I've got to, um,
Director New, I just read an
article on cultivated meat or
lab grown meat and how our
neighbors to the
east, right, Texas, um, just
banned it. How is the Department
of Ag monitoring this, and do we
need to think about introducing
legislation to ban lab grown
meat in New Mexico.
Thank you for the question,
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, I, I really have not
been following the, the, the lab
grown meat side of it, I, I can
definitely say from our industry
stakeholders, that's something
that's not very popular.
Definitely wouldn't be under the
the the the the jurisdiction of
of our State Department of
Agriculture, uh, certainly more
so the, the federal FSIS
programs, but um, yeah, I'd, I'd
have to get back to you on that
one. we're
just really haven't seen any
sort of interest or uh or
anybody that I'm aware of in our
state that's been looking at at
doing any sort of of of lab
grown meat, but um I'd have to
follow up with you on that uh,
uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Director. I do
appreciate that, and from what I
understand is that it has not
entered our markets yet, but the
states are preemptively passing
legislation to prevent it from
entering our markets, um, 7
states have passed a ban so far,
um, director knew my, my second
and last question is, um,
about one of your slides there,
pecans being the 2nd New Mexico
being the 2nd highest producer
of that in terms of agriculture,
how sustainable is that in the
current and future water crisis
that we have in New Mexico. How
are we preparing for that.
Now I'm sure that's a great
question. Yes, we're, we're the
number 2can producing state, uh,
after Georgia, and uh we both
have our perspective water
issues, Georgia too much and and
and of course uh New Mexico, not
enough, and a lot of our
producers are definitely
watching um water consumption
and and looking at ways to
conserve that water and more
efficient ways to deploy that
water and natural resource, uh,
in in different ways and new
technologies like micro
sprinklers
and and because large and large
part a lot of our our our con
growth is being done by a
subservice water uh through our
aquifers, um, and so if if
you're not really pumping,
you're not farming. Um, so
I think there, there's
definitely a lot of
conversations. I understand that
there was a settlement in the
recent lawsuit, uh, between
Texas and New Mexico and um
Colorado and so there's there's
been a special water master
appointed, and so there's
supposed to be some sort of
negotiations and a plan put in
place and what that is, I don't
know today, but uh I definitely
know that a lot of our
production is down in the
southern latitude of the state,
Donana County being probably the
largest
and most concentrated
conproducing uh county if, if
not in the US as far as
concentration of commercial corn
production, and we're certainly
there's there are industry
stickers er certainly looking at
more ways and new ways to
conserve that natural resources
and continue to sustain the the
production that we currently
have. And, and that new
production that may be coming
online soon.
Thank you for that.
As I understand it, it is a
reduction annually of 18,000
square acre feet per year that
we have to reduce in New Mexico.
Um, that we send downstream. So
I, it's something that I, I'm
very curious about when
regarding agriculture and how
sustainable pecan farming is,
um, as an economic driver for
New Mexico when we weigh that
that precious resource that is
dwindling. Um
thank you panelists. Thank you
all for being here and sticking
out. And then thank you to the
committee for hanging out here
all day. I really do appreciate
this. Um, we're gonna transition
now into public comment, um, and
we'll start with, we do have
some public comment online. I'm
going to limit public comment to
3 minutes per person, um, and we
will begin with Mr. Tom
Patterson.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair, uh,
committee members. My name is
Tom Patterson. I'm a cow calf,
uh, rancher in Catron County. I
serve as president-elect of the
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. Senator Charlie, to
your question about water, uh,
conservation.
Thankfully, the legislature with
encouragement from the
governor's office is supporting
an Awater resiliency program
that, uh, rolled out in July of
this year, 66 applications for
the $4.5 million were available
to conserve water being used in
agriculture, uh, a huge success,
bipartisan support. We will be
back asking for more of that.
Getting closer to my home
uh, interests, uh, fake meat,
uh, the market is collapsing, is
my understanding around fake
meat. People understand that
filling
some lab grown organism with
chemicals and additives will
never be able to compete with
the
uh, grass-grown meat, beef that
we are famous for producing here
in New Mexico.
Cattle growers has had the
privilege of working with
the legislature, the governor's
office with Secretary Witty,
with Director New and the staff
at NMDA on a series of
initiatives, uh, we have
supported, uh, the New Mexico
Grown program. Uh, we've been
behind and advocated for the
state meat inspection program
and on the meat processor grant
program that was, uh, that went
through the legislature in this
last session as well. Senator
Duncan nailed it.
We want to thank you for your
support of these initiatives to
develop a program to raise New
Mexico grown beef that is
harvested in our local
communities.
with local labor rather than
having to
reimport it from other states.
and so that we may have New
Mexico beef for New Mexico
schools or senior senior citizen
centers in our retailers. There
are challenges that we face, and
we intend to continue working on
those and with you.
Thank you all very much for your
steadfast support over these
past years and we look forward
to continuing to do that work.
Thank you Mr. Patterson. That
was 2 minutes and 35 seconds.
That man knows how to keep time.
Um, and here, do we have anyone
else online? That's it? OK. And
then here in the audience we
have Arvin Trujillo. If you'll
just come up and use one of
those microphones there, Mr.
Trujillo, um, welcome.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Arvin Trujil and I'm with
Government Affairs for the
Navajo Transitional Energy
Company.
My reason for coming up is to
talk about one of the best
secrets in the state of New
Mexico.
And that is Etech.
We, as indicated in the slides
from the state uh from the
county,
uh, in 2023, we have an economic
impact of about 162 million.
It says on the nation, but it's
in this general area in San Juan
County, southern Colorado,
Southern Utah
northeastern Arizona have all
been affected by this economic
effort.
And
this past year, in the report
that you have, that's grown to
175 million.
So again
this is an economic driver here
in this region. And nobody knows
about it in the state of New
Mexico.
And so again, this is an
opportunity to share with you
what this operation is about.
The annual report that you have
talks about some of the impacts
to the Navajo Nation over the
past decade.
In terms of closures and and
employment loss, but it also
goes into Etech and what we're
doing.
We've, uh, Etech owns the Navajo
mine.
on behalf of the Navajo Nation,
we own 7% of Four Corners power
plant.
Uh,
and, uh, with that, we then
drive our overall economic
efforts here as well as in the
state of Wyoming and Montana.
And so again, we're looking at
uh electrical uh generation.
via solar development, natural
gas development, and coal
development. We're involved in,
in carbon capture and we're
involved in looking at, uh,
better ways of transmission
across the US, but our main
drive is really looking at
economic development. How do we
create jobs?
And more importantly, here on
within the Navajo Nation, how do
we get our kids back?
We do a tremendous job educating
our youth.
but we have nothing for them to
come back to. I'm an example of
that. I have 3 kids.
They've all gotten their
education. 21, one's got her
master's, the other one is just
finishing her master's.
One lives in Baltimore,
Maryland.
Another one live, my son lives
in Denver, Colorado, and my
other daughter lives in
Australia.
They should be here
contributing to this region and
we've had discussions on that.
But they looked me dead in the
eye and they said, Dad,
come back to what
And so again, the opportunities
here is to really begin to look
at driving this effort
And so Ntech is at the forefront
here in the four corners region
to begin to drive that effort,
looking at energy generation.
and looking at how we can
develop that into
utilizing that infrastructure.
for increasing our economic
development opportunities here
in the Four Corners region.
And so, also, I'm a part of the
railroad
uh,
that's being developed now
And again, that's an opportunity
that we see for this region.
And so again, I just wanted to
take this uh opportunity just to
introduce ETech.
I've also introduced it to the
uh Indian Affairs Committee.
Next year, we'll be working on
see if we can have you guys come
up and tour our operations
because I'm a mining engineer
from way back.
from the 70s
and back then, there were a lot
of people who used to call this
area.
the national sacrifice Area
because nobody knew what was
going to happen with
reclamation.
Well, in the book there, you're
gonna see that we've been
awarded time and time again for
recreational efforts. And in
fact, we've given back 2000
acres back to the nation.
and nobody has done that before
until now.
So again, we're meeting the
standards we're making an effort
and we're driving this, and this
is a real economic driver here
in the, this part of the, of New
Mexico and in this part of Four
Corners region. So again, thank
you very much, Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Trujillo, and I want to take
the opportunity to apologize for
not having you come and present
at this committee. It was a
missed opportunity. I take
responsibility for that. Let's
make sure that doesn't happen
again, again either next year
or um I'm not sure what the
shift is for our 4th meeting,
being that those were the days
that ERDPC was supposed to meet
October 1st and 2nd. Once we
figure out what that is, I'd
love to be in communication and,
and bring you back to the table,
sir. Thank you.
Thank you
Madam Madam Chair, could I just,
uh, offer one more piece of
advice. Arvin was our Four
Corners economic development
director for a number of years.
So let me just pat him on the
back. He knows what he's talking
about and, and we should listen.
I appreciate that. Um, committee
panelists, folks listening
online, thank you so much for
sticking with us for the day.
Um, that will adjourn the 3rd
meeting of the Economic and role
Policy
