Since we have our presenters
here why don't we go ahead and
try to start earlier so if I
could have the staff go and
round up the committee we're
going to fire up here in about
five minutes.
Alright if we could have the
issue and her drill come on up
to the table and then as soon as
he and article gets here we'll
have him also join we'll start
with sounds is it us chief
economist legislative finance
committee
and then what will go to tax
revenue but let's let the staff
take one more
walk around here super can't
gather everybody else and if
those who don't want to start
early raise your hand
now there.
Alright I think we go had an
reconvenient committee where one
are one thirty item but we're
gonna start a little earlier on
the general fund consensus
revenue update we start with
izing and then pedro then when
now mr
good tier will have a common up
to the table so go ahead is he
it's all yours thinking
manager so i'll be speaking to
this hand out titled money
matters and blue
and
I think what i'll do is is skip
over some of the economic
indicators which is typical year
or traditionally the tax and rep
department does that source save
that for
mr globby how but
starting just at the top level
you know what what are my key
takeaways what am I hoping to
convey to you all from this
recent forecast and it's one of
course the revenues what the
bottom line is how they've
changed compared to last time
and really the message here is
we collected a little bit more
than we expected in the previous
year about three percent
but in going into the future
starting with this year we
expect growth to be a lot slower
so there's something of some of
setting impacts on the revenue
estimate here higher base lower
growth and we actually end up
funny enough around the same
area where we thought we were a
year ago so that's that's number
one number two is the economic
forecast in that sort of the
uncertainty principle that I
want to describe that's unique
to this worcaster that's that
we're seeing a lot of mixed
signals in the economy today
we're seeing make signals in the
labor market interest rates
might be heading in the
different direction then we
originally expected even just a
couple weeks ago but in addition
to that we're also seeing some
interesting signals on inflation
we know that tariffs exacerbate
inflation and so we were
expecting some rise there you
know how much of that is being
seen or experienced through the
economy already and i'll get
into that a little bit more
later but really the second
thing is really the mixed
signals that we're seeing in the
economy.
And how that leaves us in a
difficult position of
interpreting where we might be
heading and then third and and
lastly is is the uncertainty
directly related to federal
policy changes that specifically
in this presentation related to
taxes but of course is you know
very well as a part of this
committee it's also related to
appropriations and economic
activity in general and and so
i'll get into more detail on all
of these topics as we work
through this presentation so
starting with the chart at the
bottom of page one this speaks
to or or hopefully graphically
demonstrates the principle I was
describing where in FY twenty
five we expected one point six
percent revenue growth we had
much more than that in in
percent terms we actually
collected four point six percent
in terms of growth so that's
that three percent extra that we
collected but you can see in the
later years twenty six we're
downgrading our expectations
from growth of growth from two
point six percent to point four
percent and in the following
year three point five to two
point nine and so on and so
forth and what that results in
is this table at the top of page
one if you look at the bage line
that says august twenty twenty
five consensus you can see
fourteen point one billion
dollar expectation for the
budget year fourteen point one
billion dollars of general fund
but the line above that shows
the change from the last
forecast and you'll see and fy
twenty seven only seventeen
million dollar change
if you look at FY twenty five
it's the three hundred and
ninety million dollar change so
more two hundred ninety million
more in the year that passed but
because of the slower growth
rates were basically at the same
in the budget you're at FY
twenty seven
okay what that means in terms of
appropriating is in this call
out box in the middle of page
one fy twenty seven revenues
less appropriations where
estimating four hundred and
eighty four million dollars of
total revenues minus total
appropriations so this is a
total new money is on top of
what you appropriate last year
four hundred and eighty four
million dollars is what we're
estimating in the next year and
that represents about four and a
half percent.
Appropriation growth and to put
that into some contacts last
year we estimated at eight
hundred and ninety two million
sorry about half as much new
money this year as last year
if you turn to page two
this is the in the middle of the
page here this table is the
general fund financial summary
of very abbreviated form of the
general fund financial summary
and this is the state's balance
sheet so of course you start
with revenues at the top how
much you spend in the middle
there and then the bottom line
transfer tour from reserves and
then you're ending reserve
balance at the bottom and we're
estimating that you ended fy
twenty five at thirty three
point nine percent reserves and
before any appropriations in the
upcoming session you're at
thirty six percent in the coming
year but we know that'll go down
with appropriations in the
coming session so it will be
less than thirty six percent
let's see here
briefly touch on some of the
economic forecasts if you look
at the chart at the bottom of
page two you can see the
down grade and expectations for
gdp growth nationwide from
december last year to this year
you can see slower economic
growth expected in twenty twenty
five but then slightly higher in
twenty six and then about the
same and twenty seven so overall
less economic growth for the
country expected in this
forecast compared to last year
if you turn up to page three a
little bit more on on the
signals in the labor market
you know over the last year
especially in twenty twenty four
we had very stable and and
strong labor market
indicators one of those is the
job creations each month and in
twenty twenty four we average or
over the last twelve months I
should say so that's part of
twenty twenty five half of
twenty twenty five the us
average a one hundred and fifty
thousand new jobs created every
single month over the last
twelve months but in the last
three months me june in july
we've seen that number kind of
go off of a cliff instead of a
hundred and fifty thousand a
month we've now seen that to be.
Thirty five thousand and part of
the story here is downward
revisions as the federal
government gets more data from
employers or households they
update their expectations for
how many jobs were created in
previous months and those
previous months had been higher
maybe one twenty maybe one
thirty and every month since
they've been revised lower and
lower in lower down to an
average of thirty five thousand
and there's something that we
can glean from those revisions
when the economy is doing really
well
and we're waiting on more data
to come in we might expect that
all businesses hired at about
the same rent we might say
that's a hundred and fifty
thousand but if the economy is
doing really well as we get more
data we might find out that we
underprotect it there was
actually a hundred and seventy
five thousand or two hundred
thousand drops created and so
the upward revisions are
assigned that the economy's
accelerating are doing better
when the reverse is happening
when we see the job numbers
revised down what what is
happening is the jobs that
reported at first were rosier
what they reported as being jobs
created were rosier than the
rest so it's more data came in
we saw their businesses were
doing worse than we had
originally expected and so that
can tell us about a decelerating
in the economy or or certain
trajectory that's maybe towards
the negative and so what we
might see in at the end of this
month is another downward
revision that could put us in
the negative we're not you know
beating that into this forecast
but it is one of those mixed
signals a yellow flag that we're
seeing that maybe the job market
is getting a lot tougher we're
seeing that of course in other
indicators in the job market
hirings are a lot lower there at
twenty thirteen levels their
significantly slow down from i'm
just a few years ago that means
it's hard to get to get a job
nationally
but you know there are some
other signs that can can be a
little confusing the
unemployment rates steady or
dropping a little bit and part
of the story there is the labor
forces shrinking
a lot of the research is
suggesting that increased
immigration actions is
decreasing the supply of labor
either by new entrance.
New immigrants to the economy
but also existing folks who
might be exiting the labor force
and so even if job growth may be
decelerating it's not showing up
in the unemployment data just
yet because the total labor
force is shrinking if that makes
sense unemployment is total
people looking for work who
don't have work divided by the
total of number of people
interested in in in working at
all so if there's less people
interested in working it may
hide the fact
that there may be you know
proportionally more people
struggling to find a drum
i'm moving on to the consumer
price and next year
we'll see if I would short for
that
I I will in a few pages but I
just want to speak a little bit
to this you know we we seen
inflation going down consumer
price in index had been
decreasing for several years now
and I think mr globby who will
go into this more but we
recently signed the last month a
slate take up of maybe point one
so it's in the wrong direction
not alarming it certainly could
be a lot worse maybe we're back
to twenty twenty three levels of
inflation
but we also know that the full
impact of tariffs haven't been
fully baked into these prices
yet we are seeing the effective
terror free which in this
forecast was estimated to be
around ten percent approaching
fifteen percent so we can expect
more inflation than than maybe
we're estimating in this
forecast here maybe for december
we'll see higher expectations
for inflation
and I I just want to point out
that there are a lot of other
yellow flags out there is just
speaking with your staff about
the slowing housing market
housing starts permits for new
housing construction is is down
significantly new housing sales
is down significantly nationally
end in your mexico and so those
are um
metrics that we're keeping an
eye on for potential indication
of where the economy's headed
moving on to the next page I
feel turned to page five skip
ahead a little bit here oil and
gas
we actually ended fy twenty five
at about where we.
Thought we be in terms of prices
from the previous year we ended
at sixty nine dollars a barrel
and and that was about on track
as I mentioned but what we're
seeing is a significantly lower
expectation for prices in the
coming years where at sixty
dollars and fifty cents in the
current year for twenty six
that's seven dollars and fifty
cents lower than what we thought
we'd be in december and i'll get
into how big of an impact what
that means for state revenues
shortly and fy twenty seven even
more significant where at sixty
dollars and fifty cents a barrel
that's nearly ten dollars lower
than where we thought we'd be in
december and what that's
contributing to is of course we
had already expected
decelerating oil production
growth that means the flattening
of the previously exponential
growth platowing before
eventually declining you can see
the chart on page five at the
top here it's still some of that
story but we're seeing a little
that flattening happening more
aggressively and sooner
especially as those prices are
maybe not as profitable for for
companies to continue drilling
at the at the previous pieces so
if you look at natural gas
there's something interesting
here that i've found since our
previous forecast in that
expectations for natural gas
production are not as slow as
oil you know oil
was driving our natural gas
production growth over the last
five six years but as you all
know when you drill in oil well
the production peak occurs for
that well within the first three
to six months and then quickly
drops off there after and so you
can have to keep drilling almost
an accelerated pace to keep your
production total production for
the state of new mexico high but
there's associated natural gas
with each one of those wells and
what we're seeing with the
natural gas is that it doesn't
drop off as quickly as oil and
it actually stays that much
higher rates for much longer and
so as a lot of these new oil
wells mature even though their
oil production drops off their
natural gas days high and so
what we're actually expecting is
strong natural gas production
growth into the future despite
platinum oil production growth
which is.
Sort of a new expectation for
these forecasts turning to page
six the gross receipts tax
forecast
i'll drive your attention to two
charts here the the chart at the
top represents the share of
gross receipts from different
areas of the state for a long
time we had seen about a third
of thirty third
more or less true bernard leo
edianly rest of new mexico
and you could see that at the
top of page six there the table
in the middle of the page shows
growth for industries over the
previous year for twenty five
over the previous year and what
you'll see is that professional
scientific and technical
services is leading the pack at
ten percent growth something new
you know oil and gas had been
driving a lot of gross receipts
tax growth in twenty twenty one
two and three but since twenty
twenty four and twenty twenty
five that's actually not one of
our leading gross receipts tax
sources anymore or at least not
sources of growth and we are
actually seeing mostly
inconstruction as well as
administrative oh excuse me
other industries which are
unclassified
if you turn to page seven.
Going into what oil and gas
revenues are going to translate
to in terms of the general fund
and other trust funds at the
bottom of page seven the blue
bars represent the amount going
into the general fund and then
the orange represents the early
childhood trust fund and now
also either the medicare trust
under the behavior or health
trust one and then in green the
severance tax permanent fund and
what's really interesting to
know about these choices those
insulating mechanisms that you
all have put into place over the
last five years have protected
the general fund from losses fy
twenty three was a peak oil and
gas here and over the
consecutive the following three
years leading up to FY twenty
six we've actually had
decreasing oil and gas revenues
and so without those insolating
measures that you all have put
into place we we likely would
have seen revenue decreases over
that time and so instead we've
of course experienced
significant revenue increases
and if you turn to pha you can
see where those investments are
coming back into the general
find at the top of
this is the general on growth
rate by revenue type and I think
what's really remarkable here is
the interest bars or this
reflects investments made by the
state coming back to the general
fund or buying for but by and
large the
fastest growing revenues in the
general funds so these are both
the most stable revenues in the
general fund and the fastest
growing revenues in the general
find almost three times the
growth rate of other revenues
and that's because of all of
those investments that you all
have mean into the severance tax
permanent fine that really
children trust fund and then of
course also the landgrant
permanent fund which receives
oil and gas revenues as well and
that's really expected to
continue to power the general
fund passed a stagnant growth
through without these
investments we expect the
general fund to be less than the
historical growth rate but
because of these investments
where acts really expected to
get back towards our trend of of
previous revenue
okay i'll skip ahead here if you
turn to page nine a little bit
on income taxes these are just
the changes made to the personal
income tax over the last three
years.
You can see almost half a
billion dollars of personal
income tax cuts that's revenues
going back to new mexicans
through tax packages over the
last three years
I really difficult to forecast
part of these estimates or the
film tax credits which are shown
at the bottom of page nine and
what
can happen is
these film companies may not
claim credits in the year that
they are expected to so for
example we would have expected
an for twenty five large claims
of film tax credits but they
didn't materialize even though
they were already approved and
in the pipeline and so what
we're seeing as some shifting
into fy twenty six which is kind
of obscuring the revenue
collections if you remember we
have higher than expected
collections in f by twenty five
in part because those credits
didn't materialize and those
would have been payout to those
companies would have reduced our
revenues but we're now expecting
those payouts to happen in FY
twenty six which contributes to
that reduced collection
expectation in the in the
following year so that's always
a risk to the forecast when
those credits come in or don't
if you turn to the next page
page ten
to speak a little bit to
forecast risks we have here what
we call our rule of thumb on oil
and gas price or volume changes
and the bullet here in this text
box a one dollar change in the
annual average price of oil has
about a fifty seven million
dollars impact on state revenues
so if you remember earlier I
said ten dollars and fifty cent
reduction in price expectations
so that's about a five hundred
and seventy million dollars
reduction in in revenues
expected from this period over
the last period because of that
price decline so what hopefully
that illustrates is how
significant of a risk of course
oil and gas remains to see it
revenues both in price and
production and if you turn to
the next page this this on page
eleven these barchards represent
a federal reserve survey of oil
and gas producing companies and
what they ask is what price do
you need in the in the top chart
what price do you need.
To maintain production on your
existing world so and other
words had if prices far below
that point you have to shut in
your production for your
existing models and what we see
and in the permeant delaware and
average of thirty three dollars
per barrel that's that's pretty
good that means that we won't
expect thread ins unless prices
are very very low but what's
really interesting is the chart
below it and this question is
what price do you need to
profitably drill on you well in
what you're seeing in the
permian delaware sixty two
dollars a barrel so you can see
how a sixty dollar expectation
really challenges the incentive
to drill new wells in new mexico
but of course the barchart
represents the different survey
response you have people who can
certainly drill profitably below
sixty two and then you have a
lot of folks who cannot drill
profitable profitably at sixty
two and actually need a much
higher price and so that's it a
challenge for new mexico's
production
expectations going forward move
moving on towards something
that's maybe of more focus to
you are a couple of federal
changes that have happened with
respect to oil and gas over the
last year one the royalty
resiliency act in this this is
kind of an accounting change in
some ways previously oil and gas
companies would when producing
on federal land would have to
pay a hundred percent of their
total production would the
federal royalty rate would apply
to a hundred percent of that
production when they produce on
on federal land even if a
hundred percent of the
production wasn't actually
related to the federal and so
good example of this is you
might drill a well on federal
land and you have a later on you
have some amount coming from
steetland next door and so
theoretically you should only
pay royalties on the to the feds
for the amount on the federal
land into the state for the
amount on the state land and so
previously a hundred percent of
the production was paid federal
royalties and then later there
would be a true up that would
happen where the federal
government would say okay you
pay too much so now you can pay
less in the future now what
they're saying there's there's
sort of a rule change where
these companies are allowed to
estimate their share of
production by land type.
Up front so now you don't have
to do a hundred percent of your
production it is a subject to a
federal royalty now you can from
the jump estimate your shares
and what that has done is
there's some something of a
backlog all of those previous
overpayments are still working
their way through the system and
and previously it didn't matter
because the next well would have
the same effect in the next well
it was kind of kind of like you
could think of it filing your
personal income taxes your your
incomes withheld over the year
and then eventually you file at
the end of the year and you get
your true up now it's happening
almost instantaneously and so we
have a backlog of these with
held payments in some in some
ways of if you're following my
metaphor that we have to pay
back and what we're expecting is
maybe a hundred and fifty
million dollars liability that
we have been overpaid over the
last three years or I mean
decades actually but we expect
that to play out over the next
three years is what I meant to
say so over the next three years
about fifty million dollars a
year of liability in terms of
that overpayment from that
previous policy the second thing
so that's why royalty resiliency
act and then the second thing is
of course the change to the
federal loyalty rate that just
passed in the house resolution
and during the previous federal
administration the royalty rates
went from twelve point five
percent to sixteen point six
seven percent so we were gonna
expect higher royalties coming
in new mexico because of that
change and now it's changed back
to the twelve and a half percent
and what's interesting here is
we we didn't have to take down
our forecast because what was
happening at that time was
somewhat of a moratorium on new
federal leases there was a very
slow federal leasing
administration we did not expect
to see a rapid ramp up into the
sixteen point sixty seven
percent rate so we had
conservative expectations of
that revenue collection so when
we reverted back to the twelve
and a half percent were back to
about where we thought we would
be last year so what that
translates to in these forecasts
is not much but there is
analysis on what could have been
rate what could the revenue
collection have been.
Had that sixteen point six seven
percent royalty rate been put
into place in perpetuity and
folks over at the resources for
the future are estimating one
point seven billion dollars in
less revenue over the next ten
years due to that decreased
royal tv alright
that was a mouth for moving on
to
the next couple of of issues
here if you flip to page
thirteen also especially
relevant to you all in on this
committee are the consensus
revenue estimating groups
estimated impacts of federal tax
changes so as you all know very
well from your hearings a month
ago there are certain tax
changes that roll onto the state
and we are have done our best to
identify what the major ones are
and we've included them for you
here at the bottom of the table
if you're interested in the
detail or in the barchare
on page thirteen
and what I want to highlight or
are a couple things so
individually
we have the enhanced or the
increased standard deduction
which the group is estimating
will result in a forty one
million dollars revenue loss for
new mexico no tax on car loan
interest six and a half million
dollars last for revenues and
new mexico personal income tax
collections in your mexico and
then the increased deduction for
state and local taxes that's the
increased sock cap that's a
seventy million dollar loss for
new mexico
and then we have the other
changes to business related tax
provisions there's a long list
of them I I i'm sure you all
remember that really dense
presentation last month where it
was like line after line of
esoteric you know i'm business
exemptions or deductions and
what we're estimating there is
forty six of excuse me forty
three point six million dollars
revenue loss resulting from
those changes to new mexico but
I want to highly carbia these
estimates nationally and of
course in new mexico we're still
digesting these federal changes.
There are a lot of national you
know tax think tanks and firms
that are coming out with
guidance that we are finding are
maybe in disagreement with our
analysis and there are some that
were certain they're wrong and
i'm sure there's some that we're
looking at that they've thought
of that we think oh we need to
incorporate that as well so this
is definitely not an exhaustive
list is what i'm saying i'm
saying that there is a lot of
analysis still needing to be
done
we're not a hundred percent sure
on all of them that we've gotten
all of them but we do think this
represents the largest so as as
we go forward and we update
these week we think that the the
changes will be negligible
I also want to point out the
barchart on the top of page
thirteen here and this is the
variation in impacts of course
for for these estimates we have
to come up with a point estimate
how much we're going to put our
money on we think we're gonna
lose but it can certainly be
higher or lower and our analysis
we've tried to stress these to
some extent you know if they
come in a lot more negative than
we've expected or not so
negative as we expected what
could the the actual loss be and
we have maybe about a hundred
million dollar range on each
site so as high as three hundred
million dollars of losses there
or as low as about one hundred
and forty million
okay i'll skip through the rest
of this presentation i'm quickly
if you turn to page fourteen and
fifteen keep both of these open
of course we always stress tests
the revenue estimates and then
we compare them to spending and
what we're seeing of course as
it's typical of the low oil
price scenario has the most
significant impact on new
mexico's revenues and then what
does that translate to in terms
of appropriations and what we
find is on page fourteen in a
worst case scenario you have
maybe one point one six billion
dollars that of appropriations
above revenues in that scenario
in fy twenty six so you might
need one point one six billion
dollars of reserves for example
to cover those spending
obligations that you all have
already made and as you all
appropriate into the future year
you also might want to cover
those appropriations as well and
so we are estimating the
potential revenues below those
appropriations at one point six
billion.
So you might need one point six
billion plus one point one six
billion or about two point seven
billion if you wanted to cover a
hundred percent of those
appropriations of course that
doesn't have to be in cash you
also might choose to cut some of
those appropriations instead but
basically two point seven
billion in a room that you might
need to create if revenues were
to come down that far
and then lastly on page sixteen.
I guess two things on page
sixteen the revenue trends at
the top you can see were very
close to trend usually that's
the source of comfort free for
your economists trend is is that
the further you away you are
from the trend it may be a sign
of volatility especially if
you're highly above trend you
can expect to come back down to
trend which could be a source of
concern but what is really
interesting is part of that
return to trend is coming from
tax revenues like pit which you
can see below it which are far
below train and that's really
because of those tax cuts that
you all have passed in recent
years so a lot of the strength
above trend has been returned to
taxpayers through on revenue
reductions and then finally at
the bottom of of page sixteen
you can see reserve levels over
time they spiked in twenty two
and twenty three when revenues
came in much much much stronger
than expected nack nationwide
but of course in new mexico as
well and then in recent years
the drop down to thirty three
percent and then thirty four and
thirty six percent before
appropriations so we expect that
reserves will come in below that
as well
and with that matter sure maybe
I can hand it over to the
executive team
of course go ahead sir.
Good afternoon member for the
chair mister schair and better
to clarify senior economies the
decession and revenue department
didn't you all for the
opportunity to share with you
today the consensus general fund
revenue outlook uh today we're
gonna present the uh general
trends of the new mexico our
economy and the major tax
programs we're going to focus on
the uh demand for your there is
given that our chief tourists
has given you d
slide to just want to draw a
duration to the main topics to
get through today so uh from the
general economic trains are for
the us and you mexico economies
to general phone are overview
through the three main tax our
programs
inside uh three
were would slow through we just
want to emphasize this is the
during work of auto grazy state
agencies in particular
department of finance
administration exception of
revenue department department of
transportation on the
legislative finance committee.
Slide for just a for your
reference is just the
general uh macroeconomic context
in which the forecast was a
produce I just let me at quickly
emphasize the fact that we are
respecting our national economy
to robert love the train in the
near uh in your
mislight are five with more
detail we are presenting the US
real growth domestic product and
as we can we can see it has been
just at a dongle compared to the
previous forecasts are in
october twenty twenty four
now move forward to slide six
and now are focusing on and you
mexico real growth state product
what we are seeing is are the
same are trajectory in mexico
economic growing more moderate
compared to the previous
forecasts to we're respecting a
lower economic activity.
Who into slight seven you is
still known for employment what
we are respecting is a lower
employment level now in general
we spend the us labor market to
show some signs of our
moderation
however in slight eight
new medical drug nonfirm are
employment what we have is that
what we can spread higher levels
of employment if we see the
general forecasts have been a
revise of working the case of
new mexico
in his light nine we have some
details about the
new mexican labor market to
particular who have the year
over year employment changed by
sector and here while we want
you emphasize is what is the
right now the leading uh sector
wishes are construction on on
the other side we see the
federal government on
information sectors are with a
big losers in themselves
employment.
It's lied turn just for your
reference we have here more
information any particular I
employment share by sector in
our new mexico.
And in slide are leaving here we
want to focus on the dynamics of
the labor market in
in the state and will we what we
can see yet is the delay or
market are remains tight but
showing some signs of a
balancing as you can see here
the deraid our line is getting
close to to one
slide
twelve
centually selling you that the
new met gun employment rate is
expected to be a inline with the
US unemployment rate in very
long term.
Miss light thirteen we have
someone uh when it turned
indicators nine particular we
can see that the consumer price
seemed that have been hided and
anticipated but I suspected you
reduce our four hundred and
twenty twenty seven on the order
a hand we have that are the
interest rate if that will got a
rates as what is aspected on to
the rate our richest and it can
leave him bread off about two
point seven
moving on to oil and natural uh
guess yours quickly in terms of
oil prices are before casts have
been revised don't work compared
to december twenty twenty four
forecast and the main driver of
this behavior is yours a weekend
lower the men's lower economy
growth as we mention before.
Slight sixteen is for your
reference here we have any
mexico price production and and
breaks but in jane at all while
we can see here is that our
production falling for case has
been revised outwere under reach
town I suspected to remain
between
ninety one hundred
and slight seventeen new mexican
actually prices and i'm
production as shift tourists are
mentioned in suspect that that
in the near chairman production
world are follows the production
of a oil
in the and long term
growth suspected to be driving
by the uh the global demand
specially for provide a natural
gas
in themselves the prices
naturally as prices are
respected to gradually increase
over the time you to increase us
expert capacity in the future
now.
Which you are gross receipts tax
here
the main take away is just that
gross receipts tax were all the
suspect it to be moderately
coming the coming years as you
can see
and
we expect that the underlying
economic growth
is still a positive with private
consumption and the oil natural
gas industry leading the near
term growth are rates
light twenty is for you
reference and here we won't just
do emphasis what are the main or
leading sectors
in themselves
gross receipts tax generation
slight twenty one is also for
you reference but here we want
just to emphasize the ratif
importance of the oil sector for
area we counters.
Will respect two personal income
tax in slight twenty three
otherwise back is a some
positive growth but moderate and
in the coming years you can see
some changes in themselves the
the forecast for fiscal year
twenty five
well that are you contractual
reflects just some legislative
changes
it is suspected that our pickup
is a steel positive oh will we
grow in at the lower lower right
compared to uh the december
twenty twenty four forecast.
In his light twenty four we have
ways and salaries which is the
main driver of a personal income
taxes so here what we we are
respecting
is
that in fiscally are twenty six
and fiscally are trained server
twenty seven the forecast
continued to show slow
wage and salary growth are with
holding growth rate is for
cassage for below washington
salaries are growth.
In slight twenty five
we have um some recent if
changes are costing less than
expected and forecast assumes a
lower uh legislative adjustment
for fiscal transfiscal year
twenty nine hours by sixty four
million
slide twenty six is for you
reference this slight provider
some details about the uh
negative impacts of the federal
issue are one
on personal income taxi new
mexico
moving on to corporating
comparts.
Is like twenty eight
while in fiscal year twenty five
said was revised upward in
fiscal year twenty six and
fiscal year twenty seven were
revised dongler by about one
hundred and fifty five million
per year this is just a
reflecting a wicker
expectation for uh economic
economic growth.
Slide twenty nine
is for your reference and is
showing on more china spectact I
negative impacts of the h one
on our corporate income thoughts
in
new mexico now i'm going to
possibly to my colleague uh
chief uh dilger
thank you good afternoon my name
is the other guy i'm their chief
economist at the department of
financial administration and
i'll be covering from seven
taxes and renting royalties
through the end of the executive
presentation so i'm slide thirty
one
you have the outlook for the oil
in gas school tax revenue as
well as federal minor leasing
revenues and are the main
highlight here is even though
prices have been revised
downward i've set a bit by
increased production volumes you
can see that the portions of
these two revenue programs that
go to the general fund are fixed
captor for twenty four levels
and insulated from the changes
and volatility and the market
in this estimate we revise the
prices downward and you can see
that the main changes and the
impact are felt in the transfers
in access of the five year
averages to these of these two
revenue programs does include
the early children trust phoned
the service tax permanent phone
the newly created medical
trustphone and became your
health trust fund so the mean
highlight is the portion of the
general phone is safe and
installated from that volatility
and even though i'm prices have
come down.
That's mainly been impacted the
transfers to those additional
funds
moving on to slight thirty two
there are a couple updates on
federal legislation in the first
ones that federal royalty
resiliency act this was passed
last year and it was an effort
from the fastest streamline the
royalty payment process where
producers have what's called the
communities station agreement so
multiple proclusers come
together to per produce
production where there are
several owners of
the commodity and in that change
the
federal the owner the federal
agency has overpaid
to the state from september
through
me of this year and in
accounting for the changes in
that legislation where expecting
a retractive clawback of about
fifty million dollars in the
federal royalties revenue which
we've spread out throughout the
forecast period the second
update is on her one
that is the
legislation that was passed this
summer and it reduced the
royalty rate on production on
federal land down from sixteen
point six seven back down to
twelve point five percent
now the main highlight here is
the cracks consensus baseline
estimate uses a historical
average to produce the forecast
which is at about that twelve
point five percent so it doesn't
impact the revenues to the state
e good way to think about this
is it's foregone revenue in the
future as more production would
have come online.
At that higher rate than the
state would have received a that
much more revenue which is
estimated at about a hundred and
seventy million dollars annually
over a ten year period
for that that update
moving on to slight thirty two
this wraps up the revenue
programs and it's mainly a
rollup of the impacts of h one
which were covered by my
colleagues and you can see that
them the effect of the hour one
on the general fund revenues is
a drag on the state's general
find revenue and this is a roll
up of the changes of the
standard deduction that no tax
on current interest salt
deductions and some other
impacts from h r one
which have the drag on the
general fund of about two
hundred and six million dollars
annually as my colleague has
have mentioned this is a a big
bill that we're still studying
and analyzing and others are
doing the same and so the
effects of it are still are
being studied in ongoing
moving on to slight thirty five
or cover the general fund
overview so what is this all
mean for the general phone the
economic indicators leave the
ground work for the economic
outlook the updates of the
revenue programs
and one slide thirty six you see
the combination of the revenue
estimate are the main hell
highlights here are for five
twenty five the state is
completing
fiscal you're twenty five in a
relatively strong position
with the revenue programs
guarantee and sit and investment
revenues performing overall well
and your over year growth are
estimated at four point six
percent.
Now the caveat add to five
twenty five very confident as to
where it's going to be completed
but it's not final it's not
final until we have the general
fund audit at the end of the
year
moving on to a fiscal year
twenty six this is where we see
those head winds of the dimmer
economic outlook as well as the
drag of hr one on the general
phone with your over year growth
at zero point four percent
whereas in the december
estimates the estimate called
for two point six percent gross
rate here every year moving
forward to the rest of the
forecast period the estimate is
expects revenues to return to
moderate growth but at rates
that are below those ten year
transfer positive but slower
growth
so what is this all mean are in
terms of the budget you're
moving forward on slight thirty
seven
we have the new money estimate
of four hundred and eighty five
million dollars for a fiscal
year twenty seven and the total
new money is defined as the
updated revenue for fiscal year
twenty seven minutes all total
appropriations of the current
fiscal year.
Moving on to slight thirty eight
this sums up
there you ever growth rates for
the revenue estimate four point
six percent in twenty five zero
point four percent in twenty six
and of course the total new
money figure for twenty seven
and updated reserve estimates at
three point five billion
for fiscal year twenty five or
thirty three point nine percent
now strongly caveat that that
that's still an estimate
it'll be final when we have the
general fund items at the end of
the year fiscal year twenty six
estimated reserves are three
point ninety five billion or
thirty six point four percent
and on page thirty nine you have
a high level view of the gfs
this mainly summarizes the
beginning balances of the
general fund reserves the upped
it updated recreating revenue
estimate an accounting of the
appropriations both recurring
and non record and as well as
the estimated reserve
percentages at the bottom
and slight forty the group
recognizes that the forecast has
many risks and we've outlined
both downside and upside risks
to the forecast
on the downsides we have the
more severe impact of the
terrorists
more severe slow down than
expected a potential recession
as well as on the upside a
better performing economy than
expected and at the bottom we
listed hr one on both columns
because it's still being studied
and they're still
much too
derived from it
blastly on a slight forty one we
have the stress test analysis
this is a revenue sensitivity
analysis.
Which my colleagues covered so
i'll just quickly just highlight
that it's the groups
tool to inform leadership of
what could the leader leadership
expect if revenues different
path under a better performing
economy as well as the moderate
recession scenario and the low
oil price scenario.
An slide of forty two we
overly the appropriations for
the current year and just to
highlight worst case scenario
under the low oil price scenario
if that's what the path that the
general fund revenues were to
take how would that impact
appropriations and essentially
the impact in just that year
they would impact non recruit
probations by a little over a
billion dollars and as you can
see the record probations in the
blue bar are below the
s the s eight the the low oil
price scenario in the stress
test and lastly we have the ten
year trend analysis on slight
forty three
my colleagues covered this i'll
just quickly just give a quick
highlight that this type of
analysis is a useful tool
it highlights at house something
changes over time and then it
compares it to its typical long
term path and that so that's the
black bar that's the trend
blamed there and you have the
overlied actual revenues and the
revenue estimate
in the forecast period and
essentially the main highlight
here is revenues are returning
to trend and just below in the
forecast period as i'm so my
colleagues have highlighted and
I believe that all over my
portion of the presentation
thank you again in we stand for
questions
start with rep center for rare
and then we'll go to senator to
health thank you madame chair I
think you gentlemen great report
is usually a
lot to learn
overwhelming but always always
informative you know on your
additional risk profile you
mentioned a lot of things like
you don't know what hi one is
really getti.
Me you don't know what it really
means right now and all that
analysis is still being
you know coming in but in early
august our current president
fired commissioner erica
mcintapin tarford who was headed
the bureau of labor statistics
so and has replaced her with
somebody who
no from the another economist
but certainly with very
different political view point
and we have always been able to
trust the bureau of labor
statistics and it was used kind
of as a national trend center I
think for the world in in
certainly an economic
predictions so i'm wondering as
economists I am not one so I I
turn to all three of you how how
are we going to trust
information that comes out of
the bureau labor statistics when
it comes to unemployment and
jobs I I you know and employment
rates in jargon I don't know
what that's going to mean would
anybody be able to answer that
for me
manager and representative i'll
i'll take a crack at it
I think
there's there's sort of a a
short term in a long term
outlook there the in the short
term I think there's there will
remain to be high trust in in in
the data there's published
methodology the acting
commissioner is is sort of like
a legacy of of that agency so
there's a lot of reason to
continue i'm trusting that data
I would say that as we move
towards the medium to long term
what it'll be important to do is
keep an eye on things like
changes to methodology keep an
eye on i'm things like the
imputed rate so even currently
there are certain amount of
statistics gathered that have to
be imputed they used to be
gathered but now they have to be
imputed in part because of maybe
less folks working at the bureau
labor statistics.
So those things are important to
keep an eye on and then
ultimately you know using
whatever external information
private sources we can to
validate and and continue to
compare is another
approach that will be taken
thank you to either of the one I
add to them.
Manager
I oh I would just add that I
agree with chief dodgers as
assessment and is to continue to
trust and.
Already thank you we're going to
go next to senator to health and
senator souls pick you madam
chair and thank you for this
information i'm still kind of
trying to digest it I try to
look at it while you're sharing
it and look at
I am under the assumption in
listening to this that
this doesn't really take into
consideration the risk of
funding loss that we've all been
kind of trying to figure out I
saw said you know that it's a
risk but you haven't put any
actual numbers to it and my
other assumption is that
is that this takes into
consideration that if there is a
loss in revenue for federal that
we are not looking at
appropriating more were maybe
looking at cutting other
programs would that be fair
madam chair center thank you for
that question I I came into this
thinking I really need to be
sure that differentiate the
difference and then I totally
dropped them off there is a
really important distinction to
make between
general fund revenues that are
in in this report and how much
we expect to collect and how
that could change with federal
policy changes including tax
changes which directly reduce as
we estimate it here you know it
is two hundred
shouldn't speak off hand but a
few hundred million dollars of
general fund revenue losses and
then your point is while taking
that there's the budget site so
the revenue line and then
there's the appropriation line
that can also take a hit and so
there's obviously a relationship
there I think your next
screensentation director solely
will cover some of those
appropriation losses and how the
intersect but another way that
the intersect is when we say
four and a half percent
revenue of appropriations or
appropriations can grow by four
and a half percent in the coming
year
in many ways that has to be
inclusive of of whatever
additional spending you might do
to replace appropriations so.
I hope I hope that helps clear
that does help thank you madam
chair and thank you and then on
there was a page on here and i'm
sorry I should have covered it
where you show that the
let me find it really quick you
show that the
revenue is rather at but you
reflect the.
Early childhood fund as big and
then growing smaller
is what why are we expecting
that to not grow as much as it
has in the past
mansion senator to hear so I
believe you're referring to
slide thirty one
and the
excess transfers to early
childhood or a function of a
formula the excess revenue in
the current year over the five
year average so every time
there's a new high year that's
rolled into the five year
average those transfers shrink
thank you and then mattem to my
last question is what
you didn't indicate what gives
you the fight that the cost of a
barrel is not going is is going
to be in the sixty dollar range
rather than the sixty nine
dollars range that we had
projected it to be
what's the reason for that more
electric vehicles less driving
what made you think that that
would be the case thank you
matter and sender across the
board it's ultimately at the
very high level supplying demand
at and it's most basic concept
so you know supply continues to
increase we're seeing more
supply from opec you know more
supply state side and less
demand globally trained on
europe sort of
exemplifying the transition and
and demanding less oil globally
thank you madame chair I I i've
read a light in the last couple
of weeks about the
huge transition that other
countries have taken china japan
for example in electric vehicles
and the reduction and demand
there so I thought that that
might be the case but thank you
madame chair appreciate the
answers
thank you very much so we're
going to go next to senator
souls and then represent her
dunkin.
Think you made a chair up two
areas I went to talk about is
the stress testing portion of it
and easy I think you indicated
that the probability is for a
ten percent decline or I mean
it's a ten percent probability
of that declining amount is that
that accurate madam chair I
think this go around it might
have been the last I can get
this one might be a five percent
if i'm not mistaken I think the
numbers underneath it indicates
a ten percent
and you indicated we need to
have enough money in the cash
reserves to cover that and then
if it occurs a second year and
cover that with cash reserves so
and I realize they are not
independent events but ten
percent by ten percent
recovering for the probability
of something occurring once
every seventy years
new indicated and covering it
completely meaning we would not
come in and make any budget
adjustments at all why are we
keeping a thirty percent cash
reserve for something that's
likely to occur once every
seventy years without us calling
ourselves in the special session
to fix things that seems awfully
conservative based on the
numbers that you presume
provide.
Thank you mr chair for the
question
yeah I apologize if it didn't
make it clear earlier
I I think I certain and i'll
reiterate that they want the two
point seven billion could come
from cash or reducing
appropriations so that that's
certainly an option you could
cut spending that you've already
made or or fill it with with
cash reserves if that's the
choice i'm and then just want
one other clarification
I I thought a lot about how to
you know think about the
probability on these scenarios
and and I think it can be
thought of it's one
precipitating event and the
precipitating event is ten
percent or five percent or
whatever it might be and then
that scenario that event that
happened that has that probably
lead attached to it has a
resulting economic effect for
the next several years and so
it's not yet to your point as
you mentioned it's not exactly
ten to ten it's ten percent it
happened what year one russian
oil comes online and what
happens to oil prices over the
next several years if that one
event occurs and that sort of
the way that we think about it
in some adamant turn and that's
why said I know they're not
independent events so I it
wouldn't be one in a hundred I
said you know one in seventy
cause it's likely the next year
there could be something that
move at the other direction.
We're still protecting for
something occur once every
seventy years with the full
amount of what we have and cash
reserve for this year
wouldn't it make a sense that we
would call ourselves in the
special session pretty quickly
to fix things like what happened
during the pandemic within a
month of the pandemic clarity we
were in special session changing
our budget immediately not
waiting two years to see whether
regard enough to manage without
touching a thing
it does make sense that we are
having cash reserves and so let
me can't leave that but come
back to it slightly different
way
we add what we're considered
pretty normal cash reserves of
twelve to eighteen percent until
two thousand nineteen and
suddenly they jumped over thirty
percent what changed
madame chair and and mr chair
I I think several things I think
you know previous analysis
towards you know what a
recommended reserve level didn't
incorporate things like which
states had severance tax
revenues versus which ones don't
specifically thinking of some of
the prior moody's
recommendations and what's
changed now at least from that
perspective of what other states
are doing is moody's now
recognizes that other states
have different revenue profiles
and their recommending new
mexico's one of the states that
they recommend over twenty five
percent reserves and they don't
actually say you know they have
you know these states should
have ten to fifteen these
fifteen to twenty and the new
mexico's in the catering
category of greater than twenty
five percent but ultimately the
decision is absolutely up to you
all and and and regardless of
what other states are might be
doing but that's one example of
where new mexico might want to
be different than other states
and then i'll point out one
other thing in in our reserve
calculations a few funds have
been added to the reserves which
national best practices and I
think we all would read as
economists might agree aren't
aren't necessarily real reserves
are not actually very liquid
cash.
That includes the the new
inclusion of the behavior health
trust fund which is intended to
be invested and also the growth
funds which you all are actively
expending and so that makes up
eight percent of your reserves
right there and that might not
actually be accessible quickly
accessible in the event of of a
downturn so I mention that and
then back to the to the
you know we could call ourselves
into a special session
absolutely agree you you
absolutely did then covered I
think and the hope what if you
choose that policy option to
maintain those reserves is it
gives you the ability if you so
true's to
buy you some time to think more
strategically about where you
might want to make appropriation
cuts because you could a four or
two cover appropriations for say
a year and think you know do
more analysis and policy
analysis on where you might want
to make the cuts with the least
negative impact to services for
example
okay
manager and i'm not sure one or
several heavy of the the term
that it insulates us from the
ups and downs will insulation
works both directions it
insulates us from the
opportunities on the upside as
well and when we have thirty
percent cash reserves in the
recommendations that means
that's not money that's not
being used to fix problems to
make investments in other things
were insulating the top side
down as well
and
you'd indicated that moody says
can you get me the moody's
report that tells us what that
is and why because in the past
people have said things like
that in moody's is very careful
not to tell states what to do
you i've looked it up and at the
time when we were first starting
to set high cash reserves I
looked up the moody's things in
for new mexico it was
recommending about twelve
percent for a
for a ten percent probability
and eighteen percent for the
more extreme probability and yet
we were defending thirty percent
it doesn't make sense to me.
One other k question or comment
and I think it was in both sets
of charts but it's on thirty
seven of the the administration
one where it talks about the
total new money
and as I look at the chart here.
The estimate missed it every
year except for the covered year
which it was on the other side
missed it on the low side of
what the the actual estimate of
the amounts came in except for
the covered year which you know
things happen that we weren't
expecting
shouldn't the estimates
aberdealt were some of them are
a little high and some a little
bit low why is it consistently
always underestimating the
actual revenues.
Matmet manager center soul so
there
the target for the revenue
estimate is about a plus
reminders three to five percent
and I don't believe we have in
our slide deck
the average error rate but I I
know we do have one and I could
send it to you offline and
but I believe chief dollars does
have it on his presentation in
slight twenty eight and you can
see the
percentages of the error rates
over time
I manage I understand that well
that in data in statistics even
if you're within your target
percentage but you're always on
the wrong side you need to
adjust the machine something's
not right about the estimates it
ought to be three percent below
and three percent above and back
in fourth so that the estimate
is accurate so that the finance
committee can then adjust how
much risk they want to build in
by creating a budget below what
the estimate when the estimate
is consistently in one direction
the wrong way it feels like it's
building in the risk before the
legislature gets to determine
the budget if that makes sense
manager and mister chair III I
hear your frustration and funny
enough I actually
want to brag a little bit about
our error rates so again on on
side twenty eight in your right
we've been low I I think though
what's important to help
contextualise is in twenty
twenty two twenty twenty three
nationally we as as your state
economists really stuck our next
neck out next out we were
estimating twelve percent
revenue growth at a time every
other state was either
estimating declining revenues or
three to four percent including
the federal congressional budget
office and we we actually beat
everyone else in the country and
how close we got we didn't go
far enough we missed it by seven
percent.
But everybody else missed it by
you know twenty percent so we
we've definitely are constantly
i'm reevaluating our models
trying to do better trying to be
better and we're seeing a lot of
success with that in the last
couple years two to three
percent is what we're missing by
now and our target is a two
percent error rate which you
know ideally at zero but where
we're we're hopefully getting
going in the right direction and
and that i'm sure I recognize
this you're never going to hit
it exactly
but half the time it all be
below by little bit have above
by a little bit yet within yeah
whatever your margin of error is
and when it's consistently one
where the other then the inputs
are not accurate that it's being
estimated on a need to be
adjusted thank you madam chair.
Rate tell us move on to
representative junking and then
senator words
thank you madam chair um easy I
just have a couple of questions
for you and fiscal year twenty
six were showing a point four
percent increase in the twenty
seven it's showing a two point
nine percent is that correct
what's what's driving that
different
madame chair and representative
thank you for the question a lot
going on here
we have corporate income tax
credits coming online that
shifting that I talked about
that helps really drop it in one
year and twenty six and so then
you know when it come to
normalizes in twenty seven you
can see that grow three picked
up so we have certain tax
changes coming online including
federal tax revenue losses that
are dropping twenty six and then
as they normalize the growth
rate returns to normal are or
more normal it's still a little
slower than than the previous
average but I hope I hope that
helps answer your questions yes
that did think manager and so
as we as we look at that and
then as we look at the
you know the feds of alright
said they're going to start crop
in interest rates what will that
do to
our economy and what will they
do dire reserves
manager of them great question a
a lot in that a lot in that
answer the the short answer is
lower interest rates stimulate
economic activity so a better
economic outlook we we are
pricing in some expectations in
this forecast already for for
rate cut so it may not be more
than here but to your to your
point without those rate cuts
we'd have less economic growth
and then of course there's
certain
fiscal implications like a lower
return on our investment either
in the the the general fund
investment pool or other cash or
bond held assets
thank you madame chair thank you
for that so if they do drop them
three times as they've indicated
they might this is going to
stimulate the economy and.
And we're getting it more
revenue that way as well as that
correct
madam chair representative
that's absolutely the hope if if
the rate cuts are a company
lower economic growth in general
it may not materialize in that
way especially if you know if
the account if the economy
source despite or ahead of those
rate cuts we may see it a time
of tougher growth before
accelerating again
thank you no easy is that is
that common have have we seen
that many times where the when
the fed's cut that attained the
economy
madam chair
you know that the the period of
of correlation and causation is
is that play here many times
that the federal reserve is
cutting rates it's it can be
because the economies already
entered a period of of
difficulty and so you know it's
not necessarily that the rate
cuts resulted in you know in a
poor economic outcome but may
have accompanied it almost in
response to of course in
response to it and then the meet
me contribute to the subsequent
recovery
thank you for that i'm i'm i'm
like you i'm hopefully does
exactly what we think it's going
to do with the economy and
stimulated as well
just a good question and i'll
make a quick the underground
economy that we we don't get
anything from is have we figured
away to to get that and and to
and what size is that economy
and have we figured away to get
that into coffers and
generate some revenue on
building user
manager I don't know if
tired he has anything to say we
used to keep track of anything
i'm sure our analysts for the
tax department may have you know
expectation for how much is
being collected under what might
be owed you know the tax gap
my understanding it has been has
is it has been shrinking over
several years but i'd be happy
to follow up with you and get
your update.
Thank you manager thanks susan
center words and then me
okay thank you
anyone gone with with what
you're saying that the
it looks like the economic
growth is slying up slightly
and
so how much just this is opinion
certainly not possible by any
fact but how much do you think
it
that changes from
from the overall economy selling
imported goods
to converting
somewhat to a
time when we start trying to
manufacture or or
extract
it lack in a copper industry
a shift a parameter
could that be happening and nice
it's it's a short very short
period of time too to engage
that but could that be happening
right now.
Manifer and senator I I think
that's
a large portion of the slow down
especially in the near term as
you point it out over the next
year or two you know how much is
head winds from tariffs
I think that a significant
contributor was hard to
disentangle is how much is
directly related to simply the
imposition of the tariff and
there's a significant amount of
of
head went from changing
expectations it can become
difficult to plan and invest if
if there might be an expectation
whether corrector incorrect that
tariffs could change could come
down again and go up again you
might wait and see there's
there's a a narrative
a lot among a lot of these
investments the other weight and
see approach maybe the
terrorists will come back down
and will build once that once
that does and so that's part of
the headwind as well and in with
that
I know when I top two business
man
they talk about the shirty
of the game but it's not they
don't like rules being changed
they they know how to play
within this game but if you
change rules will then I don't
know if i'm going to be able to
reach my profit or not but with
the end especially if you change
the rules mid game
and I certainly might not want
to invest any more
in that scenario but you also
stated that inflation rates are
at twenty twenty three levels
right now
and at twenty twenty three
didn't we didn't we have a whole
lot of money being thought into
the to the general
through government to be pushed
out so what do you think the
inflation rates are so high now.
Or maybe not so high better
still at twenty twenty three
madam chair and center thank you
for the question I should be
really careful to say that the
one month reading either junior
july was equivalent for a one
month reading so not not on the
whole not for the entire year so
appreciate the opportunity to
clarify that
but
you know this could be a
temporary a temporary bump in in
consumer prices related to
tariff increases that is not
expected to we don't expect it
to be long left
and I also madam chair also
phone it pretty interesting that
leonardi county.
Produces a
gross receipt for twenty eight
percent of the income of the
state
we thank you all is being
the driver
you know it's got always find
that very interesting
the
move along quickly and the
armchair
investment incomes being the
fastest growing revenue stream
what's the downside to that
matter.
Madam chairman i'm not sure what
i'm saying yes what i'm saying
is you you.
I'm a little bit jaded in the
fact some of the stuff have been
read lately and some the past
history and I know you guys are
a lot better investors than
we've ever had before I know you
are doing a great job you follow
the rules
but if we're gonna have a
thriving economy we got to have
people that tool into investment
there's there's a
big company that talking about
sale p and l
and why would a company want to
come in by piano
in others there's a reason that
it looks very advantagious to
buy piano
and because that's simply a
earned investment firm it's not
it utility firm coming in here
it's an investment for and that
is
you think about it and i'm sorry
ma'am chair when i'm trying to
get across the
pick investments
and we've got a very good team
picking investment
but
is there a downside I mean would
it have to be for downside would
be a recession the downside
would be uh
what would be the downside what
I think some of the work that I
do the downside could be a major
shift in the economy as an
example right now what's driving
electrical need is a I
reno throughout the country that
we don't have enough power
what happens if something
happens in that piece of the
economy that bellies up just
like tech did or the the tech
bubble a few years ago then what
happens to those investments.
That were inside of those type
companies that's what happens
they barely up and we have to
deal with that so investments
are in my opinion and i've no
economists below
in this kind of world is it we
can't control what happens
internationally in the economy
we can't control the winners and
there's a war or something that
affects what we're trying to do
in the united states where it
affects shipping in effects
supply chain it affects all
those kinds of phones and we
happen to be heavily invested in
that kind of thing he could
effect or returns and that's
hard for them to that's hard for
them to I would assume answer
but they're looking out of some
type of trend analysis based on
what's already done done am I
correct amount
you have to be looking at your
transyou have to be looking
what's happening in those trans
with those growth that growth at
the currently right
absolutely manager and keeping
track of those performance so
you're looking at sectors yes
sir you're looking at sectors
they expected growth.
Okay i'll move on
our car to be quickly would talk
about the liabilities that out
and produce we know that the
film tracked credit we expect
that to be
amaredness right a hundred and
eighty million
what is that film crack
them tax liability
i've got a long page nine of
this would
madam chair if you turn to page
eighteen of that one you can see
the actual numbers and the line
number would be line seventeen
and you can see an fy twenty six
were expecting a hundred and
eighty two million dollars in
film tax credits hundred and
eighty two million
and how much
how much is the
amount we're allowing for last
settlement last week settlement.
Do you have that number
manager i'm senator do you mean
against the liability against
the state the those don't show
up in these estimates because
you all appropriate the funds
that are there for drawn for
those settlements so it's not
exactly a revenue impact it's
more of a a budget issue so
we've already appropriated that
money
the yes mr chair are madam chair
the the annual appropriation
would address any potential
settlements
but thank you for that I didn't
I didn't realize we did that
ahead of time
i've got we only did that as
they came in
senator we do it when we lose
when we lose these last suits we
end up having to put a mind of
the budget when you think
but we have
well think about things like the
camera
last suit think about the aussie
versus martinez think about
almost big lawsuits that we have
to budget for them inside of the
agency this dealing winner but
i'm thinking about the civil
right violation to the back to
us
what i'm talking about that are
setting out there better better
actually estimate right now and
and so do we do we appropriate
for those estimates
you're not a here the economies
let me get back on the subject
better share
the.
On page thirteen
that's we've got to figure down
here on the bottom table
that says
two hundred and six.
And that is million right
two hundred and six.
No
is that an average is that a one
term deal what is there
madam chair and senator that's
that's all all impacts
collectively which is not
necessarily in one given year
and the executive presentation
gives a t on a yearby year basis
if I can find where they do that
third page thirty four
so it climbs up to close to two
hundred and fifty million in the
out years but
but it's a it's on average of
the two hundred and six million
but it's madam church between
twenty six thirty first of a
year twenty six and thirty it's
gonna be the two hundred and six
on a recurring basis on average
two hundred and six on an
average basis.
Have we allowed for any economic
activity madam chair for the no
tax on tips or the
the
no tax on overturned pay or
the
the social security the senior
way back green that are we
counted for that in this
malamcha
senator words so I I think it'd
be helpful to back up to the eh
what estimates are based on and
that's the
underlying foundation the the
analytic data from the national
forecasters on the moody's
analytics side they have
implemented the hr one
legislation in to their
estimates so in its beaked into
their estimate and their data
which we built are estimates on
smp has not fully built in the
hr one package in there
underlying data but they have
included assumptions so in
effect it is partially baked in
from the moody's side any
economic activity that would be
generated by that piece of
legislation
earn chair.
The other liability that it sees
what you mention was the pay
back of the federal money's for
all in gas
so your younger putting that in
there somewhere
mad i'm sure center would yes
that the
royalty results he act estimate
is built in to the federal
military scene revenue in this
in this estimate the only other
car may not have madam chair
is presently
presently ever agency
has got all the money they can
spend
they are learning
phone and never win the world
too too
hard more people trickles to try
to spend more money and as far
as trying to put more money
under state government for more
program in my opinion there is
no more money we can push out
there and and have it adequately
be spared to do much of anything
right now and tell me if i'm
wrong that i'm chew right now we
have not gained that many state
employees we've grown that
budget percent if I perceive
con and so essentially what
we've done is push more money to
contractors
and will try and get more
contractors to do more service
force because we can't even get
the state employees to hire the
state employees to do this so
I just want to bring that up
when we start talking about
thirty percent reserves and how
bad that years
we have pushed money so hard
that they'd be a hard argument
for me to believe that we need
to push more money
then we're pushing to a car
please
war and my opinion thank you
madame chair.
Energy which leads me to my one
question on page fifty two I
have a lot of questions but this
is what I want to talk about
right now because we got to get
charles left to the table is the
general fund reserve.
I am wondering why
you not reserve number we
include things that are not
available they're not liquid for
our are spending
you have grow money in there
you've got behavioral health
funny money in their you got to
back or settlement money in
there that is not money that we
can go in and get right so my
question is is what is that
percentage really look like if
you take those things out
I think there'd be a fun fact
for this committee to understand
because we have things in there
that we really out I mean we
yeah they're in the balance
sheet and we get it but when it
comes to a reserve number and I
harped about this for many years
and in getting were with it but
am harping now and probably
won't get anywhere with it but I
just feel like we need to know
that
so you have things like and I
don't even know how much the
tobacco settlement fund is
anymore I don't want to look it
up in here or some of these
other things but they're not
really reserved
in a in a traditional thought
you know and traditionally
thinking but
i'd like to know at that
percentages and you can send
that information to us once you
want you
take those other those funds out
all right gentlemen thank you
very much we gotta get charles
up here because i've been
waiting for three months for
this report small character so
we can find actually what's
happening here
with the mid term budget outlook
and
the timeline of the federal one
big beautiful bill so charles
thank you for being here
good afternoon thank you for
having me so the slides are
being passed out
we blew up a couple of them so
they're easier to read.
And they're they're attached but
starting on slide number two
here's a new budget provision at
the federal level that we're
going to learn about today and
that's called pay go and
essentially it was created and I
believe that either late
eighties are early nineties that
basically said if congress does
something to increase the
definite said you got to find an
offset
that to pay for it and so pays
you go it's kind of what this is
it's never been implemented but
basically what happens is if
congress doesn't pass a
suspension of this la
then on b will be able to go in
and make certain adjustments to
agency budgets and accounts
there would be and across the
board cut to medicare of four
percent up to four percent to
basically help pay for the hr
one that they just passed which
as we all know increases the
national deficit over the next
ten years by three point four
billion so nobody's filed a bill
to do it yet there's
i'm a
little bit concerned that one
they couldn't include it in
the reconciliation budget it
when it wouldn't have been
allowed so it's got to be
separate legislation it's got to
get sixty votes in the center.
Congress right now
you know they're supposed to
have their federal
appropriations acts passed for
the start of the new fiscal year
on october first they've been on
break for all of august remains
to be seen whether they'll get
all those appropriations bills
done I am time for the start of
the new fiscal year if they need
to do a continuing resolution
they would need sixty votes in
the senate the thing that's
going on and congress that i've
been worried about is this
recisions packages that omb
by laws and power to basically
say we're gonna freeze this
funding amount maybe it's been
obligated maybe it's not they've
been losing when they try to
freeze obligated you know
amounts but the unobligated ones
they not been losing on so
basically we're gonna freeze
this funding and ship it a
request a congress who has forty
five days to upper down which
already vote in both chambers to
basically sweep but you know
think about our sweep spills
that's what they're doing well
if you're in the minority in the
senate why would you cut a
budget deal that could then be
undone next january
you don't and that's what's
major concern for me some
concern about potential for
government shut down
potential do they really suspend
pay go or do they just let it go
into effect not have to do
anything and you can cheap more
budget reductions even if it's
you know the third rail of
medicare
so there's a lot of stuff that's
still going to be unsettled
throughout the entire fall when
it comes to federal spending
oddly enough the biggest
reduction under paygo will be
for crime victims
so given kind of the the
discussion about the need for
crime fighting in DC you know
they don't suspend that that's
the member on one big cut
federal men are releasing
payments would also be subject
to reductions which will impact
the revenue estimate as well
we have to spend a lot of time
but how does this bill impact
you know we had that big
complicated chart madame chair
last time about.
How far federal money comes into
the state whether it's through
state agencies that you have a
role in overseeing the
appropriations for that if it's
matching funds or block grants
directly to community
organizations but then there's
also individual taxpayers
so slight for
this is from the cbo you know
we've got a progressive income
tax at the federal level so it
shouldn't come as a surprise
that the benefit biggest
beneficiaries to any changes to
rates are for people who pay the
most and that's in fact what we
see here disproportionate
amounts in aggregate on average
for each taxpayer in these
brackets so in counter the fifth
right there in the middle your
average taxpayer
would benefit to the tune of
about eight hundred dollars and
reduce tax liability
but the problem is they've
already received that benefit
back in twenty seventeen all
this building was continue those
then there were some new ones
that are temporary to tips that
i'll talk about shortly so
security and those other things
that are only for the next four
maybe five years and then they
will expire and the reason why
they did that was remember how
we talked about they're doing
this ten year window and that
was a way not to explode the
deficit even more was just make
these things temporary they're
going to be so popular will
automatically come back and
extend them but we don't want to
show how much they really cost
over that in your budget window
what is this mean in terms of
like household income and an
excellent and the cbl also built
in like
tax benefits but also benefit
changes so you know the lowest
income folks don't benefit from
tax code changes that might
because they're not paying taxes
they may benefit from transfer
payments like to earn the come
tax credits.
But they benefit more from
government transfers for things
like medicaid so if if there's a
a large portion or some portion
of folks that lose those
benefits as a result of the bill
that's why you're seeing that
big impact on the percentage
basis for the lowest income
people but for most taxpayers
this is like a one percent kind
of one way or another
the further again the largest
people in the top ten percent of
income taxes it's a benefit
about three percent or thirteen
thousand dollars
I say this because
all of this is having an impact
on her the annual budget deficit
that we talked about and the
total amount of debt and so when
you think about opportunity
costs for yes taxes didn't go up
as a result of this bill the
tune of like eight hundred
dollars for your average
taxpayer what is the opportunity
cost when it comes to the
federal deficit in our ability
to be able to live within our
means going forward
slight six the tips deduction
you know is a matter of tax
policy principles you wouldn't
want to
you wouldn't be advised to do
something like this politically
popular probably passed
unanimously in congress if it
was a stand alone bill but think
about how this is playing out
again if you're living on tips
and not making very much money
you're not really benefiting
from not taxing your tips
because you're already just
getting the standard deduction
any amounts beyond that are
going to be small impact on your
tax bill so the real i've been
officiaries of this are going to
be the people serving you drinks
at the elderado
or serving you at our highest
you know the bull ring
those are going to be the
individual so think about
somebody that's working as a
server pulling in I look to
accept you know maybe fifty
thousand dollars with tips
are beginning teacher makes
fifty thousand dollars and some
other friend in a similar
working class kind of occupation
making fifty thousand dollars.
Well the person working at the
bull ring will get you know
a six hundred dollars tax
benefit the others want even
though they could be you know it
working in a day care of some
other kind of similar type of
income level so that's how these
things will play out and work
the tips are capped at a certain
amount and then there is kind of
a fade out but the the total
income for an individual could
be quite high in terms of how
much they can qualify to get
there tipped income not taxed
ok next slide on seven.
The last morning when congress
was passing the budget
reconciliation they kind of deal
to create a basically a rural
health transformation program
fifty billion dollars
is the national appropriation
over a five year period
half of that is to be equally
distributed amongst the states
when I saw that I was like you
mean we're given as much as
california new york yes so we're
expecting at least five hundred
million then the other half will
be coming out in a formula way
that cms is going to put some
bank in your head we're going to
get five hundred million over
the next five years a hundred
million a year
if you remember back to arpa
when the federal government gave
us the state and local relief
fund they were broad parameters
for how the state could use that
fund the legislature win the
supreme court ruling where the
supreme court said the
legislature needs to appropriate
federal funds that give the
state discretion this is the
same thing so one question that
you all may want to start
talking amongst yourself do you
want to set up a fund to capture
this and then figure out how to
work with the administration to
appropriate it for things that
you as a letter legislative body
went to priorities they've
already applied for the money we
expect the money to arrive by
january so some question about
how to work with the
administration i'm figuring out
what to do with this and that's
going to be in light of what are
some of the other challenges
that are going to be had from
the changes in medicaid
reconciliation so if we want to
turn to the next slide I we went
over this last time but just as
a reminder these are c l numbers
remember all of these budget
changes that they're talking
about are coming off of what's
the cbo's ten year baseline
forecast so it's less you know
we deal in absolute year over
year is this more or less money
in cbo's world and congress
they're dealing with is this
more or less money relative to a
growing baseline.
And so you can see you know on
the next slide
that
have the trillion dollars that's
expected to be reduced in
potential a spending over that
time seven hundred and eighty
million of it's going to occur
in twenty thirty and later
so sounds like big amounts
really it's you know
coming at the at the end of this
decade when those will start
being feesed in when they're
phased and there again they're
against a growing baseline
figure
so instead of somebody getting a
four percent annual growth rate
maybe it's three maybe it's too
so that's an important backdrop
manager you had asked for some
information on the economic
effects of pulling all this
money out so it's on slight ten
we have a new economic and
analysis model called rimmy that
the legislature asked us to
purchase and so we started using
this to estimate the the full
blown effects
and basically our estimates are
in line with what we're seeing
nationally this would be
basically about a one percent
reduction in total number of
employment
and of slightly less than one
percent impact to gdp you could
ask which I did it's like why is
there only a loss of eight
hundred and sixty seven million
gdp when you know the hospitals
are getting one point three
billion and part of it is
because that money that you're
putting into some of these
systems doesn't stay in new
mexico
leaks out
so remember when you created
that hospital rate increase you
said hospitals only have to
spend seventy five percent of
that in state.
There effects of enrollment
declines the effects of spending
on hospital services and other
kinds of medicaid services are
not all equal across the state
so you can see on the map where
the highest concentrations of
medicaid participants are
by counting
the next slide made of chair
gives
a high level just schedule of
all of the different major
changes and when those go into
effects and what their impacts
are again against that baseline
figure and some of the biggest
ones are reductions in it I
expected enrollment from a new
work requirements you know think
about social welfare policy
going back to the elizabeth and
poorlies have always tied work
to cash assistance but this is
the first that we would apply in
social welfare policy of work to
health care that said that's the
only way you the major way that
most people in this country get
health care is through employer
based health systems it's only
been a new phenomenon through
the affordable care act that
there's been a an attempt to try
to delink employment and health
care coverage or relatively new
social policy there provider
taxes that you remember the
hospitals are putting up the
state share the feds are saying
you can't do that as much
they're going to phase it out
and then how much the hospitals
can generate will go into and
more detail from things called
directed payments this is where
we're going to pay the hospitals
commercial rates where a
historically medicates and you
can only pay what medicare pays
and the rationale for paying
that much more you know
sometimes that can be upwards at
three hundred percent of what
medicare pays was an effort to
shore up our health care system
you know if you've got a state
with forty percent of your
potential panel.
And you're getting paid for that
forty percent below which you're
getting paid medicare that makes
it very hard to sustain in our
business model and that's true
and in other states that took
advantage of what was approved
by the big administration.
There are some rules that the
previous administration had put
in the place to try to
streamline the eligibility
process those have been
suspended so there is an
expectation people will fall off
of medicaid I won't be able to
to comply
related but like I was just
looking at data for snap
yesterday when people go to
reapply for snap
only about fifty four percent of
them were fifty four percent of
them actually tonight they're
kicked off because they don't
didn't meet some requirement for
the paperwork either that
internet in they don't meet the
income thresholds there was
something that administratively
uh kicked them out of the
program so think about that from
a like a churn standpoint of
people coming on and going off
the other kind of provisions get
pretty small when you get down
into the the state level
the next slide and these are
also separate handouts that you
may want to I take with you eric
did a nice job of just putting
into place when exactly
challenging your fiscal year and
state fiscal year many of these
things will start taking effect
so for most of the medicaid
things we got to start getting
ready for implementing the work
requirements there's not much to
do right now because there's no
details that have been put out
but there could be an
opportunity to start planning
maybe we don't want to do work
requirements the way that we've
done them to tanner for through
snap and work for a solutions
maybe we want to be partnering
with our community colleges if
you know technical and and
trades kinds of certification
programs are allowable activity
to help obscure folks that are
medicaid so they don't need
medicaid services and can get
that through an employers the
traditional welfare system will
not prioritise those types of
innovative approaches so that
you know planning I think is in
order of in the near term to
implement many of these things.
Charles interrupt you here i'm
looking at this big chart this
is we've been asking for those
some thank you so the timeline
federal reconciliation example
with medicare changes the way I
read this we don't see anything
until january twenty twenty
eight is when that kicks sound
based on this that's correct and
the budget that you'll be
working on in january twenty
sixth
is for twenty seven
so you just say that so
not that's important to remember
and there's is there anything
that you have found as you all
have been going through the us
that kicks in for twenty seven
besides these work requirements
so work requirements are the the
main one some of the other
eligibility re determined these
things are going to result in
savings back to the program and
their administrative anyway
correct
go back through all this and yes
looking at redetermination and
that kind of thing is that
correct that's correct
and so you'll likely get a
request from the department to
boost administrative funding
they'll say well our work load
is going to be increasing and
it's like we used to have six
months eligibility retermination
so what we're doing right now is
analyzing well how did you
manage that with this about the
same number of people that you
had ten years ago when we did
this I know are there
technological solutions first is
needing a lot more bodies that's
where I think the planning kind
of thing can come into place
let's get senator lopez in on
this chart
madam chair and it's totally no
actually deal with a snap would
be he asked a question
about what and medicate this
will be on snap so I can wait
yeah okay what he's got in front
of us is the medicaid weather
snap is the second chart so do
you want to talk about that
charles.
So snap is a little bit later in
my presentation but you've also
got that same blown up again to
that one will let you jump in
there
so let me get into the weeds a
little bit on what are these
directed payments and provider
taxes and what is that really
mean so historically the state
sets rates for like hospitals
through what's called it
remember the fee for service
program that's where
it's the all traditional model
of a provider billing the state
directly and then there's a fee
schedule in the state pays very
few people are in that model
anymore virtually all of
american native americans who
don't want to be in managed care
everybody else is a managed care
in a managed care you have a
theoretical marketplace where
your providers are supposed to
negotiate with the managed care
contractors to come up with a
fair price
for steering clients to those
particular providers and the
feds at the at before the aca
would allow states to make
supplemental payments for
hospitals outside of both of
these arrangements not based on
client volume basically help
close the gap for uncompensated
care that went away with this
newest waiver that we have so
there's no separate supplemental
payment system the hospitals
only get whatever they're
they're earning in a fee
revenue.
So these directed payments
where a way where the federal
government approved us to pay
tell the mco's you have to pay
the hospitals basically upwards
of three hundred percent of what
medicare pace and that's barely
gone into effect this spring and
that was a bill that you are
passed two sessions ago and so
that's one thing where the
federal government said we no
longer want you to pay hospitals
more and we no longer want you
to allow the hospitals to put up
the match but we'll go ahead and
grandfather understood this was
the house version when the house
version came out I was like
we like dodged a bullet and then
a center version came out as I
oh it is this mean because the
senate version came out and said
yes your grandfather but we're
going to reduce the amount that
you're above medicare by ten
percent a year over a ten year
period and then it's like well
what does that really do to
hospitals overall finances and
will get to that so that's
basically what's going on with
that
this is big money that you put
in to the hospital system with
this bill you know their annual
billings
you know this is about a seven
point five billion and patient
revenues this day to exclude the
unm hospital will treat them
separately because they got
their own directed payment
about one point six billion
would come through the normal
medicaid program the latest
projections from the health care
authority is this new rate
increase will add at about one
point three billion on top of
that so in some cases hospitals
are doubling their revenue from
medicaid and medicaid will make
up from ten to twenty percent of
their total revenue medicare as
a huge
book a business for hospitals
and then a smaller commercial
market but medicaid would be
growing significantly most
hospitals are have a positive
net income it's been growing
coming out of coverage so there
are much thought more solid
state there is a handful that
are the usual hospitals that
struggle.
That continue to struggle with
the the hospital cost reports
that we saw from twenty four I
would expect that gap to close
with these new rate increases
and then there's a couple of
hospitals that are really big
that had showed big losses for
one year that could be related
to capital and how they're
depreciating that but overall
pretty strong
balance sheets for most of the
hospitals out there.
So the state directed provider
payments you can see the
effective date on slide fifteen
the impact of the state
need to update this will be one
about one point three billion
over the ten years based on the
latest projections the provider
taxes work handing glove and
it's hard to differentiate that
from the the
rate cuts but we've modeled out
on the next two pages what we
think that will mean over the
next two years slight sixteen
has some of the details slight
seventeen really illustrates
that there will be a huge ramp
up in revenue for the hospitals
and then a gradual decline over
time of about two percent of
their total revenue a year
so they're larger hospitals
would be able to in my view
adjust
their parents there costs inners
there revenue to overcome kind
of like that drag on on revenues
over the long term
the hospitals that have
continually struggled for years
likely will it's not as big of
an impact on them because
they're again not big claims
volumes for medicaid but that
would be an area to look to
start having conversations about
using some of that rural federal
rural provider money do we want
to reinstate potentially a state
or federally funded on
compensated care a reduction
program to shore up your you I
think it like the union counties
the holy cross have been towers
I looked at they got like a net
income of like twelve million
dollars and twenty four they
total turn around based on all
the money that you you flowed
into them but some of the others
sierra county is a good example
of maybe we need to have
conversations about ensuring
that those most world smallest
hospitals are.
Taking care of slight eighteen
i'm concerned I think there's a
difference that we need to
reconcile with the health care
authority in u and m hospital
there's no direct impact on
graduate medical education but
you have hospitals been putting
up rather large matches and
getting state directed payments
that in a way does support like
i'm greatly expanding gradual
make graduate medical education
program that's finally important
to our state and so this is one
that will continue to follow up
where the hca believes that
there's going to be you know
multi million dollar hit over
time on you and am hospital
again they're a big
sophisticated hospital that
could probably adjust but I want
to make sure that our graduate
medical education program is is
sure that particularly if we
look at doubling the size of our
medical school
with that new capital
appropriation
work requirements and cause
sharing more detail here
when change in the house the
house was really focused on the
expansion population and able
bodied adults without kids
the senate change that to
include
adults that have kids
that are ten or over need to be
subject to the work requirements
as well so you know getting into
elementary school they believe
they they need to go well
they're going to have to go to
work unless there's some
exemption so those are the the
law is very broad on who would
be exempt from the the work
requirements conceivably that
regulations that will come out
at some point in time will be
more detailed
but I think I don't think the
expectation that congress had
his people on a dd waiver would
be subject to the work
requirements certainly not
elderly that are living in a
nursing home
but
they are dipped the devils and
the details are now
if somebody's disqualified from
medicaid by not meeting the work
requirements whatever that
administrative.
Kind of how you have to prove it
they would not be able of it
eligible to go to the exchange
and get subsidies there so
making it very difficult to kind
of have a flow in between and it
it's going to be harder to get
onto the exchange there will be
fewer enrollment opportunities
separate from reconciliation
during covered there was like an
effort on the part of congress
to dramatically increased the
federal subsidies that people
could qualify for in the
exchange those were designed all
along to go away and congress
didn't have to do anything they
will sunset at the end of the
year but I know that the
department's likely going to be
asking for what they've already
asked for it for the state
basically to go back and
subsidize what the federal
government was doing again the
people that are at the highest
income get the biggest benefit
from those types of subsidies
cause sharing even under the
martinez administration when you
look at cost sharing the
abandoned that because of the
amount of money that it would
raise was not going to be that
much in the providers ultimately
they found will just bear that
bear not getting paid
essentially remains to be seen
how that will be implemented but
it don't I don't expect there to
be a very big
very big fiscal impact
like slight twenty has some more
information on the eligibility
and the effective beats for
those and then snap timelines
snap is.
I see change in
state federal part state and
federal partnership how we pay
for this remember snap
historically the federal
governments paid for a hundred
percent of the benefits and paid
fifty percent of the
administrative costs snap has
had a work requirement in the
past for able body adults
without kids
to congress reinstated that had
been suspended through covid and
really relaxed and waived
coastal congress is reinstating
that and reinstating it for
individuals up to age sixty four
and so narrowing the number of
people that can get exemptions
and expanding who needs to be
meeting the the work
requirements this is not a very
big employment and training
program and the budget
but it's not a very effective
one at helping people up skill
and become independent and if
you've got you know half of the
folks that are recertifying
dropping off every month you can
imagine that it's it's just you
know I don't know the the big
change is
in our administration we have a
performance measure called an
error rate if we do something
wrong with the paperwork as how
we're administering it by giving
somebody benefits that shouldn't
have got benefits giving them
too much or two little benefits
than what they qualified for
bought most of the error rate is
actually caused by clients not
reporting accurate information
and by that happening we are on
the
general taxpayer potentially
looking at two hundred million
dollars if our error rates stay
high so think about not getting
accurate information from people
asking for assistance and now
we're going to have to shoulder
you know the burden of a paying
for a a big large portion of it
benefits that we didn't use to
have to have to do immediately
we're gonna have to start paying
for seventy five percent of the
administrative cost.
When we don't get a lot of
control over benefit levels the
states already subsidising snap
benefits on top of what people
would qualify for
and has been doing that for a
number of years they'll come in
and say we need to to help
elderly who are higher income
that don't qualify for as much
of a benefit and the state has
subsidised that and the cost of
that are growing you've
increased the income support
division budget forty three
percent over the last two years
they will ask for more
administrative money
so snap if our error rates stay
bad for the next two years then
we won't have to caught share on
the benefits until f white
the problem there is our car
sharing will be determined by a
three year rolling average
formula that we're digging into
so it could be that we're
definitely going to be on the
look for the the two hundred
maybe two hundred plus by the
time we get there because we
will be in the highest cost
sharing field so we can try to
get you know that error rate
down over the next two years
but if we don't hit it we're
gonna be on the the hook for
something okay charles let's let
us center it off as jump now
I thank you medicare and with
regards to snow i'm the feds
have an issue their rules if I
am correct is that your
understanding
that's correct
thank you madame chair now once
the first issue their rules is
there an immediate a reduction
in a certain no number of
persons who will lose benefits
immediately well there's there's
things that on snap that are
effective when the law was
signed
but they have delayed provisions
and them and when we have to
cause share there's individuals
that
do to some of the cheap there is
like changes in how we could
calculate
or deduct.
Certain costs that individuals
have for like utilities
against their income to make
them show up as being like more
low income so they would qualify
if we can't discount those
anymore than there's there would
be an expectation that somebody
would not qualify and drop off
I think the biggest concern the
department has
for the snap interface dropping
is the work requirements and
then there are some
legal immigrants that are
beginning snap that will
categorically drop off not be
eligible anymore and there's
some other smaller groups that
i'll get into an another slide
on how much it would cost to
back fill for all those
individuals that would be
categorically ineligible going
forward along with dropping off
due to work requirements in the
house factor
thank you madame chaircase I
guess what i've what i'm hearing
is that there is a potential of
about fifty eight thousand
people who can immediately be
dropped off snap once the the
rules guidelines but every wish
to call him from the fezzer
issue so that's a concern with
regards to a chance of persons
that and their families who lose
some money and that was kind of
my point about how many people
drop off now administratively
when they're re upping
you know half of the
applications are like not being
reinstated.
Okay senator townson on the
chart did you have a just want
to be on regular questions
right okay.
Okay
okay so the last couple of
slides
slay twenty two.
You just heard the revenue
estimate and it it was
accurately presented but it also
probably left you at the
impression that you have more
resources to deal with this and
i'm here to tell you actually
have less
and ads because you know
historically we would have you
know an annual a low revenue
estimate and money would run
into during the current fiscal
year and be much higher than
what we expect it so you are
coming in and some years in the
sessions to where reserve levels
were at like forty five percent
for the current year and you'd
use that surplus to spend on non
recurring items and spend it
down to whatever your target was
well now you just heard that's
coming in it may be like thirty
four to thirty six that's a lot
bigger difference
you've also been using some of
next years
revenue and that spending at all
on the recurring budget
and you've used that revenue
surplus for non recurring items
whether it's capital outlay
whether it's creating endowment
funds you basically have been
trying the lfc has been talking
about that there's a a six
percent growth rate in the base
budget that's affordable through
the end of the decade if we go
back to doing 10-15 percent then
you'll have to live with it with
whatever those revenue increases
where which were less than three
percent it just accelerates the
date you blow through the
surplus so you've been using
that surplus for both the
current year in the next fiscal
year to do you know some big
things and so you can see on
this chart how that just blew up
as the revenues blew up and out
of the revenues are leveling off
the available resources that you
have above that six percent
target are actually shrinking
going into this session and
madam chair you asked to model
out what that would look like
through you know fy twenty nine
and what some potential
obligations are potential
options i'm not saying that all
of these are necessary i'm just
throwing out these are things
we've seen so if you've got.
You know we use the the thing
that we've talked about publicly
in lfc you know six percent as a
baseline
and then you've got things that
we know we want to build in if
all the grow programs are
successful what would the
liability be for that we're
planning on it already lfc's
budget guidelines say don't
create a liability for grow and
perf of more than one percent so
that we're not biting off too
much
but then there's some other
things that teachers unions are
already probably contacting you
saying well we want what the
state employees got in terms of
you know that the employer
subsidizing well what's that
cost the somebody asked earlier
about the liability payments
that money is going out the
treasury left in right for
settlements I just saw another
one with cyfd was like twenty
nineteen case and you've already
seen two work cases in the news
recently that are probably gonna
go to litigation may not be a
payout for a while so what's in
between twenty nineteen and now
in terms of liability that funds
going to need like an infusion
so that's there and then what
are we looking at with when
things will hit with snap
administratively that's going to
be enough like twenty seven
budget item and grow you find it
a food banks at ten million a
year for the next three years
with the expectation that was
going to dramatically shrink
hunger in new mexico and now
here were hit with a fourteen
million dollar administrative
bill that we're not going to do
anything without doing anything
different we're gonna have to to
pony up fourteen million dollars
in administrative cost
so
the big number here is
a number that's part not part of
reconciliation but we talked
about that we have
administrative approval for
those provider rate increases to
go to a hundred and fifty
percent of medicare for a
primary care infant maternal and
for behavioral health
dozer at risk of administrative
decisions in washington if those
went away that's kind of a wine
from a technical standpoint i'm
not even sure how you.
Can back fill it
to from a fiscal standpoint
that's a really big number same
thing with the hospitals you at
least know that's got a gradual
phase out in your
may not having it as much as
expectation the back for the one
point three billion but these
other ones do if it goes away
they may just need to go back to
paying what medicare pays and we
figure out how to to do
something else for recruitment
of attention and showing up the
quality of our our medical
system
the snap
changes if the if the state were
to say we want to pay for
books that are no longer
eligible for snap whether their
legal immigrants other classes
of of immigrants that are
getting kicked off or other
circumstances we estimated
yesterday that would cost about
it a hundred nine million a year
with knowing that we have a
liability potentially of another
two hundred million food stamps
has not been a focus of the
appropriations process during my
ten year because of how it
operates that's a big chunk of
change to matt by anything new
at all for the mexicans it's
just the state would pay for it
then below that I quit how you
been using the following years
how you what's your
nondashrecurring budget has been
and I threw in you know at a
multi year estimate for finding
the medical school down in and
funding that new capital outlay
reform fund for higher education
and you can see this is not all
affordable
so something is going to have to
give
and so that's where the priority
process works are their
administrative costs that are
going to have to come out of the
six percent growth does people
who want to do tax code changes
that's going to come out of the
six percent growth unless you
want to go through it like it
you know fourteen or fifteen
percent and accelerate the day
that we're frankly.
Going back and cutting budgets
when the the budgets on the
great three percent so those are
some things that we see out
there
they're commit that legislative
finance committee adopted its
budget guidelines this month
part of them called for treat
treating back filling the same
as we treat an agency requesting
general find that you got a work
your way into getting into the
grow and pilot and demonstrate
that it works before the states
can back philip that's not going
to work for everything like the
administrative cost for snap
that's just we're gonna have to
do it
but for like new programs or or
things do you want to use nine
recurring to the temporarily
hold over public television as
that even a priority or not or
move them into a different model
do we need to have so many
different stations whatever the
administrative implications if
we're going to be on the hook
for funding it does it come back
if congress changes
there's a lot of things that
have been done through budget
reconciliation that the next
congress comes back in and does
you know think about you here
the doctor fix for medicare
where there's a complicated
formula that reduces doctors are
rates every year and every year
congress is come back that was a
from a budget reconciliation in
nineteen eighty nine
so that line of moving parts
lots of unknowns there's some
options listed on the last slide
for things
the read increases for the
hospitals should you just pull
the plug on it now or will they
be better off by having a drag
on revenues over the next ten
years do we
think that that might change and
so let's take advantage of the
benefits of that infusion of
revenue to that to our hospitals
now and figure out what happens
later how do we do how do we
allocate the money for the the
new federal fund for the rural
delivery.
Should we talk about and think
about setting up another state
funded supplemental payment
system for rural hospitals and
fhc's should be used some of
that real provider money for
start up and expansion of
services that are needed and how
do we do that to use the fund
that we've already got here's
our different strategy you know
there's that rural health care
delivery find you've created you
put a hundred and seventy six
million in it there's still a
fair amount of dough that's not
been obligated at the staff
level we have virtually no
insight into the details about
how that's been spent or you
know the department sent us a
really nice dashboard that
didn't tell us anything that we
would need to advise you if
that's a good place to park
money or not with that manager
to be happy to answer more
questions well thank you charles
I did want before I turn over to
the senator towns and III want
to thank you for everything that
you've provided today particular
not for me as page twenty three
and now we've been talking
abstentively about what you're
outlook are for the lfc and the
budget making process I just
want to draw your attention to
the outlook for FY twenty seven
you see how much money we have
from what were their building
the general fund budget around
is fourteen billion
you see what the reoccurring
appropriation is as eleven point
four that's six percent increase
that all these adjustment
scenarios is they have listed
that are
you know somebody had put that
into the budget or we thought it
was important so right now this
this sub committee is being told
that the major appropriating
committee is saying we start
with a recommendation modeling
at recognizing six percent
growth.
So that means we have that to
work with we know that right we
know that when we are coming up
with our recommendations to the
two finance committees and we're
going to have to look at how
those things get prioritized and
when they get prioritised
I don't think that the two
budget committees are looking at
us to dig into the ways on other
things because that that's not a
role but when you look at what
those federal
is federal potential cuts are or
loss of revenue whatever we want
to call it we have to look very
carefully at that but we've
already been told one of our
policy guidelines
and if we come in there and we
say it's great thanks a lot for
sharing that six percent but we
want to go to eight guess what
happens
they don't do it
and so I mean those are things
that this subcommittee is going
to have to start really engaging
I think we're going to do that
when we get down into the los
cruises meeting and start
talking about those priorities
we're gonna have to at some
point but
I think the other thing that's
important to to point out here
for FY twenty six
when you look at the consensus
revenue number how much were
spending
there's not anything under here
for adjustment scenario
because it's not needed
you very done the budget and
exactly it's not needed so I can
talk a little bit more about
that it's going to question
senator townson
thank you thank you
the lot of work and I realize
that
I would I would just call your
attention to a couple of things
that I think it's important for
us to realize if you look on
slide a.
We have talked about this as yes
where it's just cut cut cut
but if you look at the bottom
line the net the percent change
you're over a year on the new
baseline to convince that
constant increase it's just not
as much of an increase
ran it yes I think both are true
and both can be true from the
standpoint that if you're
a provider and your payments are
being reduced that's a
production
if you're a client that's losing
your coverage because
of some administrative snafu but
this is really calculating
its calculating a benefit that
has not been provided yet I mean
we're just reducing your tental
that's crap
of a higher reimburseable that
in that correct yes okay
I got tickled when we were
talking about tips in the impact
of of the loss and revenue on
tips that's only true of every
waitress has been reporting a
hundred percent of their tips
wait turns and waitresses all
wrong I think we'll all agree I
mean I got a couple of I know
complicated really well it went
through school but not cable
sometime pretty sure they didn't
report all their tips
all you did not get
I know you do offer that
but
when we're looking at the impact
it's a calculated impact that
quite badly I don't think we
I think we we incurred that lost
years ago and we have lived with
it for a long time because it
just has her overtime going to
be something different.
That will be real and we're
going to feel that straight
across.
The error rate
I was very interested in month
or so ago when I sat
secretary armed home was that
right yeah
and if you look at the charts
historically
that department had had it error
rate if I member right you keep
we make me honest it was like
run on three to four percent for
year over a year and then the
last
couple of years it's blown out
and her
explanation was basically it
went back to the covered error
when there was justice mass
heard and people were needing
help they just started
processing people
quick during this getting
amended the system get them help
and you're right some people
were not
maybe didn't understand anyway
bad air bad data was was
inserted
and so
there's I I really do I I
believe she's going to get that
right back down to a a real
level it wouldn't surprise me
with them
twelve eighteen months ago she
has that back in the
less than five percent range I I
think it's obtainable a lot of
other states haven't at that
level we ought to be able to do
that just as well as the rest of
them.
I think.
Well you you you covered that
the hospital stuff and I I think
you're spot on
on there one other from the out.
I was on the snap the fifty four
thousand the
sector talked about.
That snap loss
and I suspect there's some
number I don't I I don't think I
hope it isn't fifty four
thousand to be realized but I
think it's going to be a
reduction and I think it will be
more because
there will there will be a
growing number of people that
when they re evaluate their
applications
they will no longer qualify it's
not for any other reason than
they have
got out of the bad place that
they were they have a better job
that you know something's
happened but they're not going
to qualify
and.
I think we get ourselves in this
shape sometimes when we don't
manage our programs very well
and we get so
and we had copied and I mean
that was that was an issue all
of this one but I mean.
We didn't ramp up the oversight
like we should have and now
we're we're having to face the
consequences of having
not paid attention to what we
were doing really well and and
people quite frankly will fill
the brand of it as well i'm i'm
not just founding that at all
because it will have the impact
on families as well but
I think the biggest thing that
that I can't leave
watch for it is
when we first started this
committee we thought the sky was
falling within a month or two
but now after we've had time to
get that time to
take through it we know that we
have some run away and plan
others and so I think we're
going to be able to address
great I think there will be some
people that have been on on
plans that shouldn't be on plans
and we're going to clean that up
and and some of those people
will will go to work
and and will i'll be better off
because of that but
saying that we're cutting
I guess it's we're just not
growing us fast and and that's
the issue but I i'm glad we have
some random to work on this and
and do a better job
technology otherwise on the air
rate but secretary are meo told
us was that
up the I think it was at sixteen
percent today fifteen or sixteen
percent that may be okay
but her audit of that showed
that ninety eight percent of
those were overpayments and two
percent of a more underpainted
so that
the tendency.
That there was a tendency to
push it out the door is
much more than there was the
scrutinize the eligibility of
the benefit thank you madame
chair and manager just quickly
at that point
part of the reason is there
under pressure from a federal
consider that it's been going on
since the early nineties to
expedite and push through things
fast and then you've got this
new I mean that we've always had
we got penalties for it
when this administration first
took office we are in there like
a penalty plan for not being
accurate enough and so there's
got to be a balance
and wasn't there also wasn't
there a way time now that i'm
thinking about it
wasn't the mexico didn't we have
a little grace period on
straightening this out it was
called the huawei
wherein with the ten were states
where I run way as twenty thirty
if we stay bad yeah and then
we'll get hit with the big bill
and then if we get good after
that it'll take three years for
it to clean out and and come off
our book so that's
a weird so
than that yeah
thank you very much costs
all right the next week senator
lopez and the representatives
thank you material in just going
back to
the issue on the
the medicaid rule
money is that are coming for the
hospitals madam chair on their
chunk of change more than change
but does that also cover our
deal health with anything with
regards to our
long term care places nursing
home as we have centers or is it
just directly you know just for
hospitals no it's not just for
hospitals it's it's more
geographic beast.
For rural providers so I I have
to go back and look at the
language and see if they're
going to come out with any regs
I wouldn't see
I think it's geared around fees
of being the other major kind of
provider type but you know that
could be something that the
legislature wants to look into
if if you've got rural remote
nursing homes that need to be
shown up they were exempted from
they do their own provider tax
that brings in extra federal
money that was totally accepted
by budget reconciliation so no
impacts there and you've been
building in increased rates for
them as well
thank you madam chair I think
that's something we should keep
on a radar as we move forward
because you're our fhes of
course are important providers
and in many parts of our state
there are so part of that safety
net and then of course to your
genesis is a file for bankruptcy
and they are a provider of long
term care services we have a
facilities in our state and I
know that I think they have if I
remember reading correctly madam
share it's like seventeen a
facilities here in the state
raswall has some concerns I
think that I also read about how
they provide
we have a long term care you
know for older folks
so it's it's something manager I
think we also need to keep in
mind when we talk about what
some of these dollars can do
with that big chunk of change
it's coming making sure that we
still can support
this very important
places
you know a lot of our
constituents do go and end up
because times is can't take care
of their loved ones either
so I wanted just to mention on
the earned um
a sip manager thank you
let's go to representatives
capansky and then
representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
director this was an excellent
presentation and I especially
appreciated all the
the listing of all of these
items on page twenty three which
really gives us a sense of
what the pressures are that are
facing our budget makers are
budget years
as we go into a potential
special session and then of
course the thirty day session
umm I have been digging deeply
into snap and while
while we do have a longer runway
for the the biggest changes I in
answer to some of the issues
that senator lopez was raising I
did want the committee to know
that
some of the changes were
effective as you mentioned
director upon signature of the
act and so the US d a is to be
issuing guidance that could drop
any day now but it sounds like
the expected effective date will
be ten one of this year on some
of those changes and so I think
it's important for the the
committee to know and also for
the public to know because this
is going to impact many
individuals so we've got
sixteen thousand people losing
benefits altogether
thirty two thousand people
losing benefits
project they're projected to
lose benefits because the
legislation eliminated the
standard utility deduction and
so instead of having an estimate
of how much your average
utilities were
individuals will now have to
provide a lot of detail about
all of their utility bills
possibly on a monthly basis and
so that is going to lead to.
And that thirty two thousand and
then additionally we have a
supplemental program that are
supports seniors and people with
disabilities veterans and so and
that category is going to be
eliminated and so that
I don't have an estimate on how
many people that is
but
i'll told that's about forty
eight thousand people that will
lose or reduce benefits and
about four weeks
and you know the estimates are
anywhere from a hundred to two
hundred million and that's lost
gross restore revenue so that's
another piece I think we should
be thinking about is what is
going to be the impact on
smaller grocery stores rural
grocery stores
snap has been for better for
worse than big source of revenue
for those grocery stores
a director and I just had a few
quite so I did one of the
committee know that now just
have a few questions
the
in addition to the impact on the
hospitals in our health care
system due to changes and
medicare to and reimbursement
rates and the
suspension of the the payment
program that we put into place
have you all looked at what what
the impact is going to be
regarding the expiration of the
premium tax credits in obama
care with our b well system so
you're gonna have potentially
people who are opting out of
health coverage because that has
also lapsed and I don't know if
you have any estimates and here
or if you all have looked at
that.
We have because
you find it subsidising those
previous federal credits in this
year's budget i'm so starting in
january using the health care
affordability fund is that maybe
we just did an evaluation on the
program that was called for when
that each cap was created and
we didn't find that free health
care like resulted in
moving the needle on coverage if
that was if that was the goal
and so I mean you know folks up
to four hundred percent of the
federal property level we're
getting subsidies from the feds
and then then we are getting
subsidies on top of that from
the state and now the
expectation is for the state
just automatically to to back
fill that will have to see if
that's a sustainable model given
all of these other health care
thanks going on and if that's
the best use going forward but
that's what you've put in this
year's budget
thank you and I I think your
point is while taken because it
does seem like we need to have a
program that's for new mexico
and is less reliant on
unless vulnerable to federal
limbs and federal policy
directives that are directed at
fifty different states and so
the more local tailoring and
control we can have the better
in my opinion
the on the last legislature more
questions here
and unslide twenty five you
mention the rural health care
delivery grants and how seventy
nine million of that is unspan
can you shut any light as to as
to why
or to the nature of the programs
that have been funded and why
there's seems a
almost fifty percent is unspent.
The.
When there's going to be
capacity constraints if you're
asking them you know the
community end of the parameters
of the bill to apply for it and
they're not necessarily applying
for it to say timing issue it's
not going to all go out at once
three no we don't have any
details about
how this program has been
working and what it's impact has
been and we're trying to work
with the department to get more
information so we can advise you
if that's a good good place to
consider parking more money if
we're if we're in fact expanding
a services and rural areas
yeah it
madam charity and director
one of the things I am in
thinking about is that our front
line clinics rural primary care
clinics are in particular will
be sort of the first to feel the
impact of some of these medicate
a loss of coverage with medicaid
potential loss of coverage city
exchange and so if this finding
is under utilized uh madam chair
I would think it we should
consider adding to the purpose
of that find so that it could be
used to cover
whether it be operating losses
or other potential uses just to
insurer
that our rural health care
system at least stays where it's
out
which I know we have been trying
to expand but it seems like we
need to be getting to you a bit
of a protective mode around that
and then finally I just wonder
director and madam chair if you
could just expand on
the question here around
repealing the health care
delivery and access act where
I don't know if you all have
thought about exactly what those
options might be to ensure that
were still ticking advantage of
the program for as long as we
can but then you know
potentially putting some
legislation in with like a
delayed effective date so that
we could.
Then fire while the program or
freeze it or or reduce something
so that it is not so vulnerable
to this federal changes thank
you so we're not recommending
any of these we're just laying
out different options at a range
of options in the red the
rationale behind that is
do you they haven't had a full
year worth of funding yet
do you want them to have a full
year of funding that it is going
to dramatic in this kind of
decline over time and will that
create additional demands for
you to back fill that or will
they be able to manage it and
hopefully put you know that
influx a new money to good use
there is some concern on the
part of the department about you
know like if you're to start
back filling some of that would
you want to keep the provision
that twenty five percent can
just go out of state you know I
wouldn't recommend that but then
if you go in to change the
program in any way that's going
to need to go back to the feds
according to hca to get approved
and would they even approve
approvator denied and looked at
the whole thing goes away so I
think from our conversations
with them they're like and they
just leave it as it is and from
our preliminary analysis of
hospital finances
it looks like they could
probably manage and you know
over time without a new for the
state subsidy except for those
chronic hospitals that still
struggle and they weren't
getting much of the revenue from
the hta anyways you know that
issue may still need to be
looked at without rural provider
fund maybe at a new state funded
on compensated care you know
pool kind of approach
if in fact that those hospitals
are chronically struggling and
indeed I foundational payment in
order to open the doors because
their volumes are seller
thank you madame chair thank you
director.
I think it's really intriguing
to think about a new state i'm
competitive care poor given that
I think they're rates of
compensated care will go up
as a result of this legislation
and how and I don't quite
remember how that worked
actually basically it was it was
taking their medicate on
compensated
care calculations and charity
care for the spare small
hospitals to small hospitals
this wasn't aimed at like your
st vincent surprised but
and basically there was a a
formula for closing that in we
had found when the program was
up and running it was literally
eliminating that data
compensated care gap for those
hospitals that were
participating in it and it cost
about sixty nine million dollars
and you actually have a revenue
stream from counties that help
pay for hospital rates
the other thing they just keep
in mind is you know our medicaid
roles are down two hundred
thousand today from what they
were at the height of the
pandemic this is expected over a
long long period of time to
reduce them another eighty to
ninety thousand so I think
there's bigger challenges
potentially if those folks but
two hundred that we don't they
didn't drop on the exchange we
don't have good intel on if they
showed up in commercial
coverage but you know working
with the people that do those
snapshots on an insurer to
something more want to pay close
attention to over the next year
or two
think you madam chair already
thank you let's go to
representative dunkin and then
represent a brown
thank you manager
charles is only money left in
the budget to get us and
comfortable chairs
madam chair the only question I
have is this bill was towers
waste from abuse.
Of money's does a state can
is there any way that you can
quantify
for example personal snap and
medicaid
those that are abusing the
system those are just outright
being deceitful in the system do
we have a way of tracking that
in the state.
Note I solid one of the top of
my head in terms of like
individuals falsifying
information in order to get
health care
or to get food steps I would
think that you're your risk
exposure is greater where you've
got cash
so I would say that it's
probably low on their medicaid
side but higher risk on the food
stamp and other cash assistant
side in terms of that potential
for fraud interesting that it
left there's really nothing in
this bill that beefs that
program integrity you know
things to kind of fight those
those things like somebody
signed up in three states we
know there's there's programs
where we can paying those other
states roles and make sure that
they're not you know on their
improperly there's a whole host
of of different strategies at
the state can insured be
implementing
you know looking at income
verification through work for
solutions
the department set up a system
to do that during covered
because we knew there was a
hundred thousand people that
didn't qualify for medicaid any
longer but they were required
stay on medicaid because of a
federal regulation for covered
so we had an expectation coming
out of cover doing that outlined
it that there would be a bunch
of people that would drop off
and.
If you look at the wage growth
at the low end it's no surprise
I mean if you're
working at mcdonalds at fourteen
or fifteen an hour and they give
you thirty hours a week you
don't qualify for medicaid
anymore you probably don't
qualify for much in food stamps
either so if anything that could
be in inducement for under
employment.
Thank you madame chair thanks
charles for that I just i'm just
curious
who then would
police this would be the fed so
that would police that no it
would be the hta I would say the
biggest risk from where I said
is for providers ripping off the
state and billing for services
that they didn't provide and you
know that's bad that's money out
the door that's not helping
anybody
and we don't have a great track
record in terms of prosecuting
medicaid friends we got some of
the lowest rates in the country
and then when we tried to do it
we ended up crashing our entire
behavioral health system
you know about ten years ago so
take a minute chair charles are
too bad that we don't have
something that we could utilize
now and and not crash anything
so thank you
brady lasco two representative
brown and then senator to heal
thank you manager um charles i'm
looking at page twenty three of
your presentation if I could get
you to transit please just a
really quick question there.
So we have a blue been at the
top followed by another blue
band in under that it says year
a year percent change and for FY
twenty five it says the year of
your change is sixty seven point
eight percent could you explain
that number.
The.
Okay just seems it for the years
that follow its a lot lower than
that
I would expect it to be
potentially high because we've
had this run up.
From twenty eighteen up until
recently where revenue growth
was super high and then it's
flat now.
Okay then and then madam cheery
just wanted to out a few
thoughts on the general fund
reserves
I do share the concern
out when we add and grow funds
in the behavior trust find
that that's I don't think that's
good policy we have also really
charged a trust find and if I
recall the language in that
matter insurer it says that
you have to be very dire
circumstances where they're just
not many any money to be found
anywhere else and that would be
something that would be
pulled from but again it's the
last resort and so because of
those types of clauses I think
the some of these other trust
funds really don't reflect
reserves at all and the question
I have out of children and
charles
that reserve percentage does
that affect our bond reading in
any way.
A dfa has those conversations
with the rating agencies and
they would say yes and that
they've been in those
conversations they've told us
that their reading agencies
wanted to see it and I stay at
thirty level sea had
entertained.
Going back to twenty five
percent in light of all these
other funds that are out there
and the ultimate decision was
made to stick to thirty okay
well and final factor madam
cherry I really do believe that
we ought to be really careful
in.
Public sizing that reserve an
edge and then of course the
dollar figures that they
represent because
i'm i'm concerned on broad
reading might suffer if someone
questions why we're adding
things that we will probably
never ever tapped into.
Well and just to clarify two
madam chair the grow was
designed as a as a back up
reserve so that if the operating
reserve is empty doubt the next
place that the legislature would
go to would be to grow whether
you want to count it in
the reserves or not is something
that you know is an outstanding
decision that the governor be
told it being part of reserve so
white while we would say it
would come out next next budget
cycle okay well thank you very
much manager all right and
without we're gonna have senator
trade here wrap it up for the
day all right thank you madame
chair again i'll try to keep it
short
trolls is the manager trolls the
health care authority indicated
at what I think are last meeting
or the meeting before that they
need to somewhere in the
neighborhood of fifty eight
fifty five million dollars to do
a update the software to reduce
the mistake error is that money
going to be I mean I do know how
they're going to ask for that is
going to be non reoccurring
that's going to be especially
they'll probably try to get it
in if you go into the special
session to be for administrative
spending that's what I thought
to thank you the the thing to
remember is that there's nothing
for the it developers to develop
because there's no regulations
yet but there could be a need
for you know contract money to
get started on how do we do the
work requirements right and the
other thing to keep in mind
about any it upgrades to our
either medicaid system or income
support system is fifty other
states are going to be doing
this at the same time and we are
going to be low on
does priority list for those
contractors and interesting
we're going to work with the
group at a dc that does it are
consulting.
They indicated that these
benefits systems are not that
expensive to develop an already
have shown me budgets for like a
fraction of what hsd would spend
and we're being sold stuff like
that we may already have owned.
The other thing to remember is
like the medicaid information
system still isn't done and
that's like over ten years old
and like four hundred million
dollars in so we don't have a
great track record with these
but they're definitely going to
have to do something to
implement regulations that are
not out yet and the white war
case workers.
And that's where how did you
have an error rate it's three
percent with the same number of
when maybe less case workers ten
years ago
then what you need to date we
need to do more analysis around
how to work with them thank you
madam chair thank you charles I
would just add to that that
we've got to see why f d system
that is nearly seven years old
and I believe the last I heard
is up in the ninety million
that implemented we do not have
a good track right about that
although I will say that I had a
great track record when I
digitized the regulation
licensing department stayed on
budget and one time
in regards madam chair I just
want to make sure that I
understood what you're what you
are saying earlier and that is
that.
When we are talking about the
budget what we're looking at you
know staying with them and then
the six percent increase are you
were you saying assuming that
agencies are not going to try to
build some of this stuff into
their budget as that six percent
or is part of their budget and
that they're just waiting for us
what i'm saying is the budget
guidelines were set up by the
life seek many recently the
budget guidelines are saying for
recurring expenses is that six
percent or lower
so the question then becomes are
are recommendations basically
for twenty twenty seven when it
be within that six percent
growth or or ceiling or not and
he's provided for us some
options to look at.
Is also basically letting us
know that that committee has
already decided our guidelines
for recurring expenditures is is
that six percent
that means
the whole thing around
accountability is going to be
important the whole issue around
how many medicaid
enrollees we have what are we
really looking at are we really
gonna lose another eighty
thousand in terms of cost
and I think this whole thing
about reserve I think it's a big
deal to
but that that's how I see it is
that the committee has already
approved its budget guidelines
and that's how it's going to be
building its budget starting
october one in just to clarify
two manager that the six percent
has been a conversation piece
that the committee is had of
kind of a ceiling of what's
affordable if you wanna write
this surplus out through the end
of the the the decade the
committee as we get agency
budget request as you know the
process you know the chairs will
sit down and start setting
targets for me to to build the
budget that could be think of it
as a ceiling and think of it as
a ceiling that would need to
include if you did anything in
the tax code as well thank you
madam chair so i'm assuming that
when we can arrap this up we're
going to be giving a number or a
percentage of both of what we
think the federal loss is going
to be that's going to need to be
built into the budget
well in discussing this with
with our co chair we've talked
about we're gonna need a meeting
where we actually talk about
what our strategy is going to be
and how are recommendations are
built since our coachers during
the next meeting you mean
include that up a little bit
then with lots of money
to we have to start it though we
have start looking at things as
much as we can but there's so
many unknown trick now.
That we we can make a
recommendation and who knows
whether or not it's gonna it's
got work though at least we have
some general
boundary so to speak on what we
can work with thank you madame
chair my last question or
comment is
trolls I hope that we can have
some information about
outstanding capital outlay and
how long it spend lingering
we've had a lot of conversations
in the based because that may
very well be where we start
shipping away at projects that
are unstarted have been on the
books for many years so i'm
hoping that at the next meeting
we can have that information to
to work into the equation as to
where we get the money from
depending upon what our
recommendations are so we just
issue the next quarterly capital
report
and i'll make sure you get that
and it's the balance is total
seven billion and there's well
over a billion that's just like
has none of its moved and we've
got all those projects listed
out
thank you madame chair I think
that's going to be really
important draws thank you.
Ready well thank you very much
charles for the work in the
presentation today we certainly
appreciate it and and committee
thank you for your good work
today we had a heavy left as we
do with all of our meetings and
we look forward to our senator
souls leading us to the through
the next meeting I think that's
a three day meeting to it down
in last crucials thank you all
for attending today and I like
to think eric shinya and our
staff who's been done a lot of
the work that's in the
presentation that work for the
committee as well.
