Good morning everyone if we
could let's have the committee
come on up to the table please
the bell has wrong as my coach
would say.
I right good morning everyone
i'd like to call the fourth
meeting of the federal funding
stabilization sub committee to
order and we're gonna start by
having our committee introduced
themselves we're going to start
to my you left and we'll just
right around the table and then
nah we'll have our co chair
introduce himself so let's go
ahead and start representative
duncan think manager my name is
mark dunken I represent a same
one county and it's good to be
here with you
good morning thank you madame
chair jim townson a states that
are representing district thirty
four glad to be here and thank
you for your hospitality
good morning and chair catherine
brown state representative for
large portions of eddie and lee
counties thanks for having us
here.
Good morning madam chair linda
lopez state senator district
eleven which is the southwest
quadrant are burning your county
and is wonderful to be here and
thank you for the hospitality.
Good morning madame chair and
members send inaverage state
senator for center district nine
you're essentially in my
district not completely senator
shunda will disagree with me but
welcome to almost my district I
serve the counties of finally
unsandable thank you
let's go to senator to him thank
you madame chair good morning
everyone glad to know that we're
in the right place
couldn't find any cars outside
so I am linda to hear of senator
for district twenty four and
basically the district is santa
fe the city a sound of a proper
so it's really nice to be here
thank you
good morning that insurance was
relative I represent house
district thirty four in southern
donate accounting.
A good morning everybody i'm
susan horrera I represent
district forty one which is must
real rebate sound about santa fe
and tasks good to be with
everybody this morning center
words could you introduce
yourself sir thank you very much
madame chair sent repair would
senate discrete seven group of
union countries thank you it's
got to work our coach area
senator souls
thinking out of chair is very
nice to be here i'm bill saul
state senator from last creases
the east mountain area so where
the beautiful mountains and also
uh just want privilege i'd like
to introduce my LA was able to
come up partly because I think
read a casino but down the
nation as she said they're up a
little bit after last night so
actually right now because you
know hosting them
and not good morning everyone
i'm representative patty long
strong I represent the west side
of the city of gallop and I also
represent nine nava chapters uh
spent an hour the summer to
chair this committee along with
senator soles and we're looking
forward to a great meeting today
lots of super important
information from each of the
tribes and web blows that'll be
presenting today and then later
in the day we'll be hearing from
the LFC staff on the general
fund consensus revenue update as
well as the outlook for how this
is all supposed to work we want
to make sure we clearly
understand time lines calendar
ring and and so forth but I
anticipate that we'll have a
couple of other uh members come
in today I know our majority
floor later had to step out for
just to minute she'll be right
back but I anticipate it will
have more members today so i'd
like to start a buy having our
our governor come up.
And lieutenant governor from
santa ana and I saw him I had
coffee with him earlier this
morning.
Come on up governor.
The.
Good morning everybody governor
it where it worst.
Governor if you don't mind it
we're being webcast so everybody
will be tunning and listening to
you and your lieutenant governor
of the person this year cabin is
here
he's not here
well you'll be able to cut be
able to cover everything that's
important for the public I
wanted personally thank you for
hosting us absolutely we go way
back for the benefit of the
committee we work together for
probably thirty five to forty
years yes and now what a project
I spent seventeen years of my
life something called the nab
water supply project and our
governor of course is banned
pivotal pivorable person in the
state engineers office when it
comes to making these indian
water projects work so I want to
thank you for hosting us and now
we look forward to what you have
to say
I can good morning everybody
going to my runner me hope from
santander here I wish to welcome
all of you here and all our
guests here this morning thank
you for being here with us i'm
pretty sure this is going to be
a very
fruitful meeting for all of you
in in all that you're doing with
the subcommittee it's it's so
important that we address a lot
of these issues going forward
and i'm just later that you are
all here today but let me talk a
little bit about the public just
a couple of statements about who
we are we are that the miami
here at santa anna that's our
native name.
We have approximately nine
hundred plus our residence here
at santa anna
we're not a big community
however
the community has with the
travel council the leadership we
have one of our former
lieutenant governors here see
who some bin instrumental in a
lot of our decision making
uh processes going forward we
have the santa ana star here our
land development corporation
across the road ah my adventures
then we have uhm two golf
courses of which former
lieutenant governor j garcia is
the chairman of the board of
both course both golf courses
and it's done an incredible job
there then just down the road
here most of you have probably
visited our hotel dummy a high
it and so those are our business
arms here at the public it's
been an incredible journey
we started our development in
nineteen eighty three with the
start of the senate a star
casino
so
it's been a a great journey we
are are able to take care of our
community members through health
and education
just a multitude of a benefits
that were able to provide to our
community and so i'm really
proud of that as try to leader
here at santa anna because it's
it's it's difficult out there
these days on what's happening
not only here in the state but
at dc what's happening there
that really concerns me and
what's happening at in
washington so i'm gonna talk a
little bit about that but
we've been here for the ones in
this area we have a
a
what is it a
an area where we travel traveled
we traveled from charcoal from
masaverty.
Um we landed here in the real
grand valley which is where
we've been
forever pretty much we purchased
our landgrant back in the day
back in a uh sixteen hundred
from the from the spanish what
happened there was each of the
community members at the time if
they had a chicken or a cow or a
salot the spanish put a price on
that peace and we were able to
purchase this area here.
Consequently coming up forward
spent a great run these last two
years
we purchased the alamo ranch
former alamo ranch from the king
family
sixty thousand acres last year
when lieutenant governor kevin
and I came on our goal was to
put that in the trust who went
out to dc with uh members of our
former governors and console
people and our trouble tribal
leader who is the
the gentleman who takes care of
all the people hearing in in
santa anna we went out there
within six months we put it in
the trust with the help of
secretary holland and her
assistant secretary
came out here we had a big event
and such now in the trust so we
added to our land base about
about a hundred hundred thousand
plus acres of land
so
it's it's been an incredible
journey off civic
and our our people are
are doing a language
teaching our language to our
children that's a big issue for
us and and probably many other
tribes throughout the state in
the cross the nation people are
starting to lose their languages
and so it's it's an important
piece of our are journey to
ensure that we have our kids
children's in the next
generation of leaders to speak
our language so that's what
we're doing here at the public
as well we've got a a wonder
center that crossed the river
open for our committee mem
members for and it was built for
the issue of diabetes that's
such a
horrific disease
many of our members are affected
with it and we've lost travel
members because of it.
And so we just
tell our committee members
please come use the wellness
center so that we can at least
try a big distance disease said
it back a little bit such not
taking all our people
and solwise.
Wow I can say how how abam that
that the the public was able to
do everything that it does for
our community so
mountain chair and coach i'm at
talk a little bit about the
issues at the federal level okay
so
this discussion is to
evaluate and
look at the changes in federal
funding that directly affect our
communities throughout the state
and across all of new mexico the
tribes communities across the
state and our goal is to ensure
that federal decisions are
informed on the ground realities
and that equity equity and
tribal sovereignty remain
central and funding discussions
santander public like other
nations navigates to complex web
federal funding sources from
health care in education to
infrastructure and natural
resource protection
and federal funds are not just
supplementary they are
foundational to self
determination self determination
committee members supporting
programs that public designs and
controls.
Any cuts
and delays and policy ships can
cause significant disruptions
and it did last this year the
beginning of this year when the
new administration came in as
you well know a lot of funds
were frozen and santa and it was
was not immune from that we have
a solar project it's that we're
we've started we had we had I
believe it was fourteen point
five million that was allocated
and then we're doing what we
call a
wildlife quarter building
bridges across I twenty five and
five fifty and those while life
quarters are to prevent are
people from
running into elk dear and and
it's really a public safety
issue
committee members and so those
funds were frozen
a huge item a huge item that I
would talk about here is the
indian health service over the
I guess several decades were
planning a new health care
facility here in the albuquerque
area so last year and former
governor he's not here today
nathan garcia started this start
at this process with ihs there
was approximately a hundred and
sixty million that was allocated
to this project and had it been
it had been being talked about
over decades and so they looked
are in the western nova cricket
they don't like the site out
there it came out to santa anna
and they were pleased by what
they saw and santa anna was
picked to to have this facility
on our lands just just western
here
so based forward
we learned there is a great
buying that wasn't communicated
to us formally that funds have
been pulled back for a project
in arizona.
At another indian reservation
and so a hundred and forty
million dollars was taken from
that a hundred and sixty million
we're left with about
approximately twenty plus
but recently well then we got
back a little bit aggressive a
bit here
we had meetings with the indian
health service here in
albuquerque and our position was
there they needed to make a
commitment to us to ensure that
we have this facility built in
the future
we have several indian native
communities here in the in the
valley here and of course
i'll
a lot of the nators that are
here in the albuquerque area
could avail themselves of this
facility and so it's very
important that we
have this facility built here on
santander lands were central to
this area here and know what
help a lot of people and even
our committee members and where
we're we're still fighting for
that lieutenant governor and I
have made several trips to
washington
to talk with people out there
we've talked to all the
congressional offices we tried
getting to the new secretary of
department of natural our
department of interior i'm sorry
have not been able to get there
so but we're still waiting for
that we want to insure that this
this facility gets built so we
really disappointed that the way
we found out about it there was
no formal communication from
anyone at interest and so we
communicated that to the folks
here in albuquerque when we did
have our meeting we were very
displeased by that so
that peace
intergovernmental collaboration
committee members it's essential
that tribes are not an after
thought in state and federal
funding formulas or allocations
on that note i'm gonna say
the state in new mexico and all
of you.
Who have been in your respective
officers have done a super job I
think with the state travel
collaboration act that was put
in the place and we're now
collaborating and consulting
worth tribes quibbles and
nations throughout the state and
there's there's still run for
improvement but i'm glad we have
this policy or this law in place
I think the tribes weblows and
nations no I don't think
tribesmen was in nations have to
be at the table when discussions
are may not only on funding but
other issues state land issues
are all the issues that that you
all work on health of education
we all have to be at the table
to discuss our your concerns and
are concerns many of I see many
of our former governors and
representatives are from the
different weblows that are here
they all do a great job in in
uh
at the state capital during the
sessions that we have in january
but we definitely have to be at
the table okay
data and transparency
reliable disaggregator data is
crucial to understanding true
funding impacts but travel data
is often under reported or
overlooked
we call for transparent tracking
and reporting on how funding
changes
affect travel communities and
outcomes sat out of public open
to partnerships to improve data
sharing while respecting tribal
data sovereignty and i'm gonna
emphasize senate and as ready to
talk and work with all of you at
the state level
and the many issues that we we
have and that you all might have
already to work.
And since our lieutenant
governor and I have been to a dc
we told the representatives
congressman congresswoman
senators
and other people that we've are
spoken to we've told them center
anna and the tribes
I hope I am not overstepping my
balance here but the tribes are
ready to work with the new
administration
we're not just anybody out there
we've been here tries quibblo's
in nations throughout the the
united states have been here for
a long long time and to overlook
as
would be atrocious to me in my
opinion so we we put that
message out there
the new administration people
that we met with
a lot how do I didn't know
who the problems work
it's pretty amazing that they
don't know so what we
told them was there's the
documentary out there and maybe
some of you may have seen it
before it's called the canes are
power
it keens a power that
documentary and one of our
former governors and several of
the former governors were in
that documentary and it tells
you about who we are what the
canes represent to us I can's
of power we have a keen from
spain we have a came from
the mexican government we have a
came from abraham lincoln
that was given to the traged
peblos and nation then s it's
really uncanny that abraham link
and president abraham lincoln
only gave these cans to the
public
and so we also have a came from
the state of new mexico so we've
been there
several governments and were
still here and we're going to be
here and we want to work with
all of you
that's my message okay.
Yeah.
Any changes and funding must be
assessed through an equity lens
acknowledging historical
underfunding of trouble
communities
we urge continued advertising at
the federal level to protect an
expand wondering streams that
benefit all of new mexico
you all have constituents
throughout the mistake and
having worked at the state
engineer's office
the east side of new mexico does
not have any tribes published or
nations however i've worked with
my good friend pat senator pat
woods and others from the area
to to ensure that
I been in the state engineers
office try to help them as well
with their water issues we're so
what is short here in new mexico
it's unreal and so this summer
has been no different and I
think climate change is is real
I would pass the real grand
bridge burn wheel here and
there's literally no water in
the real grand literally no
water in our reach of the river
for at least a week or so there
was no water in our reach of the
river at santander
so
we have to find ways and should
to ensure that that we
are able to do
the route the middle valley and
throughout the state of new
mexico we got to help everybody
so that piece so in closing.
Let's understand how federal
funding changes impact
communities across new mexico
which requires an inclusive and
culturally informed approach
santa and equivalent is
committed to ensuring travel
voices are heard need your met
and partnerships are
strengthened for the benefit of
all new mexicans.
We look forward to continuing
our work together to serve the
needs of our community and we
thank you
we thank you for the public
sentence and for your time and
attention to my remarks
appreciate it and we hope to see
you all soon and sanity again
we're almost close to another
legislator session it's just
going to come here really really
quick so thank you so much for
listening to me you have a good
meeting today and if there's
anything else we can do from our
office please give us a car
don't be strangers and if you're
ever in the the center in the
area care bernalio we have
events during the christmas
holidays we have dances are best
day is in july july twenty sixth
it just passed it was brutally
hard but we got there were
another feature
so thank you very much madam
chair and culture
thank you governor oh wait where
you stay for just a few
questions
that's let's see if we'll get
some questions here
I do have a couple of things i'd
like to say governor and this
map you know in my opinion and I
I believe the whole committee
feels this way is that tribes
and on pueblos are foundational
you know for the success
removing the mexico forward you
know such an important part of
the economy in our state and
there's no question about it and
the communities and you know I I
can say that pretty readily
because for twenty five years
like represented a native
district I can't even imagine it
being any other any other way
it's not necessarily true for
everybody as you say that
they're they're not
represented tribes and published
on the east side of the state
but there's certainly aware of
what it means to have that
internal piece of the economy
and the culture and the people
and just said can do out or two
week with everybody so i'm glad
that you were able to host us
and I think you're.
Your comments are are well taken
we have heard this I think it
was from a couple of other
groups of previous meetings just
about how delays affect what
we're doing I know what at one
time when I was during our
budget committee we had delays
where school funding and all my
gosh you know because they
depound so much on what they
think they're going to be
getting to build a budget for
the next year so they can make
sure that they're providing the
services told the kids I would
imagine in your governmental
structure it's the same way
that you have to look at what is
coming in how it's going to be
budgeted and i'm curious
on the tribal budgets are based
on a federal budget year or are
you tied with their state budget
you're it's a federal better or
case they ask out in order I
didn't realize that that so you
all kick in october one october
one okay so do you have a sense
then just in general how that's
being handled if have all the
funds come in that were
delayed that you were expecting
we're back on track the funds
have been unfrozen for the not
only for the solar array but for
the wildlife we're working on
and other projects that we have
going what about the site just
project that you were talking
about but I just project
we just had a
notice of funding for twenty
million
twenty two twenty two million
per planning it's not the full
amount but i'm i'm hoping that I
h s
leaders will make insure and
sure that we get to the
construction piece at some point
we were told you weren't shovel
ready but we are we are we have
infrastructure in the ground so
we were ready to go.
But again the funding was pulled
back and so
but again with this notice of
funding we hope to get on that
road so let me ask you
I didn't get a chance to ask
folks in these earlier meetings
are the authorization amounts
tracking with what's being
appropriate by congress
I i'm hoping that they are that
they're going to be tracking but
we're not absolutely sure right
now we just got the notice of
funding and we'll see how that
were in i'll see how that means
yeah i'd like to i'd like to
understand that better less go
to senator woods
with that madam chair to air own
to your question
again governor was was the
funding appropriate but not
funded is that the we were told
i'm when former governor nathan
garcia started this process in
twenty twenty three
I believe like
late in the year we had several
meetings when our administration
came on with
very important people from hs
from washington we were told
this money was there this
hundred and sixty plus million
was there and they urged this
make sure you watched this
funding and ensure that that
you're going to be able to start
the project
we had several meetings here and
at the public as well with their
leaders
consequently the new
administration came on and then
the money was called back
thank you thank you merchant
we have any other questions
doesn't look like it but again
thank you for oh i'm sorry I
didn't see going out center
thank you very much thank you
governor thank you for hosting
us
and thank you for up lifting the
importance of equity tribal cyp.
Sovereignty and self
determination I think that's
critical
um and given that you will have
been here since time and
memorial I think it's
in our best interest to also
listen to that western and
knowledge
I have a question in terms of
additional federal funds has
your ing funds have they all
come through from hide
efficiently.
And committee this is the orange
john he's our tribal planner
good morning madam chair
and senator nova and governor me
yes or is
finding has come in on timing we
are currently working with the
federal head in terms of
constructing as if you can see
and if you go toward santa fe
you can see the three and homes
that have been recently been
funded by heard and we're
looking forward to having a
residence moving to those homes
and we're still seeking
additional finds for housing not
only for those houses or
subdivision homes but we're also
looking at
funding our residential home to
think the village as well
unfortunately we cannot do
anything with our traditional
village because if we do federal
funding for that then are
tribal historic preservation
office at the pover i'm not
having the authority and the
state would take over that so
right now we're just focused on
the subdivision and we are
working i'm handed hang with the
federal agency to ensure that no
we do are basically completing
that project
and i'm sure thank you very much
for that information i'm and on
that note or do you all
coordinate with a local or nap
office that does here and
albuquerque from her yes we do
you do ok already well thank you
very much and i'm really glad
that those ones have come in
thank you
we have a representative of
brown and then represented
dunkin
thinking madam chair and
governor I mean how i'm just
curious to know what is the some
total of federal funding that uh
sent it out and receives i'm
sorry what would that question
again that what is the some
total of federal funding what is
the some total if you know of
state funding
for the public.
Please
thank you representative round
for your question in terms of
state finding for capital outway
we've received over like four
point two million dollars this
past legislative session and
with our truck record with the
state we've competed our
projects on time and we've
expand oliver phones
accordingly just recently we
expended our educational complex
plan and designed found to the
dollar you knew that we didn't
revert any amount in addition to
that we also
were recently war awarded four
point two million dollars in
trouble infrastructure find for
our our seat treatment plants so
we do that the public is very
well and the governors
lieutenant government on toyota
as well as government arbitrary
are very strong advocate
insuring that no they do work
with state legislature to ensure
that funding is received to the
problem and represent a brown
really proud of the
older funds that we get from the
state for different projects we
try to spend that money down as
quickly as we can we have a very
good track record for that we
try not to
we try to tell the console that
we have to spend these moneys
down in order to to get more
funding in the future and we
don't have to send any money
back
I think there's some other
travel communities that meet run
into that sort of thing but
santander is really good at
spending the money's down and
get our projects done
madam chair so put me at my
question is what's the some
total of federal funding from
all sources federal that the
tribe receives if you know
I represent the brown and madame
chair lenstram the toilet now
that the probably receives the
federal funding various from
each year so it can it depends
upon you know what we were
applied for like for example.
The head housing you know it
funded over thirty nine homes
which is like a very high number
of in the billions so it would
average about me because the
fifty four million dollars i'm
depending on you know what the
problem applied for in federal
finding and whether or not we do
receive the funding itself so it
kind of varies I would say
between seventy million to fifty
four million dollars in federal
funding
and their insurer are just to
clarify sir is at all all the
federal funding that comes in or
is that just for housing or I
know it's hard to aggregate
just a guess venture madame
share and members of the
committee yes that's for all
federal funding.
Perhaps i've done it go ahead
oh okay.
Do we have anyone else i'd like
to ask questions
it doesn't look like it so thank
you again general and again
thank you for your hospitality
venture coacher and members of
the committee thank you bread
having this year today thank you
thank you sir and i'd like to
ask the uh senators came out
just a minute ago to please it
or do some
set of her minions
good morning manchera thank you
for having him so i'm late with
someone part behind me
to active congress to figure out
who they were to get him to move
in so that's why i'm late
apologies for that appreciate
the time I I just want one
people to think of one thing as
we go through this under the
tree that was saying by
tribesmen queblo's rate the
federal government said that
they'll take care of you and in
under that treaty that's what
they did in each tribe and
published different and how they
get federal funding and how they
access it and how they spend it
so the treaty is what determine
how much federal funding the
money how much federal funding
they apply for and get and that
all goes back to the tremium
brian what year was at eighteen
eighteen eighty seven something
that if you need before
you were had history and
rehobits looks like the thing
thank you madame chair.
All right senator pinto can you
please introduce yourself think
you matter chair members of the
committee senator pittsburgh I
present district
on county it's great to be
occurred thank you for hosting
us to send it anna
for this committee they did
hostage last year for indian
affairs committee and give us a
great insight of the school in
the hotel up there so thank you
thank you madam chair
thank you senator I just want to
congratulate the committee this
morning we have a hundred
percent full cold forum today
first thing in the morning so
i'm very proud of that so thank
you all for being here today and
we're going to call up our next
percent or and if she could come
out or from the department
update status update on federal
funds
and these are on the web door
and all the presentations for
those that are turned down our
available on our website
we ask that you're all
introduced yourself thank you.
The.
You'll have to push the button
with the uh little man on there
though it's read okay if I would
be great okay at good morning
madam check members of the
committee I am does that minutes
cabinet secretary for the indian
affairs department thank you for
having us this morning have a
couple of my staff here with me
i'm gonna let them introduce
themselves
good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
adelina as I am the general
council for the indian affairs
department
good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
amanda nessi and on the policy
director at id thank you.
Thank you madame chair sell at
good morning everybody think you
welcome to indian countries I
was when nice they say when we
get to start off the morning and
indian country makes me happy I
used to work to straight down
the road um
so we're gonna go through our
presentation a little bit I know
we have about forty minutes or
so i'm not sure that will take
that long quote honestly but I
want to think you for having us
and hope that we can present
some information that maybe the
committee hasn't heard over the
summer but we do know that you
have often working on this over
the summer and this is actually
design officials say this but it
is first interim hearing so far
this summer so
silver getting back on track so
wanted to moving into slide to
you just talk a little briefly
about what the indian affairs
department is supposed to deal
and so of course we're one of
our agencies and i'll talk about
this a little bit later but we
were a very small agency and
sure as many of you know we've
got we are if we are fully
staffed we would have twenty
five after you and so I have one
policy director of one general
council and so some of the work
that ideas are supposed to be
doing according to statute it is
investigating studying looking
at information as it impacts
indian countries throughout new
mexico but i'm not only new
mexico throughout the entire
country and so
i'm looking at the legislative
actions executive actions
judicial actions the other thing
that ie d does and I think to be
completely honest they think
we're trying to work on and
improve those things within our
agency right now as it stands
but when I think the other part
of what we're supposed to do is
something that I think we do
really well at the indian
affairs department which is
collaborate with our sister
agencies as well as have
outreached and communications
with the nation's public and
tribes and tribal communities
throughout our state that's what
we are doing really well a thing
and so.
So some of what you're going to
hear about today is kind of from
our perspective you know based
on.
What we think would help the
committee to and our state learn
more about what we think could
help indian country because I am
not sure that we have all of the
answers played honestly I wish
we had more I just don't think
right now we have the best
capacity
at this time to be able to focus
on everything we'd like to but
we're trying so moving on to
this are section through you
just said general overview i'm
sorry site three just a general
overview of kind of or we're
gonna go to day so you'll see
i'm talking a little bit about
the priorities that we're aware
of an ending country how tribes
I get federal funding you heard
governor me ho talking about you
know the direction that tribes
get federal funding from senator
munios talking a little bit
about what the federal
government is supposed to do for
a tribes until i'll talk a
little bit about that because I
always think it's good to give a
little bit of historical
contacts and use some time to
teach about like what are these
relationships for indian country
i'm and then all moving to what
our state relationship is the
new mexico what that means for
some whites in port for us even
though there are these federal
requirements for indian country
and then we'll just at the last
site is kind of just a listing
of various resources that we
think that the legislature could
look into for some further
information and just if you have
time to reperiods and get
interested in learning more
though there are some areas to
look into some moving on too
slight for
some of the priorities in indian
country and of course every
nation public tribe is going to
be different I think it that
last time I checked there's like
five hundred seventy four tribes
across the country you have over
a twenty nation's public and
tribes and new mexico each one
has its own individual requests
in things that are important to
them and their own government
and how they function in so
if so.
It's important to remember that
this is just kind of I
generalization to the best of
our abilities but some of the
things we were always read of
thinking about and concerned
with our elders are seniors
education and energy health care
or lands public safety in
horsement water and of course
they think the number one thing
probably for tribes across the
country i'm thinking on cracked
here is sovereignty and
protecting their sovereignty.
On the right hand side of that
slide you'll see that just some
of the process that's been
happening since I renew
administration federal
administration took place in
january I don't think I need to
go over that i'm sure you guys
are well aware and have been
looking into this all summers
i'm gonna skip over that and
jump on to the next slide
so i'm slide number five
this is where you'll see kind of
how the
the uh
tribes get funding from the
federal government and so
similar to kindnessy's I suppose
about to sell a lot of times
tribes are there's there's
certain instances we're trying
to get money directly from the
federal government from
different federal agencies and
it'll go go stricter the tribe
in the tribe gets to decide how
it's going to expand or the
try sometimes if if it's like an
address facility or a bie
facility their federal
government has a little bit more
control when they're tribally
controlled are six thirty eight
programs that try has more
control because they're getting
that kind of block grant of
money from the phones and then
there i'm dispersing it in a way
that's best appropriate that's
that
self governance isda at anything
governor me who is talking a
little bit about that another
way that tribes sometimes get
money is getting it filled there
through the states and so
sometimes the federal government
will give it to a state entity
and that state entity while then
filter it down so I think some
of that happens with our aging
and long serve services
department see why fd has some
there's like title six title for
ends those funds go through the
state and get filtered through
to tribes and then tribes can
work with it from there so so
there is to those are kind of
the different modalities in
which tribes are getting money
from the federal government
moving on to slight six.
The.
Again going back to just kind of
history and historical stuff and
this is the stuff that I really
enjoy
so talking about our federal
obligations in relations and
again just going back to kind of
reiterating what governor me how
said but the senator muniosis
sing just before we came up is
that there is a federal trust
responsibility across the entire
country for indian country in
that comes through all different
types of
um
modalities to so you have
treaties you have executive
orders you have compacts and
statutes commonly is the big one
in indian country a lot of our
laws really come from what the
united states supreme court has
determined is right or wrong for
indian country and then of
course the united states
constitution
said the bia i'm it's website
states that the trust
responsibility at the federal
trust responsibility is
illegally enforceable for due
sharing obligation on the part
of the united states to protect
tribal treaty rates lands access
and resources so again going
back to look at
and again we'll talk a little
bit about why the states
important but I think framing it
in terms of tribes you have a
very unique relationship with
the federal government that you
don't see with a lot of other
entities and so remembering that
that that that is there for a
tribes tribes are named in the
commerce cars and so it's as
congress shall have the power to
regulate commerce with
for nation states and in the and
tribes ada united states supreme
court has looked at that and
kind of determined that congress
the united states congress has
what we call plenary power
plenary authority which
basically means congress has
kind of this really big
authority over everything
revolve involving it in country
and so tribes are called
according to federal indian law
domestic dependent nations are
it's like a guardian.
To the word relationship and
sell so there is that that
really big heavy impact from the
federal government in the cell
at moving on to slide seven i'll
talk a little bit about more
about the federal obligations in
such just kind of reinforcing
itself nineteen twenty one their
snater act went into a fact it's
under twenty five usc section
thirteen and again it just
that the beer of indian affairs
under the DO y shell and direct
supervisor and expend moneys as
congress made from time to time
appropriate for the benefit care
and assistance of the indians
throughout the united states for
education for health for their
property for line for spent for
higher education for housing for
all these different areas
throughout the you know
everything most areas and tribes
touched a a federal relationship
in some capacity and of course
the moving down into just that
little blocked on there and I
know that's really small awesome
I apologize but that but it's
just kind of an overview for
yalts kind of look out when you
have time the agency is that are
really have begin packs for any
country of a course at the
department of it the interiors
were the bureau of indian
affairs in the bureau of indian
education set cell always the
department of the interior and
of course each trust is where I
have its so it's under there so
those there's a couple of the
the big agencies tribes work
with and but you know of course
they're always working
with everybody
so setting this framework again
the framework is really just to
kind of say that overall one
things happen out of federal
level I think they
disproportionate network impact
indian country because indian
country has this heavy
relationship with the federal
government because that's what
was set into lock.
And so so what we are going to
see is that when there are cuts
even if they're not direct cuts
to indian country there are that
impacts ending country when
there are policy changes our
policy conversations those
policies have impacts on
reverberating impacts on indian
country sometimes even if
they're not directly directed at
indian country and we'll talk
about that in a little bit as
well so i'm moving on to slight
eight as I think moving into the
next few sides are kind of what
I think the committee was more
interested in hearing about from
us and so
and i'm just gonna be completely
frank here I think a lot of the
info so the information we have
here is what we've been able to
come up with my policy I
director amanda has been working
diligently to keep by step today
and to find information the
problem is that I ensure you
guys know this is everything is
kind of a moving part right now
we're not really sure for sure
where things are something's
happened the next day something
changes and so she did a lot of
work and outreached to travel
communities to a lot of our
sister agencies to some of our
federal delegation to see if we
could poll numbers but I just
want a caution the committee and
of course anybody who might be
looking at it is these numbers
could very well be changed the
next second they may very well
already absolutely and so it's
it was really tough for us to
come up with a good number
so looking at some of the things
that we do you know though is
the corporation for public price
broadcasting was eliminated
through the recision spill there
are three tribal stations in new
mexico and so those will likely
see impacts and you don't know
the direct impacts are exactly
what will happen from what i've
heard the corporation is really
trying to get some money right
now so that they can be
sustainable and continue
programming but I don't know if
that's going to happen but zoni
publo pine hillary may.
Um of never honation and dual c
for the hicaria patching nation
i'll have radio stations so
those are similar radio stations
and indian country new mexico
that will likely be impacted by
this.
And moving on to the museum of
library and sciences so the loss
of access to native american
grants and native american
library services so that was
eliminated and each our wine
local foods for schools and
local food purchases
the usd canceled the program
multi state information sharing
an analysis center so that was
eliminated and moving to fee for
service our tribal colleges and
university funding so right now
the budgets remaining flat
but we do know of course we know
that in particular like sippie
had a lot of layoffs
I I had a little bit of a
different relationship because
they're federally chartered
school and so they have a little
bit of a different relationship
but again any impacts you tc u
tribal colleges in universities
will impact all of them and
they'll have to kind of figure
out you know I was listening to
a program a couple weeks ago
and right now it sounds like
most tribal colleges at least a
new mexico feel comfortable
right now they feel okay that
they're going to get through the
next year but whether or not
that's going to continue I think
again everything's kind of up in
the air and sell you know one of
the things that I think we're
kind of going to talk about
today is you know forward
thinking so what do we do if
this happened and send how do we
help nation's public and tribes
in our state i'm to ensure that
we can maintain what we have
been placed already and then a
course of the travel energy loan
guarantee program was the
eliminated and hr one is well so
these are some of the things we
do now that have been eleven
eliminated some of which have
tangential impacts on nation's
public and tribes are throughout
through the state to sell
so for the fiscal year of twenty
twenty four there are various
grants that were terminated.
But then reinstated and so you
heard i'm going to meet him kind
of talk about some of those
things that we don't know where
they worried thought they were
going away but then they came
back and so there are various
things that have impacted indian
country throughout new mexico
and and if you all want
more information on this like
kind of like I will all differ
to a mandate to go more in defts
but i'm all finished the
presentation person then we can
go back to the fact
the moving on to slide nine
so
slide nine ten enable level
our where
it's kind of up in the air and
where we were really struggling
to figure out what information
do we say how do we adequately
put it in should we put numbers
because our we gotta say
something that's wrong or
incorrect one so we really
struggled with this but we did
do our best amendment at a
really good job as they said
really working through and
digging through to find as much
information as we could so we
could provide some real accurate
and helpfully information
when i'm gonna make a sum up in
the end of kind of what I think
this means I could mean so
travel set aside funding for
their tribal opinion and
response grants so there is a
proposed elimination which would
be about a hundred twenty eight
million dollars from the
president's budget
but you know it's still proposed
the indian health services
there is a proposed increase
over the FY twenty five budget
from the senate appropriations
but we don't know if that's
actually going to happen so kind
of just in our little scope of
health care services at least
looking at around a hundred and
twenty million dollar cuts
potentially at least we know
it's over a hundred million
dollars would be the big thing.
Human services we know that
there was a medicaid impact and
i'm snapped impacts throughout
the entire country that is a
course impacting new mexicans
directly a lot of a need of
people are on snap and medicaid
benefits in new mexico sixteen
percent of all recipients for
snap then we do know that they
carved out
and I forget if it's an
exception or an exemption for
native people but
they're that there is a car
about for indian people for snap
benefits but there are these
these kind of reductions
throughout looking at nearly
four million dollars to cuts in
new mexico those aren't directly
to nations public our tribes or
indian people but again
it's too woman was talking about
manager was talking about
earlier that we
if it impacts new mexico it
impacts all of indian country
and so those are kind of when we
see those cuts we know that
there's going to be
reverberating impact indian
country and indian people
throughout new mexico
moving on to slight nine again
what we don't know
and
is that all their americans act
their total six grand so there's
a flat funding for for twenty
six
so it was the fifty point three
million dollar allocation for
for twenty five the senior
community service employment
program again that's some of
this money gets filtered through
aging for nation's public and
tribes so if there's cut served
by just remain in place than how
that you know of course tribes
are going to be impacted if
there's cuts because they
receive some of that money from
from our aging from our entities
state and to team to those are
aging services labor in
education again as we know there
were federal layoffs across the
board towards the beginning of
the year the spring earlier in
the year and so some of them
according to the information
from working with department of
work.
For solutions there are total
for hundred and fifty nine total
and employment claims and sixty
four former employees that the
bia and so of course we have we
have a large needed federal
employee
group in new mexico so we have
the interest in our currently we
have just throughout the
throughout indian countries that
nation's public and tribes we
are still have the
bia has one of its big points
the training center in one of
its big points that are a lot of
indeed country comes through to
to train and so one of the
things with like these federal
last that's not directly
reported or i'm related to
funding but one of the things
that i've heard and
conversations with
some of our constituents is that
that they don't know who to
contact anymore so they make a
car to who they that was a
contact or they send their email
and it they're not getting a
response or they're not hearing
and so then they're like oh that
person is no longer there and
they're trying to figure out who
so not necessarily that that
funding has gone away but just
that they haven't heard and I
think again governor me how
talked a little bit about that
when he was saying that they
didn't get direct communication
on their grant and so I think
that's been one of the things
we've heard is you know how how
are they getting information
they make you sure that they're
being updated on who they're
supposed to at a communicate
with
the bureau of indian education
is looking at a four hundred
fifty million dollar reduction
that's from the president's
budget
so
again nearly four hundred and
fifty million dollars changes in
in education but in labor in
education but again this is all
in flax then it's really hard to
pinpoint exactly what's going to
happen
moving on to slight eleven.
Looking at rural development I
programs like wick
so seven point eight million
dollar productions in new mexico
so the women in in children so
that of course will impact
indian country or impact need of
citizens awake always provides
really good services for women
and infense
and so looking at that from the
president's budget and then the
pin young grant this is by had
talked about the pinyon grants
and it's it they received over I
actually received an official
letter and from a deperiment of
commerce in the national
institute saying that they were
ceasing the funding and so I
thirteen of those thirty nine
grants grant applications that
they had received fourteen
including planned activities and
collaborations with nation's
public and tribes so again that
that impacts new mexico indian
country as well
a department of energy and
indian energy looking at a
twenty million reduction from
seventy million for a four
twenty five to fifty million and
f or twenty six so about twenty
million dollars and then I
senator not always talking about
the indian housing block grants
flat funding for fy twenty five
so a new mexico there was a
hundred and fifty five point
eight million dollars allocated
and I found twenty five in
senator I think amanda has a
breakdown of some of those
numbers from last year if you
want to ask her about some of
those
and then moving on to side tops
to those those size kind of
conclude
unfortunately where we are right
now a lot of unknowns a lot of
difficulty in a thinking out
hopefully some of it was heard
from governor me how and
lawrence talking about um we
don't always know we don't know
that you know if you know what's
going to happen we don't know
how much we're getting reduced
in some times I think it's
really difficult.
At you know representative i've
heard your question about you
know what is the number for how
much federal finding are how
much are steep funding and I
think it's difficult to go and
figure out
the I think every tribe is
always influx
it's always different depending
on you know different grants
that are applied for and stuff
and so it's also difficult for
us then as the state to try to
figure out what those numbers
were and what those direct
impacts were so we had a again
we just had to talk to him
trying to figure it out but we
did the best week code with a
lot of communication and
collaboration throughout the
state
moving on to site twelve the
next two sides I twelve and
thirteen are really just
examples of white some of these
different cuts and impacts can
look like an indian country so
i'm looking this is pursuant to
achieve from our state and how
tc use and higher indian higher
education are impacted by
various federal funding
complexities so never hope
technically university they had
some grants
that were directly impacted so
they're water equity and
building work force
so there are some some impacts
directly to the naval technical
university but then federal
funding impacts at nine tribal
hired institutions like sign on
college are you on health
sciences both of there was also
saw some things being impacted
the same one specifically their
need of outreach
and achievement relationships so
they're still waiting to hear
from the department of education
on whether or not it's cut and
then you're and i'm health signs
is the native chair um carries
there it was a travel here style
is talking to clients about
immunization so that was has a
direct impact and was cut
moving on to slide thirteen
again just talking about not
direct funding about policy
implications as well as talking
about a little bit earlier this
is just merely an ex.
Sample we haven't felt direct
impacts for this specifically in
new mexico but it did happen
throughout the entire country
and so the executive order
fourteen one five one which was
ending radical and wasteful
government die programs and
preferencing and so we saw a lot
of programs throughout the
country um
cut or decide to to spend
themselves for you know to align
themselves with this one of the
things for a tribes is again
talking about in it we don't
specifically put it in here but
it does it does impact indian
country because a lot of places
and people tend to think of
indian country as a race or
diversity it's not necessarily
always true if we're looking at
the political classification and
due to the federal relationship
that the tribes have with the
federal government and with our
state quote honestly so there is
a little bit of a different hide
and extreme different
relationship that tribes have
with the federal government and
with with our state in
particular as well so we don't
see any of those we haven't seen
these directly yet new mexico at
least to my knowledge are target
to what we could understand but
those are things that happen
across the country and things
that I think people are looking
at when there making
considerations
will be anticiped fourteen this
is where we talked about our
state and I have a typo there
are so please excuse them but it
was supposed to say two thousand
four is when our um are uh
agency became an agency by la
and so i'm so we were
established in two thousand four
and it's it's section nine
twenty one dash one is our
enabling statue and kinda again
tells us what we're supposed to
do is an agency we started out
there one of the first slides
with talking a little bit about
it
but again going back to
y so tribes have these really
important relationships with the
federal government.
This unique relationship this
the federal government has this
trust responsibility but what I
think is important about new
mexico and why it matters here
new mexico is because in new
mexico we have said we are going
to work with some nations policy
and tribes and rested as well
and sell how do we best help the
nation's public and tribes and
our citizens a new mexico to
ensure that they get the
services and so that we can make
a better new mexico for all the
mexicans and so again governor
my only health talked about the
state travel collaboration act I
think that's a really important
thing for our seat that are
state does really well and I
think probably somewhat uniquely
and so our receipt has said it's
important to us to work with
nation's police and tribes in
new mexico and that we are going
ensure there's collaboration
between all of our agencies with
our legislative bodies we're
going to put funding into indian
country and we're going to make
sure that there's positive
government to government
relations with nation's public
and tribes from our government
and we're also going to make
sure that there's collaboration
and respect for tribal
sovereignty and true
partnerships throughout an arsty
and sell
so that's some so that's why all
of this
information while there is so
much that tribes get impacted
from the federal government
that's why new mexico can and
ship care or does care because I
realize have also said I
hopefully we care as humans but
also because our lies have said
this is where is important to
new mexico and this is what new
mexico saying we are going to
deal
and so when we're seeing these
federal cuts and impacts what
can you mexico do and how do we
best help or what how do we try
a little bit to stay ahead at
the game i'm moving on to side
fifteen again other commitments
by new mexico specifically
there.
Travel infrastructure fund act
in the capital outlay act i'm
not going to go into those arm
but those are other things that
are our state has said this is
important to us we're going to
ensure that we provide funding
to nation's public and trips for
four infrastructure within their
tribal communities so as new
mexico on side sixteen what can
we do the new mexico is
dedicated to working and
partnership with nations
publishing tribes and our tribal
citizens as exhibited through
our state loss the state learns
of direct if if and when an as
the state learns of direct
impacts I think that it be who
exists is a state to work
alongside nation publishing
tribes to determine how we can
either help fill in gaps and or
advocate for nations publishing
tribes and I think that's one of
the best things we can do so
continuing to have in will
continue to do it from the
indian affairs department at
continuing to have conversations
reaching out I am hearing things
another thing is I think
i'm not sure that id is
necessarily hearing as much of
the federal concerns because I
think appropriately tribal
leaders are having those
conversations with a lot of
their federal representatives in
the people that they talk to out
of better level and so you think
what we've been trying to do is
I know the state also wants to
know we want to know please tell
us let us know how we can help
to and so I think they're kind
of like oh you know so I think
that's something we've been
working on and i'm really happy
that the committee is hearing
from i'm directly from tribal
leaders today because I think
that's really the most important
from the state side we can give
as much information as we can
but really hearing from tribal
leadership is where you're going
to get the best information
because they're going to provide
you what they're feeling on the
ground in their communities id
is going to continue to
communicate and collaborate with
nation's pockets and tribes
we're gonna provide training
opportunities I tribal
sovereignty our legal systems.
Cultural competency
we will continue so on our wife
say we did build a paid on her
website for federal funding
updates in federal funding where
we're trying to kind of link to
other state agencies and federal
agencies so that as they update
their pages you can come to id
to get linked out to those so
that you can see what those
updates are
again everything's always a
moving target right now at least
from what we know and then
working with nation's public and
tribes and state agencies in the
legislature determined how new
mexico works and partnership
with nation's public and tribes
and how we can best help look
forward moving on to sight
seventeen again as they said
this is really just a big
listing of various additional
resources you know we're neither
saying that these are the best
resources are not we're just
saying here are some resources
to look at until and sell of
course looking at the federal
entities at state agencies that
provide direct services to
nation's publishing tribes in
the name communities have good
details id does not do direct
services and so
we we don't have the capacity we
don't have the expertise right
now so what I would focus on is
really is building those
relationships with our sister
agencies as well as doing the
research that we can
to the best of our abilities in
the specific programmatic areas
that we have and also with our
policy director and then the new
mexico federal delegation of
course would have good
information as well and then
there is some external resources
of just different things
throughout indian country that
people kind of look into to see
what's going on throughout the
entire country and indian
country.
Ah and that madam chair
concludes what I do want to say
again kind of reiterating what
you said manager is that one
types of doing while all of new
mexico is doing well and we
really believe that and sell we
appreciate that the committee is
looking into this and trying to
find ways in which our state can
best help at nation's police and
tribes and ensure that i'm all
of our communities are doing
well shimmer which
are very good presentation to do
either other staff want to make
a comment
no matter already
I wanted to draw the committees
attention to page or slide five
um
and when you look at page like
five if you see how the federal
government funding flow works
and you see the the right side
where it's a state agencies and
administring agencies and so
forth for the nations web loss
and tribes when I want to remind
the committee about and why this
is so
critical in in budget price
service and in tax policy is
because for every one of these
programs that is administered by
the state of new mexico every
one of them allows tribes to
apply
and every.
Tribal member or population is
part of the fire so when we
think about all these programs
that we roll out whether there
are for education funding
formulas block grants new mexico
finance authority and and I
would challenge the committee is
there any program that the state
of new medic new mexico
administers that tribes count
apply for
if you know tell me now cause I
would stand corrected
but i've been around a long time
and i've seen all the pieces of
legislation that come through
and there's never a piece of
legislation that says tribes are
eliminated their different they
get federal money only
so when we think about are owned
are own strategy for the state
we've got to include it all
because all their populations
are included in all these things
when we think about
redistricting as an obvious one
redistricting educational
funding formulas when we think
about how block grants go out
when we think about any program
that the new mexico finance
authority operates every drive
this interested can apply
any lending program so all your
populations are included when
we're looking at need need
because programs housing is
there any housing program that
you can't apply for
I doubt it
so that's the reason why we've
included all of this who were
talking about new mexico it's
got to be everybody.
Because you're all part of the
base population the base needs
assessment when we apply for
federal funds for the stated new
max account we use your numbers.
We use your employment
unemployment numbers we use your
health statistics.
So when you start breaking this
down i'd say to the policy
director that's also look at
what that looks like for you
when we're talking about
medicaid it were talking about
those kinds of cuts what is that
percentage population that you
think are part of the whole of
our part of the total.
Snap program you've already
pulled out out but is that a
deep enough review so I think
that's the reason that you know
we have set this agenda up the
way we how is because all the
tribes are part of the whole in
terms of when it comes to
financing programs tax policy
everything.
So I just wanted to raise that
before we got a questions from
the rest of the committee but I
also had of a couple of a couple
of other questions for you
you all are tracking this and
this is great and it's going to
be going on your website to
anyone who wants to look at this
count
want you to know that today
we've asked that the lfc are
provide for us a timeline of
when all these things are
supposed to happen based on what
they know I mean we're all in
the same boat we all recognize
it we can't say that this is
exactly going to happen on
october first we actually don't
know that and that's okay but we
have a pretty good handle on
some of these things and what
you're that they're being
proposed to happen
are you or do you know if the
tribal leadership is also doing
the same thing with the federal
funds that they anticipate
because they do out your budgets
also.
Madame chair I actually a man
aware of whether the travel
leadership is tracking at a do
now
and it you think you're going to
hear from the epcg chair later
today but they do not apcg is
tracking impacts to nation's
policy but I don't know if
they're doing that line item
kind of tracking
alright they're good let's go to
the committee do we have any
questions from the committee for
this panel I thought sometimes a
very very good presentation
gives a very good or review for
those who don't work as closely
as some of the rest of us do
with tribes and quibblers and
and so forth representative of
her error.
Thank you madame chair at the
last lfc meaning I asked about
ped was presenting and I asked
them if on what was going to
happen to the snap benefits you
know that formula funding out
there at the local school level
they said they were work there
was some kind of a four year
forgiveness and that they had
talked to other school districts
and that they had they had kinda
ninety nine percent of them had
submitted an application saying
that there would they would put
off a cutting that formula at
the school level which I was
pretty pleased to hear but I
speed working with you on
triple schools
manager representative we I have
not heard that information
directly and i'm happy to follow
up with a sector rego sector to
to get the information and but
we do work closely with the
assistant secretary at kitty and
money go to insurer that were up
to day of course again we're not
providing those direct service
system or not in the every day
now but we do communicate option
and in particular when there's
when there's big things that
they think we should really be
aware of they they are really
good about sharing what that
information with us but i'm
happy to reach out thank you I I
just wanted to make sure you
know about that because I was
very happy to hear that doesn't
apply to all snap recipient that
i'm not saying that but for the
schools they got a in ninety
nine percent of the matter and
in the application and they got
a four year waiver so I I just
think you guys had to be aware
of that thank you manager
alright let's get go to
representative dunkin and then
senator pinto
comma
just a good question for you I
know that
congressman called oh is the
chair of the appropriation on
the house and I know they've
increased
travel funding for a travel
safety.
Health and
education I think but they also
dropped their
their version of this bill
in july have you heard from that
are there any reductions or how
does it
work out with
what they administration want
manager representative I have
not directly had i'm gonna
differ to my policy director
amanda
mancher representative
as as we talked about there is
so much flux here right you had
the president's budget come out
and then the house is working on
their appropriations bill
it was difficult to put together
information that would be
beneficial for all you for you
all
knowing where everything is at
that moment and so i've been
looking at the appropriation
bills but you know once you know
they leave the house they jump
over to the senate and then they
have their turn with it um and
that's why we hoped out the
website at id will be helpful
for people around new mexico to
understand what's going on but
we're just waiting for waiting
to see but it does it does vary
from the president's budget and
I have seen increases where the
president's budget had a market
decrease
thank you madam chair and that's
what I was was getting at he to
need american and I don't assume
that he would do anything here
that would be harmful of the
nation's so thank medium to
appreciate that
ready we have a senator pinto
and then senator many
thank you madame chairman
members of the committee
and when you are talking about
when it entertains the continued
to fight for is not a whole prep
because every year there is some
kind of issue with the funding
they receive whether it be
through grants or discontinued
grants at which they are not
notified
so that it's when the entity
that doesn't always get.
Or is able to apply for some of
these programs as we move
forward the
tables here cause ids probably I
think is capital out how many of
the capital outlet projects are
under
basically with there was a match
funding how many of those do we
need to oversee that pro the
projects or you are going
forward and if they're better
off pending snap match how many
are jeopardy.
Manager senator that's that's a
really great question so one of
the things that we were seeing
and
we took a brighter proach to our
federal match funding that we
had and
as some of you may now it came
as a it's twenty five million
back in twenty twenty three and
it's been reauthorized a couple
of times so we have it again
through twenty twenty six right
now so is twelve point five
million dollars of that fetter
of that twenty five million was
set aside for federal match fund
and I am sure we'll talk about
the satellite sea more but we
haven't
we have it we didn't get very
far this past year we still have
about a little over seven
million dollars if I
were calling correctly from her
last meeting um seven million
dollars remaining some of the
issues this past year were that
tribes weren't getting that
information or they didn't know
if they were going to get it and
so there they're granted so they
were like well what do we do and
I think from our side wise while
we have this you have a notice
of funding award
you have a subsequent kind of
unknowing but you have a notice
the funding word originally and
so what we said was for us we
were asking for a notice of
funding a word that's that's we
took again we took a broad
approaching so that's what we
used to try to get that out and
that's what i'm telling told
other ways that's where it is
going to continue to do it and
so we are working at getting i'm
the rest of that funding out
some out of chairman secretary
so do you have a breakdown of
each tribunation or quiblo as
far as the capital projects that
could be inteoperty so we know
where to put this money in that
sense especially when we
use consider a breakdown
manhint chair senator up until
we actually i.
I don't have the breakdown here
for this presentation but I am
happy to provide it to you we do
have a breakdown and we were
happy to share that.
In memchair members of the
committee I think part of that
too is where we need to
categorize whether it's critical
are not that we find it because
part I think that's one of our
previous under this committee is
to come up with the plan and
really make sure that those
projects that are already moving
forward that we are you know
depending on where the the
priorities of our tribes nations
and publish stand that we want
to make sure there's sustained
that there is a floor amount for
us and we know that it's a
moving target so it is important
that it is up kept but I didn't
see it anywhere in the table
here uhm
and what they're expecting that
funding to be from the federal
government
and the
these services direct services
that the state agencies provide
looks like I think there are
some agencies that are missing
and matter charity that's
critical that there is a correct
listing of
those are direct services that
are provided and that rely on
the thorough government and that
sets up the funding that could
be in jeopardy and madam chair
and secretary you're aware of
the six thirty eight entities
could you give us a brief
description of such word or
members here
manifest and it opened our just
to clarify real click and find
me are you talking about what is
the six thirty eight so six
thirty eight is public last six
thirty eight it comes from the
indian self determination
education act of nineteen
seventy five I believe
and basically what it does it
was a.
We have all these different
errors that indian country has
been through federal error is
that we've been through and so
the most the one were in right
now is what we call and self
governments are self sufficiency
and what it does is six thirty
eight says from the federal
government so if
generally placed the lawn for
certain to education to health
care services but it can apply
to lots of other things so
historically again using its.
A guardian word relationship
that the united states had it
word it really overseas a lot of
those programs so it does the
health care for ending country
does the education and release
it's okay this is how you have
to do it at I but after the
indian self determination
education act that said okay
basically what what do you from
the federal government side in
order to respect travel
sovereignty and give tribes more
direct
influence over their education
are there health care services
we're going to give this block
of money to the nation public
and then the national public
tribe gets to expenditure in the
way that they feel as
appropriate for those services
and they're still some
restrictions but it's certainly
not as restrictive as it's the
federal government is overseeing
it and so there are many health
care facilities a lot of the
nations publishing tribes in new
mexico have six thirty eight
their health care facilities
there some that have done their
schools there some that have
done mine forcement there are
some that have a combination of
both back home and my
reservation we have which is the
north code I so does not new
mexico course but we have we
have our elementary school that
has half bie employees and part
like other like tribal are state
employees and so sometimes when
the federal government has a a
day off those employees are off
in the other teachers are
covering the other clock the
classes for everybody else sell
you'll see a mix of that in
indian country you might have
one for spent that is still run
but the health care facility is
six thirty eight so
so when you hear a self
government or six thirty eight
that's generally what they're
talking about for nation's
public and trips and matter
insurance secretary though
spending that is received six
thirty eight
is it under contract.
The funding is
madame chair senator and i'm not
i'm not sure how to answer that
quite honestly it's they do have
to show that make sure this
interests do you have to show
that they're meeting the
criteria that they're supposed
to it's kind of more of a grant
but it is
here you're agreeing to do this
and they do need some
information from
try saying that the tribe is
taking on that responsibility
and a tribe can also decide that
they don't want that
responsibility anymore again
going back to my trade back home
we had one of our elementary
scores with the big score the
tribe took it over the six
thirty eight of it we did it for
two years my tribe could not
sustain it and so it went back
to the the trip requested that
bia take that school back under
its a wing so that that because
it wasn't the tribe was enabled
to
continue to serve it.
And madame chairman members of
the committee this is when
entity that's very important to
understand because when they're
given that grant and most of its
ford funded it is contract just
like we do with any kind of
grand there's a contract between
them and that don't receiving
that money there was talked at
six thirty eight would not be
under a budget cut but it's
fluctuating still do we do not
have
one in apple who
six thirty hotspital health care
facility so when they talk about
a hs being very important and
supporting it from the state in
mexico just because of that
little designation
but to be a six thirty eight two
year required to go through the
financial audits and be
sustained for a most I think it
took five year audit back and
then whenever you applied to
five year old ford so you have
to click so complaints for ten
years to show that six thirty
eight there are some bie schools
down our six thirty eight graph
in new mexico but not all of the
travels schools are so we're
moving along in this budget
process to I think that's
important we need to distinguish
with some
with this committee i'm thinking
out of chair
thank you senator will go next
to senator minos and then
senator to health
thank you manager a ma'am
sectors will move forward you
you mention you had a portal on
your you created a portal on
your web page for information
about federal cuts to to get out
what I like to see do is come
back and change that and let
them give you information that
is hitting them directly so
peblo zoomier whoever can they
come back and list these are
federal cuts that we know are
going to happen so we can gather
that information I think that's
going to be more important
because each quebel was going to
get a little bit differently in
certain areas I just may be
completely different but.
So I want to look at that
because that's going to
determine how how we place money
right how what's the priorities
to go to representative
horrarist question in a mackinly
county every kid is eligible for
free food and lunches in that
qualifies them for snap in so
they won't get headed all in in
that area in so the snap waiver
comes back and says you know we
have a waiver and new mexico
till twenty twenty nine or
twenty thirty.
Because our numbers are so so
miss calculated a wrong but if
we start to correct that then we
have to spend money and so we're
kind of in this conundrum of do
we fix it and save ourselves
money or do we start to figure
out
where our airs are in the snap
program in in the qualifications
the federal government is coming
back to pre covered twenty
twenty regulations right those
were all pre twenty twenty
qualifiers ensured there's going
to be some veterans that are
their head there's going to be
some other ones where working
with the food banks to try to
figure out what those numbers
look like they just want people
to be aware that we can just
pump two hundred and thirty
million out to food banks and
say or can make a make hunger
and they'll fail and in they've
said that themselves it's a
small slow process that we got
to get to snap and feeding
people and making sure they have
health care going to be a
priority
it's not gonna be a priority to
to back fill other things that
that aren't life critical to me
right
and so i'd love to see how we
could get them to create a
portal for you or ukraine and
portal for them and i'm gonna
use now the whole nation is any
here's the federal government
cuts that we know we're going to
get hit and we have to be able
to verify they can just say.
Right what they are in start
tracking those are numbers of
their hit in in education.
What is the indian education
number is and what was that
money used for federally so we
can see that the state can back
fill that or not and that's how
we're gonna have to look in this
category because more only eight
or nine months into this
administration could be nine in
a couple days and we got three
more years and they heard
yesterday there's another bill
coming so we don't know what's
going to happen in so we can't
spend everything in the
beginning.
But I will caution people in
center sold was there in those
of us on the l c we saw up one
point one billion dollars worth
of stuff and capital and red.
Uhm.
If we're going to move money in
and flush money out that's where
it's going to come from because
it's money that's on spent uh a
lot of it may not be critical
needs and it's leg from twenty
nineteen.
To now
so those those are funny sources
that we're going to look at
pretty hard
we had an eastern agency meaning
this last week you know this on
the malhonation I mean they
still haven't spent a lot of
their arpa
and they still hadn't they
appropriated some of and they
still had another four hundred
million at the head on
appropriate so they have
a flexibility to back through
some of the stuff and in so if
there's money that is on spent
maybe this is my next question I
like to know in the tribes and
premiums how much federal money
went on spent right cause that
will help us define whether they
can get the money out and
whether the program qualifies in
what a priority was for the
triber public to do that so they
will help us determine where the
real needs are where they can
spend money in where they can't
spend money because we can't
appropriate money in this error
as as things slow an economy and
economy is slowing I mean
we seen revenue numbers come out
of
the last week and I probably
going to tell you we're programs
expect their new revenue numbers
in december to be declining
in soul we knew that for the
last four years that we are on
this read up but oil and gas we
tried to help everyone when we
could do the best we could and
now we're going to become in
this tiny error or we're not
gonna have revenue and you're
going to see a flattening of the
state's budgets we move forward
and really targeting
appropriations where they really
need to be to take care of kids
mother's children health care
food was critical needs that
people need to survive
as we move forward so if that
could be created in that portal
you can answer that but I i'm
not a web design for anything so
in in the other thing at one of
me known is.
Is you need it make sure that
they put the information there
cause a lot of more information
seen at the last minute all we
didn't know about that well by
the later five letters and a
hundred phone calls later
they knew about it right and so
if you want to work together
this is how we have to work
together to understand what's
going to happen to the future
and tribes and problems it helps
us prepare helps everyone
prepare so no one's left out no
one's left behind but they're
going to have to step up to the
plate in participate.
Okay manager center I think you
much just
ask to say i'm not a web
designer it's right now it's not
a portal it said so web page so
it's a link hard one of the
pages you click on on our
website and then it i'm just
filters out to other agencies
than federal agencies and state
agencies we will work on a
portal one thing I do want to
note again
and again I think you know just
looking at it from you know a
little bit of a trouble of
perspective to is
our seat does do a good job I
think I think we have a great
state travel relationship in new
mexico which hopes also don't
have to share information with
that if they don't like to and
so I think it was great to hear
a governor me how say hey we
want to work with you and we're
ready to talk about this and
looking at data sovereignty
instead how we do that as a
steep moving forward so those
are considerations taken to
consideration but we will make
every effort to work with them
see if we can get something
developed so that we can get
true and accurate numbers where
maybe hopefully it's helpful for
the nation's public and tribes
as well and then and and just
again following up senator when
you are some kind of talking
about worked you know.
I did have a conversation I got
to visit with governor cooperta
yesterday i'm he's been you know
having it have time but he says
he really appreciates all the
help that you've given and that
you're always out there and that
you can start bying visit him if
you aren't at home
by am here he I asked him you
know governor what are what are
you guys hearing right now and
of course his lieutenant is you
know working with him very
closely right now but he was
like you know I don't know he
said there's there's
everything's changing we don't
really know exactly what's going
on and he was like i'd love to
hear what you think it's like
what we want to hear from you
and so I think there is kind of
this thing you know you know you
know waste presidents here so
she'll chat a little bit with
the own hopefully give some more
information from the never
honest and perspective
but we are won't we're happy to
try to do that but he just want
to make sure that word you know
being honest that if it's not
fully up to date some of that
may not be
for lack of our conversation our
attempts no I I completely
understand that but they are
everybody's got to understand to
that if we don't know we can't
help and if you want to not give
us information than and you
don't get help then it's on you
it's not on yass rate because we
want to get to this as early as
possible some of this doesn't go
into a vector twenty eight
twenty nine thirty right till
the rules are made I mean the
medicaid rules still haven't
been determined in and so some
of that is going to be critical
but if if they want to take care
of their people and they want to
help them then this information
is critical to us is
legislators to make sure that
that we try to fulfill those and
we're not going to fulfill every
single but we're going to
fulfill the critical means as we
move forward so I don't know if
it's a portal I don't know if
it's a website I don't know if
it's an excel spreadsheet that
you send them
everyone to do that but I I know
that it would be easy to
seminate information through
technology in.
And so that way if I call during
city hey can you send me the
latest listing on zone public of
what they think is going to
happen to him and then you can
say well they have these ten
items or they have nothing and
so that helps me consider they
can go I know the governor has
an issue I didn't see him when I
was getting my fishing license
in zim
in cats any fish
err but a that way it's easy for
us to come back as legislators
that represent like the naval in
sale can where we are and what
are we missing and we're seeing
this and you're missing this in
case information is going to be
critical as he move forward to
the whole entire process as we
go forward and I think that's
the key thing that we need to
have I know sometimes they don't
like to share but sometimes
sharing this caring so
thank you madame chair.
But thank you senator we next
have a senator to hear and
senator soles thank you madame
chair and all for an interest of
time i'll keep the short um
think you secretary for the
information I don't think I
heard it but I apologize if I
missed it is there any concern
over impact age.
Being cut
madame to senator and I actually
don't know
but you didn't even miss it okay
okay that would be really good
to know I mean it's clearly a
big deal for some of our schools
I understand even albuquerque
public schools has a large
amount of impact aid
particularly novel but
so it would be good to have that
information the issue about the
food you know being able to
purchase local food that's
already really kind of been
addressed but as long as they
thank you madame chair for
pointing out that even if all
the or all tied together and
when you know you can't buy
local food from local farmers
that's going to include local
native farmers so I appreciate
you making sure that that is out
there and then I I do
you know two days ago on tuesday
madam chair secretary there was
an
article in the sanity new
mexican about a new.
Lawsuit against the federal
department of education
specifically in relation to
hispanic serving schools but my
concern is is that I think we
need to watch it I have not read
the last lot of information but
I think we're gonna need to
watch that to see whether or not
that's going to impact more than
the higher education that you
have already pointed out in here
as that moves forward so thank
you madame chairman
i'll see we'll go to senator
souls and then representative
brown
thank you manager and some from
center to health comments I just
indicated the clinton that when
we have the next meeting down in
los to talk about impacts to
public schools and certainly
impact aid as part of that and
so thank you that kind of helps
on a future piece for the agenda
my specific questions manager
and and secretary on the slides
on what we don't know
how much are those
things that that are
the potential exposure if it all
went away as opposed to what
things we expect might go away
so it makes sense the
difference.
I always want to be careful that
yeah we don't think the whole
skies falling down but there may
be parts of it fall down is how
much is the total exposure and
how much is but we are pretty
sure we're not going to see
madame chair
act I don't know that
I don't know that we have clear
indicator of what we think might
not happen quite honestly but I
will say if you look on page
eleven a side eleven we do have
this potential funding reduction
number and sell potentially you
know merely you know three
quarters of the billion dollars
almost so seven hundred and
forty nine million possibly and
and we got real worried about
putting that number in there
quite honestly because we're
like you know
is this the whole sky is filing
number or is this is this not
enough did we not calculate
correctly so
they think you know potentially
half a million to a billion
dollars maybe as potentially in
flocks would be
a gas
manager and and thank you and
that's kind of what I suspected
and and what I wanted to hear
from you is that's the potential
total exposure
most things when they talk about
cuts to snap in all these others
it's not the total going away
all of medicaids not going away
but there may be some
significant pieces of it that we
need to be aware but just so
people recognize because I saw
that like my gosh the course of
a billion but it's like waiting
that's the potential exposure I
think not the expected outcome
so thank you that's not manager
already thank you senator we
have a representative brown and
then senator townson
go here thank you matter
bound of secretary thank you for
a very
informative presentation I know
that as you pointed out some
things we kind of know some
things we do a lot more things
we probably don't know at this.
The question I have to start
with is on slides nine through
eleven are we looking at just
new mexico is it new mexico
specific I seem to see some
general federal cuts showing up
in these charts and just curious
uh
missing something on there
madam to representative I
probably don't make it clear
enough but yet so some of it is
this is but the federal budget
is across the board some of it
and we try to be a little more
specifically thinking some of
them are you'll see like new
mexico highlighted where it's
just new mexico so it is it's
kind of a mix of things because
some of them we weren't exactly
sure what are those numbers
looking like in new mexico but
but again going back to this
conversation if if an impact
one area it's likely going to
impact another area and um and
just going back to just the
previous conversation of
you and I think it is true that
there are from senators you hear
there are there are these damn
impacts of if
if we stop with capital outlay
in indian country while then
tribes aren't going to be
looking for a contractors
they're not going to be
purchasing the supplies they're
not going to be doing that and
then how does that impact the
rest of new mexico is well and
so there are all of these other
kind of the rolling effect of
what happens one that is these
different impacts of kind of the
same with the federal government
with I thinking is that you know
this may not be direct direct or
we don't know the exact number
but if it's happening across the
board there's the likely going
to be an impact or if it impacts
indian country there's going to
be impact throughout new mexico
as well
thank you matter cheering made
of secretary
I I think you know we're already
to the end of august excuse me
gearing up for january of twenty
twenty six we're trying to
winnow.
This information is best we can
and we're going to have some
standing committees that are
going to be taking some actions
to recommend to the uh the two
chambers in the legislature I
think it would really help me
with any future iterations if we
had a separate car on these
slides of what we don't know for
new mexico specific impact in
terms of dollar figures
be nice to see
as you're looking through
excuse me her one of our four
if you could even mention when
the clock starts aren't some of
these changes that would also be
very helpful for us I think
I noted matter.
Under human services category we
did get some new mexico spec- it
says in new mexico in new mexico
and so forth so if we were to
just kind of separate the
basically the general
proposition under these two
bills and then see there and
that'll be changing over time I
know those numbers as we do that
so
I just think that would really
help me for sure so thank you
manager
thank you represent a brown and
I and I believe that's also what
senator pinto had asked for we
do need that separate
information and we turn it to
the staff so we can all i'll get
that thank you let's go to
senator townson and then senator
locals
thank you madame chair secretary
yep when we get into the data
everybody has uh ideas george
and I can hardly spell portal
but we have ideas about how we
ought to build them but
what I would like is historical
trians so where were not looking
at a single year or two of data
that we're looking over a longer
period of time so we can we can
really astertain what's going on
and and the impact so the other
thing was in the mexico specific
and that's been covered but
thank you very much if that
could be that big good better to
have.
Right let's go to senator low
powers and then well wrap up
with representative for
thank you madame chair and thank
you very much for your
presentation
any data any info that we get I
think helps us as we could read
what I call this big picture as
we move forward talking about
budget
I I did notice and I didn't hear
it so maybe I missed it and with
regards to sippy you did mention
now the hotel can others but has
there been any effect on budget
cuts or grant freezing of any
grounds for sippy.
Madam terry senator looks like I
have somebody in the audience
and.
The.
Madam chair and sanitarium
doctor breach on a sim from the
new mexico higher education
department and I am track the
federal funding cuts for or
travel colleges and universities
at this time.
Is communicating to me that
there are no grant impacts to
sippy
but the department is going to
be sending out guidance this
coming week on just a reminder
that we are not only looking for
grants but we are looking for
other federal program cuts as
well so
when I have those revised
numbers I can send them your way
no no appreciate it madam chair
because
it there are different streams
of money as we've been talking
about this morning that helped
to fund the programs and
entities institutions that do
serve our indigenous community
so I appreciate that answer and
I look forward to seeing what
else may be within the mix so
thank you
madame shared thank you and
madame charges to comment your
last week the legislative health
and human services committee we
met in gallop and you were there
and your part of our discussion
there last week also was
centering around
health delivery um
and primarily we are focused on
indian country and looking at a
course gathering information
from gallop and the never honest
it was only problem which is
there to the south and others
but madam chair is still part of
that bigger picture that senator
monios was also mentioning when
we talk about health care
delivery
and
retalk about indian health
service you know the services
that are provided in that one
corner of the state but then of
course how it affects the rest
of indian country for pointless
you're the tribes in um nations
so madam chair it's not just
exclusive for but I think
working together as we look as
to with regards to the medicaid
cuts also for senior services
those are so important as we
were in
and I I don't know if you were
there madame chair but we were
in tohatchy with indian affairs
committee listening to some of
the testimony that was given for
their senior center that was
there.
And that was very interesting to
hear and learn more than a
course across the street with
the big school so I think that
madam chair as we talk about
budget it's everything that we
do is interrelated on the list
goes on but I I appreciate at
least a start but I know and and
look forward to much more
information madam chairs we get
closer to our own budget cycle
thank you.
Alright let's go ahead and
conclude with representative of
here thank you madame chair
a secretary that again I one
think the panel for a great
presentation but I wanted to
know
how many of our tribal
governments have casinos in this
state.
Madame two representative I
should know that i've had a name
want to say it's eleven after
the type of my head but
let me give it fifty one second.
The.
Well that's okay I can go on
with my next question
madam chair
representative
there are fourteen tribes here
in new mexico casinos thank you
very much for that what would I
guess it when I ask you know we
were fortunate as state we have
three billion plus in reserve
that was promoted by many of
these members are certainly
looking for it to the looking at
uh the trump legislation that we
would knew it would come down
i'm curious if tribal
governments with casinos are
starting to do the same thing do
you do have any idea of that how
they're looking at what they're
you know what their reserves are
how they're going to what
they're planning on have they
dip in doing that is actively as
we have been doing that.
Madame representative in my
conversations with nations
police and tribes travel
leadership by haven't again I
haven't heard directly of what
they're doing I don't want to
speak on behalf of tribal
leaders but I think it's safe to
venture out and say that travel
leaders regardless of whether
they have gaming or not quite
honestly are all probably
checking their budgets trying to
figure out you know ensuring
that they can continue to have
services for their community and
meet the needs of their
community and figuring out you
know what are they doing
in a
planning looking for it into how
they can best serve their
constituents in their community
so I I would venture to guess
that each of them are but I
don't have that data in front of
me but again i'm happy to do
that outrich to nations policy
and trims and try to come up
with some type of
documentaries to system where it
travel leaders can share him
formation with us
I just I think madame chair I
think that would be helpful to
know because we do have to work
together and three billion isn't
going to cut it we all know that
and like you we it's a guessing
game at this point and it's the
same for us
but I I would venture to say
that what your department might
need is to get more people with
tribal governments make sure
that they're spending that our
permanent that's there they're
maybe you're you know maybe one
of your requests would be to
strengthen your departments so
that you would have more cba's
or you know ground in minute
people who know how to run
federal money and that is a
talent but if you could get them
in your department to aid tribal
governments III think I think
that's that's going to be first
and formals for you as a as a
secretary to get some help you
can have two people doing it
that's all I have to see
manager.
Already well thank you very much
for your presentation this
morning ladies and I will look
forward to those updates
thank you if we turn the school
and have a vice president of the
name of how nation mrs montoya
could you please come up and
your staff.
Good morning and we're ready
when you are.
I'm assuming this is the buyer
okay good morning everywhere
please excuse my super glasses.
I truly do appreciate being
given this time to come before
each and every one of you today
from the beautiful land of the
chat minutes leadership here my
name is reshellment where I am
the nab honation vice president
coming to you from windor
arizona are navigation spans
between the four states the
state of new mexico the state of
arizona the state of utah and we
do have our arranging colorado
we have either total of thirty
one chapters in the eastern nab
nation that are it within the
state of new mexico and then we
also have our northern nabo
nation that has a believe
twelve chapters that are within
the state of new mexico I come
to you just a little bit north
of here i'm from the community
of torio and starling chapter
which is near cuba new mexico
but I also have lived in the
cities of bloomfield and the
artist in new mexico I have two
high school graduates from the
city of champions down there but
again think is so much for
giving me this opportunity to
speak in regards to what is
happening with our funding what
is happening with the nabonation
the relationship we have with
the state of new mexico are one
of the biggest concerns that we
have within it and then
abortation that we have all them
heard just a few moments before
was the gallop indian medical
center we have been working with
the nabonation I had s area
leadership in regards to galif
indian medical center being
placed at the america site and
everything was moving
wonderfully
until we came upon the
employees that work with those
departments in those divisions
of navigate area ihs has a lack
of technical support and design
needed adequate staff to carry
forth what it was happening and
what was going on in that area.
Um as i'm sure a lot of you have
been given the report that
galloped in the medical center
which is in gallop new mexico
one of the border towns of the
nabonation um
has has rescended funds to this
area to this facility it has two
thousand two hundred and fifty
thousand out patient recorded
and then five thousand eight
hundred in patient admissions to
this facility I myself have
utilised this facility when it
comes to
medical issues that the local
patient the link the local
clinics cannot handle and I am
again I come from just north of
here and torio new mexico and I
would have to travel all the way
into gallop to get those
services
another issue that we have been
tracking and looking at is our
education department are
education
how we work with um the
different schools with aren't
within abonytion also the
schools and the border towns
that are students are highly
populated in of course one of
them is gallop independent are
gallop um schools then we have
curtain and farming ten schools
we have some light students here
in our cricket public schools
and one of the
issues that we see is the data
no mali program the dance and
amaling program is a pro a
funded program that helps
do education for our students
and the school and cultural
education the funds have not yet
been released to our schools as
of what i've heard as a this
morning and our schools are now
looking to us nab honation
within the nab schools to take
over that cost and we're not
sure
where that funding is that and
when it will be released and we
have our nabonation washington
office.
Our directors name is vince red
house who's working in
washington to keep track of that
and to find what is happening
with that we heard questions of
impact aid a few moments ago and
we have our principles that talk
to us as far as nab nab her
leadership and what they are
being told by the different
entities that they work with and
for this call school year one of
the principles let me know that
they were told to cut twenty
percent from their staff from
their programs to make sure that
if any more cuts are made from
washington or from the state or
for the nab from the travel
nations that they'll be able to
make sure that they're gonna be
ok so the cuts are already in
talks within the schools and
it's already a concern by our
staff and administration there.
A few i've beginning of this
month I attended the um tipic in
tolso oklahoma and one of the
biggest topics there was the
fact that the fiscal year twenty
six green book has not been
released
we need that green book to plan
for the fiscal year twenty seven
as you know the fiscal year
twenty five but it was work we
worked with it as a
comprehensive budget so we can
precaut we don't have the data
to plan for fiscal year twenty
seven ba bie both let us know
that there's an issue with
releasing the green book because
of staffing issues i'm not sure
how big that was we asked that
question but they didn't really
give us a clear answer there in
intelstate
and then coming to staffing
issues
we as the nab honest and we've
been asked about our arpo
funding when I were going to
spend down how would it what do
we have a plan to spend out our
deadline is december twenty
twenty sixth to have that
money spent down we continue to
work with our nabonation
chapters in regards to the arpa
funding being utilized for
bathroom additions to homes that
do not have bathrooms right now
we are working on getting the
water lines to these homes and
then also the electrical lines
that need to be extended across
our nab honation we are still
working on that as you all know
living in the state of new
mexico you know the terrain that
we live in the naval honest is
not a flat area to where we can
just cross a cross a field and
get water lines connected we
live in valleys we live on top
of maces we leave in between
maces and so that gives us a
little bit of a challenge on
getting these i'm utilities to
our people
we appreciate very much.
The working relationship that we
have with the state of new
mexico with all of our
representatives and our senators
that look out for not just us as
nab who people but as new mexico
citizens and we appreciate that
very much and we welcome and are
working hard to continue that
collaboration with the state of
new mexico um
again are biggest our biggest
concern is the gallop indian
medical center and how we've
been working with that um and
then just to tag onto that is
the gallup waterline that what
the water lane we are working
and we really want for that to
continue on and get that
completed
but are asked for court cracky
shadow and they do it by her and
said
cheer thank you
very good and very concise as to
what the now the whole nation's
priorities are for the state of
new mexico the less start with
some questions senator pinto I
know you want to ask a question
the go ahead
per madame chairman because of
the committee think you vice
president for joining us I
really don't have any questions
they know we do pretty much up
to date with them number nation
so I appreciate you and um
informing our members here that
don't close you where equipped
in ample nation as much so thank
you for being in a day of
travel.
Do we have any other questions
for the vice president
it doesn't look like we do at
this time but we certainly
appreciate you coming in
appreciate your very concise
presentation today and as we as
you heard us with our discussion
with our state agency we'll be
looking for that information to
go into them into the indian
affairs department so we all
have access to it so we
appreciate it and thank you very
much for being here think you
think you so much everyone in
work keep continue to work hard
everybody again we appreciate it
not just as nab citizens but as
new mexicans we do have the
nabonation fare coming up the
first week of september you are
all welcome to come and join
thank you thank you very much
oh radio moving right along here
mr mountain are you here sir can
you come in
i'm on it we're gonna we are
ready here next from
the old web low council of
governors there'd be a status
report from james or amount.
And cher good morning good
morning sir here you can we're
ready when you're ready
with respect to you all and on
who I represent
and I just you know my language
the opening had annoyed to
employee that are you in the
week we'll set up we have senate
record they had
senator body and saw quite a bit
more time day keyton decade up
only more have to go to uncle v
more have many kind of quick
opportunity to be money on but
annoying i'll get call home
bargain with a hundred and forty
had annoying that touch into the
not doing no way wrong we wake
in car knowing
who knowing one many connections
in mexico state legislative sub
committee mohan new mexico nor
you are good are going to tune
the annoyance he turned about
wake me until honoured to change
the out on the big wheels they
can't pick on the outcome
they'll burger it to new general
we are me we can't get me we see
it was a car breaking he trouble
in a couple of noise when we are
packed in the morambo what we
manually do is in our way to
second when many on a behalf
mancher and honourable members
of the committee are thank you
for having me and again what's
respect to I want it to
recognize you all and also who I
represent
and affording me on behalf of
the public council of governors
this opportunity to come before
you all i'm james mountain and
the chairman of the public
council governors it's good to
see while
legislators are thanks again are
for this opportunity they are
public council of governors is
comprised of twenty published
nineteen public here in new
mexico and our sister public is
let a dell sore down and no
password
and
our origin of this council.
Has roots that date back to
fifteen ninety eight um and we
currently continue to
convene monthly as needed
in
a commitment to one another in
the spirit of
supporting our efforts and
promoting a protecting
preserving our language culture
in our heritage and and in this
instance that you have asked and
provided the opportunity to come
before you are I hope that I can
provide a a
addition to what you i've heard
a little bit on my way in in
this discussion on what our
perspective looks like and what
we're trying to figure out and I
think it goes it's safe to say
that we are
looking to clarify so many
questions and that that's where
we all stand at this time as
well
you won't have the presentation
in front of you and as we get
into it as we you would go to
page number three
i'll start from there
as we go into the upcoming weeks
it'll be a critical time period
as you are well known and the
session reconvenient on
september second is our
understanding and so as we track
and monitor those those matters
it it it's critical i'm in a
pause real quick madam chair and
I do want to recognize you and
if you will I I heard your
statements about
the states.
I guess I know i'm paraphrasing
this but your sentiment of how
we are citizens of this state
and how we are important to the
state we feel the same way and I
know that that you all treat us
that way and i've seen it in so
many aspects and where we are
strive I mean there's no other
in all the work I do across the
country with tribes there's not
another state that he caused
what you all do and the
commitment that the state in the
mexico has to our tribes here
and in in the state and so the
relationship i've heard the
sentiments as well and regards
the state travel collaboration
act in those fundamentals that
we have in place on again it's
it it's a mutual partnership and
that's what we strive to have in
place with the state in mexico
so
I will look to see if I can
provide some numbers and I do
agree fully with what I heard
synergy more nose talk about in
regards to
this partnership needs
accountability on both sides so
I will try to continue to
emphasize information sharing
as much as we possibly can or
each individual publo chooses to
do so but I will emphasize that
as I take that back to them but
they do
I think there's still a
disconnected how we we share
that information and utilise it
but now maybe more than ever
this this might force us to
actually take charge of that
collectively and figure out how
that needs to be done so I will
definitely take that back but I
do want to recognize what you
have stated madam chair and I
appreciate what what you did
stayed earlier
again back to the we're talking
about education and the bureau
of indian education are what
I have been able to gather with
some of our most amazing
individuals and partners we have
lobbyists.
At the federal level at the
local level on that are
committed to providing their
their their free time to us and
to our council and that the
published that that I represent
that we represent and they've
were able to compile some some
numbers again I think in the
discussions today it it it's I
want to be very cautious that we
still have the we don't know
what these numbers actually
truly mean some of them are
approximation some of come out
of hr and that's what i'm going
to try to reference and so much
still unknown
in the fy proposal on the budget
by president trumps and his
administration we recognize cuts
to the b I e for post secondary
programs
funding cuts also reflect
approximate numbers of nearly
ninety percent to the budget
that we've seen
and and realized i'm in prior
the funding are this prior the
funny was at one or ninety six
million now it's gonna be
reduced proposed to twenty two
million.
Are under executive order one
for one nine one where is it
it's the expanding education
freedom and opportunity for
families and this is a big
school voucher program are this
looks to impact us as well
probably the greater impact we
may we may see on this is at the
end of the indian school where
we might lose students that
choose to go to a different
school
initial discussions is that with
our urban
and rule
populations and and where you
know we we reside it might not
be so much of an impact we might
not see about again the unknown
as there but it is a concern
that we're monitoring and I
wanted to bring that out to your
own attention the great american
outdoors act of funding expires
in twenty twenty five and this
with us eliminate ninety five
million annually for bie school
maintenance
and we talk about maintenance
we're not we're not talking
about building
rebuilding infrastructure
they they almost go hand in hand
but I my understands that two
different parts of money and so
when we look at our tribal
schools again federally control
we're gonna see a hit right
there drastically so it's
another thing that were were
monitoring at this time when we
talk about early childhood
development specifically our
head start programs
it's it's almost like this is
hanging on by a thread and we've
been realizing this since as far
as back is I can remember
getting involved in this some
thirty years ago and with we've
been really pushing to preserve
what little we have left on the
headstart front and with the
white house president's budget
request for f white twenty six
that proposed the proposals
eliminating had start.
Fund funding entirely
what we believe we've we were
looking at though is and hopeful
is in the senate appropriation
to me the proposals to increase
had start and early childhood
funding to twelve point three
six billion.
And
an eighty five this would be an
eighty five million dollar
increase over the fight twenty
twenty five budget.
On the next page.
The.
Mancherer and um.
Honorable committee members are
some numbers in regards to
higher education institute
institutions here new mexico
specifically the institute of
american indian and arts I i.
Is looking at thirteen point
four eight two million and
federal funds that are at risk
we also are looking at potential
issues are well realizing issues
and the the risk at the
southwest politic in the
institute sipping is at eleven
million in those cuts.
And when we talk about these
sorts of effects in regards to
indian education
I want a note that
with sypian particular and I
we've already realized
cuts to staff
and
I think if we spent
some real dedicated to me my
bill see what those numbers look
like but I think the obvious
effect is when you don't have
professors there and your
borrowing professors from other
institutions which is what
simply had to realize earlier
this year in and immediately
early on in the air february
march
it makes for
not only confusion and
the sky is falling I heard that
earlier but it was realized
where students were apparently
set home students left and
feeling those effects and you
don't have instructors there now
there were are you an faculty to
the credit of the universe in
mexico who stepped in to provide
those spaces and those gaps
or do this unknown is that it
was reported just last week to
us at the at the council that
faculty has been restored
ironically couldn't tell you if
that's true or not
legislators leadership so again
adding to the unknown it it just
changes from day to day and
those are part of our
discussions that were happening
council as well we are really
trying to get a grasp on this
and track and monitor this
so those are in regards to
education and I want to be a
little more specific and
addressing that with you all and
and provide try to provide some
some background as much as we
understand it if you will go too
slow item number five slide five
wanted touch on and start
talking a little bit about.
Health health care behavioral
health and and what this might
mean what this will mean to us
as published and tribes across
the country but here in the
mexico and regards to the
nineteen publos
as you all know medicaid is is
is being
drastically
decreased
and cut out our numbers reflect
nine hundred and eleven billion
reduction over ten years
how this effects indian health
service is nine million dollars
nine million nine hundred
million dollars reduction for FY
twenty six
in the president's budget
alongside of losing behavioral
health services which medicaid
primarily funds
and losing millions of millions
losing health care coverage
worsening work force shortages
and diminishing
existing services and I use
existing services lightly
i'll give you an example the
santa fe indian hospital it's a
clinic today at best
you all talked a little bit
about six thirty eight
contracting and in the spirit of
that six thirty eight
contracting in center pinto I I
heard you china on them what it
what it takes to do that I
appreciate that
when we have the sanity indian
hospital it's height and I
remember it is a kid
seeing up my older brother
cousin who i'm close to he and
knee surgery at the time.
There's not even a thought of
any sort of surgical procedures
at that hospital there are not
any emergency
services at the hospital and my
son who is now twenty four was
one of the last babies born in
the santa fe service unit back
in two thousand and shortly
after that that service shut
down and then the emergency spam
service you know shut down so
again today it's a clinic at
best and there are still and and
when you when you when I sure
that with you I hoped it giving
you a little bit of this picture
helps you all to understand
really what or up against now
when you start losing staff and
doctors and the staff actually
just who are there maintaining
the facility and that's what
we're looking at that's what
we're faced with when regards to
hs
it'll mean it makes make it so
simple but i'm trying to be as
direct as possible and what that
means and as I just done came
back from travel and discussing
the six thirty eight issue we
also need to recognize what that
really means for us is tribes
because when the tribes have the
ability under the self
determination act of nineteen
seventy five to self determine
in pursuit of that ideal of
sovereignty
we have somehow and and maybe in
some respects gone backwards
because we are realizing that as
zoo as the publo on governor
pino has has relayed to me that
they've lost their dental
services had shut down due to
the policies
the policy effects from this
year when they pulled their six
thirty eight contract dollars to
help a dental clinic in the
public
they had that direct access for
their tribal members in the.
Convenience but now it's shut
down as my understanding as of
today because they cannot get
the staff there to provide the
service so what that will do is
that those individuals needing
emergency dental care or regular
care routine care they will have
to now go back to the santa fe
indian hospital to seek that if
they don't have the coverage
which will be going back to a
facility that is already beyond
strange if you will
another example of what we're
seeing is at the federal level
we house the southwest regional
office of the bureau of indian
affairs here in albuquerque
there on our are are public
property at the end in public
cultural center and we continue
to see
staff
let go
pushed out if you will on the
the dose effect
has been realized are for
instance when we talk about
easements less savings now with
the state new mexico and getting
those are environmental
clearances the preservation
clearances were also saying that
we don't have surveyors we don't
have people to issue permits and
approve those we don't have
anyone to review any of those
those
steps that are part of the
federal process that we all know
about and we all practice that
was already an issue before
twenty this year and now with
nobody there things have come to
a stand still so I wanted also
put that in there and and I
don't know how you measure that
in in a dollar
and it might seem big in regards
to each individual publo
where they're at in trying to
get these projects moving get
these clearances approved.
Get the services to their people
but when they're just not there
I think that the end of the day
we all understand that's a
bottom line and we're not we're
not moving anywhere and that has
created and definitely had the
effect
and probably intended effect of
the realization of the sky is
falling and has fallen in in
many respects
the fear is real the fear is
there
our leadership has held stead
fast in working to
not try to sound the alarm and
be a part of that and here what
we hear what we listen to in and
see every day on channel seven
tel four channel thirteen CNN
fox instagram tick talk facebook
whether whatever medium there is
we are standing instead fast and
doing our best to lead or are
communities were trying to get
the facts in place and that's
our goal and objective
partnering with you on being
able to have this discussion
today is a big part of that and
again I I do want to recognize
in thank you for that
sanitation facility construction
as well there's an eighty seven
percent reduction from FY twenty
twenty five enacted at this
level
advanced appropriation will be
the elimination of critical
funding mechanisms removing
protections against government
shutdowns as well
this is the elimination of
advance appropriations that
could lead to severe
consequences during a government
sent down present potentially
resulting in deaths for instance
from preventable conditions
according to the national and
health board
critics warn that this is the
significant of a disruption to
essential house service
increase that effect you
american indians and alaska
natives.
The.
As I mentioned and i'll
underscore the funding proposal
ranges from thirteen point three
point four billion to fourteen
point five billion
either way this dressing affects
healthcare services to our
problems and tribes I want to
touch in the health space also
on food and nutrition you all
talked a little bit about snap
business something this is
actually where I was just
returning from is it food
distribution program my indian
reservations
national conference where usda
leadership show attended
alongside of directors who
service those programs
for the public you have a
consortium of the eight northern
indian public council
food distribution program
that you have the five sanda
ball which encompasses from
coaching to his letter out west
also participate in that five
send wall through disputing
program accommodatoona service
that their people as well as
that totally
tribal members as well again all
qualifying right
and then there's any publo who
has a standard long program on
mount west
why it's important to mention
ftpir for dipper which if you
don't know what for dipper is
and and I don't mean to say that
you all don't but it's
commodities commodity cheese
heard a lot of jokes about that
this past week but I will give
you some numbers on how critical
this is because it serves our
most vulnerable people in our in
our homes and our communities my
grandma
I was raised on that with in my
grandmother's house for many of
of our grandma's and grampas and
our antiques and uncles it's the
only source of food for a month
and it's a food box.
And what we've done over the
years dating back to my first
involvement two thousand six
with this program are being
asked to attend this national
conference back then and and and
and it hit home at that time
they were still had the generic
white label on the cans arm on
the boxes and the the discussion
at that time was changing those
out to have a name bran label
still with high fruit toast
corns are up in all those those
are
bad things that that we we grew
up on
but also eliminating the can
meet the can check in the beef
and check in
which
I don't know it looked worse
than eating a can of alpha dog
food and that's what it makes me
think of
those thoughts just the policy
that's just been the federal
policy
I remember grammar cleaning the
beef in the chicken out of the
can
so that it was edible but we
still ate it because that's all
we had at some time and and then
that's a reflection it's it's
it's it's not me making the
support my own experience i've
been more fortunate than that
but it's a history of of what
our people have gone through
it's it's a fact
but now we do see brand did
label pack in the food package
of a foods we have fresh produce
we have x in the package now we
still have the the powdered eggs
that was a must for keeping we
still have the the the brick
gold of commodity cheese
that was kept in there but we
also now have realized
frozen meats and poultry in the
package and traditional foods
and traditional foods we we
could go into a back and forth
on that but what we've done as
tribal leaders and with our
directors from across the
country i'm talking about a
hundred and twenty approx me
hundred and twenty.
Programs for dipper programs
across country representing
approximately ton or native
tribes whether they're
standalone or and I couldn't
sort of as I described earlier
and by adding these traditional
food packages it it's the
epidemy of consultation of
government government
discussions with usda so I do
want to definitely recognize
that but it's threatened and
i'll as i'll leave you with one
last thought on on the food
package this is a model food
package in all the work that I
have just described and where
we've come from particular in
the last twenty years nineteen
years is is a testament of what
we can do
in true government garment
dialog the healthy food index
healthy eating index for
government food programs scores
at a hundred
the average government package
there's approx me sixteen food
practices including snow scores
fifty nine
anyone care to guess what our
scores.
Eighty four
we've had those this in place
for almost ten years now
and I love to to to to grandson
on this I hate grandstanding I
try not to do it but as you know
a leadership like scan a natural
for us I guess but
and I mean that I don't mean
that disrespectfully but
we
I do stand on that and it's it's
a testament to the work that's
been done and I will add to that
that really that work started
with the all public council
governors
we really lead this discussion
and brought together tribal
leadership across the country
brought together a teos
so I I do want to give a shot
out to our conversation in a pad
in the back because it was our
leadership that really brought
people to the table to make this
happen this program is is is not
on the chopping block as of yet
but we are
committed in doing our diligence
performing our diligence to make
sure that it doesn't get cut
with the cuts to snap though
historically we have seen and we
will see an influx of those
participants migrating back into
the food distribution program
and our question to us da to
president
trump and the administration
into lawmakers is
how we gonna fund this
we'd love to have those
participants there but it's it's
a flat budget
so another challenge at at risk
rat hand and without a farm bill
to ensure the five years of
funding
and now it's reduced to what
they're calling a skinny farm
bill
please don't ask me what that
means because we don't know yet
but we're trying to figure that
out
again goes back to the unknown
so I hope that what i'm suring
with you is is helpful in in the
perspective.
And I just want to close on a
couple things and and try to
take too much more time but
we're also talking about energy
development in that slide number
six and and really what this is
is gonna impact is consultation
and when we're talking
specifically about the beyond
them being must offer
and this is a proposed rules
implementing through the big
beautiful bill hr one leasing
reforms
and this will be key
and I shouldn't say keep it this
will tremendously impact our
ability to negotiate they're
their fast tracking it so we're
talking about some of the things
of
getting those public lands and
just doing whatever they want
basically that that's really
just the way to state it and
we're not going to have a say so
and neither you are
neither is the public
what that means and trying to
untangle all that again we're
working on trying to figure that
one out as well
specifically with tribal
historic perfect preservation
officers and that funding that
goes through the department of
inter bia that is is looking to
be eliminated
the current administration has
left it and placed the next year
fiscal year we've been out as as
leadership though public council
of governors has gone to the
department of interior to
washington as a group
to sit with the doc leadership
we initially sat with the deputy
associate secretary to address
these issues and two weeks ago
we sat with secretary bergem off
for an hour and a half
one of our biggest issues and
major concerns is the
preservation of chocolate canyon
for so many reasons not only
because it it it's it's a
destination place and it's a
sharing of our heritage it's
it's a it's a national preserve.
It's a gym but I think to the
public people who built that
place and although now the
stewards are is the nabo nation
of that place alongside of what
we we still have access to but
our spirit has not died from
there are spirit still lives
there are
our elders and our ceremony
monial practices in an
individual to a responsible for
that still make those program
pilgrimages annually to
chocolate canyon and places
alike here in all of new mexico
that we know of that we still
know of that we still protect
that we still care for that we
still pray to it it it is the it
is the essence of who and why we
are as public people and in in
entire event in that whole for
corners area as well so with the
limitation of tribal historic
preservation officers you're
basically another attack on
going back probably to the
eighteen sixties policy have
killed the indian
kill our spirit that's the only
way that we really can be
honest.
On the last point I have is a
bullet point here is law
enforcement
it says unknown there in your
your presentation have no idea
what that's going to look like
and we are already strained i'm
not going to get into
jurisdiction and cross
commissioning and all that stuff
the fact that we will have no
officers patrolling
across the board in in indian
country and i'm not going to
talk about you know criminal
versus civil judge diction
week we could be here told
next year talking about that
stuff
but the fact i'll give you an
example real quick suddenly find
so public
is does not have the resources
to have our own police force
and six thirty eight the police
force
and wish we are relying on the
bureau of in in affairs law
enforcement and they've done a
great job of building up their
police force and policing our
area
but we share with four other
problems pickers to the north
think about how many miles away
that is from selling found so
number out to the west think
about the traffic flow that way
as well and our citizens native
and non native in that area and
the sanity indian school
to sixty mile radius basically
was so many barriers but if you
have only one officer and duty
or at times when I was last
governor in twenty fifteen and
sixteen we didn't have anybody
on duty because the federal
garments detailing them out to
standing rock for the no
doubtful issue back then
now we're not experiencing that
but one of the things that we
asserted meaningless secretary
burger men and
the long forcement agency of doi
was stop teachering from our
area if you want details someone
taken from a different agency
and or just don't take them from
a different agency increase your
long enforcement and the the
budget.
And so I died I had that direct
question our dialog and
basically stated it that way as
well so
enclosing again mancher and two
honorable members of the
committee like we do appreciate
this opportunity
I didn't touch on on the housing
should I say a couple things
about housing
while I have the opportunity as
i'm looking at my notes
nahd will actually be at the
forefront when they reconvene as
our understanding and that
hasn't been off addressed in
funding since twenty thirteen so
I heard you all talk about
housing earlier
I can't give you definitive
numbers on what that will look
like and what's being proposed
I do know that there's
legislation arm on the table
that the national american
ending housing councils working
with representative
by them and representative
downing
to introduce bipartisan
legislation
I would hope to be able to share
that with you on the indian
affairs committee once we can
have an idea what that looks
like but I I couldn't tell you
what that is right now
but what it what it does matter
is that native home ownership
rate is fifty four percent
compared to the the national non
native home ownership of seventy
two percent
tribes face mortgage lending
barriers on trust
think the federal government
coperate of the head in and we
are too when we have the ability
to change those those laws but
it gets into a sticky situation
when I talk about sovereignty
and
those sort of things.
The.
But I do think that in
inconclusion when congress
returns funding decision for nah
and reatherization for
appropriations or appropriations
in general will be the focal
point and will will have some of
a more clear idea I hope we'll
have a more clear idea but our
understanding is that that's
when they're really going to get
into this discussion and be able
to provide stronger numbers and
what it might really mean and
the numbers that i've provided
you I wish that I could have
provided more on on the numbers
ma'am chair and and members of
the committee but
unfortunately it still goes back
to that idea that we really
don't have an idea
so I stand for questions are
manager
thank you very much I
I just want to say excellent
report i've been very pleased
all morning we've had some very
very good reports today from
everyone including this one
all right we do have some folks
at one ask questions will call
on them and just a second one
thing i'd like to ask our
various interim committees to
deal with things like snap as an
example if the state of new
mexico decides that couriers are
going to replace or supple
amount those dollars that are
being last will we also have
some influence on the policy and
what i'm when I am referring to
is it makes sense that we look
at a healthy food index that
why would we just follow a
federal guideline and just
automatically say we're just
going to pay for that the way it
is or are we going to have some
influence on what that policy
looks like I i'm not on the on
that committee but I I know we
have members here that do serve
on house on that committee.
And i'd like you to think about
that when
when this committee makes our
recommendations that we also say
gosh do we want a snap inducts
that's fifty nine
on the on ranking up to a
hundred or do we want something
that's better and I I think it's
particularly if new mexico is
going to provide that kind of
funding we need to have some say
on it but without being surplus
go to some questions we have
representative of mark dunkin
first and then we'll go to
senator pencil
thank you manager
i'm just grateful this isn't
starting stone
and
your absolutely correct we don't
have a clue what it's going to
be in what it's going to turn
out to be some of these will
hurt tremendously and I think on
the other side of that some but
this is
we're not going to see it at all
so having
looked at your numbers and stuff
on
slide three the great amount
american outdoors act
eliminating ninety five million
for school maintenance is at a
state of new mexico only or is
that nationwide
mancher members committee and
represent dunkin that is
nationwide as my understanding
thank you madame and so from
that I can assume that a lot of
this is nationwide not just new
mexico
ma'am chair members communion
represent duncan yes that's what
we we tried to capture as much
possible and eight I did reach
out to
the leadership here at the state
and partnership and I felt there
was best to leave that to
secretary monitoring she was
going to bring that but again it
would those numbers really look
like still unknown thank you
thank you madam chair I guess
i'm gonna go back to what
everybody else is said if we
could see what new mexico's is.
I don't assure the care what
areas owners is because we don't
have any say so for their bills
or or anything to do with their
laws so I would love to see that
thank you manager
senator pinto thinking many
chairmen thank you for your
presentation
and it'll blue a virus place
here
commodities who are always a
summer timer thinking especially
when you talk about community
and especially when the labels
fell off to something those
counter much a surprise as to
what was insight if you didn't
know and now cheese was almost
as good as go but
on those days
we're very fun in that sense so
as we move forward and don't
want to committee to no
that these southwest reader not
office book to be ie it houses
the roads provides a lot of
services and my correct
up
manshare members come in santa
pinto yes you are correct and I
I did fail to
touch on that but you're correct
in madame two members of the
community I swapped the
committee to understand that
when we talk about some of these
jurisdictional issues and trying
to tackle some of our road
issues that that does play and
especially that funding is cut
art officers moved because there
was officers in gallop new
mexico that were moved back in
the nineties are so and down
size significantly and talk
about addressing even our wild
towards population out there and
be does play significant role in
that and also the clearances
that are there.
The health care facilities um
within the area and speeds and
you mentioned sanity the clinic
there the infrastructure
investments to upgrade that
hospital do we know if there was
any investments as far as i'm
cutting to increase the the
because we know you can't just
say it's a hospital they have to
pass inspection they have to
have certain things in there and
they know that facility is
when you said some of the
printer networks last born in
there I don't think that
facility has really gone through
at an extensive renovation.
Mention members coming center
pinto
there was an an upgrade and a
renovation to the santa fe
indian hospital
within the last
twenty
twenty years are made in
i'll say it was more of a
makeover to make it presentable
and kind of reorganizing just
the lay out to basically make it
just a clinic
n n what they did as they they
they took the emergency services
unet our area and made it into
more of an expanded clinic for
out patient services and then on
the other side where they had
impatient over an eight steas
recovery they they they put the
dear prenatal department on that
side are the only other piece
that the I can recall write off
hand that is there is again the
the the the morgue when when
people pass
are are still house there for or
published too
then go and retrieve our those
who have passed and bring them
back home to lay them to resolve
that really is what it is at
this point
in rating chair members that
maybe the faculty are the staff
that are worth in that facility
they don't just serve the sanity
clinic they go out to the other
surrounding public statute
within the area if they are
short and and then that puts a
string on the clinic itself
because they end up sure handed
but they try to make sure it's
covered and they understand that
technology too is needs to be
upgraded because there are some
clinics that serve other public
in the area in which the systems
are not compatible and is double
during to do work for our staff
that are there.
And if they are not able to
receive um date they go to seek
it to hospital certainly
mancher members come in center
pinto
they get referred to various
health care service places if
she will our facilities
contract services is also
streamed in regards to like
specialty work like if you you
know there's still a dental
clinic and an eye clinic again
they don't know what level of
the impact was realizing right
now
but they do get to st vincents
or they're referred to maybe
some are close and cookie at
home a lot of our people from up
north of santa fe also refer to
the solomos as well so it's it's
within that region arm and
depending on
the care that's needed as well
and madame chairman members of
the community cause i've had
several family members to have
had been referred up to saint
vincent and had been flown from
gallop two st vincent because
they are at capacity and gallop
so it's it's essential that we
assume make sure that our
facilities that are serving our
native americans are considered
in much of our are spending to
the stat program
some of the ba schools I
understand also receive funding
for the food
aren't as that
not so
many chair members can be a
center pinto
a thing of them hearing what
we're we're going with this is
is what kind of food thought the
food pork programs within some
of our big schools that the the
public happen
yet that all enjoyers tribal
control schools
get yes they do receive federal
uh funding and and part of the
food program.
What that impact is at this time
I I do not know as well but you
you you are correct in I think
what we have seen in across the
board with with food and how
it's being funded is that
right now it it it it seems to
be that that base level other
than snap but what the fall out
effect will have out of snap is
is really going to be the
unknown
in madame chairman thank you for
that answer chairman because
some of our programs in alba
crookie when we tried to do the
local
agriculture and support local
again the area have
contracts with some of our
schools to provide fresh food in
the area so it trickles down of
going down the pipeline to our
agriculture and if we don't
access that water and make sure
we're agricultural communities
then it took us down to the
water right because we're not
going to be utilizing if they
don't receive the funding to do
some of this
in one comment i'm going to meet
to is that the these grants
there was one grant that was
through the app department of
agriculture to provide protein
to make senior centers and to
some of my boot pantries and
that grad has been cut out so
now my providers trying to find
private and need they can get a
match to continue to have that
protein source provided to our
local time entities that provide
that
my next question I missed to
chairman is about not so much
about the bedroom police but
kind of the delights of the long
port smith and what we're seeing
with cyfd.
Because not all our public
tribes nations have lawyers in
that sense to support are
children that are in danger have
situations in the area
and
my understanding is you know up
in it with the national guard
executive or to bring the
national guard up into the area
of espenial we do have our
surrounding public star do we
don't they were actually
consulted on this as this order
was put out manager chairman
man chair members the community
center pinto
I in my role as their public
council governors chairman have
had not hadn't have not had
those
has not had that broader
discussion with the occupant and
senate clearer
that discussion though has been
ongoing and has been and and was
touched on two years ago the
state travel leader summit it's
been ongoing as since that time
are with tribes
and the published in particular
but I will add though that the
issue state in the executive
order they'll public council
governors are aware of that when
we've seen it obviously it's
public information we've seen it
in the news and
we have been having those
discussions internally in our
council but also with government
or loo hungry and I believe
that's what prompted the action
and and I do applied to lead her
leadership and the leadership of
those published for taking that
that action in in that step
forward because it's not just
happening in espinally it is
truly happening in in all of our
publicity we have seen an uptick
in drug overdoses
fentinal I and I don't know what
the internal is but I I know
it's not good.
But for us it's only found so
for example it was always
marijuana and beer now hard
alcohol that that is been
plagued dust and is is killed a
lot of our people
and has been our issue but
I was always worried about when
are we going to see the first
overdose at home and similarly
found so and when I was in in
office at that time
part of my responsibility has
always been in all
being the first point a contact
no matter what time I did as
twenty four seven and it might
sound cliche but it's it's the
reality of what we're we're
appointed in and an aster to
serve as in that role in
unfortunately I was the first to
see the actual jug overdose at
suddenly found so of of a needle
injection night and I don't
recall with them I want to say
was I want to say was matt or
something to that effect but I
had to sit with the grandmother
who
would not let her son her
grandson go and we had to sit
there she had already been
sitting there for hours
hoping he would come back and
when I got called I was able to
finally after a couple hours
get her to to move on but I I
sure that with you because
now we're starting to see an
uptick across the board in our
public communities and that's a
discussion that the governors
have had in particular this year
and towards the in the last year
but I did talk with my governor
at some only found so governor
monkey knowing he he informed me
that he's already seen this year
for drug overdoses so I just
wanted to put that perspective
in there about what would its
have been enough.
Fact on I know your question was
specific about consultation in
regards to
the executive order in a spinola
but
it's it's it's it's everywhere
and those discussions have been
on going with the administration
and in our council it meant
check to get a this morning
terms to consult in an of the
when you said send out the
council didn't have defending to
sustain law enforcement that
well so it's just something that
would agree to part because of
that issue i'm done being
fulfilled and I think my last
thing is just a comment when you
talk about historic principation
especially when we
have the been trying to work on
the code talking museum but
that's your other capacity think
you made him turn think mister
chairman.
Alright we don't have anybody
else on the list for questions
but I would like to thank you
for being here today this has
been a very very good hearing
this morning it's gives the
committee a good idea of what
we're dealing with in terms of
the perspective of the tribes
and nations and problems so
thank you for being here I
appreciate that and very good
presentation today memchair and
horrible members thank you for
this opportunity for your
leadership and
the council looks forward to
working with you and partnership
and we have the mechanisms but
we don't take it likely in
regards to it just being a law
we want to expand upon that end
and we we also realize we have
to be responsible and in
spending our moneys
and executing on our end and III
do want to state that we the
published gotten very very have
gotten much better at spinning
their their their moneys and in
the the statistics of the indian
affairs department at dot arm in
the administration are
reflective of that can we do a
better job yes and must we do
probably at this time want now
more than never absolutely but
again working in partnership
with you all and your continued
support to fund these senator
would you and I still have a
follow up conversation on that
and and i'm i'm available make
myself able any time we can
collaborate that but
I am very well aware of public
leaderships very well aware and
were committed to the
partnership and I just wanted to
see again thank you for that
already we have one more
question pass senator go here
nobody think about her thinking
mr german I quick question and
think you so much for being here
with us today I know you mention
that you don't go into that then
terms of housing but I do have a
particular question and perhaps
secretary money might have a
list but do you have a an
acquired list at all for a
problems in terms of ing funds
have been reverted to the
federal government because of
unused finding.
And if not could we acquire
something like that because that
links in correct directly in
connection to send it over yours
in terms of the appropriation of
funding and how we prioritise
based on these accountability
measures
madam chair members of the
committee in center nova I don't
have that list I do know it's
publicly available and we could
we could come up with that in I
I would agree with you that that
are sent secretary more net than
any first department should
produce that
but it is federally available or
publicly available in and those
numbers should we should look at
those numbers as well cause
again then and maybe that's
something we might learn from is
is how is that information
sharing may possible to hold
each party accountable and make
insurer get spent and if you
don't spend your money at
reverts
well now now we we truly know
what that looks like so
that's a little expension on
responding to but I I don't have
that information but
the reason why don't have the
information and we don't house
at the public council governors
it goes back to that is we do
respect an internally understand
that each
nation in our case public they
have
the
ability and we respect that
ability to care for their own
information and they do at times
hold it close you know internal
in in confidence but I don't
disagree with any of you in
regards to how do we figure out
that mechanism is sharing that
information because it's
critical right now
thank you.
Well again thank you very much
for the presentation today and a
couple of housekeeping things
for the committee what i'd like
to do next is to take up the
minutes and i'd like to ask for
emotion for approval
we have I motioned we have a
second
thousand yes the tower many
minutes are in your packets okay
we have emotion and a second is
there any objection to approval
of the minutes from the tals
meeting saying none the minutes
have been approved thank you
very much were going to take a
break and i'd like to ask that
we let the committee go through
the food line first if he has a
we can get our presenters here
our next set of presenters who
are little earlier we're going
to have them up earlier so if we
could get the committee through
first the travel line and then
everybody else i'd appreciate
this thank you very much.
