All right, everybody, that's
Senator Padilla will be here
shortly, um.
let's get started
Just to kind of
give you guys a, a
a sense of what we're gonna do.
I'd like to go over
recommendations made by the 2002
working group, the 2007 working
group, a handful of other
recommendations that have come
from here and there, and if you
want to, we can talk a little
bit about what other states are
doing, although I've got
something more planned for
probably a future meeting about
that. So,
we can talk a little bit about
it, if you'd like, up to you
all.
Um, Aaron, can you bring up the
recommendations?
Well, Aaron's bringing up those
recommendations. I just wanted
to say hello and let you know
that Lisa and Em, who are, are
two newest staff attorneys are
joining us just for kind of
informational purposes to hear
about the work that the, that
you all are doing.
Aaron, can you zoom that in
there a little bit.
All right
Here are the, can everybody see
that pretty well?
And I'll, we'll go through this
one by one, and I'll, I'll kind
of read them out so you can, we
can, we can talk about them one
by one,
I'll be honest, the first few
are gonna be a little
stark
We'll get into it. Um, so let's
get into it.
2002 recommendations were to
limit members serving as voting
members on 3 interim committees
and only 3, and that includes
ledge counsel, LFC, and LESC,
right? It would drastically them
at the number of committees that
you all can serve on.
Um.
I was there a recommendation? I
assume they have their reasons.
Um, you could also consider
limited interim committees to 15
members only, and 6 advisory
members.
Um
if we were, and I'll talk a
little bit about how to
implement each of these two, but
it's, it's up there. Most of
these are legislative council
policy. Some would require the
legislature to pass a bill and
get it signed by the governor.
Um, and I, I don't expect
this group to to
decide on these recommendations
today. I just want to get them
out there so that you all can
marinate on them, and we can get
to that
later on in the interim
Um, but I just, I just want to
get him out there. Um,
allowing designees to be named
to in our committees, this
kind of doesn't really work
anymore because
onlyve legislative finance and
resTEP revenue stabilization
have designees.
um, so I don't know that it, it,
it's something that's really
apt for 2025. Um,
allowing members to attend up to
3 days of committees of which
they're not members. We've since
extended that to 5 days that
you're not a member of. And that
actually appears to be working
really well. And it's, I think,
worth thinking about expanding
those. And, and one of the
reasons I think it's, it's
useful is because the members
that attend those extra days
really do show up, whereas a lot
of advisory members tend not to
show up to every meeting, and I
get it. Everyone's got jobs,
and, and lives and other things
going on. But the members who
use their extra days are really
good about showing up, and, and
it's something that we've used
to help achieve a core on more
than one occasion. So expanding
that beyond 5 is something I
think it's, it's worthwhile.
Again, it's up to all of you.
Um
prohibiting committee meetings
outside the Capitol after August
31st.
We don't allow it after
September 30th, now, when that's
the legislative council approves
it.
for the most part, there's their
counsel pretty much rubber
stamps it and you know, I don't
know that it's
I've never seen him say no. And,
and again, up to you all if you
want to start doing that, but
I will, I'm sorry, this is
the meetings that have to happen
in the in the roundhouse.
after September 30th, after
September 30th, they're supposed
to be in the roundhouse, but we
allow committees to travel
through October pretty
regularly, right? And but I will
also note that, particularly in
the election years, in remote
parts of the state, worms are
really tough to come by. Oh
yeah, so it's, it's, you know,
if, if they said council wants
to consider
naming that a little bit more,
we can talk about it.
Um
scheduling parameters, the group
reports are really super clear
on what that means.
I think
you know, it's, it's difficult
to schedule
as many meetings as in Monica
can speak to this, trying to fit
all the interim meetings and
interim days.
into the limited number of, of,
of weekdays available is tricky.
And so,
I think we're trying to do that,
but it's, it's impossible to
eliminate conflict among
members. We, we, we mitigate it.
but we don't, we can't eliminate
it. It's, it's, it's
all but impossible unless we
drastically reduce the number of
members on committees. Well,
and, and I was gonna ask you
about that. That is a
legislative council function on
the size of
council-created committees, yes.
but a lot of the statutory
committees, those members are
laid out in statute. So if we
were to change that, you'd have
to change the law. For instance,
legislative council, it's 8 and
8 from each chamber, and that's
in statute.
Well, that's, you, you never
have a hard time. No, that's the
last comedian I'm worried about,
but there are a couple other
that like we get a list of all
the ones that, that require
would require legislation. I'll
send it out right after the
meeting. My, mine is not. Yeah,
no, I've got something for you.
Um
allow committee chairs to seek
to replace members
who attendance is lacking.
That's actually a legislative
council policy if a, if a member
misses 3 consecutive meetings.
The chair of that committee can
ask that member to. Guys, I'm
sorry. I got to go to a press
conference right now with the
go. I'll be right back. I have
no idea how long where to find
me. Yeah, that's why I thought I
would call. No, no, I'll send
you the recommendations and,
and, and we'll run that. My my
bag is still there. I'll give it
a good home.
All right. Um
again
this is in Ned's council policy
now is allowing members to
replace members. I've never seen
it exercised, and so
yes, it exists, but I don't
I, I can see how I would put a
chairperson in a spot to have to
do that to a member, so.
I don't know where you want,
where you want to come down on
that. Um.
requiring constitutional
amendments to be considered by
an interim committee or
constitution revision
commission.
I don't know that that really
has any bearing on, on the
problems that I think we're
supposed to be solving, which is
too many committees, too many
members. It's, it's part of the
recommendations. I included it
here. I don't think that it's,
it's really has anything to do
with the problems that we're
facing.
Um.
reducing the size of LFC to 15
members, adding House Education,
Senate Education Committee
chairs as non-voting members.
Um
self-explanatory, but it would
be a statutory change too, where
I mean that would require a
bill. Um, repealing all
statutory committees.
This is drastic, but it was the
recommendations that they made.
It's just, and these are all
things for the legislature as a
larger body to consider. This
working group can can advance
recommendations, as you know,
to, I suppose, legislative
council, the council cannot
endorse or oppose legislation,
somebody would have to carry a
bill on their own.
Um
Legislative council conduct
ongoing training throughout the
year.
We could do it, I think.
at a minimum, some, some
chairperson training would be
really valuable for members.
but again, I know that you all
have jobs and lives and
families, and so this would add
to the demand on your schedule.
I think it might be worthwhile.
but
it's
it's, it's another
demand on your time. Um
your ship of L Legislative
council, LESC and LFC meet early
each room to discuss key issues
and divide those issues among
various committees to avoid
duplication.
I think the duplication amongst
interim committees isn't limited
to
to just those three by any
stretch. So we've all been to
committee meetings
where the same presenters show
up to, you know, 3 or 4 interim
committees over the, over the
course of an interim, and, and
sometimes it's not even anything
that's really within the purview
of that committee. So, so I'm
planning
might not hurt
Uh
Aaron, do you want to flip it to
2007?
and, and zoom it in
Thank you
So the 2007 recommendations
as you can see
um
they're not that many of them,
but the working group in 2007
made an interesting decision in
recommending that all these
recommendations be
passed by, by, by one bill or
one package.
Um.
they didn't want their
recommendations taken piecemeal,
for whatever reason. Um
and we'll go through this. Um,
limiting the number of interim
committees to 12 interim
committees. We're currently at,
I want to say 23 interim
committees, including this one,
so that would be roughly half
the interim committees. How we
would do that.
it would take some work. Um,
reducing number of advisory
members appointed to each
committee.
Um.
self-explanatory, it would be up
to the legislative council to do
that.
Um.
and, and I don't know how
willing they are to do that.
We can, you know, that's more up
to leadership, certainly more up
to leadership than it is to me.
Uh coordinate stuff he needs
among the permanent staffs.
I think this kind of speaks a
little bit to
some of the 2002 recommendations
about ledge counsel, LFC and E
LEESC um
working together, and I also
think that there's some
sense, just looking through the
minutes of the 2007 group.
about having staff
from
standing committees work with
interim committees to kind of
create a bit of a
a more continuous
look at at issues, right? Bill's
actually that get considered by
the judiciary committees
continue to be vetted over the
course of the interim, and, and
some of that involves staff.
Uh, that's the point
proportionalation based on the
chamber size. Um, the Senate
Republicans will not have a hard
time telling you, as the
smallest caucus in the
legislature, they're appointed
to a huge number of committees,
and they can't be there to all
of them. It's, it just doesn't
work numbers wise. And so
you know,
looking at putting a few more
members from the house and fewer
members on a committee from the
Senate.
might help with some quorum
issues.
possibly
Uh, it's up to you to talk about
it.
Uh
can you get the other
recommendations, Erin, and zoom
that in?
One more, 22 more tabs over.
There you go.
OK
This is just recommendations
that have just been mentioned to
me from, from whomever. Um.
expanding the number of extra
days for each member.
We talked about this a little
bit earlier. Um, again, those
members tend to show up, and,
and we use them to to achieve
quorums kind of regularly. Um,
allowing committee members to
promote advisory members to
voting members. Um,
I think this would be handy. We
would, I think it would be
helpful to limit it.
at least initially to
members of the caucus, so you
can't promote a house are
to replace a missing Senate D,
right? And that's, that's that's
the only person who's there. But
you'd have to, I think, give
some preference to the caucus.
members who are missing, if that
makes sense. Um,
increased standing advisory
members.
to other committees
Um.
standing advisory members are,
are kind of a recent
development. And I, I, just to
make it so everyone's clear on,
on what that is.
If you are a member of, let's
say, house tax and rev.
and you are not a voting member
of the Revenue stabilization and
Tax Policy Interim Committee.
you are automatically a standing
advisory member. And what that
means is that you can attend
meetings, um, receive per demon
mileage, for attendance at those
meetings. Um, I don't think you
get to vote, but at least you
are able to attend those
meetings so that when you're
called upon to vote upon those
issues in the session, you burst
of what the the interim
committee has been talking
about. The same goes for the
Senate Tax Committee on ResTEP
and the other two are house
appropriations and finance
members, Senate F
in ance members
are automatically standing
advisory members to legislative
finance.
Um.
you know, we could probably
expand that to judiciary members
in each chamber.
going to CCJ, um, and probably
the House Education, Senate
Education members
being standing advisory to LESC.
Um, we could expand that, I
think.
Um, allows without a quorum
present to begin a special
subcommittees.
And this kind of
speaks to
I don't want to get too much
into this, but I think
everyone's aware that a week or
so ago there was a bit of a
problem with the CCJ
interim committee starting, and
I think that there's just some
confusion across interim
committees about when they can
get started.
And I'd like to just, if we, if
this, if this working group does
anything, it would be really
helpful to just provide
staff and chairs some some
clarity and direction on, on
when they can get started. And,
and I think it's important
because
as chairs know and staff knows,
like getting people to attend
committee meetings from far and
wide. You've got a schedule to
keep, and if you wait for
members to show up to achieve a
quorum, that schedule's just,
it's out the window, right? And,
and it, you know, we've all been
to communities that are an hour
hour and a half behind.
Some of that's because
it just takes time, but some of
it's because we don't start on
time and and and some of that is
because we don't have a quarrel.
So, I don't want to confuse this
one with who can get paid,
because that's a subcommittee of
a different sort, and, and we
can talk about that if, if
people are interested, but I
would just start as a special
subcommittee for the purpose of
receiving testimony would allow
the committee to get started.
um.
stay on schedule a little bit
better.
It would help. It'd be hugely
helpful to staff.
Um
committee chair training
um, self-explanatory.
uh, NCSL came, it's been 1012
years ago since they did this,
but they did come and and do
committee chair training. I
thought they did a great job,
and, and, you know, as we're
reduced paying members of NCSL.
it would, it would be helpful, I
think. Um.
we'd have to figure out how to
do that, but they're, they're
always more than willing to to
do that kind of thing.
Seminars, same kind of thing
we've talked about replacing
some, some interim committees
with just
instead of an ongoing set of
meetings about water or crime or
taxes, you would just have a, a
two-day seminar. I assume here,
but we could talk about that to
just any and all are welcome to
come. You don't have to be
members. It would just be here,
we're gonna talk about a
particular issue for a day or 2
or 3.
and members can get up to speed
on any, any policy issue that
that we would put on for that.
Um, and lastly we're using the
overall number of committees.
You see this recommendation has
come up in several places.
It will be a difficult
conversation, and, and
that's for, that's a
conversation for you all to
have, which
takes us through our
recommendations. So,
discussion
Jared, is it possible to kind of
begin with the first
recommendation and we can start
discussing them one by one, and
then, you know, we could talk
about anything that's
duplicative.
Sure, we can do it however you
like
That's how I'd prefer to proceed
if it's OK with the other
members.
I agree
Do you, so we'll just go one by
one through the through the
starting in 2002.
Yeah, and we can do it quickly.
Yeah, OK, yeah, no, that, that's
fine. I just, just so we're
clear. Um,
yeah, that, that's start
So, um, first one, I mean, I
know this is one that I've heard
a lot, um, I, I don't know if
we're going to get a lot of
pushback on that, but I think
that this first one in column,
um, or in row 3 is kind of
central to the mission that we
are put on with this committee
and not like, how do we make
this process more efficient, and
I think, um, you know, limiting
voting members to three
committees will really help
people take the interim process
more seriously, and if we did
this in conjunction with the
other um recommendation that was
on a subsequent list to um
allowing a chair to replace
committee members, voting
members who missed more than 3
meetings. I think this could
really help give us some teeth
and really make people be more
conscientious as to when they're
choosing, you know, what they
want to be doing during the
interim, but I'm sure
my colleagues have thoughts
I agree with that
um
because I've, I've noticed
a lot of voting members not
showing up to
um specific committees.
and I wonder, you know, I know
everybody has lives and jobs and
things that they're responsible
for.
Um
so I think maybe limiting
cause I'm a voting member, I
think of.
4 or 5
For me, it's not that big of a
problem because I'm retired.
but
I mean if you have a job or
you're running a business
or in the case of of uh
representative.
Hochman V Hill that she's trying
to
keep her head above water with
her law practice
We really need to look at the
demands we're putting on people.
and be aware of
um committees like like CCJ.
There's members of that
committee that I that have not
been there all interim.
Uh, so I think we need to look
at that and how do we solve that
problem?
And, and one other thought too,
um, and I'm, I'm sure Senator
Woods, uh, would want to pipe in
on this, but the recommendation
that committees be more
proportionate to, um, you know,
body size and, and, and caucus,
you know, proportion caucus
number. I mean, while it sounds
like it might be a good idea
when, um, you know, implemented
in tandem with these other
recommendations. I just, I also,
you know, would like to hear
their thoughts
on what the reduction of that
proportionality might mean,
especially for our colleagues in
the minority, but just another
thought.
Well, if you want any buy-in,
uh, I'll, I'll jump in. I'm
sorry I'm on my dang phone.
But if you want buy-in from the
Republican side, they have to be
in the meeting.
Now.
if there's absolutely not
enough.
Senate Republicans, we could
probably put in some more House
Republicans on that, but they're
definitely need to be the
conservative side of that.
you know, uh, discussion needs
to be brought in on every
committee that we can get it on.
So somehow
we need to portion that if we
can't find enough Senate
Republicans to get in there.
Let's try to put some more House
Republicans on that, on those
committees to make that
balance back up is my opinion.
Well, and maybe that is the
approach because we want to
thread the needle between, you
know, making sure that there's
proportional representation, you
know, as is, you know, mandated
by, you know, the democratic
process, but I also have had
several conversations with my
colleagues on the other side of
the aisle, and it's really tough
for you guys sometimes,
especially you senators, you
know, you have to be, feels like
you have to be at every interim
committee meeting all the time.
So, um,
another thing to consider, but
maybe that's, that's part of the
threading that needle.
Uh, Jared, if you would, could
you send this link to
uh my AOL account. It's a
Woodspat.
at AOL.com. I'm trying to get on
with my iPad, but
I'm having trouble. I'm in the
in an office in one moment,
Senator, and I'll, I'll, I'll
send you a link right now.
OK
In the meantime, you know
keep discussing, I think
All right, so Jared, is it
possible to maybe in the notes
or like add another column,
like, you know, positive
discussion or possibility, yes.
or something like that. I'm, I'm
keeping notes on it. So I'll, I
think I'll resend this out with
something exactly like that.
Cool. Awesome. Um, are you guys
ready to move on, or we still
want to discuss the first point?
Well, you know, the other part
of this is
the
most of these
interim committees are we still
allowed to
go in through a Zoom meeting or
not?
Are they all in-person meetings
now?
They're contemplated as
in-person meetings, and, and
that's an interesting
point to discuss because
I don't think the irony that
this committee
that's meaning to reform the
interim process has met
exclusively by Zoom.
Um.
Yeah
Yeah, I know this one is
something different, which is,
which is curious, right, because
all the other companies that
were trying to fix are required
to meet in person. Um
and, and we certainly, I think,
can allow, I mean, there will be
some, some technological hurdles
to, to doing that.
I don't think they're
insurmountable by any stretch.
Um.
the question that will arise is
whether or not members get per
diem and mileage for attending
virtually. And, and, and that's
that's a big question mark, I
think. I know the Legislative
council has, has been
unwilling to this point to do
that. I mean,
2020 was a, a, a different
creature altogether. And, and we
had to do it then. But
you know, moving forward, I, I
think it would probably help.
to, to do it that way. Again, it
would be tricky.
We could, but again, we can, we
can talk about it, and, and
these are all things that you're
gonna have to sell to your
caucuses.
Well, and that was one of the
things I was going to add to the
list, the end Jared is I know
that we've had these
conversations previously. I know
that legislative council does
have reservations as to whether
or not we're even
constitutionally allowed to seek
per diem for Zoom meetings. I
probably think that if we wanted
to, um, you know, be most
prudent, we probably, for those
members who would appear by
Zoom, um, probably best for them
not to request a per diem, um,
but it would be a way to open up
the meeting
and especially satisfy some of
these quorum issues that we're
having. I know that I would be
able to attend probably twice as
many interim committee meetings
if Zoom was an option, as it has
been for this committee, um, so
I, I think that and, and also
like we just need to join the
21st century, guys. I mean this
is like we did it for Zoom or
for the pandemic and, you know,
everybody, of course, wants to
be there in person if they can
be, cause it's a wonderful
chance to, you know, nothing
replaces the the value of an
in-person meeting. I agree.
But sometimes it's just not
feasible and if we're looking at
trying to make sure everybody
meets a quorum, which I think is
one of the main issues here that
we've been asked to look at. We,
we really have to take that into
consideration, and I know that a
couple of years ago there was
money added to the feed bill to
allow for additional
technological improvements just
for this purpose.
Well, I know, I know that's uh
an IT issue, for sure, because
we're asking to meet in some
some of these in a real small
areas of the state.
where the broadband is not that
stout.
So it may be very difficult. And
the reason those meeting out in
those areas is for people to
travel there and see that area.
to, to see what the problems
are.
So
probably it's probably a yes and
no issue here that is going to
determine whether you
should you even sign up for an
interim.
if you can't, don't think you're
going to make it.
And that's
and that's a tough question to
ask.
the legislators. They may have
the greatest intentions in the
world, but as far as making the
quarrel
and making sure the, the proper
ratio of Democrats and
Republicans are on that quorum.
That's even a tougher issue, and
I know you call all the time
trying to make sure who's going
to the meetings. I know that's
a, that's a staffer problem. I'm
assuming that's a major problem
is that right, Jared is that
is that the major problem? It's
just finding out who's going to
be there and then who shows up.
It's, it's an issue. Yes.
and
part of that issue
I'm gonna be
a little bit blunt about this,
is, is, is members are not
always reliable about a.
answering or returning phone
calls
or B, you won't have to talk to
many staffers. We've talked to
members who say, yes, I'm going
to show up.
No, they don't actually appear.
They will tell you, no, I'm not
gonna be there, and lo and
behold they appear, or you don't
hear anything, and then
sometimes we get members who
just happen to show up because
the meetings
in or near their district. And
so, sure, sure. Yes, it's an
issue.
and, and, and some of that's
just member behavior, if I'm
being honest, and, you know,
some members are great. I want
to be clear that some members
are fantastic about
communicating it. Um
you know, it's some members
don't, and, and I, I get that,
you know, again, people have
lives, jobs, and families. And,
and sometimes it's hard, but
it's an issue but not the way
you think it is.
So why, why I'm saying this is
is there a particular committee
that this is a common thing that
happens.
And those may be the committees
we need to think about being put
on job gives you a reason to put
that
meaning on, on that uh
particular interim on a chopping
block.
I
let me get back to you on that
before I, I don't wanna, I don't
wanna
I can put some together to kind
of figure out if, if, if that's
a chronic problem for, for one
or more committees, but I, I
don't want to answer that
without some kind of information
in front of me.
OK.
Yeah, but I, I know it seems to
me is, is the crux of the
problem.
It's part of it. It's a big part
of it.
there I
to be honest
for this working group, there's
not a silver bullet that's gonna
fix the interim, right? There's
no one change that this group is
going to be able to recommend
and implement that's gonna
completely fix
you know, all the issues that
confront the interim. So, I,
it's gonna take some kind of
combination and probably some
trial and error. Definitely.
All right, for um for row 5,
Jarrett, like what can we go
back into the loud does he needs
to be named to in our
communities. I mean, are, aren't
designees
already technically on an
interim committee. They just
have a limited number of days.
Not exactly. So in the case,
it's only two committees have
designees right now. And the way
it works is if you are a voting
member of revenue stabilization.
Um, and you know you're not
going to be at the meeting. You
can designate somebody from the
list of designees to attend that
meeting.
and I believe be a voting member
in your place.
But if you're a designee, and
you go to that meeting, you will
not receive per diem and mileage
for attending that meeting.
And you certainly don't get to
vote
So
it was one of the
recommendations that somehow
came out of, I think it was the
2002 working group. Um, we
changed revenue stabilization
to, to designees instead of
advisory members because as you
know, an advisory member is
welcome to show up to, to an
interim committee that they're
the advisory to.
to ask questions, you get a
packet of materials, you, you
get to, you know, contributeers.
all those things
I'm guessing if that's the
difference. Designees do not. So
I don't know that it's, it's,
it's necessarily working or not
working. Again, I
I can probably look into that
but
it's not a huge problem. I, I
certainly don't think it's a
problem for LFC in in Quorums
and and that type of thing. I
know that is remarkably well
attended.
And I think that tax policy
committee is pretty well
attended to.
But
I, I
would like to talk to staff of
those two to give them more
clarification on, on how
designees work or are not
working
I would like to see more
information on that too. Is it
really so to commun
communities, maybe we can add
that to the
the data in that package that
you provided us.
because to me that sounds like
it might not really, it's kind
of a non-issue because there's
only two committees and it
sounds like those committees are
well attended.
I don't know that it solves the
problems confronting this
working group.
But you never know. I'll look
into it
Are we OK to move on to, sorry
guys, I'm kind of being the
the train driver today, but I
think it's really important that
we get through all of these.
You know, I like it, go ahead
Um, all right, so row 6. So my
question on this is allowing you
to
10 to 3 days of committee such
non members. Don't, I mean, I
know in the house we already
have this. We have this, we have
up to 5 days, or is that only if
you're
if you're a special advisory
member. I mean, like I know that
I'm named to something for
elepsy and I get up to 5 days
that I can use for LFC, but it
can be for any committee. So how
is that different?
This was, so this came straight
out of the 2002 recommendations
and in 2002.
you know, 23 years ago, that was
kind of groundbreaking material,
but now we, we, we have up to 5.
You're right, we've expired 3 to
5, um, and again, I think it's
worth thinking about making that
number larger.
Yeah, I mean, like, like you
said, if people actually attend.
I know I always attend the
meetings that I asked to go to.
Um
as, you know
for my 5 days, so maybe that is
something that we should look
into, especially in conjunction
to
allowing
uh chairs to mean
you know, people for purposes of
quorum.
I
I mean, one approach to to
fixing the interim, if you want
to think about it, going back to
uh row 3, like severely limiting
the number of committees.
that members can serve as voting
members on.
If you did that, I conjunction
with
greatly expanding the number of
extra days members can use.
It might
it could work
You're using extra day
Those numbers are almost always
show up.
Um.
and you
you know, members want, you
know, make it 10 or 15 or
however many.
working group or the that
council thinks is appropriate.
You know, I, I think
a robust attendance, I think it
was.
I agree
All right.
Uh, row 7 prohibit committees
from meeting outside of the
Capitol.
I mean like
that fixes a problem for those
of us located in
urban areas, but that might make
things harder on our
rural colleagues
Maybe when Senator Woods
rejoined us, we can have that
discussion.
Um.
I think he was trying to rejoin
on a different device, so if you
if you want to give them a
minute, I'd probably the one to
speak most directly to this one.
All right, we can come back to
that one then
Um.
8, required committee scheduling
parameters.
So,
talk
about this, Jared, in addition
to what you're not super clear
from the 2002 report.
what that recommendation means.
I'll go back and, and kind of
reread the minutes, but I don't.
no one, no one worked on that
group.
I think it's, it's still
employed at the council service.
It was a big group
and I
don't know what their
recommendations are
on it
spitballing, and I don't know
what, what this one
means exactly
I don't, I don't know that it
takes is
anything.
we're looking at, but I'll look
more into it.
Right.
OK.
I added it, but I don't know
what it means. I was kind of
open somebody else here had some
insight.
I wonder if Jarrett, if that
could, I mean, one thing that
that could speak to is the
number of days, like, you know,
um,
LHHS regularly makes like 3
and 4 day long meetings. So it
could mean that, um,
and maybe just frequency
throughout, uh, uh, yeah,
frequency of meetings and number
of meeting days are two things
that come to mind for maybe, but
I, but I
what I think it means
if I'm
I was putting into the
legislature in 2002. I've only
been here a couple of years.
Um.
the calendar that that Monica
puts together that you all see
up on the website that's got all
the interim committees.
That's a relativity recent
development. I don't think we
used to do that, and the result
of that was
you know, voting members had
multiple committees on
multi the same day
and couldn't be everywhere at
once. And so we've since
begun to put together a calendar
that minimizes and eliminate the
number of conflict among voting
members on committee days and
and Monica will tell you it it's
a remarkably difficult jigsaw
puzzle to put together.
And I think the complexity of
putting that calendar together
is directly affected by the
number of eating days that each
committee schedules uh overall
through the interim and also the
length of individual meetings.
So those kind of go together
perhaps.
So I think to I think we already
kind of do scheduling
parameters.
um
I don't know what else, what
more
do in terms of scheduling
parameters, but
I
you know
if, if, if, if members here have
ideas,
please express them
I mean.
all I know is
you know,
I'll hold off. I don't have any
new ideas on this.
We can move on
Um
so I think 9 is essential.
Big 9 is like the very crops of
what it is that we're talking
about in the subcommittee.
because I know that when I was a
chair
I mean, China chair Committee
while trying to get a hold of
the speaker or the prote to get
their approval.
for someone to, you know, fill
in the form, was like really
stressful and tough.
and
so like, you know,
I, I think giving the chairs,
making that a chair is
prerogative could really change
the game.
Go on.
I agree, um,
it, it would speed up the
process. It would
um,
I mean, as long as we have like
guidance for the chairs on
to elevate to to a voting
number.
uh for that meeting
I think this, this is an
excellent idea.
Yeah, I think, I think this is
like a resounding yes.
First recommendation, check.
I guess I'm, I'm back in. I'm
sorry I got.
technological malfunction.
on the I agree
with this allow committee chair
to seek replacement members.
tenants is likely. I believe
that is a good thing to do.
I prohibit beating outside the
Capitol after August 31st again,
I think that's a good thing to
do.
Number one
was
what was the
third we talked about here
lately
but the
real embers, the real members
are used to, to traveling.
Question we have for you,
Senator, is what they would
think.
It's, it's they're used to
traveling and, and
you know, even
that, that allows them to
vote a question I'd have if you
would be sure to allow those
members to have an opportunity
in the chair to speak to the
chair about getting those
committees close to them prior
to
August deadline
you know, make some allowances
to move around.
not to have them in a very
confined urban area.
until
you know, until August 31st.
uh uh opinion on that subject.
Like we might have agreement on
that
and Jared
Did we talk about number 3, the
limit member serving and voting.
The 3 interim committees. Yeah,
I can't remember if you were
still on at that point, Senator.
Um, I, I would love to hear your
thoughts on that.
That is not a bad idea. We need,
you know, we need participation
of these members and
asking them to be voting members
on over 3 interims, I think is,
is.
that would draw the subject
matter closer to the
to have these members bring it
into fewer committees.
That's really what we're trying
to do.
to start with is do we need to
discuss the same issue in
several interim committees or do
we need to
make sure you're there to vote
on it in an interim committee or
or.
you know, key it up to, to
resounding maybe enough
a day.
for a committee instead of just
expanding the committees.
I think people need to
take, you know,
many in which they're voting
members.
I'm not sure voting members more
seriously. Like I know that.
in my time in the legislature,
you know, being a bright-eyed
bushy-toe freshman and wanting
to do all the things on all
committees that I learned pretty
quickly that, you know, you
can't do that. And so kind of
asking the legislature to take
voting committee committees more
seriously, I think would be a
really good thing.
Yeah
Guys, I'm gonna ask for a moment
of, of personal privilege.
Can we, can we put this on hold
for a minute and I'll be right
back.
I know you're all busy and I
hate to ask you for that.
It's only a minute
OK
Maybe, maybe it's fine
Thank you.
Does anybody know that press
conferences that uh the
governor's having?
Yeah,
it's uh
helping out.
Universal
Daycare
Ah.
set up a day was going, I'm, I'm
assuming he'll be back at some
point and he can tell us more
about it.
I know you have to come back at
some point because
his bag is in my office
You're gonna need that
I heard a, a tiny bit about it
on the radio as I was driving in
this morning. So Jarret, when
we're done here, I mean, are we,
I know we're expected to
present
to um blood counsel, right? So
we're gonna present to them and
they're gonna take a vote or do
we know about that yet?
Well, that's an interesting
question. Um,
I think yes, at some point this
group
will have, I mean, you're all
members of that council anyway,
so.
it makes sense for, for you all
to just kind of present the
recommendations to them.
and and
as you can kind of see by my
column be a lot of these
can be addressed in legislative
council policy.
and, and
but if, if we're really
interested in in in pursuing
some of this.
you know, I'm happy to, to work
with, with Marnico and Shana on
on proposals to
change that council policy. Um,
because I think that's the form
I would have to take.
And, and that's
probably something we should do
for the end of the year, but
you know, we've got time until
the next round of interim
committees are appointed.
and something to keep in mind,
honesty, we could be a couple of
years away from implementing
this. If I'm being honest, and,
and here's why.
um,
at the end of a 60-day session
like we just had interim
committees are appointed, right?
And, and we're
in the midst of that interim
right now.
Next year
the tradition is simply to
reappoint those communities as
they're appointed this interim
with who were chair, vice chair
rotation.
And so it could be honestly, the
interim of 2027 before.
um
drastically reducing the size.
It's up to the district council.
It's certainly not up to me.
It's, it's up to leadership, but
just
logistically, it it could be a
little while before
to roll this out effectively,
which is to say,
we've got the real time to get
it right too.
So effectively maybe we
what our goal should be
goal in mind should be
to
like we should probably have a
vote put together a package,
right? And all of the changes
and then we can have a vote on
it and then
once we approve it, then we can
formally present that package of
rule changes to legislative
council.
and then they start very like
that idea.
Yeah, and we might also want to
keep in mind that just as the uh
the
change in um
policies, as it related to the
um DLAs took quite some time
with ledge counsel
We might wanna budget that it
might take several
means for them to have these
discussions.
Um.
on
the old changes as well. Like
this might actually be bigger
than the DLA thing.
Yeah, but
we'll talk about it, of course
And, and I think once we
finished today,
you know, I'll, I'll, I'll start
working on, on some legislative
council policy changes. I'll
work with Monica and Shana on
that, um.
cause I, you know, it would be
helpful for you to have
something in front of you that
you kind of looked at and, and,
and revised.
mostly agreed upon.
before you start voting on it
And we can talk a bit about, you
know, I, I
did some
what other states are doing and,
and I'd like to talk a little
bit about that. It probably our
future meeting.
but I will caution you
what I've found
Mexico's approach
that our set of problems
are somewhat unique
There aren't many states
with 20 some interim committees
that are as geographically
passed.
um,
you know, obviously whose
members don't receive a salary
and they get burn.
somewhat or something of a
unicorn.
which shouldn't surprise anyone
Yeah, no surprises there.
But I, you know, we'll talk
about it again in another
meeting, but there are some
states that have
approaches.
I don't know that
you know, that you know the
saying if it works somewhere
else it's finally gonna work and
you might go.
it's probably, it probably is
true for this too.
Senator Woods, are you back? I
think you minute has elapsed.
I'm gonna count that as a no
but in just in the interest of
of moving forward a little bit
if, if, you know, Representative
Martinez and Harenby Hill.
wanna, wanna keep kind of going
through this just to keep you,
let me, let's, that's, we
we keep going, we can catch him
up
I, you know, I mean, at this
point, it's just
the house is represented, which
is a little weird, but.
you agree to say what you want
here.
We, we, Senator Woods after
Yeah
We're not there. I just got back
all the time
no perfect. Awesome.
Uh, where are we? row 10.
Required constitutional
amendments, we can consider it
to be like.
me.
I don't know, but I mean, it was
something that came out of those
recommendations. I included it
I don't think it's, it's
pertinent to what we're.
working on at all
I, I've never known a, in a
constitutional amendment to come
before an interim committee
solution.
Like there's just so much
particular work that has to go
into those bills.
That you know
I hesitated to even include it,
but I didn't want to be accused
of of of picking and choosing
which recommendations to share
with this group. So I, I, I
just, I put it in there.
I'm not excited about that idea.
You know
11, reduce the size of LSC to 15
members and add HE student will
man
could cause a civil war.
No guys
what do you think
What's the size of developing
now
It's over 30, right?
No, it's, it's 16 voting and
then it's
it's a massive number of
Signees, and now with the
addition of standing advisory
members, but I think
if
you wanted to approach this in
such a way.
as to cause less of a civil war,
I think it
would be worth considering
somehow adding
the house that's an education
chairs as standing advisory
somehow too.
I agree with that
I would actually, well, an
internal, a cold civil war
that's been going on.
it's
they've got skin in the game
with the size of the education,
you know,
in the size of the overall
budget
It's, it's, it's not a bad move.
I think, I think having them as
a standing advisory member is a
good idea.
Yeah I agree
How about the, the Senate tax
and House tax.
They're already on there, right,
Hey.
If they are, no problem
Although they don't have to be,
I mean they are, but they've
God was he was standing advise
members for the tax committee.
and usually those shares of the
standing tax we are locating
chair and vice chair.
of the revenue stabilization
Committee
I don't know that there are
automatically unlegislative
finance.
If it's, if it's something that
that
you won't want to get your
advance as an idea.
I will write it down
I, I think that that like
traditionally,
they're usually included, but
they don't have to be, so we
would be looking at changing the
can be to it have to be. Yeah,
because there's, there's already
a
an RSTP committee.
um,
that those, those members are a
part of.
and that's the same thing on
that committee, the
the, the Senate
Finance and uh
House Appropriation members,
chairs should be on that.
tax revenue stabilization
Committee also.
That's correct, but just keep in
mind
that again, I, I know that a
quorum is, is not much of a
problem for LFC nor the tax
committee.
And so, you know, if you're, if
you're looking at
the size of other committees
I think this is probably helpful
and I
but just keep in mind you of our
goal of this working group
and I don't know the
disadvantages that. OK.
I delete that one then. I don't,
but I'm not, I don't want to
shut it off either because it is
not, but you have this game in
the game. I, I don't.
pin in it for now
You're OK with that?
Um, or pell statutory
committees, that would be open
warfare.
everybody. Um
pretty, pretty drastic. Uh does
anybody feel strongly that we
need something
drastic?
I, this is kind of a
is sensitive
for me because I was part of the
creation of
the military.
Military and Veterans Committee
as a statutory committee.
Now,
here
years
' s my issue
I think it's important that
veterans' issues be at the
forefront.
but in the last few years,
um, that committee, the
attendance of that committee has
dropped.
um, and I've asked
some of the members
uh why they're not showing up
and, and it goes to agenda.
If, if there's not a good agenda
if it's all fluff
Members are not going to want to
show up to us.
Um, so I'm not sure that I, I'm
in favor of repealing that
statute.
Um, I'd
be interested in strengthening
the agendas that are presented.
I, I agree with that.
represented him with Martinez. I
think that maybe we can also
quell some of the, that with um
requiring chairs to meet and
kind of discuss agendas
beforehand and, and
eliminating
some of that
duplicity of presentations and
agendas cause they that's
another I've heard that
criticism quite a bit, and that,
you know, if you're on a bunch
of different interim committees,
you stand to see the same
presentation by the same people,
at least 2 or 3 times. Yeah, I
think, I think in that case,
those committees should have a
joint meeting so that
presentation is done once
um,
and not 3 different committees
cause I've been, you know, I
think last year or the year
before,
um, I heard some issues 2 or 3
times.
And, and I, I think that we
should definitely make that
I mean, recommendation. Again, I
think it should probably be
chair's prerogative, but I know
that a lot of the chairs are
open. Like I know we've been
having discussions with CCJ of
having a joint meeting with um
uh LHHS and the behavioral
health issues and stuff and like
if we can get the chairs to
coordinate, I think that would
be like a game changer.
I agree because it, it, it
creates um a little bit more
efficiency.
and people might come to more
meetings, yeah.
this,
this is the same thing I've been
trying to point out that
uh
these, these same
people want to push their agenda
hard enough, they want several
committees to hear the same
subject.
And
there should be some way that we
can limit that. Either
getting a gender approved by
legislative council or
something, some way we should
limit that.
And also,
let's face it, if there's not
the desire to go to those
meetings, we shouldn't have a
meeting.
Maybe, maybe I, I'll put this
out for you.
What do you think about uh
putting a, a, a time limit on
how long a committee can
operate.
to say we have that chair
Thompson has implemented that at
LHHS and it's been quite fiery.
Um, I know that there was an op
ed written um by one of our
minority members who was quite
adverse to that decision because
it felt like he felt like it was
forcing the committee to, you
know, like it wasn't allowing
members to ask ample questions
and stuff, but if you have
committees like LH
H S who have like 30 some odd uh
30 items on their agenda, you
kind of have no choice, right?
So, um, maybe not so much
meeting like limitations on the
time of meetings, but maybe a
limitations on the number of of
uh
presentations you can have
within a meeting day or the
number of meetings simply just a
number of meeting days and
making people commit to those
meeting days cause I know there
are some like statutory
committees, like I know CCJ has
expanded, you know, the meeting
was supposed to be 2 days, and
then all of a sudden it was 3
days and it just makes it hard,
you know. I'm thinking more of
sunset.
I'm thinking more of a, we, we
have committees that was put
together for some issue
and put a sunset on those
committees and, and they have to
go back before legislative
council to convince legislative
council that that's a committee
that needs to keep
me.
Like our committee, our
committee is going to be
sunsetted for sure. Yeah, like
this one. I'm damn sure hope it
is.
What, you don't like hanging out
with those senator? I love
hanging out with you guys.
We can do it over survey so we
don't have to do it over this.
We can, if we can accomplish
something here, it's going to be
a heck of a big step. And so
that's one way is to put a
sunset
on every committee
and uh other than these, uh, the
exception of, you know,
legislative council LEFC, LFC
ethics Committee's on Compacts
and Senate rules. All right, if
you put a sunset on every other
committee.
and you had to come before
legislative council.
every year and say, this is an
important issue this committee
is going to discuss.
and make a sale
I, I actually love this idea
cause it's a way to kind of
accomplish everybody always
complains that there's too many
interim committees, but nobody
wants their interim committee to
be cut, right? But if we were
all we require all non-statutory
committees to come to
legislative council and convince
them to like re-up the committee
for that specific term. Maybe
that's a way of accomplishing
that.
I should point out here that
that's kind of what happens.
in theory, but in practice it,
it, it's nowhere near it.
All the committees that aren't
statutory are council created.
And so they sunset effectively
every interim. The council just
chooses to reappoint them.
every interim, you know, so
water's been around for forever,
but it's, it's council created,
it doesn't exist in statute, and
so it, it basically does sunset
Then instead of counsel just
chooses to, to reappointed.
Two things I think I, I think we
should require legislative
council to have one meeting.
to look at
the, the work product.
of all these committees
And going back to what uh the
the majority whip was talking
about on on time.
You know, I think if, I think if
you.
have a
either a controversial issue or
an issue that you know is gonna
require a lot of discussion.
Maybe limit the things on the
agenda.
So there's ample time to have a
good, um, exchange of ideas.
because the interim is where
we're supposed to be really
digging down into some of these
issues. And when you limit
members to 2 or 3 minutes of
discussion, it kind of
um
nullifies the whole idea of the
interim committee.
I agree, though, the interim is
where we're supposed to find out
the facts, the deep dive. We're
not supposed to do that during a
regular session.
So I agree, they it's
probably limit agenda items
during those times.
So what would that look like?
Would that be like a specific
rule or, I mean, cause like
right now I think it's chair's
prerogative. Some chairs do do
that. I know I did that when I
was a chair, but others don't
cause they feel like they want
to give everybody a fair shot.
Well, I think, I think some
chairs, if it's a controversial
issue that's backed by one side
or the other.
Um
they purposely limit the amount
of discussion, cause they're
maybe not comfortable with
you know, digging a little
deeper. I'm not, I'm not sure,
you know, I, I can't question
the motives of anybody.
but
I just think some of these
issues are, are serious issues
that deserve
a full discussion
you know, instead of 2 or 3
minutes, maybe give each member
ample time
Limit it to 10 minutes max, but
having 2 or 3 minutes, you get
one question and that's it.
And with the time limit is.
the person you ask the question
to can burn up the 10 minutes.
Yeah
Um, you know, I just, I, I
think, I think that's an issue
that we really need to look at.
because if we're not allowing
enough discussion on a on a
any controversial issue, whether
it's supported by the
conservatives
the moderates, the liberals, the
progressives, whoever is pushing
this.
there needs to be ample time to
dig down
um
and I think, you know, if you
did that,
I think you, I, I think.
you would have more attendance
at these committees.
because
right now people are frustrated.
I mean, I hear it from my side.
People are frustrated. Why go to
a committee when I have 2
minutes to ask a question.
It's not even worth the travel.
So maybe let's add that as
another potential.
potential
And I don't know if that, you
know, that just becomes part of
the, the.
committee chair training?
uh that you, you, you know,
that's maybe an attention item
in the training, um, I just
think
it adds fairness to both sides.
It would increase attendance,
and it would accomplish the
purpose of these interim
committees where you're, you're
supposed to drill down into
you know, the, the big meaty
part of the issue and and be
able to ask those questions to
create more discussion among the
members.
I mean, I'm, I'm, I'm definitely
open to it. I think it could be
a way of accomplishing
more than a couple of goals that
we have.
Well, I think, and I'll need a
little help in, in figuring out
how to actually word that if, if
you all want to think about that
a little bit.
training. The committee chair
training is a big issue.
If, if some of you guys have
been on committee chairs long
enough, you don't need a
training.
But when you start sticking
freshmen on committees to be
chairman.
they're, they're
I mean
they need some help. They need
some guidance. They can either
have a real uh productive
meeting or they can just discuss
what they want to talk about and
that may not be what the vast
majority of people want to talk
about it.
So anyway, it's
I, I like right now it's really
dependent on whether or not the
previous committee chair is open
and available to training the
new chair, and sometimes you
have really great chairs who
spend a lot of time, you know,
and energy, completing that
training and then sometimes
chairs just disappear and then
it's up to the new chair to come
in and like reinvent the wheel
and then actually that burden
falls on on a legislative
council and the staff.
person and that like overwhelms
them even more. And if that
staff person is with the uh
traveling committee, it it could
be like, I, I, I know that I
almost made my staff person not
to come out, but like I'm pretty
sure I almost drove into a
nervous breakdown when I was a
new chair, and so I think that
chair training is a great idea,
even if it's just like a half a
day.
I agree, and, and I think I, I
think we need to look at
best practices
for for committee chairs
cause, you know, when the, I, I
attended one committee when the
majority whip was the chair, and
I thought it was run well
The, the agenda items were
proper, there was enough
discussion on them. There was
enough background given.
Um, unfortunately, this year, I
know the, the Senate has
appointed
um
you know, a couple of freshmen
and they're doing their best.
I went to uh economic
development committee and, and
Senator Charlie is, she's doing
her best.
Um
and, and the meeting and
Farmington, I think, was
for the most part, pretty good.
Uh, but there were some things
on the agenda that I'm like,
what?
What does this have to do with
economic development.
Um, so I think that, I think the
training is extremely important
um
otherwise, it's, you know, it's
a waste of time, and then, and
then members don't want to show
up.
If it's a if it's a full fluff
meeting that you've traveled 3
hours to get to 456 hours.
You're not as excited to go to
the next meeting.
Right, yeah
I we're happy to to work with
committee chairs, um.
and, you know, like I said, NCSL
is, is more than happy to, to
come here and put on some kind
of training too. And, and some
of it's
I think for chairs not so much
agenda construction, although
that's an important part of it,
but just handling
who can make motions, who can
vote, some of the parliamentary
stuff about it would go a long
way to a smoother meeting, I
think.
Well, and if chairs don't, new
chairs feel like they've already
had sufficient training, you
know, then they could probably
like ask to be excused from it
or whatever it is, but I, I
don't think training for chairs
is a bad idea.
And the problem I would have, I
think it opted them out of it.
is the fact of what they could
put into the meeting to help
the new chairs
But hell, I've never been a
chair. Let's move on.
You can chair the next meeting
of this, how about that?
OK. Uh, you're German.
Let's go to the next item.
All right
Um, leadership of, so we already
kind of discussed this. We're
all in agreement on this, right?
Are we?
On 3 on 14
We did talk about it a little
bit.
Yeah, I think that, I think.
we're pretty good on that
Yeah. But there should be an
interim chairs meeting.
like a ledge counsel appoints
everybody and then like maybe
after that ledge council
meeting, the chairs have their
first meeting, and they talk
about, um, you know, the days
and scheduling and then topics.
before they get going. I like
that idea.
And then it should be continued
conversation too because things
change, but it's like, hey, you
know, we're having this meeting
and these people are presenting
to us, but I heard that you
might be having it too. Do you
want to have a joint meeting or
we don't, we don't have to
include that on our agenda,
right?
I think it gives some of the
more seasoned chairs a chance to
mentor the the new chairs coming
in.
Sorry, I lost you, Alan, can you
say that again? I said it, it
gives the chance for some of the
more seasoned mint uh chairs to
mentor the the new incoming
chairs.
Yeah,
totally
Now they could have some joint
meetings.
uh, these, these, especially the
freshmen that are on the, our
chairs.
You know, that's got to be,
if they've never attended an
interim meeting whatsoever.
and now you're the chair of one?
It's got to be a little
intimidating.
Yeah.
All right, we're good to move on
to the next to 2007.
Yes.
Right
I mean the funding, the number
of interim committee to why 12?
I
it seems arbitrary, I don't
know. I, you know, that, and
you're just to be clear, like,
you don't have to stick to any
of these numbers, like they were
made, you know, 1020, 15 years
ago. And so
you know, this group can can set
like it doesn't have to reduce
the, the number of committees to
3 for voting orders, you can
expand or reduce that. You can
find a number that's appropriate
for you. It's a little less of a
nuclear option than the last
one, which is repeal all
statutory committees, but
if there is a sense that there
are too many committees
This is the place to start
looking at at
at limiting that
but it's gonna be a difficult
discussion.
Yeah, and I think, I think we're
gonna have to
I think that's one of the
reasons this committee was
created. Uh, one of the key
reasons that I think
in one of our meetings, we're
gonna need to look at each
committee.
and, and then make
recommendations to legislative
council.
That's a good idea
Yeah
agreed
And as far as the 12, I still
like the idea of
them justifying the need for
their committee.
every year. There may be
something pops up that's a real
problem that needs to be
discussed and it needs to be
discussed over the summer.
But I can't believe every one of
these interim committees
they are more educational
committees than they are problem
solving committees, I expect.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's a
cultural issue too. I think like
just culturally ledge council
re-ups everybody, but I
definitely think that there need
to be some hard conversations
because some committees are,
well some committees have
agendas that are overflowing.
There are other committees that
are struggling to find things to
present and so like we need to
have those hard conversations.
Yes.
I think that for what it's
worth, there are a handful of
committees that probably don't
need to be
created year after year and have
several meetings over the
interim. I think that there are
a few committees that probably a
two-day meeting would suffice
for the interim.
Yeah.
Well, and like maybe that part
of that process, again, I think
it's a cultural thing and maybe
empowering our committee chairs
to be like, no, it's OK. Like if
you feel like you only need a
two-day meeting for the entire
interim. Don't feel obligated to
fill up an entire, you know,
schedule of a monthly meeting
every month, like you don't have
to do that and you shouldn't do
that. Like, don't feel expected
to cause I do think that
culturally there is that
expectation.
Uh, you know what, I, I agree
with that, with, I, I think some
of these chairs feel.
pressured
and that's where you get the
fluff agendas that, you know,
it, it's not really
a pending issue
Um, and I think that that
discussion happens
um, in the, the chairs meeting.
where, you know what, we, we
don't need, we have one pressing
issue for this committee. We're
gonna have a one day, all day on
this issue, and that's all
that's needed.
I mean, I think it alleviates
some of the pressure on some of
these committee chairs.
who are
digging for reasons to meet,
and, and that's where you get
the frustration from the
members.
who are like, why, why are we,
why did I travel 4 hours?
to have this discussion that,
you know, is
is not really an issue
Yeah. I think maybe including
that in training and being very
clear.
like, very clear.
I, I mean, if you want to limit
the number of committees, I, I
obviously up to you, but I think
a handful of committees work
could probably be absorbed by
any another existing committee.
And therefore you don't have to
create a separate committee, you
would just add some of that
existing companies with drug and
recreate it, but add that work
to another committee. They can
dedicate a day or two to to that
committee's work.
I and I, I'm really hesitant to,
to name specific committees
here.
but we can talk more about it.
Well, certainly the staff can
see that.
I'm sure when you start talking
amongst yourselves, you can see
that, you can see those
committees that are, you know,
this one could have went to
there, blah, blah, blah.
I don't think it's lost on this
working group either, to be, to
be honest.
I mean, in all, all, all bring
up my my pet committee, the
Veterans Committee.
Some of those issues could have
been presented to Health and
Human Services.
The, you know, the veteran's
mental health, why are you
having a separate committee?
Um, why not
just present that to the health
committee.
Um, so I, I agree with you, some
of these committees could be
absorbed
and then I think so, but I
I don't need to tell you this
because I, and I don't want to
get caught up on individual
committees, but
you know this as well as
anybody. Veteran mental health
is very different from just
regular mental health.
It's, it's highly specific, and
I think that military and
veterans is, is probably the
appropriate place for that. But
it's certainly not up to me.
I agree with that, but you set
that up as a just
that's all you're gonna talk
about that one day, because it
is very different and the needs
are very different.
Um.
but
I mean, it goes back to to the
fluff you, you, you have one
major issue, and then the next 4
meetings are all fluff.
I don't want to throw the
executive under the bus here,
with military, but
when Representative Martinez
was, was
a member of the Department of
Veteran Services.
He and I would sit together and,
and kind of plot out the
interim, and and it really
worked. And, and that
that
process stopped under this
administration. And again, I
don't want to throw the
executive or the governor or
cabinet secretaries under the
bus, but that was a really
effective way to plan an
interim. I really appreciated
Representative Martinez's help.
on, on figuring out how to, how
to
create an effective agenda. And,
and that's been a lot harder
lately.
Well, maybe, maybe we make that
a requirement, that some of
these
executive agencies, I know that
we can't order the executive to
do anything.
but we could make it a
suggestion that experts from
you know, let's, let's just say
the Veterans Committee, experts
from the Department of Veteran
Services and the Department of
Military Affairs, get together
and say these are the issues
that we see
These are the issues that need
to be dealt with. That's what
you and I used to do.
Uh, observer Hockman Hill, do
you want to keep us moving? Yes,
let's move on.
So, um, we're at row 3, reduced
number of advisory members
appointed to each committee. I
mean, uh
I'm actually agnostic on this
one. I'd love to hear my
colleague's thoughts.
I think this is better
accomplished in other ways, like
allowing chairs to appoint, you
know, members for Quorum and I
don't, and, and maybe limiting
the voting committees. I'm, I'm
not sure the advisory would be
as much of a problem if we did
that.
The only reason it's, it's
worth considering a little bit
is the logistics
for example, and this is only a
handful of but like water and
health, if you include the
massive number of advisory
members, it kind of limits the
locations that you can meet in
outside the Capitol. Those
communities are huge.
and you don't always know who's
going to show up. And so
that and it's worth noting that
you've all seen this. They're
advisory members appointed two
committees who have yet to show
up to a meeting.
I think that's also an issue we
need to look at.
I don't know how you, how you
get at it.
But, and I think we talked about
this somewhere
and we can still
um
that's up to a chair, I think.
If if a chair wants to to go to
the appointing authority, which
at this point would be the
speaker in the pro tem and say,
you know, Representative
Martinez hasn't been to military
and veterans. I say this because
it's absurd, but like, you know,
he hasn't shown up to a meeting
all interim. Can we just remove
him as an advisory member and,
and the proteer speaker can meet
that. So like quick.
like underlying question, is
there any sort of rhyme or
reason as to how many advisory
members are appointed to a
committee, or is that just
chairs? How is that even
determined?
I am not aware of any rhyme or
reason.
So maybe we should consider it.
I mean, I can tell you this.
and because you all get the
email from me when we ask you
which interim committees you
would like to be on and, and
some members
you know, pick 12 committees,
and, and while they can't be
voting members on all of those,
a lot of times that's what
translates to them being
advisory members.
If you express some kind of
interest on those questionnaires
that go to leadership.
you know, even if you're not
particularly interested in it, a
lot of times members will wind
up as advisory members on those
committees, even if they're
never going to show up.
And so that's why I think the
problem probably will begins.
but I don't
I'm not entirely sure how you
fixed that either.
So maybe we limit that at the
same time that we limit the
number of of voting committees.
as like part of the, we provide
pretty specific guidelines on
the what committees do you want
to be on?
right? Like rank 3 choices,
right? If you're going to be a
voting advisory.
I, I get all kinds of responses.
Some members rank 1 through 24.
So remembers just give me X's
without any kind of ranking.
It's, it's kind of all over the
place.
So maybe we make the
instructions very clear too,
like you will not be appointed
to more than 1 committees.
OK.
I like that idea because then
you really put thought into
I really want to be part of this
committee.
because when you leave it open
I mean, I, I have members on my
side that are putting 10, and
they show up to two committees.
Yeah, that's the uh the
problematic attitude, honestly,
and that's part of the problem.
And it's almost like kind of a
flippant flippancy.
And I'm part of the problem.
I'll be the first minute.
That's what I was gonna say I'm
part of the problem too. I, we
are the problem. I, uh,
signed up for water and Natural
Resources and
never have made one meeting this
year.
And the funny part of that is, I
never missed a meeting.
while I was a voting member, and
now I'm an advisory member and I
haven't made a meeting.
So it, it seems to have made a
difference to me, but then
again,
you get so many meetings on top
of each other, too.
That makes it a problem
So, but anyway,
I think we
let's talk about that again at
another time. Think about that
one.
We move to the next one
Coordinating staffing needs
among the permanent set. What
does this mean?
This is another one I'm not
super clear on.
I, I, I included it because it
was part of the 2007 working
group's recommendation.
but
there's not a lot of clarity on
on precisely what that means.
All right, let's think because
by permanent staff, some of it
is the staff of of LFC LESC.
and the council service, right?
You can interpret it that way
and, and, and working together
to, to figure out staffing. But
some of that
I think is, is just counsel
services. We staff most of the
interim committees.
all but all but two really.
Um
I honestly, since 2007, I think
some of this has been addressed
because
in 2007, water was already huge
and it was, it was, I think John
Bowler and I were, were trying
to staff it, and I think the
council service
in a lot of ways, thanks to
Monica and Shana.
and Raul and and Jabar, you
know, that's the longest.
have gone a long way to
improving the amount of staff
dedicated to each committee.
We're a lot better about that
now, so this one might have
already been checked off.
All right. Cool
Let's check it out. Delete it.
No, I, I think, I think, yeah,
council service leadership has
done a, a, a great job, I think,
in, in, in allowing more staff
to staff committees, and, and,
you know, sometimes if, if a one
person can't be there, another
staff member goes.
We're a lot better than we were
about that, I think 15 years
ago. So, so we're good.
I think, I, I should check with
Monica though.
Cool. All right. Number 5, a
point proportional
representation. So already
talked about this a little bit.
How do we feel about this,
colleagues?
I mean, I'm, I'm all for it just
as long as the minority feels
like it's, you know, still
that you're not getting too much
of a short end of the stick.
Well, that's
always the problem when you
are in a minority, you, you
always feel like you're
underrepresented everywhere.
But if we can't get people to go
to those meetings
then it creates problems also.
I like the idea of
appointing
as a proportional
representation. I think that's
kind of what the voters kind of
expect.
So, you know,
I guess I'd be more in favor of
it than against it, but
yeah, as long as, as long as
both sides of the aisle are
proportionally represented. I
think it's a, I think it's
fine that the house
um, and Senate have proportional
sizes on that committee also.
I'll tell you a funny story real
quick.
This had to do with the office
space in the Capitol.
We picked up one senator this
last election.
And I thought there for a while
we was gonna have to housing
in the toilet because
they couldn't seem to come up
with another.
office space
Yeah.
It was pretty comical before it
was all said and done.
And I thought, what if we had
elected two?
We had had to build a whole new
roundhouse, by golly. So anyway,
that's just forget that story. I
just.
I did
Tao.
That's funny
All right, we're open to agree
with that one, so if y'all are
kind of happy, well, we can talk
about it again if you want to.
Yeah, I think, I think we're
open to this.
OK, OK
So now we're on to the other
list. So expand the number of
extra days for each member.
I mean, I'm open to this too. I
just, would it be too much of a
nightmare? Who tracks the extra
days. Jared, is it legislative
council? Would it be too much of
a nightmare for them?
It might
be, but I don't know
if you drastically reduce the
number of advisory members and,
and drastically increased, maybe
not super drastically.
The number of extra days, it, it
might be a wash. I, I
I would touch base with
accounting and, and see because
here's the only tricker part, I
think for staff about extra days
is, is oftentimes
you know, staff leaves for a
meeting in Las Cruces or Hobbes
or wherever, you know, the day
before a meeting and, and
oftentimes a member decides that
evening they're going to use one
of their extra days.
But staff is already in Las
Cruces or or Hobbs without a
folder or a voucher or a
placard.
for that member, and, and
sometimes that's a little bit
awkward.
I think I've been in meetings
where we've had to, you know,
scrawl a member's name on a an
Inside Out placard and it looks
kindergarten-ish
Um, well, I think it's incumbent
on the on the legislator.
if I decide I'm gonna attend
Health and Human Services. I
need to give staff enough time.
I think we need to set
a specific
time, like, you know, 3 days in
advance at least.
or, or a week in advance,
whatever, whatever it is.
puts the pressure on the
legislator, not on the staff.
And to be fair, most members
are, are great about that. Like
we don't, but it it's, it, it is
a thing. It happens. And, you
know, we, we try to figure out
how to, how to deal with it.
And um, you know, if, if, if you
go advance this recommendation
and, and we go forward with it.
I'm, I'm sure we can
improve on that a little bit. We
would, we would have to. I
don't, I don't know that
expanding the number of extra
days is necessary. I'd be
interested in how many extra
days or or actually used.
I think I've used
since I've been a legislator,
maybe 2 extra days.
It's like anything with the
legislature. Some members
routinely use all five.
Some members don't use any and,
and, and a lot of it's just
somewhere in between that.
I, I don't think
more than 5 is necessary.
I mean, we're having reason I, I
brought it up is because again
like the members who use their
extra days are the ones who who
are
very good about showing up
But if, if 5 is working and
I'll, I'll check and see if it's
OK with you all with accounting
because I know they do track it,
obviously, because we can't pay
somebody more than 5. So we do
keep track of it. And, and then
we find out
Yeah, if, if the majority of
members are maxing out at 5
days. It, it may be worth
considering adding a couple
more. Yeah, I'd be interested in
finding out members aren't
evading themselves of it, then I
think you're right. Yeah.
This is a bargaining place right
here, guys.
If you, if you limit the, the
advisory members you might
increase this a little bit.
And that way, both sides wins.
but you don't always have to
look for that huge venue.
We can, we can talk more about
this one and, and let me see,
let me see if it's, maybe it's
not a problem at all.
Yeah, let's get more info, info
on it, but I think we're open to
it. I will do that. OK.
All right, 3, allow committee
chairs to promote advise members
to voting member. Oh, me? I've
kind of already talked about
this. Yeah, we've talked about
that. I think that would
probably be in the, in the same
recommendation to allow people
to, um, you know,
tap people for quorums.
right? It would be helpful
I think because
I text the speaker or the pro
temer Monica does.
several times a week to promote
advisory members up to, to
voting members. Yeah, we need,
we need to look at efficiency.
It's more efficient to let the
committee chair make that
decision, seeing who's there.
how many people are needed for a
quorum. I think that, I think
the chair can make that
decision.
Everyone's OK with this one
then? Yes.
OK.
Cool. Um, 5
um
allow committees without a
quorum present began in special
subcommittee. Well, do we need
this one if we allow chairs to?
OK, so I've got it. Maybe we
also include this one for times
in which there are no uh extra
members available to be tapped
to, to, you know, become
subcommittee members or
whatever, uh, then we allow them
to proceed as a special
subcommittee, and would that
then allow them to get per diem
jud? Is that the point of this?
I think more it's an issue of I
had a committee chair text me a
couple weeks ago and saying I, I
don't have a quorum. Legislative
council policy lays out what
constitutes a subcommittee, and
that's a presiding officer,
House D House R, Senate D,
Senate R. That allows that
committee to get paid even if a
quorum doesn't materialize.
But the other issue is
sometimes, you know, committee
chairs and staff will wait 45
minutes an hour to get started
on the assumption that they need
a quorum to begin.
Um, this would, I think, allow
some clarification on, on when
you can get started, keeping
meetings on track, it would help
with a little bit.
It would help staff say, you
know, you, and then it would
still be up to the chair, right?
I know what happened at CCJ. The
chair wasn't willing to start
the meeting until he had a
quorum. Chairs which still, I
think, retain that prerogative,
but if there's some confusion,
you know, other chairs would be
able to
get, keep the meeting going.
minus
an actual subcommittee
I, I think this is a good idea
and you see this mostly on the
first day of a meeting.
Yes.
and usually it's the mayor or
whoever is hosting the committee
is going to take up the first
half hour, 45 minutes.
Um, I, I think allowing them to
start as a special subcommittee
is absolutely fine.
And again, like the mayor's got
somewhere else to be probably
shortly, right? Waiting around,
like we've all been there, most
of us, it's, it's kind of
awkward when you're waiting for
a committee to start and the
mayor's staring at you.
by allowing the community to
just get moving, be helpful. I
like that idea.
OK.
Garrett, just so I'm clear, um
is this actually targeted more
at allowing a committee to
proceed with business.
when a subcommittee is not
present.
when even a my phone's ringing.
Sorry.
No, that's OK. Cause uh my
understanding is that policy
allows for a committee to
proceed when when just a special
subcommittee is present, but is
this more about allowing
business to proceed even without
a subcommittee. So say the chair
and one other member is there.
OK, so just to be clear because
I couldn't tell from the
discussion if that was clear to
everyone that this
would be a policy change that
would allow business to be
conducted without even a
subcommittee present, special,
not business, right? So you
couldn't send a letter or
approve minutes or endorse
something, but you could take
testimony. Only taking testimony
because you can't transact any
business minus a quorum.
I think I was in a loose sense,
but just to start.
Yes. Certain business as you say
in your.
business encourages members have
all been in meetings where
members turn up
you know, an hour or so late,
and, and
eventually you, you achieve a
quorum
It just takes, again,
Representative Martin is is
exactly right. The first day of
a meeting
sometimes it takes a while, and
I get that members are coming
from vast distances to to get
there, and it's hard to get
there exactly on time,
especially in weird remote
places.
This would just allow
the meeting to to continue.
I, I think, and I think this
encourages those voting members
to be their present, um, you
know, if, if they're, if they
get upset that, oh, this issue
was discussed and I wasn't here.
Well, the, it's your
responsibility to get there.
It is, there is the other issue
that I hesitate to bring it up,
but it is a thing.
for the lifetime
You know, members leaving
meetings or is a bit of an issue
too, and I don't want to really,
it's up to you if you want to
discuss it, but
you know, a lot of us have been
at that meeting where there's
the chair, maybe one or two
other members, and, you know,
for the last few presentations
of the day, and it, it's, it's
not the best look.
Well, and, you know, this is one
of those sticky issues that I
was very interested in because
you get those members and it's
frustrating for
for I, I've felt the
frustration.
where you're sitting there,
you've driven 3 hours to get to
a meeting and you have people
there for the first presentation
to sign their voucher and then
you don't see them again.
I mean, if you're getting paid
to do something.
you should be doing it. I mean,
I've had, I've had occasions
where I had to leave. I'll tell
the chair in the morning,
Listen, I, I need to leave by 3.
to get to this next meeting or
to
you know, whatever. But I think
if you're getting paid to do a
job, you.
you need to be there. If my
staff, when I had the
department.
worked half a day.
they're taking half a day leave.
and we're getting paid to be at
these meetings, I think we need
to take it seriously. I, I'm
tired of seeing members go in,
sign their voucher, and
disappear.
Well, we could take care of this
one really, really easily, but
people aren't gonna like it,
and, and we've, I've discussed
this issue with several other,
you know, legislative committee
members and some members of, um,
you know, led council, the same
way you get paid at a job. I
mean, we could either say, well,
if you stay a half day, you get
our last you get paid a half day
and if you get paid full day of,
of, uh, per diem. You have to
stay
the whole day. I fully support
that idea.
Hell yeah, let's do that. All
right, I'm in.
I hear you all, but I just want
to caution you that it's
difficult if you put staff in
this spot of having to determine
who's attended, how much of a
meeting.
Well, I mean, we can make it
pretty easy. We can make it
pretty easy. If you attend a
half day or less, which is, you
know, 9 to 12. You get paid a
half day, and if you attend, you
know
um
8 hours, you get the full pay.
So that way it's not really,
it's, it's not as much of a
decision, right? Because you can
say, well, they were there for
one hour, they get half day pay
if they were there for for
8 they get full or whatever it
is. We can put in standard, we
could, we could.
put in kind of like benchmarks
that would
not require that much judgment
involved. Does that make sense?
Yeah, and it takes the pressure
off of the staff and puts it on
the leadership.
if, if one of my members
is showing up for half a day.
then they, you know, that call
should be routed to me.
Why, why did I only get paid
half? Were you only there half
the day.
Well, they would know that ahead
of time. Guys, it's Michael. I'm
back. Um
it seems to me like a bit of a
reporting nightmare.
I mean it would be, it would
increase the work levels on
staff quite a bit.
Well, there's that and then also
um when did you talk about
establishing Quorum and all that
kind of stuff. OK, I, and I
apologize as that last a lot
longer than I thought it was
going to, so.
I just, I think it's frustrating
for all the other members when
you see somebody show up, sign
their voucher, and leave. I mean
it's like.
I'm saying you all day long and
this shows up or this number
shows up, signs his voucher and
disappears and gets the same.
paycheck that I do
Absolutely, it is very
frustrating. I've seen that
multiple times.
I mean, it is a problem. It is a
problem. I think we all
recognize it's a problem, but we
also have to recognize the fact
that it would be uh definitely
an increase on the
administrative burden.
So perhaps a way to move forward
is for maybe us to get more
information from like the folks
responsible for this, Jarrett,
and maybe they can talk to us a
little bit about what that might
look like for them.
and whether or not it might be
possible.
Can, can I drop something in
here? Uh, and I've just walked
in again, guys, but is there an
automated way to do some of this
stuff?
Uh, and where I'm going with
that is, you know, in my
business, you don't start
getting a paycheck until you
clock in online in the morning
in all your systems show green
as you're ready to rock and
roll, um.
and then that's when your
paycheck starts for the day, and
it's, it's simply puts the onus
on the individual rather than
everyone else chasing them
around or trying to motivate
them to do this, that or the
other, uh, behavior is going to
be what it is, and folks are
going to have to take
responsibility for themselves. I
don't know if there is, but, but
it almost like a
an electronic time card that you
check in with and then staff
really only verifies that you
were
you know, there
Do you really think that they're
gonna clock in. Well, I don't
know. I, I don't even,
maybe not. I don't know, you
could be right, but it just
seems like we're creating a bit
of, you know, babysitting or or
we already have babysitting, I
guess, but uh, but, but it's
gonna exponentially increase if
you start splitting the days and
how do you track the the the uh
quorum and all that kind of
stuff. Well, to answer your
question, Jarrett, if that's how
people are gonna get paid. Heck
yeah, they're gonna clock in.
That
that's what I was thinking,
but from a legal perspective
though, guys, from a legal
perspective, I'm not sure that
dividing a per diem like that,
which is based upon a federal
standard and remember is is
reported for tax purposes, um,
as per diem, I'm not sure if
treating it that way would move
us dangerously close into income
territory per definition, so we
definitely, we need to, to, to
um probably consult a tax
attorney or someone who would
know.
That's a great idea.
And then what what you would do
is, um, you know, again, we, we
treat our employees in my
company like adults, um, and
they can they clock in at their
machine, at their desk, or at
their workstation at home, it
would be the same thing with
this deal. You'd have a single
laptop that everyone would clock
into almost like a punch in,
punch out kind of thing,
otherwise, if we're we're
politicians here, and we're very
creative people, and so I hate
for folks to get on their phone
and clock in, whether they're
there or not. I'm I'm not saying
that
would ever happen. I doubt it,
but you just never know. So
you'd have to clock in, you
know, in the actual room where
the meeting is taking place.
Well and there would also be
some accountability. I mean, I'm
sure the
you know, government watchdogs
would look through all the
records I'm sure would be
discoverable or would be public
record, and then people might go
back and check, you know, run
tape on, um, you know, the
various webcasting and say wait
a minute, that person claimed
for DM for those hours, but they
weren't at the meeting. I mean,
there need to be some
accountability and we probably
would need to click a box or
something, you know, swearing,
you know, that we, that we give
our word that we were there and
then we're collecting this pay
for our time.
Well,
there's you're right,
Representative, but there's
added response, there's added
accountability there as well,
what I just described, because,
you know, we, we have everything
in the light of day now, every
meeting is do we we do broadcast
every single meeting now, don't
we?
If we don't broadcast it almost
live, sometimes in, in kind of
remote places, we, we archive it
and so it will show up on the
website but it's not
sometimes in real time.
But it is eventually available,
everything. I mean, I, I, I, I
think you guys know where I come
from in the world that I, I, I
manage my business in. I've
talked about it several times
along the way, in the 13 years
I've been and I want people to
have self-responsibility, and if
and if you're screwing up and
you and, you know, you're doing
something that you shouldn't be
doing.
That's on you, that's not
anybody, that's not on the
legislature or any one of us,
it's on the individual.
Let me get some more information
on this one if it's OK with
everybody, because I think
Cokman v. Hill's point about
income and that sort of thing.
it could be problematic. So, if
you're OK with with moving on
from, from special subcommittee
and, and letting us go ahead
with that and clarify it in
council policy, we can come back
to the other thing, if that's OK
with everyone. I'm good.
OK, good
All right. Well, the next is
committee chair, uh, training,
we already talked about that
unless um Senator Peria, you
want us to go over that for you
real quick.
Uh, just, just, could I get the
three highlights just real
quick? Pretty much what it
sounds like, uh, we can either
do it, you know, in-house with
counsel service, but NCSL does
offer committee chair training.
I mean, we've, we've got some,
some members that don't have
quite as much experience as
others.
Um, I've been in a couple of
those meetings. They're doing
the best they can, but I think a
little, you know, and sometimes
it's hard to ask for help if
you've just been thrown into the
mix, as chair, and you don't
know what you're doing.
you know, offering it and
Representative Martinez, I
think, brought up that that some
younger members can learn from
more experienced chairs too. It
would go a long way.
Cool, yeah, you're good with it?
Yeah, OK, thank you. I think
that's great.
Next, we have seminars. Um, I
think this sounds like a good
idea. My only fear is no one
would attend them.
I think that's a legitimate fear
It's, it's hard to get people to
their, um, you know, um, sexual
harassment training.
It's hard to get people to their
ethics training. It is. And, and
this would, this would be
another layer to that. So it's
up to you all. If you think
it'll be helpful, great, and if
not, we can move on.
My vote to move on.
Yeah, email.
Did you guys talk about, I, I,
I'm sorry, I know I just walked
back in, but did you guys talk
about the size and of and the
number of committees that we
have, and have you gone through
that yet? We have, OK, well, I
don't want to take you back then
if I don't, but I don't, I don't
know that.
if you all want to catch Senator
Padilla up. I don't know that we
came up with a
an antidote for that
either nothing yet,
Senator. We were talking about,
you know, a a few things. So,
um, changing the culture a bit
and right now Legislative
council has to basically approve
the reupping in the
reapportionment of non-statutory
committees as is, but culturally
like they kind of just do that,
right? Um, so maybe trying to
like have more of a rigorous
process through that and proving
that there's a need for that
committee, um, we went as far as
talking about repealing all
non-statutory committees and
starting from the ground up, uh,
we talked about, um, changing
the culture as it relates to
Che's prerogatives and not like,
hey, if you don't feel like you
have to hold a meeting just for
the sake of holding a meeting if
you don't have enough to to fill
a full agenda every month and
maybe you just meet for a couple
of days in the interim, and
that's good, right? Because
you're, you're
re maximizing efficiencies and
everybody's time.
Um, and then I think there was
one other thing that we talked
about, can someone else remember
what it is?
We talked about sunsetting those
committees, and then
those committee chairs would
have to go to the L Legislative
Council to justify their
committee.
And that way, if they
we see that there's overlap in
those committees. There's really
not a need to keep
replicating the same subject
matter, especially
because of all the videos were
taping all these meetings, they,
you know, if you can't make that
meeting, you can go back to the
video and
and at least digest the
information that was given out.
So reducing the overall numbers
of committees, the easiest way
in my eyes to do that.
would be to have those
uh committee chairs.
justified their committee to
legislative council, tell them
what they're planning
their work plan for that
committee, and actually
force the legislative council to
make a yes or no.
uh determination on those
committees.
So, uh, well, thank you, Pat,
and thank you, um, uh, uh, day,
and, um, so, well, excuse me,
Senator and representative, I
should be a little more formal.
Um, so I thought a lot about
this one, and that's why I
wanted to bring it up if you
hadn't talked about it yet. And,
and, and it sort of
thunderstruck me the other day
that
well, really everything that we
do in the interim is gonna
appear before
will eventually will appear
before a standing committee. It
would take in either one of the
chambers. And so where I'm going
with this guy, and again, let me
just drop this out there and
then we don't have to, I don't
want to bog everybody down on
this one today, but I want you
to start thinking about it,
please. Um, why wouldn't we just
create a
like or similar interim
committee that addresses every
House committee and every Senate
committee. So you have, you have
your LFC, you have your um uh
business tax transportation,
whatever you want to call that
one or whatever, you have your
health, you have your, you know,
those would be the interim
committees. Then it would be
the, the interim committee chair
of say, you know, LFC or the
interim committee chair of LESC
or the interim committee chair
of LHHS or whatever interim
committee, whatever.
um, that would establish, so
those would be the interim
committees, guys.
They would be very large
actually.
But the what you would do that
as a committee chair and a and a
vice chair and a ranking member
of these of these interim
committees is you would create
any number of subcommittees or,
or yeah, subcommittees that
would work the agenda of that of
that swim lane.
Uh, I'm just gonna throw this
out there because it just seemed
to me like that's how I, I
would, you know, do it in my
business, and that's a lot of
what we do when we have major
projects. There's a project
manager, project leader of the
project, but then there's any
number of work groups within
that.
that project
and that's where the the and and
you you'd have
you'd have a real work plan put
together for an interim
committee that really did
address any number of whatever,
anything economic development
might roll up to a commerce
committee or up to a, you know,
that business tax and
Transportation Committee or
whatever you guys call it in the
house, we come up with an
interim swim lane on
on tax. We'd come up with an
interim swim lane on on business
and industry. We come up with it
and everything would flow
through those interims with a
series of work
being done in interim interim
subcommittees, and that way it's
not this, how are we getting all
this work done?
There's, there's so much
duplication in my opinion. There
is, it would have the effect on
reducing the number of interim
committees, I think, because we
have 20 some now.
you'd have to pride the best in
that because we don't have that
many standing committees. So
that's part of it. And those
committees would probably then
necessarily be a lot bigger. I
don't know if that's what, what
you are after or not. Well,
that's kind of what I'm
suggesting, but that the reason
it would be bigger is because
you now you'd have a lot more
variables to create and design
subcommittees that helped do the
work of the overall interim
committee.
You know, um, anyway, I just
throw that out there as
something for everyone to
consider. I, I feel like
everything swims through a
standing committee to get to
become a law, to get a
governor's signature. So why
wouldn't we design swim lanes
that are, you know, interim
joint swim lanes that were work
flowed through to show up at the
legis legislative session
eventually.
So, I'll stop talking now. Just
want to throw that on the table.
It's a good idea
I will note for whatever reason,
this was discussed in one of the
either 2002 or 2007. It was
discussed because it shows up in
the minutes, but it didn't make
it as a recommendation. Why that
is, I don't know, but I
this has been contemplated
before. OK, I didn't realize
that.
Maybe I don't, it's a different
legislature now. That was 15
and, or, you know, in one case
20 years ago, you know, so.
it's a different consideration
now, perhaps.
Yeah, and then, and then you,
you could meet your, your quorum
standards, I think a lot easier
if you did what I'm proposing
here, uh, because
the committee chair would have a
lot more power, let's just face
it.
the House chair of the Senate
chair that you'd still rotate
that back and forth, so both
teams had the same, do, you
know, respect and, you know,
what have you. But they'd have a
lot more power in designing,
developing and implementing a
work plan for that year.
We can work on this. I'm, again,
this is, this is up to you all.
I'm just a
I'm the Zoom host at this point.
Um.
just, you would have to repeal a
handful of statutory committees,
I think, to get there.
I'm not saying it's, it's, it's
not doable, but I think this is
something, if you all want to
advance it to ledge counsel.
That's all 4 of us are voting
members of of Legislative
council, you are, but, uh, but
the other question that I had
is, and if anybody's looked at
all of the historical documents
and can help me with this. Was
there ever a time, um,
when
when the um
well, God, I guess there isn't a
single bill that doesn't,
wouldn't fall into
a standing committee swim lane.
So therefore you could design
the interim committees around,
like I said, so you have a house
Appropriations, Senate Finance.
Well, that's going to be a
finance and appropriation,
whatever interim committee. I
mean, you, you could have
legislation, um, or, or bills
that would be heard before
multiple or could be considered
before multiple interim
committees. I, I think we
produce better work product, in
my opinion.
So.
it, it's, it's up to the four of
you, or if you want to proceed,
we'll
try to figure out how to make it
work.
Well thank you for that.
You're right. I mean, what is
the object of the interim
committee. It is the study
subjects that's going to be
presented to one of these
standing committees, um
and with, with the invention of
the
Zoom on each one of these
interim committees, you'd have
plenty of ways for people to
view what's going on.
at their leisure
So
I'm not sure that might not be a
good idea, Michael, Senator
Michael, I think you've done
some good.
Well, thank you. Um, but here
again, we, we would want to do
chairman or chairperson
training, so that we don't wind
up in the same situation where
some chair creates 27.
subcommittees
you know, we'd have there there
would be a lot of training for
whoever was selected as the
chairs of the interim.
committees.
Well, I'm glad I got that off my
chest.
OK.
That
I think we're winding up here,
um.
we've talked about it. I'll,
I'll try to catch Senator
Padilla up on on some of it, but
let me try to come up with those
things that would affect
legislative council policies, so
you guys can have something to
look at.
I did have one more question,
sorry. um, and maybe you guys
already discussed this, but how
did we wind up with
sort of standing interim
committees, and then
uh Legislative council created
interim committees, cause I know
there's a lot of confusion for
members, like, so as an example,
when I got back, I was in
leadership for 4 years before,
then I got back into leadership,
and then I got back on the
Legislative council when I got
back into leadership, uh, 3
years ago I guess, almost 4
years ago, and
I couldn't share science and
technology anymore, even though
that's the committee that I
truly love and and adore because
it was created by the
Legislative council, right? So
what, what, where did all that
come from? Does anybody have any
of that history?
Some,
I mean,
I, it's like statutory to is
essentially representative,
created by a bill.
right? And so military and
veterans was actually
council-created committee
before a bill was passed to make
it a statutory committee, but
once it, once it exists, and
that you all put a sunset in, it
will never go away. Whereas the
council-created committee,
theoretically
gets recreated every interim, so
the council could decide not to
create it, right? Uh, the
practice, that's probably how
the Los Alamos oversight
committee morphed into science,
technology, and
telecommunications. Very much,
yes, because there was, there
were a couple of committees that
oversight and Lasamos again, and
that was some of the effort in
2007 to
try to reduce the overall number
of committees. They got rid of
the welfare reform Oversight
Committee, which was statutory
and morphed a couple into it.
And we talked about that a
little bit earlier today. Um
is having some come committees
absorbed the work of a handful
of other committees. Oh, I think
that's why that's a big reason
why I'm going, why I made the
recommendation I did to this
group a little while ago, it
just seems to me like there's
I think one year we had 3
economic development interim
committees, if I recall, a rural
economic development, economic
development, and then uh some
other study group or something
or task force at some point we
had a corrections oversight and
a criminal justice committee,
right? Those
pretty, they fit pretty well
together, and I think there's
opportunity to do that again, so
it, I think one of the next
things that we're gonna talk
about at the next meeting, and,
and I want to talk about when
we're going to do that too. Um,
is to look at the council
created in statutory committees
and and and just kind of see how
big they are and be that can be
absorbed by a different
committee. We can do that, um,
I'll try to come back with some
legislative council policy
stuff, but that may not happen
because the next meeting meeting
is I think in
2.5 weeks. I don't know if you
guys want to meet again that
quickly, or not? Well, we are
kind of burning daylight now
that we're heading into, into
the end of the year. So we
should meet again. I, you guys
agree? I mean.
one more meeting
and call it good
come up with some kind of
recommendation.
Think we might have two more
scheduled overall. One's not
till like I think mid to late
October.
Um, but we have one on the 23rd
of September, I think it's the
23rd. So we can do two more if
it's OK with you, Senator Woods.
And that should do it. OK, I'm
in.
Yeah.
cool
All right
Uh, Richard Mason, an attendee
has raised his hand, and it's up
to you guys if you want
reshoot, absolutely. OK. Mm.
Aaron, would you mind, I think
let's see if I can just about.
Richard Mason
I think you're gonna, there you
go. Hello, can you hear me?
Yes, yeah,
um, Richard Mason, I'm a
lobbyist for the League of Women
Voters in Mexico, and, and I've
sent you sort of a draft of
this um
but the house has how and it's
sort of related to what
Sandipideus said, um, house
government elections in Indian
affairs, if you look at the
issues and Senate rules, the
issues they hear about voting in
elections, there is no, there's
no clear
committee to hear that. They're
assigned to CC and J, but with
all the criminal justice and
other issues.
it's, it gets short shift. Now,
if you looked at some of the big
voting bills, how they had to be
rewritten and everything in
standing committee because they
there was no interim committee
to look and hear those things in
advance. And some of the
constitutional amendments like
legislative salaries and
reorganizational legislature.
There was no clear committee
interim committee to hear those.
So I think it's related to what
Sena Padilla said, looking at
the standing committees, making
sure that all the issues
that are heard before those
committees have a clear
designation, um, in the interim
committees.
Thank you
I think Richard, I, I, I love
what you just said. I mean, the
other thing is um
you know, one of those interim
swim lanes really ought to be
government oversight. So we'd
have to, we're gonna have to put
together what these swim lanes
would look like. Um, and, and
therefore, that you, you, I
could see what he just, what
Richard just described, I could
see the nominations, um,
uh, the, the appointments review
summer, you know, interim
reviews. I could see a number of
things that would roll up to a
government oversight type
government elections or whatever
oversight in the interim. So,
so, you know, and you have a
government oversight or
elections, whatever in the
house. So what I'm saying is
take all of the House
committees, all the Senate
standing committees, all the
House standing committees, draw
them out into like some sort of
semblance of order, and where
would all of the interim
committees that we have today
float up to, and then that
that's where you start kind of
really
par ing everything down
I is it up to you all? I'm gonna
assign some homework to the 4 of
you, and, and
go back and, and think about
how that would look, and, and
how that's gonna play out for
your caucus, cause you're gonna
have to sell that to them too.
Yeah, I'm, I'm gonna put
together, and I already started
a sketch of kind of what these
swim lanes might look like, but
I'll, I'll do a little bit more
work to it. Just send me your
swimming sketch when you're
ready.
All right.
Uh, anybody else? We kind of
went through all the
recommendations.
Anybody else have anything else
Thank you. We all good?
Pat, Allan
all said, all done. I'm good.
Thank you, everyone
Was there anything else
