Good afternoon, everyone. Uh, we
are back in session. This is Pen
investments and pensions
Oversight Committee, and this is
a continuation or a little ahead
of schedule today.
and our one o'clock presentation
is now going to be at 12:30
It's the legislative
Finance Committee, LFC General
Fund reserves, and it will be
presented by Jennifer Fabian.
Did I say that right?
Um, he's our economist with LFC
and Jennifer Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
My name is Jennifer Fabian. I am
a senior economist over with the
LFC as the chairmanman just
stated.
And today I'm gonna do an
overview of our General Farm
reserves, but they are, how do
we define reserves, how money
flows in and out of these funds,
which funds are reserves, how
they're invested, um
and that type of overview, um,
so I'm gonna jump right into it.
We're um this presentation, I
think Christina's passing it out
now.
OK give me just a second for her
to
you guys to get your bearings
So let's start on page 2 and
just in general when we're
talking about reserves, we're
really talking about general
fund reserves. So we say
reserves, that's just shorthand
for the general fund reserves.
Um, I'll be saying that
throughout the presentation.
It's helpful to start with why
we even have reserves. So, New
Mexico has a constitutional
requirement to pass a balanced
budget, which means we can't
spend more than, um, we've taken
as revenue in any given fiscal
year. The problem is we passed a
budget 6 months before that
fiscal year even starts, so we
don't know exactly how much
revenue you have to spend. So
reserves are there primarily,
um, and 11 purpose, um.
to backfill in case we
appropriate more than the
revenues come in.
So revenues are a little slower
than we anticipate. There's
reserves there to cover the
appropriations that you all
have.
approved in the legislative
session.
The alternative is also true. So
if revenues come in a little
stronger than um we anticipate.
The reserves are there to catch
that surplus, catch that
overflow and put it in a fund
primarily the operating reserve,
which I'll go into a little bit
in a moment. But it's easy for
you all to appropriate in the
next fiscal year. So you're not
leaving money on the table, it's
not getting funneled away
anywhere. Um, it's there for you
to spend in the next um
legislative session, usually as
non-recurring spending
That typically was the
non-recurring pot when uh
revenues weren't quite so robust
as they are now. That was kind
of whatever came in over what
was forecasted was what you all
spent to non-recurring.
That's changed in recent years.
There's more money available for
non-recurring.
but that money is still
available
It's important to remember what
reserves are. They are money set
aside in case of a downturn
primarily.
and we're talking about a short
term downturn. We're not talking
oil and gas starts to decline,
or other revenues take long-term
down trends. This is like
weathering a short-term storm.
Um, reserves are not intended to
be invested for programmatic use
or spun off into um different
priorities of spending. They are
really just there for one
reason, and it is to backfill in
case of a downturn.
So we talked about early
childhood trust mind or funds
like that. Those are not
reserves because they have
another purpose. They're
supposed to go be invested,
spin-off investment revenue that
then gets spent for programmatic
uses.
Reserves are not that, reserves
are there. It's basically your
rainy day fund for your checking
account, and we'll go into that
in a little bit more detail.
And then,
lastly, bond agencies look at
reserves as an indicator of a
state's financial health, so
they want to make sure we're on
sure footing, especially a state
with volatile revenues like New
Mexico.
So they want to make sure
that if people are investing in
the New Mexico, that um
you know, their investments are
sound, if in case of a downturn,
they can still be covered by the
General Fund reserves. And of
course, that makes it a lot
easier for New Mexico to issue
debt, um, and to take out debt
as well.
So let's go into kind of each
fund. So on page 3, you'll see
our general fund financial
summary, which is our state
balance sheet. This is the 2nd
page. The 1st page goes into our
revenues and our appropriations.
And then the second page is the
reserve summary, which you have
on page 3. I know it's really
small, don't worry, I zoom in
when they talk about each fund,
so you don't need to be reading
all of this teeny tiny numbers.
Um, but generally here you can
see we have 6 reserve funds.
and those make up total
reserves. You can see on the
bottom of the sheet, this is the
number we're always talking
about, this percentage, um,
reserve. There's a dollar number
and a percentage number at the
bottom of the page. Um
reserves are typically referred
to in the percentage term, and
it kind of makes sense because
the reserves are intended to
backfill appropriations in case
of a revenue downturn.
It makes sense to kind of talk
about them as a percentage of
appropriations. So that
percentage means that this is
the total balance of all the
reserve accounts over the
current budget.
So we're saying 30%, that means
our reserves can cover 30% of
our appropriations or of the
budget, um, in case of a
And I'll go into it a bit more
about how that number or that
target is derived when we're
looking at risks to the state or
the chances of those revenue
downturns happening. um
I'll go into that a little bit
more about how that number is,
is typically discussed.
So moving on to page 4
I'm gonna talk about the
operating reserve.
It's really the first line of
defense in case of a revenue
downturn. It is most comparable
to a checking account.
So, uh, it's one of the two main
reserves that we think of as
true reserves, um, that in the
tax stabilization reserve, which
I'll get to you later.
Um, but it is, like I said, like
a checking account. When revenue
comes in high, it goes into this
account. When revenue comes in
low, this account can be spent
out of, um, with very little um
red tape, I guess. There's very
little restrictions on this
account. It only requires a
majority vote, um, to tap into
this account from you all
because it is kind of your
checking account in general.
This account is capped and how
much it can hold, it can hold 8%
of recurring spending.
If more money is coming into
this account because of excess
revenue.
um then that cap allows that
excess flows into the government
results and Opportunity Fund,
um, which is another state
reserve, um, for now.
So that is the offering reserve
your checking account.
So let's move it into on page 5.
Some of these what I call
ancillary reserve funds. These
are funds that have been
included in reserves for a
while, but don't really function
as a as reserves, and I'll talk
about that a bit
And that's the appropriation
contingency fund and the state
Support Fund.
So the ACF or the appropriation
contingency fund is primarily
used to hold revenues for
disaster declarations and
spending from the governor in
those emergencies. When the
governor makes an executive
order, she can spend up to
$750,000 per executive order
um out of this account
This is appropriated into, this
money is put into this pot by
the legislature every year.
Um, there's no other kind of
overflow or bucket mechanisms
that feed into the sun. It is
strictly appropriated.
We call it ancillary and not a
true reserve fund for a couple
of reasons. One is that it has
programmatic uses. Um, it is not
there primarily just a backfill
in case of a revenue downturn.
Uh, it's also quite, it usually
has a pretty low balance.
Uh, it's high right now, um,
higher than it has been. You
guys upped that appropriation
last year because of wildfire
risk and flooding, um, that
we've been seeing.
Um, but it doesn't contribute to
the bottom line of the reserves
so much.
The second is the state support
fund. This is also limited in
use. It's used for schools, not
a major contributor to reserves.
It has less than a million
dollars in it, um
and money also gets hereby
appropriation.
And there's more information on
that on page 6, just kind of
laid out for you all in text
Moving on to page 7.
I talk about two other reserves
that we typically don't think of
as true reserves, although they
are counted in reserves for now.
And this is the behavioral
Health Trust Fund and the
governments results and
Opportunity Fund. I apologize
for the typo that should be
government results, not
government recurring.
Um
and these were both added
temporarily to reserves in the
last couple of years. Rowe will
be dropped from reserves in FOI
27. You can see it's zeroed out
there on the page. Um, and then
the behavioral trust fund was
just added during the last
session. It's only counted as a
reserve in FY 26 and 27.
And on page 8, you can see kind
of the grow decision tree, um
the grow is created so that
one-time surpluses in revenue
could be used over several
years. Um, and as an opportunity
for unproven pilot projects to
be tested before being brought
into these budgets.
Um, the grower earns revenue
from excess, uh, balances in the
operating reserve, like I said
earlier, if operating reserve
hits 8%. Um, any surplus revenue
will then flow into the growth.
and each year 25% is available
for appropriation. So the grow
is intended to be spent down
over time. It is not supposed to
be a permanent fund that is here
in perpetuity to fund these
types of things forever and
ever. Um, it is an expendable
trust.
And then the Behavioral Health
Trust Fund was created to
provide permanent support for
behavioral health services. Um,
it earns a temporary share of
severance tax revenue that would
otherwise go to the early
childhood trust fund. So there
is a
5-year average of 7 sex revenue,
anything over that 5 average,
typically gets sent to the early
childhood trust fund, if tax
stabilization reserve is that
its capacity, which we'll talk
about in just a moment.
And for just 3 years, half of
that distribution from severance
taxes will go to behavioral
health in the other half to the
early childhood just when.
So we'll get some money over the
next 3 fiscal years.
Um, and then after that is
essentially subject to
appropriate, but it should
operate like a trust fund and
that it should not be sent down.
It should spin off revenue um
into these parties for a while.
I'll talk about this a little
bit later in the presentation.
Both of these funds are included
in reserves temporarily.
to boost reserve balances to
target levels to show bond
rating agencies that were on
shortcutting.
And lastly
um, arguably most importantly is
on page 9, the text
stabilization reserve, it
operates as the state's true Bay
Day Fund.
Uh, and it's most like an
emergency savings account.
It contains the majority of our
reserves, as you can see, it's
over $2 billion and
it's known as 3 or the era.
Larry Laaga finds, um
and again, it's
because it's a rainy day fun it
is much more restricted in use
than say they operating reserve.
So you turn to page 10
you can see that kind of
flowchart for this stabilization
reserve, the tax stabilization
reserve.
Um, funds are deposited into
this reserve from the oil and
gas emergency school tax. Um,
the severance tax, as we call
it.
um
as long as reserves are under
25%, they'll go into the TSR.
They'll fill up the taxation
reserve until reserves hit 25%,
at which time those funds will
then be directed to either the,
the behavioral transplant or the
early. And because our reserves
have been so high last couple of
years, most of that money has
not been hitting the TSR. It's
been going to these other funds
um that have programmatic uses.
And again, because this is our
rainy day fund, its uses are
restricted and it's um
appropriation is restricted.
Um, money in the tax
stabilization reserve can only
be appropriated if the, if
either the governor declares an
emergency and it reserves it,
uh, receives a majority vote in
both the House and the Senate.
or 2/3 vote in the House and the
Senate.
Um, the fund grows at the wrong
gas transfers and.
OK, so those are the 6 reserve
accounts.
Um, the two true reserves, I'll
say, are operating in the TSR.
And on page 11, we can kind of
see the history of our reserves.
On the left-hand side, you can
see our balances over time,
starting from around 2007.
And you can see between 2007 and
2018, 2019 or so, reserves were
quite low, and this was during
that time we call the last
decade. There was not a lot of
revenue growth coming into the,
into the state at all. Some of
you guys were around, um, trying
to make decisions through this
time, which I assume must have
been very difficult. Um
the legislature was liquidating
a lot of its holdings and
assets.
and spending most of the revenue
that was coming in really just
to keep the engines going and
keep the state running.
and keep programs, you know,
rolling at the pace they needed
to be. Um, but you can see
reserves have climbed really
quickly in the last 6 years or
so. Um, we had a revenue boom
from oil and gas, as well as
from a lot of our other
revenues, um, income taxes,
groce receipts, taxes have all
gone up, um, substantially in
the last six years. Um, general
economic prosperity has been
improving.
And so you can see our reserves
have started to go up.
which makes a lot of sense as
our budgets have also gone up in
this time. Our budgets have
grown about the same pace as our
reserves are a little bit faster
than our, our budgets. um
which makes sense as our budgets
grow a lot more of it is subject
um
to cuts if there are downturns.
A lot more of our revenues, um,
are subject to these downturns.
A lot more of our revenues are
oil and gas after the oil and
gas boom. So a lot more of our
revenues are subject to being
lost in a short amount of time.
We have very volatile revenue
here. I think it's the 5th or
6th most volatile state in the
country just behind a couple of
other oil and gas states. Um,
and a lot of
experts like Volker Lyons or
Moody's Analytics, a recommends
for an average state to have 3
months of revenue and reserves,
which were New Mexico would be
about 3.5 billion.
Um, we're poised to have about
2.5 billion in reserves, and we
know New Mexico is quite
volatile. About 2 times more
volatile than the average state.
And you can see here where I'm
getting that $2.5 billion dollar
figure.
If you look in the FY 26, that
last bar on the left, um, it was
blue, that blue bar at the top.
which is our other reserves,
that's primarily behavioral
health trust fund and grow,
which are gonna be coming out of
reserves in FY 28.
So we're really just gonna have
the tax stilization reserve and
the operating reserve with a
couple
million dollars from those two
other very small funds. The
reserves are actually gonna come
down um when those funds fall
out of reserves.
And you can see reserves as a
share of our of our spending has
also increased. Again, this is
assuring. It is, it's a positive
thing as our revenues have
become more dependent on
volatile sources.
OK, moving on to
page 12
I want to talk about the
consensus revenue estimating
groups stress testing.
So the, that's is from an ethnic
group is a group of economists
from the executives, uh, side
and the legislative side. And
we, I'm a part of this group and
we are the group that comes up
with the revenue forecast every
quarter.
And with every single revenue
forecast, we do stress tests. So
we use indicators from Moody's
and Bieber and S&P Global, um,
to try to figure out
how much revenue we would lose
in an oil downturn scenario, a
general low economic performing
scenario and a high performing
scenario.
And these tests that we run
really help inform the reserve
levels um that are targeted by
the LFC, by the governor, um,
and by you as you go through the
legislative session.
So you can see in this chart.
just for example, the low oil
price scenario that first blue
line, it's line 7.
um over $1.1 billion could be
lost from the general fund in
the current budget year, FFY 26.
1, about 1.6 and FY 27.
and 1.7 in FY 28. Um, and that's
just the general fund
difference. There would be other
losses to their early childhood
trust fund to the 7 sex permit
Fund and elsewhere. Um, so when
we run these scenarios, we can
start thinking about what would
be a comfortable reserve level
if this situation were to
happen.
Um
so we know that to get through
the current year by 206, the
budget year up by 27.
and uh the next year after 28,
we would need about 50% reserves
to get through a full oil crash
of this magnitude, which is
quite severe.
Um
and that would get us through
those, that three-year crash
without cutting any budgets. Um,
and without having to raise any
other taxes.
The 30% reserve, which has been
a target for the last couple of
years, but get us through about
half of this scenario, about a
year and a half of this kind of
3-year crash, which would give
you all plenty of time to
strategize, to come back to the
table, um, and start, um,
discussing other options to deal
with the situation like that.
Um, I'm not advocating for 50%
reserves here, um, but that is
what it would take to actually
weather the entire storm without
making any changes to the
budget.
um, to not recurring spending to
capital to anything.
Um.
and likely if that were to
happen, you would want to do
those types of things anyway.
Um, so 30% has been a pretty
solid reserve member for new.
And so this context really helps
inform um the rag. The stress
will also include things like a
recession in the in the other
kind of S3, the, the low
scenario, not the low oil
scenario. So we can kind of
start to get a feel for what
options, what pathes they could
take revenue-wise.
that could help inform the
reserve levels that we need.
OK, so moving forward on to page
13. I'm gonna start talking
about
how we invest through our funds
and how that might be different
from a lot of the other funds
you all look at on this
committee.
You're looking at Pura, ERP,
you're looking at SIC funds that
are long-term permit funds, um,
so I just wanna kind of talk
about the different kinds of
funds the state has, how the
reserves might be a little bit
different, um, and how
kind of the purpose of those
funds will inform the investment
strategies of those funds. So on
page 14,
see a matrix here uh reserves
permanent funds, endowments, and
trust funds.
All of these names get used
interchangeably, especially in
legislation. Um, but when we
talk about reserves, permanent
funds andows and trust funds.
They really mean a couple of
things. So, first is reserves,
and we just talked about
reserves. Reserves are not
intended to be invested for
programmatic use. They're not
intended to be returning a huge
sum to be used. They're really
meant to just be parked in case
of an emergency.
Then we have the permanent
funds. The permanent funds are
really, really great way to turn
now money into future money.
Um, the majority of permanent
funds get reinvested year after
year, a key to the permit funds
is that the spending, the
spinoff from those funds for
whatever use, whether it goes
back into the general funds,
like the severance tax permit
fund or something like the early
childhood Trust Fund that has
such a large corpus, um,
the key to them is that this,
whatever you're spinning off to
spend should not be greater than
the investment earnings.
So basically the corpus should
be maintained and reinvested,
otherwise you'll start spending
it down, spending it down, and
it hits insolvency or it's not
permanent, right? If you start
spending down
the corpus of those funds, they
are no longer permanent.
So our two main permit funds are
the land grant permanent fund
and the Severance Tax permanent
funds.
Uh, you can maybe consider the
early childhood trust fund at
this point, similar to a permit
fund, um, although it is not as
restricted in use as as other
two funds. There's other two
funds, especially the Lare
permit fund, which is
constitutional, um, the
severance sex parenton as well.
It's very hard to tap into those
that corpus if needed.
The early childhood trust fund
is basically the last fund that
you all could appropriate out of
if needed. If all the other
funds that we talked about
today.
have been depleted, you can
spend out of the early childhood
trust fund.
I think the simple majority
So it is there, um.
a little bit less protective
than a than a permanent fund,
but operates similar to a
permanent fund.
Now we're talking about
endowments and trust funds.
Those two are pretty
interchangeable.
and those two words and those
two titles, and this is
essentially programs or funds
that have been set up for an
intended purpose, like early
childhood trust fund was started
as a trust fund, um.
we have the Behavioral Health
Trust Fund. We have the Medicaid
Trust Fund. We have the Water
Trust Fund. We have, I have a
list here.
Rural libraries Endowment Fund,
Land of Enchantment Legacy Fund,
Conservation Permit Fund, opiate
settlement funds, higher
education trust fund.
uh, Medicaid and Behavioral
Health. So these are all funds
that
have a programmatic purpose.
They're intended to put some
seed money in, be invested by
the SIC to spin off some revenue
for those funds for a very, very
long time.
Some of those funds are designed
to be expendable. So you spend
more than they earn, and
eventually dwindles down. Um,
this is like the growth fund.
So the grow is intended to be
a couple of years, maybe 67
years of spending out of the
growth fund before it's
depleted. And then there are
things like the Behavioral
Health Trust Fund, which was
intended to not be depleted.
It's intended to spend only the
interest earned and continued to
grow, so that that fund can be
perpetual.
Um, so there are different
approaches. So when creating
these funds, it's important to
think about how long you want
the funding to last.
um, and make sure that those
distribution mechanisms and the
investment earnings are in
aligned with that strategy.
Um, there's no right or wrong
answer. There are reasons to do
them in, in both ways. It's just
really is the, the will of the
legislature and, and usually the
sponsors that are designing
these
to make sure I hit all of my
points on that. OK.
So let's move to page 15.
So, because of these, these
funds have different intents.
They're invested in different
ways. So you can see here are
two permanent funds, land grant
permanent funds and the seven
tax permanent funds here on the
left, typically earn their
target is 6% plus, um, I think
6751 and about 7% for the other
of annual returns.
Um.
typically, they're hitting
around there, um, doing a fairly
good job. And then you can see
this, the general fund
investment pool, which houses
some of our reserves. It also
houses some unspent capital
money and some unspent agency
budgets, um, will sit in that
fund.
Um, it doesn't earn as much. It
earns about half of the
permanent funds. This is because
it needs to be a little bit more
liquid. Um, it needs to be able
to be spent if needed.
If large capital projects get
deployed, that money needs to be
there. The check needs to be
able to be written.
Um, same thing in an agency
pulls out money for their
operating that had been sitting
there, or if a downturn happens
and we have to tap reserves.
It's sitting in the suburb or in
the general fund investment
pool.
So typically it follows very
closely with the federal funds
rate or the two-year treasury
note, you can see that, um, line
in black, especially the
liquidity pool, which is usually
overnights, so they're really
following the repo raids, the
overnight repo of um the federal
funds rate essentially.
And then the long term or the
core is usually invested a
little bit longer period. Um,
it's typically earns a little
bit more, although while
interest rates were
skyrocketing, it was earning a
little bit less.
Um.
but you can see here that when
permanent funds are invested for
a long period of time. Typically
those funds, 95% of the fund
gets reinvested year over year
over year. So they can be in
much longer term holdings and
generate a little bit, a lot
more returns than say something
that needed to be more liquid,
like the general fund.
Moving on to page 16, a little
bit closer look at the State
General Fund Investment pool.
You can see here balances have
grown.
quite a lot in the last several
years. A lot of this is oil and
gas. Um, money that is, it comes
in
kind of every single month
through tax revenue and um
federal leasing payments, and
then it only gets dispersed out
once or twice a year. So it
actually sits in the sponge for
quite a long time before it gets
um
finalized and this distributions
to the early childhood Trust
Fund or the Behavioral Health
Trust Fund or taxation reserve
are finalized. Um, so some of
those, some of that is
contributing to higher balances.
that is kind of on a treadmill
Um, and you can see on the left,
the liquidity in the core
balance is about 50/50, about
half the fund is invested in
these 2 to 3-year term holdings
and then half is invested in
liquidity hes overnight so it
can be spent quickly.
Um, and as these balances have
risen,
um, and interest rates also rose
for quite a, quite a while are
still quite high. You can see
the earnings on the right have
also grown.
Um, and on page 17, you can see
the state investment pool
earnings actually go back into
the general fund, and you can
see it while volatile. We had
one year of negative growth, um,
have been very high the last 3
or 4 years, over $300 million
over $400 million the last two
years.
Um, and then you can see our
general reserve gains and losses
as well on the left. Um, again,
growth will come out of that.
The tobacco settlement permanent
fund is on here for a while. It
was dropped from reserves last
year. Um, it's not a true
reserve fund either. It had been
included for a very long time.
Um, but was taken out because it
has programmatic use. Um, it is
used, um
for tobacco cessation programs,
um, and for
and it receives money from
settlements or from tobacco, um,
lawsuits.
So that was taken out as not a
true reserve, um, which was a
wise move.
Um.
but it's on that chart just for
reference because it was
included as reserved for a long
time.
And with that
I can stand for questions
Mhm.
Oh
I think I also saw a
representative Duncan. Um, so
Senator Gonzalez and then
Representative Duncan.
who
Thank you.
I'm sure I, I have a couple of
questions.
Uh, first, uh
census group
is, uh, is there any, are they
included with the state land
office on the number of leases
that will be
forwarding.
Yes, we received some
information, Senator, sorry,
Chairman and Senator, um
we try to include information
they have on which sales they
might have in the next couple of
years. We don't often know for
sure. Um, when we do the revenue
from the state land, it's kind
of a complicated thing because
that money goes into the land
grant permanent fund, and then
the land grant permanent fund
spins off money. So we're kind
of forecasting one thing,
putting it through a machine to
then spit out the revenue to the
general fund.
um, and to the just the
beneficiaries, which are
primarily public schools.
Um
we have heard that they are
upping some of their sales, um,
and selling at a higher cost. I
know we've had to um kind of
groundbreaking sales in the last
year. Um, so we do include that
in our forecast so that we can
know for sure.
Very well, thank you for that uh
from the information that I that
I
think sales are going to be
strong
Uh, the other one is, um,
Seville 26.
I will be starting this year.
or as uh some of that. Yeah,
Madam Chair, Senator, Citadel 26
went into effect at by 25.
So we are seeing it
We saw this last fiscal year, we
are seeing it now. So at Citadel
26 did for you, for you all that
don't have the numbers
memorized. Um, it essentially
took oil and gas money, capped
it at FY 24 levels and put any
of the excess into the permit
funds, um, or the early
childhood Trust fund. Um, and so
that is in effect now. You'll,
you can see that in our forecast
as well. um, that our general
phone numbers are staying fairly
flat from oil and gas. There are
some oil and gas revenues that
can still grow.
that aren't capped, um, but the
majority of them are cap. Um, so
we did see that come in last
year.
Sure
So can that be pointed out here
or
Not in this report, Senator and
Madam Chair, but in our
forecast, certainly, and I can
show you exactly where I find
it.
Duncan
Ma'am, um
Jennifer
would you
be able to tell me where
the money's gonna come from for
the free childcare? No, I am not
able to tell you that, um.
Madam Chair and Representative
Duncan.
um, it was announced and you all
know what you appropriated and.
Thank you Jennifer.
um
I hope the governor has a
Senator
sorry
Thank you. I really appreciate
the presentation and it's, it's
nice to know, especially after
that last decade, how well we're
doing
and um
you know, good decisions have
been
made to turn money today into
money tomorrow.
Um
The, the people think.
um it's one of those um
questions I asked the, the
treasurer last time because you
know she mentioned overnight
before and, and I didn't even
know it was.
And now, my understanding is you
buy, you sell securities, and
then no
you buy securities and then
somebody wants, somebody is
going to repurchase them in a
higher rate.
Can you explain? OK, and, and I
know we put all of our liquid
money in this thing
explain a little bit more um
I like to understand a little
bit better what we're talking
about.
Yeah, uh
Madam Chair and Senator C Lopez,
uh, it's kind of confusing and
I'll, I'll explain it as well as
I know it. It's, I'm not a
financialist or a financial
market expert, but essentially
you are buying and selling
overnight. You are holding
something for only a couple of
hours. And so it might have a
very small return on it in that
small overnight, but it's
essentially a way to keep
holdings that should be invested
and maybe statutorily have to be
invested.
invested, but just turning over
quickly so that it maintains
generally liquid.
Um, it is a way to invest liquid
holdings without them literally
just sitting and not accruing
any kind of interest.
But what what
what did they get? This is what
I don't understand. I always
understand this is why I have
that problem with the coin, the
Bitcoin.
You know I just always like to
understand.
what's going on with money
and capital and, you know, what,
and so what does somebody get
out of
of
uh selling to us
only to to repurchase it a few
hours later.
What's the benefit there? I
understand our benefit we get
interest. Could we lose money on
the deal?
Well, we could, we could
technically, Madam Chair, um,
interest rates have been
and because the liquidity is
typically treated at the
overnight repo, which is very
close to the federal funds rate.
So it's usually around 2% and
then it went up quite high and
then back down. Um, that they're
looking to, to kind of level out
around 3%. Um, but yeah, if it
doesn't go our way, we could
lose a small amount of money,
but we typically recoup it. Um,
you don't, I, I don't see a lot
of losses in the liquidity. I
track it monthly, um, very, very
rarely, if ever, um.
I don't know the answer to that.
I am not a financial markets
expert. Um, I can look into it a
little bit for you and try to
get back with you about the
the real mechanisms behind repo
and overnights, um, it is not
something I am super well versed
on. I,
I'd be interested because I,
when she
when uh the the treasure last
time mentioned it. I just said,
what is that? And then she
explained it.
And then I started thinking, why
would anybody want to do that?
What, what's the benefit of
selling to us and then
repurchasing it a slightly
higher rate.
But
who wins? I mean, it sounds like
we win, but then why would you
do that?
So I don't know, or are they
getting a higher rate than
they're selling it to. I don't
know.
OK, well, I appreciate that. So
then, um, so that, that's what
we do with the, the funds that
we want
to, to keep as liquid as
possible.
And um I'd loved your
explanation. I thought this was
really helpful, your explanation
of the various types. What is
it?
I've read it so much that I lost
it. Oh, here it is on page 14,
the reserves permanent fund
endowments, trust funds, because
that can get a little confusing.
Um.
and some of these are protected
by the Constitution, right?
So that makes them a
so what
is something of permanent fund?
Is it the constitutional
profession uh provision uh
protection for the statutory
protection or how does that
work? Because it really is
anything permanent.
Sure it's not just to make sure
that the Dunham chairs a center
to Lopez. That's a great
question. So the Lare permit
fund is our only constitutional
permanent fund. Um, it was
created back when the state was
founded. Uh, it has oil and gas
and energy, um.
dollars going in and then it has
very specific distributions, um,
our other main permanent fund is
the severance tax permanent
Fund, and that's created
entirely by statute. The reason
we call it a permanent fund is
because the way the
distributions work, we only spin
off 5%. It typically earns more
than 5%. So the corpus is
generally permanent. We're not
touching what's been invested in
the funds. The corporate, so we
never dig into the corpus.
Occasionally we might, if it
doesn't earn 5%.
but typically it earns more than
5%, and the intent of it is to
be a long-standing permanent
source of revenue. In this case,
to the general fund, the summer
tax permit fund spins into the
general fund. Um, and it's been
a very sound investment thus
far. It's gonna be overtaking
all of our investment revenue,
so that the general fund
investment pool and um the
spinoff from the Grant Permanent
Fund are going to be overtaking
income taxes as the second
highest source of revenue in
just the next couple of years.
That's good. And I think that
that's great, but I get confused
because I thought that sort of
trust fund does.
You know, when you have a, when
you create a trust, that's the
whole point is to have the
corpus earn money for you. So
how do we know something that
the state does is a permanent
fund versus a trust fund.
I think you're right, Madam
Chair and Senator, that it is
the language and the terms we
use, especially when we're
naming funds, is very fluid. Um
in my mind, a permanent fund is
something that should last
forever. Some trust funds are
also intended to be that way.
That's why I said early
childhood trust fun to me is a
little bit more similar to a
permit fund at this point.
Um, but for example, the grow,
which is intended to be spent
down, even though it is earning
interest and it has a large
corpus. Um, it will be sent down
eventually. Um
isn't really a permanent fund,
um.
it's really there's fine lines.
I trust, so a trust fund would
be
something that has a corpus that
is meant to achieve a certain
goal, and when the goal is
achieved,
it couldn't,
maybe.
I don't know.
See, I just, I just, I get
confused with the various terms.
Um, and, and, you know, we
started the behavioral health
fund, yeah
And my understanding was that
was to eventually get become a
billion dollars and eventually
become a fund that would fund
behavioral health into the
future. So again, turning
today's money into future money
great thing, um, but then I'm
like, well why isn't that a
permanent plan? You know, it's,
it's confusing. Yeah, and I
think umrue Women in Center, I
think another key distinction is
that they do have intended uses.
They are for behavioral health
or for Medicaid or for early
childhood. So the trust fund is
for a specific intended use,
whether or not it getsent down
or not is just up to the design
of the trust fund. Um, it could
be permanent in nature where it
doesn't ever deplete, or it
could be spent down.
But permanent funds typically
spin off into more generalized
uses, like the general fund, or
the beneficiaries of the Lar
permanent Fund. mostly to
schools, um, but it's not like a
we have this priority as a
legislature at this time. So we
want to invest in some funds
that are going to ensure funding
for that issue for a very, very
long time. It's kind of more. I,
I appreciate that, um, you know,
it is, I, I appreciate coming to
these sessions because I learned
more detail about these words
that are thrown around when
we're talking about the budget
and trying to understand what
we're, what we're trying to do.
Um, like I said, I like the
idea.
of turning today's money because
we can't even spend up into
future money, but then I also
think it's important that we
have a good balance of meeting
the needs of today. And I also
think we need some flexibility.
um, like in my understanding a
permanent fund, that's just
untouchable.
Um, a trust fund perhaps is
touchable, but then I went, I
also understand is you have to
change the constitution
for the, the land grant
permanent fund and everything
else is statutory, statutorily
created, so they're not really
permanent because
a future legislature could
decide to have a different pri.
I, I really appreciate the
presentation. It's very helpful
and, and good news. Um,
definitely.
Thank you, manager
Thank you. um
so
I had a couple of questions. Um,
on the liquidity issue.
does this
liquidity
No, madam Chair, there's no cap
or statutory requirement. The
treasurer can choose that
balance based on what they think
the cash needs will be. So when
we started spending, putting a
lot more money into the
severance, I mean into the
journal Fund investment pool for
capital spending when our
capital spending started coming
out of the general fund instead
of out of bonding, um, they
upped that liquidity knowing
there was going to be a lot more
cash out the door, um, because
of increased spending, um,
historically, I think they, they
like to have a 60/40, um, 60%
core and 40% liquidity as our
spending ramped up, they
switched that for a little
while, where it was 60%
liquidity, 40% core, um, and
right now it's been about 50/50
for for a while.
I'm just
thinking
I used to sit on a credit union
board for like 13 years, and I
know that when we were over
liquefied, we would allocate
some of that money into
maybe some other investment, uh,
possibilities, so the state does
not do that.
The state yes and no, Madam
Chair. The, the treasurer can
choose to put more into the
core, um, investments, which are
longer term and will earn a
little bit more so they can,
they can, um, they, they create
that balance based on what they
think they need to have cash on
hand to be able to write checks.
Another thing that comes out of
the.
the general fund investment pool
are those large oil and gas
transfers to the severance tax
permanent fund, the TFR to the
Early Childhood Trust Fund, so
they need to have billions on
hand when those um transfers.
you know, when that button is
pushed at DFA and SIC that says
send the money, they basically
have to have it on hand, and
they know generally when those
are happening, they happen in
January and September of every
year, um, but things like that,
they need to kind of be ready
for, um, so they generally have
a higher liquidity portfolio,
then maybe a credit union would.
So dare I ask this next
question, um, we're going into a
special session, and we're
looking at um making up some
funding in
certain medical areas.
Um, and snap also.
um, where is, where would that
money be coming from?
So, Madam Chair, I think there
will be some discussion about
this with the LFC and with DFA,
um.
trying to figure out
the pots of money that might be
available. The one that I know
for sure is the operating
reserve. Revenues ri FY 25 did
come in strong, um, so there is
some pot of money there.
There'll be a final reckoning
with our last forecast with DFA
kind of trying to track down
every dollar that has been
spent, um, and that number
should be coming out soon,
shortly.
I don't have it. It has not been
published, I don't think it's
been finalized yet with DFA but
it will be coming soon.
You said
the operating budget, operating
reserve should have some money
in it from excess revenue, um,
from FY 25% you know? Operating
reserve, uh, I'm not sure
exactly how much will be in it.
There was um some spending also
coming out of reserves, um, so
they have to kind of do a final
rack up once, cause now that 25
is finally closed, um, so there
should be a final number.
I'm not, I don't know what's why
I said dare I ask the question,
um, so.
with regard to tourism, um,
we don't have any kind of a
trust fund for tourism or
anything related to that, right?
Uh, Madam Chair, nothing
directly for tourism. There is
the conservation Legacy Fund,
which is to preserve outdoor,
um, space, water, um,
investments like that that could
be used for tourism
opportunities. So where does
that fit in and what, what
bucket does that fit into?
So the conservation legacy
funds, the tourism money that
comes into our state, where does
that?
Where does, where does that
fall?
Um, well, tourism use means
spending, Madam Chair, of, of
tourists that come in, lodging,
lodgers, tax, etc. yeah, so
generally tourism money they're
spending on food out at
restaurants and um hotels, which
are subject to the grocery seats
tax that's general fund. Yeah,
grocery seats is entirely
general fund. The lodger's tax,
however, is a local tax. So any
lodger's tax you see is levied
by the municipality or the
county, um, and they can stack
if you're in this
municipality, not have a
lodger's test. The state does
not does do other states have
lodgers tax? I thought so.
OK, that's, that's something I'm
very interested in finding out
more about, because it seems to
me like.
with all the tourism that comes
into New Mexico, um.
you know, we should be taking,
even if it's 1% or something,
and putting that into some kind
of a fund for.
to encourage tourism in the
state, and I would be interested
in if you could get me that
information, other states that
do that and like what
percentages maybe no.
Do we have any other questions?
Um, Senator
Figueroa, thank you, Madam Cha
to say your name, by the way.
Appreciate that
Um, I'm
I wanna ask about page 10, I
think.
to start with
just to make sure I understand
the chart at the left hand side
of the page, that blow chart,
um, last box, didn't we change
that to the behavioral Health
Trust Fund and Medicaid fund
now, so the severance tax per or
the.
the severance tax
that the it's called the oil and
gas emergency school tax that
would flow into the TSR, um, it
gets split now between the early
childhood trustsment and the
behavioral child trust fund. So
the flow chart wasn't updated.
It's only 3 years that it's
going to Behavioral Health Trust
Fund, and it's split 50/50. So
there is always going to be
money going to early childhood,
and then half will go to
behavioral health. OK. I thought
it was 55, 45, half 45 to
Medicaid and 55 to behavioral
health. So the Medicaid Trust
fund gets money from excess
Federal mineral leasing. Oh,
that's right, that's the
mineral, OK.
Thank you. So have, if this flow
chart were updated, the last box
would save 50% early childhood,
50% of Medicaid. That's right.
OK.
Thank you to behavioral health,
sorry.
Medicaid is half that comes from
FML, which has no flow through
the TSR.
OK, yeah. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair, um, I'm gonna
reiterate Senator Serio Lopez's
comments about terminology. We
have got to straighten that out,
um, but if I understood what you
explained to her.
Expendable or not?
is written into the statute, so
there's no way you can tell by
the title Trust fund or blank
fund, whether it's an expendable
or intended to be permanent.
That is correct, Madam Chair and
Senator. Yeah, that's enormously
confusing, and I think Madam
Chair, we as a state have the
power to, you know, make in
inject some consistency here,
um, and how we term these
things.
Last question is page 16.
um, like we do with, with many
other revenue sources if there's
an excess over the
5% and 5 year rolling average,
it goes to a certain thing that
is like Madam Chair putting in
an automatic sunset or a safety
safety valve, if you will.
Why don't we have something like
that to direct this revenue
stream
It's a relatively new revenue
stream. It's never been this
big, right? So now we have this
fairly big flow of money, and we
have not
allocated it some direction or
another, but Madam Chair, I
think my question is, is there
any reason we could not or
should not.
designate this for a certain
period of time, perhaps to be a
revenue stream that feeds the
behavioral Health Trust Fund.
Over the five year rolling
average, for example.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator,
there's no reason you could not.
Um, the one thing that might
hold you back is just um tying
the hands of.
yourself and future
legislatures, um, when you
earmark revenue and it no longer
goes into the general fund, it
just becomes less flexible, um,
and so if there is some, if
parties change or if there's
something that needs, then
you're kind of clawing back your
marks and it just becomes a
little bit messier, um, but it
is your prerogative as a
legislature. Madam Chair and
Jennifer, I think that's why you
said the five year rolling
average.
so it doesn't direct all of the
funds.
um
and that's also why you'd put a
sunset on it to address that
exact issue, but I think for a
little while we're gonna have
this excess flow of funds, then
we should think seriously about
what we want to do with them.
Thanks, Madam Chair
Well, Jennifer, thank you for
your presentation and uh I'm
sure we'll have more questions,
um, as we get closer, um, but I
guess, um, if you just give us
your phone number and your email
so that in case of any of the
representatives or senators do
that. I'm probably not, not on
the, I'm not gonna say it on the
zoom you can't, OK, never know.
I could, but it's online, it's
available and Christina and Paul
will send it as all of us.
Thank you, I do have some more
questions for you and open door.
I I'm just over in the annex.
All right, thanks.
Marquita, thank you for joining
us early, uh, so we have with us
today, um, a little early.
and thank you for bearing with
us. We were moving pretty fast
pace today, uh, New Mexico
Finance Authority venture
capital program overview and
update, and this is Marquita
Russell, the chief executive
Officer of NMFAA. Kita, thank
you. Take a drink of water and,
and we're looking forward to
your presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. It's a
pleasure to be with you here on
a beautiful Friday afternoon. I
have provided two documents. One
is our annual report. Um, we are
required under statute to
provide a report on July 1st of
the prior calendar year's
activities, and so you've got
this report in front of you,
summaries of it appear, however,
in the PowerPoint that I planned
to go through. So there's,
there's a little bit of
additional detail and color. um.
and then, uh, of the rest of it
should be in here. So I'll be
speaking off of the PowerPoint,
uh, just to give you, that's the
gold one, right? That's the gold
one, yes.
All right. So for those of you
that aren't aware, in 2022, the
legislature you all passed a
bill that um created within the
Finance Authority of venture
capital Program. It was a
surprise to us, um, and we were
delighted to take on the
challenge, and we think the
reason that the legislature or
the sponsors approached us as
because we were in a position to
do something different than the
state Investment council. State
Investment council, who've got
an incredible shop, have a very
clear mandate to
for yield uh production. Their
job is to make money for the
state of New Mexico and for its
citizens and legislature. So,
but that's not our mission. Our
mission is to provide gap
financing to stimulate economic
development and to help um
communities throughout the
state. So the sponsors came to
us right as they introduced the
bill and put into us a venture
capital program. It was very
standard language and we luckily
had people on staff, several of
them, that had a lot of
experience in social impact
investing as well as just fund
management generally speaking.
So we took on the challenge in
the next year we brought you
some uh some suggested changes
because again, the goal here was
to do something different, but
the language and the statute was
very, very much like all the
other programs in the state, so
we didn't have the flexibility
in the statute to carry out the
mandate that we believed we were
given. So in 2023 you all passed
some amendments to that, that it
made it explicit that we could
do
differential fund investments
that our job was for economic
development in particular. So we
set out on a course to create a
diff a very different program,
different in the sense of the
fund managers that we're going
to be made up in our portfolio,
um, industries and sectors that
would be represented that aren't
uh maybe incredibly high growth
sectors, which is what typical
venture capital programs are
looking for and fund managers
are looking for, um, and to
bring new investment in dollars
into the state. So we thought we
were pretty well positioned to
do that and I'm, I'm happy to
report on some of the things
that we've done. Um, but again,
starting on page two, our job,
we can do two things under the
venture capital statute, we can
make investments directly into
New Mexico businesses, um, and
we can make investments into uh
venture private equity funds. So
we can do them directly or we
can make them through fund
managers. Um, if we make them to
directly to businesses,
investments
in one business cannot exceed
10%, and in one industry cannot
exceed 30%. That's a statutory
constraint. Um, and then you
have provided some, some nice
funding for this in 22 when the
bill was passed, there was an
immediate $35 million
investment uh and then an
additional 15 the following
year. So $50 million so far in
state funding. We've paired that
with some federal dollars that
we um are administrating in
um, or administering in
partnership with the Economic
Development department, one of
the three programs we're
operating with what they call
the federal state small business
credit initiative is a venture
capital program. Uh, so far
we've put about $15 million into
it. So that's attractive
funding, but it's really federal
money is very difficult. They've
got very rigid requirements, uh,
that you have to meet.
And then lastly, uh, we were, we
entered into a um MOU with the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department, a $10
million appropriation that was
made over to us so that we could
help capitalize and start up a
green bank. They uh Enert had
received some money from the
legislature to do that. They
didn't really have the powers to
do that, so we've made what's
called an equity equivalent
investment into the Green Bank.
So we help, we put some
guardrails on it and help make
sure that the invest
ment that the legislature put
aside was ultimately invested in
the uh business that it was
intended for.
before you go on.
could you define Green Bank,
please? Madam Chair, Green Bank
is, uh, the Green Bank that we
invested in is the climate
Investment Center. They make
loans to um businesses, uh, they
can do them to residences, to
commercial power, but it's for
uh renewable energy typically.
So it's for uh
green initiatives, I think
they'll call it. All right, on
page 3,
wanted to just let you know how
we set up the program. So after
the statute was changed, we were
able to um uh produce a really
best practices investment
policy.
that we use to guide the
operations of the program. It
outlines the qualifications for
fund managers. It outlines the
concentrations in uh certain
kinds of fund investors. Um, it
provides that there are uh
targets that will be met with
the dollars that we're
ultimately investing and gives
direction to the staff
investment committee that makes
the recommendation to the board
on how to make those
investments.
Um, so, pursuant to the
investment policy, uh, we are
investing in projects that
advance at least 2 of the
following economic development
objectives, uh, to create and
invest in new early stage and
expanding businesses.
to recreate or retain quality
jobs for New Mexicans, to
increase investment in diverse
sectors of the state's economy,
increase
access to capital for businesses
owned by entrepreneurs from or
benefiting under served
communities and to attract
additional private sector
investment into early stage and
emerging businesses. So those
are our stated policies and we,
we grade each of the
transactions that we look at
each of the proposals against
that criteria.
Uh, we have vetted many projects
with our partner Mikita Global
Investments. Um, more than 50
proposals have been vetted to
date, and we have made
investments in about 8 of them
or 9.
Um, and they are
we are looking to um anchor
investments, so you'll see that
we've um we've been the anchor
investment on a new flexible
debt program for New Mexico
businesses. Uh, we have funded
emerging fund managers. Uh,
we've partnered with National,
um, firms that are highly
aligned with New Mexico's
economy and sectors of need, um,
so they, if they, for instance,
agriculture, that's not, um, uh,
uh, they're not equity, uh,
private venture funds in New
Mexico
that specialize in agriculture,
but agriculture's incredibly
important to the New Mexico
economy, so we've looked for
things that were important to
New Mexico and if we can't find
a local manager that has that
expertise and that mission, then
we go out and we try to find
someone that can fulfill that
mission within the state. Uh, we
believe we're bringing new
capital and new experience that
way to the state. Um, and our
portfolio is ultimately a mix of
uh market rate and below market
rate or differential rate
investments.
On page 4, I've highlighted the
um fund manager qualifications.
Uh, this is, uh, it's a rigorous
list, um, not everyone in New
Mexico that is in this business
is able to meet all of the terms
of our fund manager
qualifications, um, but
from the top, adequate
investment experience and team
capacity were particularly
looking at um their back office,
uh,
the back office, uh, technical
expertise, um, we're looking for
key man risk and succession
planning, a lot of small fund
managers here. We want to make
sure that this investment, you
know, they're there for honestly
10 to 15 years. We want to make
sure we've got someone there
that is uh gonna stay there for
the length of our investment,
um that has strong conflict of
interest policies and that have
high alignment of their funds
under management.
So
our policy allows us to do about
5 to 10 funds, um, we are, our
commitments thus far have ranged
from 2 million to $10 million
and can't exceed 20% of the
balance of the fund at the time
of the approval. Um,
and I think, oh, I mentioned the
portfolio concentrations. So I
think that's really what I would
just highlight there are uh our
documentation is standard
documentation that's uh best
practices in the industry and if
in fact we're using the federal
funds, there are additional
qualifications, rigorous
qualifications that the uh fund
managers have to comply with.
Um,
so on page 5, these are the
approved commitments to date.
And again, you'll see them in
your uh packet. Um, tramway
Venture Partners, that's a local
fund, uh, state Investment
council has done some of those
investments in that, that fund
as well. It's one of the few
that looks more traditional, but
it is an emerging fund manager.
uh Ravis Indigenous Impact Fund.
It's a, it's a national,
actually, it's an international
uh venture fund that uh invests
in native-owned companies, um,
dangerous Ventures, which invest
in early stage New Mexico
companies, uh, building
sustainability, advanced New
Mexico, this is the fund that we
anchored, um, we actually went
and looked for a manager that
would be able to do gap filling,
flexible debt, so they are
looking really at
sort of microloan-esque projects
that need money to complete a
specific kind of um activity.
They've got a contract, they
need the funding for it. They
don't have collateral. That's
not something you can take to a
CDFI or a bank, but it is
something that you could take to
advance New Mexico, and they
would look at that for you.
Um, Tiberton Ag is an
interesting fund. It's a
national fund. They invest in
food and agriculture production
sectors. Um, each of their
funds, this is fund number 2,
but each of their funds has a
footprint that they're looking
at. Um, we are very much in the
fund, in the footprint of their
second fund, and they are
looking to help those businesses
that where there is not a
legacy, um, like
the family farm and there's no
one there to take it over. The
farm means a lot to the
community. There are people
working there. There's a product
coming out of there and there's,
this allows for some succession.
Um, Vamos Venture fund, which is
uh, invests in uh Hispanic-owned
business owners and they do
scalable tech-driven technology,
rethink impact, which is a later
stage fund uh for women-led
businesses and uh perennial
Fund, which is a flexible debt
program for farmers that are
looking to convert their crops
from traditional to organic uh
farming. It takes a while to
make that jump
from one to the other to you the
several year uh switchover and
so that's what this does. It's a
debt program, so you see we have
some flexible debt uh along with
some non-traditional equity
programs. You'll see on that, on
the right side of page 5, where
we believe they fit um at the
time in terms of our, uh, the
five objectives that we set out.
So those, I won't go through
those, but you can see that
there's at least several that
have very strong um overlaps
raven indi
gen ous partners. I'll just pull
out as a very strong alignment
in terms of increasing
investment in diverse sectors
and addition attracting
additional private sector
investment. We $7 million piece
of a $100 million fund. Um
investing in underserved
communities. We noted a strong
and then medium um uh impact in
investing in new and expanding
New Mexico businesses and
creating and retaining quality
local jobs.
So this is what we um are
monitoring to date.
I'm on page 6, I'll just give
you some sense of how much money
we've put out to date. So
there's the commitment in the
middle, total committed funds,
the amount that we um that was
called in uh in 24, so the
amount of that commitment that
was sent over to the investor,
um, and then the uh aggregate
amount that was invested as of
the end of 24, which is the date
of this uh particular policy,
and you'll note that
in every case except the top one
that the, the right-hand column
and the column just to the left
of that are the same. And the
reason is that we closed tramway
in 2023, and there was a call in
2023. So the rest of them look
the same because they all
happened in 2024.
Um, moving on, just looking
forward to how much capital we
have left. Um, you'll note that
we have about
uh total investments right now
of total 8 investments and we
actually made one
following the date of the July
1st, uh, date. Um, so we have
total funds invested at $50.5.
We have one New Mexico business
that's the Climate Investment
Center that, that direct
appropriation that you all made
to Emner that we then took over
investment of. Um, we have funds
set aside for the administration
of this program over that 10 to
15 year.
So we have about $75 million of
funding and about 9.5 was
remaining at the time uh that
the report was generated. Um,
and I would note that we had
made one additional investment,
and that was to um a group
called Roadrunner. Um, and so
that is an additional investment
that we've made, but we still
have a few dollars, um, our
investment to Roadrunner, uh,
was
sorry, I don't have it, $8
million. So we have about $2
million that we can invest in
another company. Um, the New
Mexico companies that and
certainly those that receive
SSBCI funding, state matches a
real difficult part. Um, we have
to have at least a 1 to 1 match
with the SSBCI money. We don't
have to have that with our um uh
with our state dollars, um, but
we'll note, we always have it if
it's an out of state investor.
So if it's an Adam state
investor looking to invest in
New Mexico companies with strong
mission alignment in New Mexico.
We require the 1 to 1 match.
It's only those emerging, uh,
fund managers in New Mexico
where we might uh
stray away from or uh verge away
from that uh 1 to 1 match.
So Madam Chair, I think with
that, um, I am ready to stand
for any questions.
All right, um, does it, do any
of the committee members have
questions?
Representative Duncan
thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Margarita, thank you for that.
Um, can you tell me what the
loss is uh percentage wise on
our loans. So, Madam Chair, thus
far, um, I don't have any, you
mean on the loans that we, the
debt funds that we anchored, um,
I don't have that information. I
don't, I think it's, there's
still relatively new. I don't
know that they would have any
trend information to give you,
but I don't have that
information, sir. OK. And then I
assume you, you keep track of
that
that was my question
Madam Chair, yes, we have a
rigorous compliance department
that looks into those things.
And thank you, Marquita. Um, so,
Madam Chair, on that, as you
look toward, you know, 2345
years out, what do you project
your losses are gonna be?
Madam Chair,
we believe in, certainly in the
flexible debt program, you know,
there is some risk there, um
there's more risk than a
traditional loan. Uh, but they
are, these are
we've partnered with entities
that really understand the
markets that they're going into.
So particularly on the A one,
where their only expertise is A
and the only thing they're
making loans for are ag
production. We feel pretty
confident that that is going to
be a low-risk portfolio from
that perspective because they're
taking existing farmers and
existing practices and
converting them over to organic,
where there is a proven market
for the, you know, the cost of
the product. So that one we feel
to be a market rate investment
and um uh
likely not to sustain a lot of
loss. The other one is an
emerging, uh, it's an, it's for
emerging businesses and we
partner with another
mission-based lender in each of
the loans we make. We won't do
100% of the loan. We'll only do
50%. So we still think again, we
have partners that are going to
be using their own, whether it's
a CDFI, um, it's likely to be a
CDFI honestly. Uh, they have
their own lending requirements
and their own expertise in terms
of their businesses, so.
we think the combination of our
the expertise in the fund
manager that we chose and the
partner in each of those loans
will minimize the risk as well.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
I, and I certainly hope that
that you know our partners are,
are smart enough to keep us out
of trouble and and keep our
losses down, uh, then one last
comment, I appreciate the oil
and gas industry funding a green
bank.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. I really
appreciate the people of New
Mexico's resources, lending the
oil and gas industry, who can
then fund the Green Bay. Um,
hey, it's true the resources
belong to the people of this
state, and um, so the state
appropriation, that's exactly
where I was going to go with
this. It says that it so it
went, I was trying to remember.
It went to Energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources, and you took
it over, um, and, and now, can
you tell us a little bit
more detail, um, you said it
goes for renewable energy. Is
this like
is this like small low, really,
really small loans like to put
in the solar.
in a home, or is this like for
businesses to
to uh uh redo their renewable
energy programs, or is this for
a business launching renewable
energy.
Yeah, could you just tell me a
little bit more about the, the
Green Bank. Certainly, uh, Madam
Chair, and I, I can send you
some information from the um
Investment Climate Center, um,
or climate Investment Center,
CIC, um, but they have the broad
capacity under their program,
and they're, they're a startup
CDFI that's looking to make
these investments. So they are
emerging, I believe they're
starting with larger scale
projects and not starting at the
more local level that takes a
lot more resources to get done,
so I believe they're starting
with more either commercial, um,
uh
sized projects or um you know,
for, for businesses, but I, I
honestly couldn't tell you that
that's what we are looking at
the, the metrics that we're
looking at or how much money
they've been um they've raised
as a match because we are
requiring a match in here, um,
whether they've met other
identified milestones for a
newly created CDFI. We thought
it important that we put some
milestones in place. So we're
monitoring the growth of the
organization, um, primarily in
this investment, again, we didn
' t select the company, the
investment center was um one of
the only ones that came forward
that fit the criteria that Mnerd
had um had received in its app
in the appropriation, and the
direction Emner was given.
And CDFI is Community
Development, financial
institutions, yeah, yeah, I
remember I, I, so in order to,
yeah, um
and of course we, we don't have
any idea about what the return
is on that is the last question
demonstrated.
No, Madam Chair, and again, you
could go to their, they, they
will have information for that
and I can get that and send it
on to Paul to give to you, but
I, we don't track right now that
investment level. Um, yeah, I'm
interested in such a tiny little
amount, $10 million and the
transformation we need is so
huge, um, but I'm interested to
see how it's going.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
my question.
Um
Marquita, I just want to thank
you for accommodating us and
coming a little bit earlier. Um,
so on page 7. I just wanted to
go over this one more time
because I wanted to understand
this, so, um,
there was a committed 60.5
million.
80% of the 75 million is
currently available funding,
however, after expenses,
there is 9.5 million, but then
you said something else later
on, and I thought I heard 2.5 or
something like that. Is that
what you said?
Madam Chair, yes, following the
end of the the calendar year
report, the fiscal year end, uh,
we had $9.5 million. We have
subsequently made a commitment
or an investment in Roadrunner
Um, and I've seen it a lot.
not, not just, you know, in
Albuquerque, but I mean, I've
seen it all over the state,
especially when it comes to new
technology, um, and I'm just,
and I'm thinking and in
agriculture, of course, is
really highly important to New
Mexico. Um, are we?
up here needing to be thinking
about adding additional funds to
this? I mean, is that something
that you're thinking?
Madam Cherry, I, I think yes. I
mean, if, if you are interested
in furthering the mission of
this program, the reason you
brought it to us was to do this
differential rate investment to
um invest in transactions or in
kinds of funds that the State
Investment council is not able
to participate in because of
their, you know, dedication to
yield generation. Um, I think it
is time we, the 22, it took us a
while to get our program
together. This is a complex
program. The Finance Authority
is a lender
and, and overseas grants. So to
do investment, we wanted to make
sure we did it in a sustainable
way that it wasn't just we had
one good person on staff, and if
that person left our program
fell apart. So we really, we
took our time to create um a
program that we think is best
practices. It's sustainable in
terms of its staffing and the,
you know, to, to personnel
leave, we're still gonna be able
to operate this program, um, and
we've invested the funds you've
given us to date. So we think
we're now poised to get
additional
investment there is this fund
needs to become sustainable in
order to help additional
companies. I mean, we talk about
New Mexico being too much
government, too much government,
but this is really an
opportunity
for us to start
you know, economically moving
away from government.
and creating new ventures and
new new capital in New Mexico,
and I think to to representative
Duncan's point and his question
is um how many of these have
failed and I didn't hear you
say, you know, 80% or
30%, you, you said it's really
new and we're not at that point
yet to see that. So is, did I
understand that correctly? Ma
sure, that's correct. So with
the exception of that Roadrunner
fund that I just mentioned and
tramway, all of these other
commitments and, and closings
happened in calendar year 2024.
So these are very new fund
investments, um, and it takes a
while for us to really start to
see track record. OK. And then
my last um
my last question was on page 3,
you have a category in here
under your objectives, um.
for underserved communities,
could you define that, please?
So, Madam Chair, um, in this
instance, we include um
geographic areas, certainly
rural communities are very much
underserved when it comes to
capital, um, and then also, uh,
demographic or businesses and
business owners, um, that have
had, uh, have not had good
access to capital over time. So
it's both a demographic and a
geographic definition.
And those could be areas that
are um below the poverty level
and such. Madam Chariot does. It
includes the demographic of the
entrepreneur as well as the
community it's located in, and
again, it could be just simply
being in a rural area, that
would certainly be an
underserved community in New
Mexico. So for startup
businesses possible startup
businesses as well.
OK
All right. Well, that answers my
questions. Anyone else have any
other uh senator Figueroa. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thanks,
Marquita, I am looking at page.
6,
and
understanding that these are
new, um, are there any
guidelines about the timeline
which you expect.
this money to be allocated,
disbursed, sent out because it's
a little concerning that um the
2023 tramway has only got out,
gotten out at half a million
dollars. There's just 3 million
sitting there for a fairly long
period of time, and these
others, we we're halfway through
2025 now,
are you
looking at them and thinking
this is a reasonable pace for
which this money could should be
disbursed, or is it really gonna
take this long, 10% out in one
year is seems really slow to me,
but this is not my area. So
what's your hope? What are,
what's the target?
Thank you for that question. So,
um, we allow under our policies
one year for our part for the
funds to meet their local match
requirement, so the one year in
which to complete their
fundraising, and they have 5
years under the fund agreements,
uh, in order to make those
investments. Um, and I, I
honestly think if they made them
too quickly, we would worry
about the kind of due diligence
they were doing on the
underlying companies, right?
They are, they are looking for
the right match. They need our
they not only are looking for
the kind of either underlying
business and its function, as
well as the personnel. Does the
entrepreneur have what it takes
to actually grow this business
into something. So it does, it
takes a while to match to to do
this matchmaking between the
companies that are looking for
funding and uh fund managers.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Marquita, that's really
helpful, but that also indicates
that they have 5 years to get
these investments.
started
We can't really talk about
returns until well after that.
Um, so I think it's really early
for us to think about investing
more in this process. We don't,
we won't have data for a little
while.
Madam Chari said there's a
couple of things. The debt we'll
see sooner because of course
that's not going to be subject
to, you know, the growth of the
company and the development of
the entrepreneur in the markets
emerging. So the debt we expect
to see sooner. There's a couple
of these funds that are later
stage investors, investments. We
expect to see a return on those
faster than others, but this
really early seed capital, no,
it takes a long time to develop
the, the product to test it, to
get it to
market, so it does take a while.
There's something that they call
the J curve, which is your
investments go down pretty far
before they start to go up
before the return really
happens. And so we are
definitely in that part where
they're drawing down the funds
and have yet to really find a
company that's, you know, gonna
make it. So because of our um
the diversification of our
portfolio, we don't think we'll
be waiting for 9 or 10 years
before we see anything. We will
see some early returns, uh, but
this is way too early for us to
see some returns.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks,
Marquita.
and Marquita, uh, Representative
Duncan has one more question for
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
these are all loans, they're not
grants, right?
Mandi, we have two debt programs
in here and the rest are all
equity investments.
Marquita, we want to thank you
again for coming early, um, if
you're looking for a sponsor to
help you with this fund, I'm
very interested in it.
And um did you say something
about, I think you have an open
house coming up soon, right? Did
you want to say something about?
We do, Madam Chair, after 30
years of um finding spaces for
our board meetings, we finally
opened our offices over on San
Mateo in midtown Santa Fe. We
have an open house, uh,
2 weeks, Thursday, the 25th, I
believe. Um,
I will.
I will make sure we get it to
you.
Thank you for the invitation.
