When we take roll first. Do you
want to take roll?
Representing Duncan
Senator Figueroa. Presentative
Hall.
Representative Luhan
Representative Cio Lopez.
Representative Serrado
Representative Silva
representatives or Senator
Stephanics.
Senator Woods
Representative Armstrong
Representative Lord
Senator Munoz
Representative Royal Caballero.
Benner Stewart
Senor Thornton
Vice Sheer Gonzalez, present.
Perrigo.
OK, thank you. Um,
Representative Duncan, would you
like to introduce yourself?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Mark
Duncan, uh, represents District
2, San Juan County. Good to be
here with you.
Morning, Madam Chair.
Representative Bill Hall, um,
District 3. Good to be here.
Thank you, ma'am.
Senator Figueroa, good morning,
Madam Chair. Natalie Figueroa,
Senate District 18 in the
northeast heights of
Albuquerque. Good morning, uh,
Senator, District 6,
representing. Thank you. And I'm
representative uh Borego, uh,
Albuquerque representing the
Northwest Mesa of Albuquerque.
Um, we may have, uh, just for
the record, we may have some
additional
uh representatives and senators
come in
come in and possibly leave.
There's um conflicting committee
meetings this morning and uh I
understand there's also uh uh
meeting with the governor, uh,
regarding medical malpractice. I
would just also like to make an
announcement that um today we
are going to work through our
lunch hour, um, only because we
have conflicting means also this
afternoon, so in an effort to
try to
minimize disruption and uh
maximize our time, um, and for
the public that's out, um
in uh online land.
uh we will uh make that
announcement. So, with that,
um, we will begin with the State
Investment council, annual
investment plan, and we have
with us this morning, Mr. Robert
Vince Smith, Chief Investment
Officer.
Mr. Smith
Great, thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm Vince Smith. I'm the W State
Investment Officer and chief
investment officer for the New
Mexico State Investment Council,
uh, also with me today is, uh,
is Charles Wollman, our director
of communication and Public
Affairs, and Molly Callahan, our
new manager of communications
and public affairs, so 3 of us
from the office here today to
present to you. Uh, let's just
jump in. So the, the annual
investment plan, uh, I'm sure
you're familiar with this, uh,
the, the plan that we have that
that's up on our, our
website is uh is the 14th uh in
the series of annual investment
plans. We're very proud of this
plan. It's, uh,
it's
Yes.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, madam
chair. Um
so, uh, 414 federation of the
plan that we've we've written,
uh, we, we like to say that we
only call it a or the only
reason we call it annual is
because we produce it annually,
otherwise, uh, the plant looks
out over a 7 to 10 year forward
time frame, uh, to, uh, to make
some judgments about what might
be coming at us and how we're
building the portfolio and a lot
of, a lot of other information
uh about uh the way we invest,
uh, very few funds in the
country draw up a plan like
this. Uh, we do it for
transparency purposes, uh, and
and to be able to to show what,
what we, what we are doing and
what we intend to do uh with the
state's, uh, with the state
sovereign wealth fund.
Uh if you flip to page one,
you can see, uh, a sort of a
placard here or actually page
two, I just gave this
presentation. You, you all have
the exact same packet that, uh,
was a presentation I gave to to
the uh national sovereign wealth
Fund, um, a group, uh, it's a
group of 12 funds, uh, sovereign
wealth funds just like us in the
nation, we have quarterly
meetings, uh, every 2 years we
get together in person. Uh,
they're usually anxious to see
this report when it comes
out. So two Fridays ago, uh,
today, I, uh, uh, presented that
to them. That's, this is the
front page, uh, how that report
in fact the whole report is the
same one that they, they
received, so we'll go through
that same information. Uh, so
there's 4 parts here, uh, to it.
Uh, first, we're gonna look at
two trend changes that we've had
in the last 2 or 3 years that
are very important to the to the
uh construction of our portfolio
and how we're approaching the
markets, um, uh, interest rates
and inflation
Uh, second, we'll go through
sort of a laundry list of other
factors we've identified that we
think over that next 7 to 10
year time frame could exhibit
similar changes in trend, uh,
and that are also important
enough, uh, that they would, uh,
impact how we build the build
the portfolio and and manage uh
manage our assets.
Uh the third we'll, uh, we'll
look at some of the financial
market implications. I'll admit
that this is my least favorite
part of the plan because it's
such a crystal ball that people
like it, so we do it, uh, and
last we'll talk a little bit
about what we propose to do
about all of these uh things.
So, uh, I just wanted to make
one more announcement, um, I was
just told that the plan is not
on the iPOC page of the New
Mexico Legislative website,
however, it is on the state
invest.
for those in um
online that are looking for it.
Thank you.
OK, so we'll re-engage here on
page number 3, what you're
looking at there is a chart of
the tenure treasury yield, uh,
good long chart goes back to
1960, but you on the 10-year
treasury, we call that the
master yield, so many things in
the financial markets are priced
off of this 1010 year yield, um,
so the stock market is priced
off of the 10-year yield,
mortgages are priced uh from
their debt that corporations
issue often are priced based on
the 10-year, 10 year treasury
or, or other places on the
treasury curve, so, so getting
to know and following the 10
year, 10 year yield is really
important for us. Um, and this
is, this uh has, this is one of
the two items that we think have
had a trim change, so you can
look out there at 2020 see it
kind of bottomed during uh the
COVID crisis, uh, and then pop
back up we think that's a new
trend from this long down trend
that we had, and we'll take a
closer look at that here, uh, in
just a minute.
Uh, the page, the next page
number 4, this is the same chart
except it's inflation. Uh, the
CPI index, uh, actually it's the
change in the CPI index. Uh,
that also goes back to 1960, uh,
just a little bit different look
to it, uh, because it's a rate
of change rather than a price or
a yield, um, so, but you see a
very similar pattern, high, high
inflation back in the.
70s and 80s, sort of a long um
period there of a little of
lower inflation and an even a
shorter period of even lower
inflation and then it tick back
up. Uh, but we'll look at that
uh a little bit closer here in a
minute. Uh, page number 5, back
on the 10-year chart. We've
marked this up a little bit so
we can do a little bit better
analysis. Uh, you can see the
top in rates there in 1980,
1982, uh, even out to 1985, um,
that's the
rates above for the orange line
there that a very long down
trend in rates from about 1985
through
through, uh, about 2001, 2,
2003, somewhere in that area.
Then we get a booming process
here, um, uh.
from, from about 2012 to about
2020. Uh, that's the, the rates
above the yellow line there. And
then off to the races we go, uh,
the rates above the red line
there, we think this is a new
trend we're going to talk about
3 reasons why we think uh that
it's a, that's a new trend.
Uh, page number 6, same thing on
inflation, that's that the
consumer price uh percentage
change, very similar pattern.
We've got a double top off to
the left there. That's actually
not unusual, so we had a, one of
our services um that we use, uh,
for, um, for economics, uh, did
a study of 66 inflationary
periods in countries, mostly in
the west, and found that when
inflation uh rises like it did
here in the 1970s in the US, it
often ends with
a double top
Um, now that's a little bit
concerning because we look at
the right side of the chart,
we've got half of a double. So
his, his study would indicate
maybe we've got another spike in
inflation coming. We certainly
hope not. We're not forecasting
that and we'll cross our fingers
that it doesn't happen. Uh, but,
but you see two other periods in
here that correspond with what
was happening with the 10-year
yield, uh, during that time.
First, a little higher rate of
inflation for quite some time,
so.
so from about that 1983, 1984
985, all the way up to uh uh
when the market crashed in 2000,
uh, or or when the market really
crashed there in in '08 or 9,
that rate of inflation averaged
uh where that yellow bar is
about 3.16%. We had a 10-year
note of about a little over 6
during that time frame then just
like in the 10 year chart we
popped down to a lower rate of
inflation is corresponds to the
to the bottoming in 10
year rates where we had a lower
rate of inflation uh about 1.5%,
10 year note of about 2 1/3. Um,
that level of interest rates and
that level of inflation is
unusual when you go back in
history, uh, you can see the
history of the chart back to
1960, but if you continue that
chart, even back to the 1800s,
you would see that that period
of time of inflation, uh, and
particularly of interest rates
at 2%, uh, 10-year interest
rates. It's very unusual period
of time in history. Uh, then you
see the big spike, uh, that came
out of the, uh, how the COVID
crisis and then sort of the the
rebound, we think, going
forward, uh, that red line will
be reflective of what we could
see out of inflation, so sort of
3 to 4%, which is what we had
back there in the, in the 90s,
uh, 2000s period, uh, with a 10
year note of uh 5% sort of 5 to
7% on 10 year treasuries out. So
those two things, as we just
looked at have really changed in
the past few years. Uh
and they're very, in each of
them, particularly the 10 year
yield, but, but also inflation
are very important to how we
construct these port um, uh, and
so forth. Uh, so let's look at a
few reasons why, uh, in fact,
we'll look at 3. Now it's
probably 1000 reasons why, uh,
10 year yield bottom that looks
like it's in a new trend. One of
the things we always do when we
think we've had a trend change
and with uh is to look at the
factors that were driving it and
seeing if those have also
changed, uh, those have changed,
we can feel a little more
confident that that
trend is over and if we can find
new drivers, uh, to the new
trend that we could feel more
confident that that's actually a
a trend. So we're gonna look at
three things here, uh, that we
think, uh, uh, caused the
previous trends and then uh give
you an indication of their
status today. So first, on page
7 is this guy, uh, Alan
Greenspan, uh, he was chair of
the Federal Reserve of August of
1997 to January 2006, uh, we
used to call him the maestro,
and he's the creator of the
Greenspan Put, uh, Greek
Greaseband actually became chair
of the Federal Reserve Board,
uh, the exact same month and
year that I became a public fund
investment officer. So for the
1st 15 years of my career, I
managed a stock portfolios for
two different, uh, public funds,
one in Montana, one in Texas,
uh, with this guy as Fed chair,
and it was great. Uh, I, I
really like the uh cartoon off
to the, to the left hand side
because that's how I remember
Alan Greenspan. It was like
every time the economy would
weaken up a little bit, here
comes Greenspan with rate
cuts and, and, uh, and, and uh
bank liquidity, you know, my
stock portfolio would be doing
not so well and all of a sudden
it would pop up again. And then
before you do it, uh, Alan
Greband was raising rates, not
to slow the economy or bother
the stock market, but to get
them up so that he could cut
them again at the next uh at the
next uh weakness in the economy.
So, um, uh, reason number one,
we think, uh, uh, rates may have
uh have stopped going down here
and may have reversed, is Alan
Greenspan. If you look at the
next chart, uh, page number 8,
here's that familiar uh 10-year
chart. You all, by the time this
presentation's over, are going
to be the expert in the room on
the 10-year treasury at the next
cocktail party you're at, just
about guarantee you that.
Uh, but in the box there that
you see, that's Alan Greenspan's
tenure.
uh at the, at the Fed. So you
can see that very steady, in
fact, almost all of that very
steady down trend in the 10-year
yield, uh, Alan Greenspan was
the Federal Reserve, uh, chair.
If you flip to page number 9,
the other factor that's changed,
uh, inflation in the boxes Alan
Greenspan's tenure and actually
this is, uh, actually this is
federal funds rate. Um, you
could see that pattern that we
were just talking about. So, as
soon as Greenspan gets into into
the fence chair, uh, they're off
to the left. He's raising
interest rates and as soon as
the economy starts squeaking up
there a little bit in in 1990 or
1989, he's cutting rates all the
way through the, the uh the
market down.
down trend of the Gulf War, um,
all the way down to almost 2.5%
there that's soon as the economy
starts picking back up, he's
raising rates so that he can cut
them again and there's that cut,
uh, when the market uh had its
crash there in 2000 to 2002, and
you can see that the trend
continuing. Now you see the
trend continuing outside of the
box to the right because his
successors tried to mimic his
policies. Uh, they didn't do
them as well as he did, uh, but
they did try to mimic his
policies
uh, uh, and so I think that's
why we see, you know, rates, you
know, kind of going down and
actually holding at zero here
for, for quite some time with
some efforts then to uh to raise
them as the economy strengthens
up. So that's reason number one,
we think, uh, or one of the big
reasons. Reason number 2, and
this one is a very strong one,
and we'll look at this one in a
little bit more detail, it's the
baby boom generation or 1946 to
1964, uh, the picture on the,
the right of boomers, I think is
what you get
when you uh tell Chat GT GTP to
create you an image of boomers
enjoying their retirement, uh,
but I really like the cartoon
off to the left, this describes
the boomer generation in spades,
it's like the first one over the
line for anything, and we're
gonna look at some of those
things, says, here comes the
stampede. This was the largest
generation our country has ever
produced, 78.8 million people.
Uh, the next one down is the
wondering why they all have
white hair.
The uh
the next one down was a
millennial generation, uh, uh,
which is only going to be about
74 million, so quite a few,
fewer than the boomers. Uh, they
were followed by the
X-generation, uh, which is only
about 58 million, it looks like,
uh, so very large generation
that had a very strong impact on
the eco of deflationary impact
on the economy. Actually, this
inflationary impact on the
economy, I gotta remember to use
the right word there. Let's flip
over to page 11. There's that
10-year chart
again
and the boxes when the baby
boomers have come into the
workforce and when they're
they're leaving, so on the far
left hand side, the baby
boomers' half of the baby
boomers have entered the
workforce right at the peak of
interest rates. Uh, they're in
1980.5 of the boomers are out on
the left hand side, right at the
bottom of interest rates, uh,
in, uh, in 2020 or 2021 or 2.
Uh, right now today as we sit
2025, uh, there's only about 4,
4.5 years left before the last
boomer who was born December
31st, 1964, will turn 65 and uh
we use that as a cutoff for when
people uh uh generally leave
the, the workforce.
Uh, well, let's take a closer
look because the boomers were
really disinflationary uh in the
economy, which, you know,
obviously causes interest rates
to fall. Uh, and we saw that
10-year chart, uh, several times
here falling.
Um, this is actually uh we, uh,
median weekly real wages, so
they're weekly wages uh in the
economy at the median, uh,
adjusted for inflation. This is
a nice long chart that goes back
to 1979, uh, and what we've done
here with these bars is sort of
overlay it with the baby boom
generations labor force
participation. So if you look
out to the left
you'll see a yellow bar, that's
where half of those boomers came
into the workforce, and we saw
that on the previous page. Um,
if you go to the to the right to
a green bar, the boomers are
fully into the workforce, and we
consider somebody fully in the
workforce when they're 25 years
old, um.
uh, and then we've got 3 more
bars here we'll explain in a
minute. But there's 2 times in a
person's economic life that are
particularly important, uh,
economically. One is when you
turn 25, uh, up to about 35
years old.
In that time frame, you are
fully into the workforce, you
know, you've gone to college,
you know, for 4 years or maybe 6
if you got an advanced degree,
uh, you've gotten into the
workforce at 22 and you've got 2
or 3 years of, of time to get
some experience in doing exactly
what you, what you've, um, what
you've come into the workforce
for, or you've graduated from
high school and even in the
workforce right after that,
you've got 5 or 6 or 7 years
there to earn skills and and uh
things to sort of get yourself
up to at least where a college
grad coming in with 2 or 3 years
of experience or above.
uh, of that, so you're fully in
the workforce we think when
you're about 25 years old at
that period of time in your
life, people are super
consumers. They are spending
every penny they earn. They are
borrowing more on credit for
mortgages, for car loans, you
know, they're out there buying
houses, they're out there buying
cars, they're, you know,
borrowing on credit for consumer
items to put in those houses,
uh, at least they used to be the
average age of a first time home
buyer now is 38 years old, so
we've really pushed that out of
that
$25 to 35, but historically it's
been 25, 26, 28, it's been the
average first time home buyer.
uh, a super consumer is what
happens when you get in that 25
to 35, your uh your old
category.
The next period is when you turn
45, uh, 45 to 55. That's when
groups of people, uh, are
generally are earning their
highest wage or they're about
the highest wages that they're
going to earn uh over their,
their career. Some people put it
a little bit later or, you know,
50 to 60, uh, but the stats are
really more support 45 to 55.
After about 55, people start
retiring and that group's
income, gross income starts to
starts to weaken up a little
bit.
That's the green bar in the
middle. Uh, that's when boomers
hit 50 years old, right in the
middle of that 45 to 55. What's
happening to you then is the
children are gone, maybe there's
still something there for you,
you know, paying college costs.
You're earning your highest
wages that you're going to earn
over your life over the your
working life, and you're really
socking it away for, for your
retirement. Uh, the house is
either paid for or it's uh has
significant equity, you can
refinance it for a lower
payment, so you could put more
money into your invest
ment s uh to support your
retirement. You are a big
capital provider to the economy,
so you've gone from being super
consumer from 25 to 35 and be in
capital supplier, uh, from 45 to
55. Very, very, uh, uh important
change in people's economic
lives, very important changes
for the economy and the boomers
were huge, and they all did it
at once, just like that chart uh
that we showed you on the other
one, the first one over the line
is saying, here, here comes the,
here comes the stampede.
So what we've got for the blue
line, uh, that's, uh, that's the
median real wages. You can see
what happens as the boomers are
coming into the workforce here
off to the left side. It's
really having a moderating
effect.
on median weekly real wages,
just because of their size. It
was a supply issue, it was all
those boomers coming into the
market being economic agents all
at once.
And you can see that lasts up
until about 1997 or so, as the
boomers move into that 25 to 35
year old age group, uh, and then
start moving toward that 45 to
55 along about 97, you could see
the real we real weekly wages
starting to increase.
Part of that is, we think, uh,
the boomers going into that
higher wage earner category. So
it's that big lump of people all
moving at once into higher into
the higher paying jobs that's
moving up real wages, um, that
goes sideways there as you can
see from about 2004 out to about
2015, um, the fourth line, the
yellow line off uh forth from
the left. That's the first
boomer to leave the workforce.
That's that chart with the
boomer crossing the finish line.
wages moderate for a little bit,
start to moderate as they leave
and then boom, they start to
take off as that supply starts
to roll off as this boomers
start retiring and that supply
comes out of the market, and the
people who are replacing them,
the Xers, are very small
generation, um, millennials are
pretty big generation, but as
you get out to that red line
when half of the boomers are
retiring, the generation coming
in, replacing them uh is the
Zoomer generation Gen Z, that's
a very small generation, looks
like that generation will be
even smaller than
the Xers. So we've got a supply
issue is why those prices, why
the price of labor is going up
here. Um, that big spike, that's
COVID, you can discount that a
little bit. That was a lot, the
simy checks and things people
were receiving, but, uh, but you
can very much see an uptrend in
uh in the cost of labor as, as
the big supply of the boomers
leave the uh leave the
workforce.
That's uh factor number 2 of 3
of the 3 big factors that had a
disinflationary impact on the
economy and helped push down
interest rates and inflation
that we've seen since uh since
1980.
The last one is these guys over
in China, um,
uh, a big disinflationary factor
for what the boomers did for
labor supply here in the US and
for capital supply later in
their lives, the Chinese did for
goods, uh, pressing down the
price of the cost of of goods.
So, uh, on the next page, uh,
page number 14, this is a
picture of China's manufacturing
capacity or capacity as a
percent of global uh uh
manufacturing capacity or
output, uh
you can see back there in 2004
it was about 8%. That's about
all the farther back we can get
data, I put my strategist on it,
we just, I really have a problem
finding quality data earlier
than that, so it's about as long
a period as we got. But you can
see 8% rises up to more than 30%
in 2021 and now we're starting
to roll over a little bit.
Uh, and we'll go into some of
the reasons about why, why that
occurred.
uh a little bit later. There's,
there's a story around China
they really damaged their
economy doing that, and uh and
we'll take a look at that.
So, page 15 of the significant
deflationary factors, uh, that
we've just talked about, they've
almost left the building here.
So, Alecrespan is no longer the
Fed chair, his predecessors, uh,
no longer tried to put his
policies in place, uh, uh, um,
you know, our, our current Fed
chair, uh, Jay Pao is more of a
Volker. He's a little more of a
hawk on inflation, uh, much
less uh uh um of a green span
where, you know, it was just
down, down, that's all all he
wanted. Uh, second to Boomers,
we've just showed that uh we've
maybe 4, 4.5 years left before
the last boom boomer turned 65,
that big disinflationary factor
is now out of the economy and
China's got 1 ft out the door on
the goods, good pressing down
goods prices.
Uh, so that's those two,
inflation and interest rates
and, and, and why and and some
of the reasons why we think they
came down from that very high
level in the 1980s, and why we
think they've probably bottomed
and we do think a new trend is
in place.
partially because all of those
deflationary factors are now
allow the economy, and it does
look like there are some factors
that would support a new trend
that would have higher inflation
and as we showed on the on the
previous chart maybe 3-4%
inflation, maybe 5 to 7 out on
the curve for interest rates,
uh, uh, 1010 year out to 30s.
What that really does though is
put a very uh normal shape to
the ill curve, um, you know, Yo
curve starts with lower rates
and sort of rises and and
flattens a little bit out to
long
er rates. Um, historically,
that's how yoke curves look. Now
we've got this sort of whackadoo
thing where we've got longer or
or higher, shorter term rates
and lower, longer term rates.
Uh, we think that gets fixed
here in not too long of a
period, uh, and we look much
more normal in shape and we
think we're also look much more
normal and level, uh, of, of
interest rates. So here, here
going forward.
So that's those two things have
been big factors to change. They
are very important to how we
construct the portfolios at the
SIC, uh, and we're happy to talk
about that at length to anybody.
Uh, so let's, let's flip change
or flip to another thing here
and I've, I've only got a few
more minutes here, but, uh, um,
here's some other factors that
we think, uh, are changing at
the moment, that we think could
have similar impacts to the
changes that we've seen in
interest rates and inflation.
Uh, one is, uh, uh, the reversal
of globalization.
So,
so for a long time,
globalization has been stalled,
but we think we're in an actual
reversal of globalization now.
Uh, there's some bullet points
of why we globalized and I
missed one that should be ahead
of the Cold War, uh, that was
Bretton Woods when we got the
world uh currencies and banks
back online after the Second
World War, but uh the Cold War
and the Marshall Plan and the
organizations such as OEEC and
OECD, uh, which really were
European economic integration
organizations.
uh, and then of course, policy
changes uh in China in the late
70s, early 80's and China's
entry into the world markets,
uh, actually China entered the
World Trade Organization in 2000
or 2001, uh, that's where you
see that big inflection point in
the uh the manufacturing supply
coming from China.
Um
reversing globalization though,
uh, these trends have been
strengthening, so those, those
trends are either gone, the
boosting globalization trends
are either gone or are
mitigating, such as China, uh,
but reversing globalization are
tre trends that are very much in
play now. One is geopolitics,
um.
presidential elections here in
the US, uh, starting with Bill
Clinton, President started to
look at uh foreign countries and
trade and relationships with
foreign countries through an
increasingly nationalistic lens,
uh, from previous presidents,
uh, and then geopolitical
events, so 9/11, you know, 24
years ago yesterday, had a big
impact on how we uh view, uh,
you know, our security apparatus
and, and view the uh many other
places in the world, uh, of
course,
uh COVID-19 had a big impact on
supply chains and evaluating uh
strategic manufacturing here in
the US and a lot of other, other
things that sort of pushed us
toward a reversal of
globalization, but we think that
is a trend that will at least
advance in our 7 to 10 year time
frame and maybe come to some
some res resolution. Uh, we
think there needs to be some
resolution on the record values
in the US public of traded
equity markets. We've been
talking about this though since
2019, probably, yeah,
we've only either gone sideways
in terms of evaluations or maybe
even a little higher.
Um, but we think, you know,
anytime you get a time like this
when so when the stock market is
very overvalued and it is.
Uh, you always get people coming
out of the woodworks to say,
well, this time it's a little
different, or maybe we should
use these other evaluation
methodologies, nonsense. It was
nonsense in, you know, 1929 when
the stock market got up to high
valuations. It was nonsense in
the late 60s with the nifty 50
that pushed valuations too high.
It was nonsense in, you know,
2000 when the tech bubble uh
9798, 99 when, when the tech
bubble blew up and 2000, it was
nonsense in '07 when you know,
Price of real estate got too
high and pull
ed everything down. Uh, it's
nonsense today. Whenever you get
valuations this high, uh, you,
you almost always get lower
rates of return going forward or
you get lower rates going
forward, but you also get a
correction that gets them back
down to something normal or
something reasonable. We're
looking for that over the next 7
to 10 year time frame. Hopefully
a little sooner rather than
later. uh, so we could feel more
comfortable about uh investing
in those markets. Um, and then,
uh, and I won't talk much about
this just due to time, but we've
really had
uh extended economic cycles uh
over the last two cycles. In
fact, the current one is 16
years old against an average of
7 to 10. Um, now there's a
couple of technical recessions
in there. I don't count them. I
think the last real or the last
proper recession we had was
2008, 2009, so 16 years ago. Uh,
very long economic cycle, the
cleansing value of a recession
is, is well known and we just
haven't had that, so we have
high levels of debt.
uh, and, and huge budget
deficits, uh, a lot of those are
a function of just simply the
very long uh economic cycle that
we've had. So, 2 more and we'll
advance to the last two parts
here, uh, China, I promise you
I'll get back to that. These
guys are in trouble, um, there's
just no doubt. First they have
massive government debts, but a
lot of people have massive.
What's the problem in China is
the crashing demographics, and I
could probably do at least an
hour presentation on this, but
we'll do it 5 or we'll do it 30
seconds here. By the end of our
7 to 10 year outlook period.
This is just 7, next 7 to 10
years, that's a blink in the eye
of history. I mean, it's
important to us in terms of
building portfolios, but it's a
blink in the eye of history.
China's working age population
is going to fall by 12%. Now
these are UN numbers and their
demographics, so we can actually
know something about it and know
something in in
with some precision
What that means is, is the
number of people that are aging
out of the workforce, a number
of people hitting 65 or older,
uh, will exceed the number of
people coming into the Chinese
workforce by 12% of the existing
workforce, which is about 800
million people, it's a lot.
They're gonna take a big hit
over the next 70, 10 years and
there ability to continue to
produce like they have been, uh,
and we saw that manufacturing
chart earlier, which is already
rolling over. We can expect that
to just continue to continue to
roll
over.
The number of people of 65 years
or older in the country will
rise by 88%, almost a double.
That's the next 7 to 10 years,
uh, and probably the worst
number on there is the number of
children in China will fall by
40% in that country over the
next 10 years. It's just, it's,
it's unbelievable.
By the end of the century, by
2100, China's population is
expected by the UN to fall by
57%, more than half, with a
downside estimate of 9 of 71%.
It's a complete collapse in this
country, uh, and they are a
major major global economic
player. Uh, today we're going to
see big changes in China. That's
why they're on, that's why
they're on our list. Oh, similar
statistics in the US, uh, the
working age population here
should grow about 2%. Number or
above,
about 3% number of children in
the country should grow about 2%
uh compared to these, uh, these,
this Chinese data. Oh, and the
number of people 65 or older in
our country will grow about 22
or 23%.
Uh, so, you know, a quarter of
what's gonna happen in China.
Glasses AI, we're not even gonna
touch on this, uh, except the
technology is always a change
agent and AI may very well be
the granddaddy of them all, I
tell our counsel and I tell my
staff the only thing that we can
do with AI is just try to keep
up with the changes we can't
know what it's going to bring.
All we can do is spend every,
spend at least a little time
every day trying to keep up with
what's going on with AI if we,
if we do that, we're doing it
right, we don't do that, we're
doing it wrong.
Um.
so let's kick over just these
last two pages and uh and we'll
do this very quickly. Um, so
this is the financial market
implications, like I say, it's
my least favorite part because
it's such a crystal ball, um,
all, all we can do is look at
factors and and make some
judgments, uh, the near term
factors that we went over and
extended economic cycle and debt
loads and so forth, given all
that plus given some of the
longer factors, you know, we
think higher level of inflation,
higher rates, uh, shifting
international economic
relationships, demographics, all
that stuff we just talked about.
We think it's fair for us to
expect lower than average
investment returns over that 7
to 10 year time horizon.
Now, what do we mean by lower
than average. It's, it's really
important to, to know.
We did a study several years
ago, uh, and we've just updated
here, not, not too long ago,
that shows historically public
funds have earned about 2.5 to
4% points over the starting
yield on the 10-year treasury.
Remember that master pricer, the
10-year treasury yield. So what
we really set up was we could
put all of our money in the
10-year treasury, which is about
408 today, 4.08% today. This
morning when I looked
uh, we could put all our money
in that 10 year treasury 10
years from now we'll get 4.08%
investment or rate of return
compounded per annum and all our
money back at the end of the
10-year period. Or we can own a
diversified mix of risk assets,
and on average over time, um,
during normal sort of periods,
uh, public funds have earned
about 2.5% to 4% points over
that. So what that gives us is
uh 6, so today, using that 408
yield gives us the expectation
of about 6
58, 6.58 to 8.08. We sort of a
normal range of what we could
expect from here based on the 10
year um uh yield and what we've
seen in history. We just think
we're on the lower end of that.
Uh, we've been targeting 7%. If
you look at our investment
returns, we've been earning 7%.
We've been, uh, we've been
correct on about the level, um,
that we've been able to earn,
that a lot was driven by what we
thought we could earn over the,
over the, you know, 1010 year,
10-year
bond. Um, so we think we're just
on the bottom end of that. We
think 7's a perfectly reasonable
number to, to shoot for and, and
one that we could continue to
earn. Um, now that's over the
next 7 to 10 years, we get that
correction in the US equity
market that we've been calling
for for too long. Uh, you know,
it could be a little bit lower
in the nearer term, but, but
over the next 7 to 10 years, we
think uh 7% rate of return is
completely reasonable to expect
uh in uh on the lower end of,
of, uh, you know, historic, uh
yields.
Uh, last page, uh, what, what
should we do about all this
stuff? Well, we think a little
tougher periods coming. We think
that correction in US equity
markets coming. We think there's
still some, you know, uh,
adjustments to be made to higher
interest rates, higher
inflation, with that nerve that
situation needs to be uh
resolved our deficit situation
needs to be resolved. A lot, lot
of stuff out there that's on
that previous page.
When you get into periods that
are a little more volatile and I
guess one of the things to say
is when you get into low rates
of return, lower rates of
return.
It doesn't come in a nice calm,
smooth manner, so the stock
market just doesn't sit there
and produce 4% returns.
It produces big rallies and it
produces big crashes and
at the end of the day, you get
down to that lower rate of
return, um, but when returns are
down toward the bottom or
towards the lower end of uh of
uh long longer term returns you
usually get volatility. So, how
do you handle that? Well, uh, if
you've sat in the CIO chair as
long as I have, uh, you know,
you have a diversified portfolio
of assets going into this, into
an environment like this, and
that's what we have. We have a
very diversified portfolio risk
assets, uh, with the, with the
growth funds such as land grant
and severance.
Uh
so, and lastly, the point there
is along with that diversified
portfolio, you really have to
have a mindset that here comes
some volatility, decision making
and volatile environments is
tough. We've got to be ready to
be just as tough as uh as the
volatility and make the right
decisions such as rebalancing
and, and uh moving our asset
allocation when things get, you
know, really cheap or
belly when things get really
expensive. We've got to have the
mindset to be just as tough, uh,
or tougher than that, than that
volatility that we think coming.
So that's it, Madam Chair. I'm
here to answer any questions
that you might have over that
information. Uh, there's some,
uh, things on the back page
here, how you can get more
information in terms of the full
investment plan, uh, a webcast
and some, some other things.
Thank you, Mr. Smith. Um, so
before we go to questions, I
would like uh Representative
Wuhan and Senator Sidilia Lopez
just to introduce yourself, and
then I will go to Representative
Gonzalez. I'm sorry, Senator
Gonzalez, uh, vice vice chair,
um, with a question.
Uh, good, good morning, uh
Representative Tara Luhan
representing House District 48
here in the capital city. Good
morning. My name is Antoinette
Cedillo Lopez, and I represent
District 16 in Albuquerque.
Thank you Madam Presentation.
Um.
what else is going to ask you
some.
You mentioned some dates and
going back to like 19 valuation.
but uh what creates that and
what pushes that?
So, over, over, uh history, a
number of different things, but
currently, uh, a couple things,
at least in my mind, um, and,
and these are, these are just
me. Uh
the indexing, uh, that we've,
uh, uh, done with uh with all
stock markets, but in, in
particular hours.
has caused less um less active
management, less consideration
of anything of value, of
quality, of growth, uh, so when
a lot of people put money into
their retirement systems, it
goes right into an index fund,
which puts money in stocks just
based on their size and the
index, no other, no other uh
consideration. Now the
assumption with uh indexing is
always that, well, there's these
guys out there doing active, you
know, research and actively
valuing these companies, we're
just sort of piggybacking. Well,
it's become so prevalent, so
much of the money that's in the
stock market is in index funds
that it swamps the amount of
money of people who are actually
considering, is this a good
stock to own based on growth, or
is it a good stock to based on
its value. So I that always had
that, that's had an effect of
just making the stocks go
straight up. Um
also, uh, and this has happened
before it happened back in the
late 60s with the nifty 50, uh,
there was about 50 stocks in the
stock market that you just could
not not own, or you had to own
these stocks. Most of those
names have gone, like Kodak was
one of them, uh, so a lot of the
stocks are are gone now it's
been, you know, 80 years or
whatever, um, but
uh
that's going on today, almost a
third of the stock market
valuation is in 7 stocks out of
500 in the market, they have
huge valuations, over 100 times
earnings when a normal stock
might have 12 to, you know, 18
times earnings.
These stocks have over 100, uh,
and you know the names.
Uh, that's playing a factor of,
of that, of those stocks just
going to the moon and because
there's such a big portion of
the market, they're taking it
with them. So that's two of the
factors today of why we've
gotten to such high valuations.
Oh, thank you for that response,
uh, Madam Chair, the, the last
part is um.
you, you mentioned that, that
that does a high valuation
doesn't work.
So, so, uh, stuck stock values
tend to tend to be a mean
reverting, so there's just a
long-term average, and when you
get so far above it, you tend to
revert back to that mean when
you get so far under it like we
were in the in the 80s or even
in the bottom of the market in
2008, 2009, um, it starts to
revert back upwards toward that
mean. So evaluation tend to be
mean, mean reverting. If you get
up to valuations like we are
today, um.
you know, about 22 times uh
forward looking earnings. Um,
historically you've earned
between 2 and 2%, um, for your
compounded for 10 years. Uh,
there's some other evaluation
methodologies, uh, uh, one's
called the Schiller Cape ratio,
if you get above about 25 or,
uh, to get closer to 30 on the
Cape and we're 33 or 34 today.
Um, you get sort of that same
rate of return, 2 to minus 2
compounded per year.
over 10-year periods. So just
looking back in history when we
get to these valuation levels,
the return over the next 10
years is almost always at the
bottom of the return. Oh, sure,
I'll, I'll just end with this,
so you mentioned uh going at
4.08%, 7%.
So then that 3% is the, that's
the risk.
Right, so if we, if we put all
of our money in that that land
grant has today, you know, $34
billion if we put all that into
the 10-year treasury today if we
could do that, and held it until
that 10-year treasury matured,
we'd get 4.08% return compound
per year over that 10 year
period, and we get all of our
money back uh at the end.
or we can own a diversified mix
of risk assets like we do and
earn anywhere from 2.5 to 4% on
average over time. Uh, we can
expect that sort of earnings
over the 10.
Oh, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Vince.
Thank you, Senator. Um, I'll go
to Representative Luhong with a
question.
Great, thank you, um, Madam
Chair, and
I think right now, uh, what's in
the news is that the, the Fed is
going to lower base points, uh,
rates. Uh, can you maybe uh tell
us what that means for, you
know, the
you know, building on what
Senator Gonzalez was talking
about and those investments of
those long-term investments
and can enter. Sure, so, so
currently, you know, we're about
4.25% on Fed funds rate, and
that's the interest rate you're
talking about there, they're
thinking about lowering the
market's pricing in 2 or 3 cuts,
uh, for the rest of the year and
a cut is 25 basis points, so
0.25%. So the expectation is,
you know, we get down to, you
know, uh, um, 375 or 350 on the
Fed funds rate. So
percentage-wise, it's not all
that much of a cut.
You saw some of those cuts that
Alan Greenspan did when the
economy weakened up. Those were
percentage points. Those were,
you know, 2 or 3 quarter points.
Uh, so kinda get uh gets history
when the Fed does cut rates,
it's pretty modest, uh,
expectations in the market now,
uh, short term interest rates in
the short run are important to
the stock market, so it could
be, you know, you know, better
news or good news from the stock
market. In fact, stocks have
been up here, uh, you know, last
few weeks, uh, in in partial,
uh, anticipation of that.
However, uh, when the Fed cuts
race, they're seeing weakness.
That's the reason why. And the
weakness right now they're
seeing is
in the labor market
Now
you know, we, we believe the
numbers that come out, you know,
on all that kind of stuff as
much as we can, but you've seen
the revisions to the to the
labor numbers. So in fact, the
BLS chair got fired, uh, over
the volatility in these
revisions. I mean, they'll come
out and say, oh, we had this
many jobs and then they'll
revise it 6 months later, down a
million jobs, you know, it's,
it's very volatile, so we have a
little bit of uh uh uh we, we,
not that we take it with a grain
of salt, but we look at it with
a little bit of a jaundice eye,
uh, that particular data series
and the F
ed seems to be all over it, so
they've either got more
information or more confidence
uh in it, but they, that's the
main reason they're talking
about cutting is uh weakness in
the labor market.
Thank you. That's, that's what I
read too, that, that, that just
gives uh.
I mean, the confidence that we
need for our state with our
investments and what that means
for us and thank you, you, you
covered that for me.
Um
and just getting back to um
what's going on in, in, in China
right now. And, and I mean this.
we're looking at our market
investments in the whole thing.
It's, it's really politically
there's so much political
motivation in policy behind how
things are fluctuating and
volatility that we're talking
about. And
I guess my, my question is there
in in some of the the federal
policy that we're, that's being
implemented or trying to be
implemented is to build um
more strengths in companies and
in investments within the United
States.
So is that because we knew, you
know, these
what we're seeing and some of
the information you gave us in
in China.
But I mean, for me, one of the
biggest factors in all of this
is you, you noted AI, but all
other technology and how that
affects the workforce, because
that's, that's why we have such
um incredible um advancements
right now in technology that are
replacing, will replace our
workforce. So how are we, how is
that measure coming into place.
The technology replacing
workforce, kind of that that
national policy.
Yet, you know, I, um,
forecasting AI is impossible,
but if you listen to the guys
who try and because it's
impossible, why would you listen
to him, right? If you do, uh,
uh, they're showing significant
replacement at the lower end
jobs, of course, first, um, that
between robotics and and AI, um,
it, and we're actually, I think,
seeing it in some of the
numbers. The labor force
participation rate of the Zoomer
generation is the lowest
of all the generations that are
in the workforce, and it's
declining.
That's the people who are taking
the entry-level jobs. We wonder
how much of that may be due to
AI or anticipation of AI, uh, by
companies.
a total speculation, well all
we're seeing is
one set of numbers doing one
thing and we've got this, uh,
sort of, you know, information
on the other side that says AI
may be taking jobs. So, um, no,
no doubt there's an effect, uh,
will be an effect, and it'll
just be as, you know, uh
disinflationary as the boomers
leave in the generation just
shortage. A man Jared uh in
there, but I'd be interested in
in how this does unfold because
yeah, it the.
but putting the factors
altogether, I think is really
important that we keep a
highlight in the full picture
and looking at investments and
everything helps us do that.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, I will go to
Senator Siila Lopez and then
Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Madam Chair. This actually
builds off with uh
Representative Lujan was talking
about.
what is China doing? China has
the same numbers we have. Do we
know what their strategies are?
they're the same sized economy
that we do, uh, you know,
there's 1.3 billion, I think,
and we're what, 350, roughly
347, um.
they've got the same size
economy we do. There really is
nothing that they can do, even
if so so their birth rate, uh,
you know, is I don't know, um,
about 1.3, maybe 1.2,
countrywide, in the big cities,
it's 0.4. It takes 2.1 children
per woman, uh, to replace your
population. It's some of those
big cities, they're, you know,
0.4 or 1/5 of that, less than
1/5 of it.
Um, even if you took their, even
if you took their birth rate to
3, they can't catch up to the
number of people that are, you
know, aging out. What about
immigration?
China has negative immigration
and has for a long time. Nobody
wants to move there. Uh,
apparently me by the numbers.
because I just
um, we get so much from China.
They're so advanced in
technology.
I just can't think they'd be
observing and just waiting for
it to happen. That doesn't make
sense to me. And so I'm really
interested in finding a little
bit more about what they're
doing.
um, and we're having, of course,
not as bad, but we're having the
same kind of issues, um, with
the baby boom boomers.
And what are we doing
So, uh
the, the bigger reason that
China's having these problems,
so some some people point to the
one child policy, but that was
just additive, it was just
exacerbating the main problem,
which was taking the place in
the world that they had, uh,
beginning in, you know, roughly
1980s, um, you know, kind of
really taken off there in the
early 2000s. And that was
massive moving massive numbers
of people out of the countryside
into the cities in order to take
manufacturing jobs, right? So
when you, when you live on a sub
subsistence
farm, you have 4 or 5 or 6 kids,
right? But when you move into a
tiny apartment in Beijing, you
have one, maybe, uh, and the
numbers say you have less than
you have, you know, less you
have either 1 or 0.4 is the
number. So,
that's really what did their
economy in over a long period of
time was moving that massive
amount of peoples. I, I've been
to China several times and I've
I when I went, I saw huge cities
that had been built, apartment
complexes, shopping areas,
manufacturing areas, um,
everything was there except
people and their plan was to go
in the countryside and move all
these people into this big city
and open up a big manufacturing,
uh, uh, you know, effort.
so
they, there's nothing they can
do about the numbers, I mean,
even if you went from there, you
know, 1.2 children per woman is
existing now, even if you
doubled that, they, they can't
catch up to what the damage it's
already. How do you manage that?
That's tough. You, you can't
have the position you have today
of being, you know, a global
supplier of manufacturing at 30%
of global manufacturing can't do
that anymore.
Um, you know, what options they
have, uh, hopefully you're
thinking about it because
they're a major economic player.
uh that we we have to pay
attention to, and that major
economic player, if it
collapses, the in the worldwide
impact it's going to affect us
negatively too.
Yeah, that part partially feeds
uh or or or me chair and uh and
and Senator Senator, uh, vet
feeds partially into our uh uh
inflation story that, you know,
with the same thing that the the
reason part of the reason
inflation went down was because
of the supply coming in from
China. Part of the reason
inflation will be supported, we
think in the future is supply
coming off. Interesting. And
then what are we doing about our
baby boom problem?
So, uh, uh, Merry and Senator,
uh, we're actually not in, we're
actually one of the better
conditions for the rest of the
world, so Europe's obviously got
a problem. Um, Italy's really
bad, uh, Germany's pretty bad.
Uh, here though, you know, we,
uh, uh, in these statistics are
a little bit off my head, I
forgot to write them in the
report, but, you know, our, our
children are grown by 2% per
year. That's lower than average
or what we've seen, but it's
still 2% growth in in our
children population, uh, our,
our seniors are, you know,
they'll go up by 27, 28%, I
think is what the number was.
Uh, and, and we'll, we'll, I'll
shoot you over the, the actuals.
I'm just going off the top of my
head here, but it's in that
range. So that's not terrible
part of China at 88% and uh in
the in uh Europe, uh, you know,
which is in the 30s uh for a
number of people hitting 65 or
being older.
Uh, and our workforce is still
expected to grow 2, 3%. Uh, so
we're not, we're not in terrible
shape. In fact, if we went down
to birth rates like they have uh
in China.
It'd take 50 years before we saw
the kind of damage that's been
done to China.
And that's because we have a
more stable rural population. It
just takes that long for
demographics to work.
Yeah, I, it, this was, this is
fascinating, and I remember you,
you made a presentation last
time, and one of the things we
talked about was immigration.
and, and China's
antagonism toward immigration
because they're, they don't let
a lot of people in. Um, if you
say a lot of people don't wanna
go, but um, there's so many
desperate people in the world
that I think they would even go
to China, um, you know, and you
see them in our detention
centers. Um, I, I talked to a
gentleman in the detention
center, said he would go
anywhere in the world except his
home country, because he would
be killed there. So we have a
lot of people in this world
who, who want to travel
elsewhere who can't.
And it seems like we're like at
such a waste.
because just warehousing them
instead of integrating grating
them to solve these problems,
just makes no sense to them, and
so that that's why I asked. Like
they've got to be thinking about
this.
and they've got to be thinking
about how are we going to
prevent this or using AI and
that was the
Senator Lohan's point, how we're
going to change the workforce
dramatically so that we don't
need as many people.
Um, so, no, I really appreciate
the presentation and it really
helps as uh as Representative
Luan said to kind of think about
the big big picture, cause we're
such a tiny part of that big
picture, even though we have a
lot of money, um
it
it, it affects the big picture
effects, what's going to happen
to our money and what's going to
happen to us and our population.
I really appreciate the
presentation and I apologize for
being late.
Jared Senator, just one final
comment would be uh uh on your
question line, um, you know, we,
we've got a, we've got a
strategy group, uh, at, at the
state investment office, so
people that focus on this is
their day job, is to look into
these things. Uh, that's not
common in public fund space, uh,
they get to it
and most funds get to it in some
way or another, often it's to
see what the CIO thinks, uh, but
I've got a full group, uh, that,
that's, this is their day job is
to do stuff like you just had,
or just like you saw. What an
interesting job and thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Representative
Duncan.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, I'm
gonna be redundant a little bit
um here with, with my line of
questioning.
and my first question is a
twofold Gen X and China
decreasing in population and the
ability to manufacture.
um
one, how are we gonna keep up
with the appetite that we have,
and number 2.
I'm a firm believer that we
should manufacture in the United
States for the citizens of the
United States. And so is that
where we're headed and how are
we going to keep up with the
appetite again with what Replu
Hunt started, you know, I think
more and more jobs, as you've
indicated, are gonna go to the
less skilled first.
how far up up the ladder, we're
gonna have to go and.
Yeah, that's, that's a madam
chair and Representative, thanks
for the hardest question, but
or, or the one I can or what I'm
at least able to what I'm least
able to answer, maybe I should
say it that way. uh
uh, yeah, um
so I
so one of, one of the things
we've written in previous annual
investment plans, and we changed
our format a little bit this
year, so we didn't directly
address it again this year, but
if you look back at some of the
historic plans we've done. We've
talked about how we're in a low
growth environment, both here in
the US and and internationally,
just uh globally.
uh, and a lot of factors,
demographics is, you know,
toward the top of that, that
list.
Um, the counter story to that,
though, here in the US is
exactly what you're saying is,
is, uh, and because of things
like 9/11 and COVID and and
reevaluation of more strategic
manufacturing here in the US.
So should we be producing more
pharmaceuticals here in the US
that are 80 something% uh made
in China now, um, you know,
should we manufacturing some of
the higher end technology, uh,
of things here. uh, the counter
story to the low growth story is
that we're going to
build it, and that just that uh
building of infrastructure just
that capital expenditure that
companies will have to go
through, uh, to be able to
manufacture, uh, here more, um,
we'll provide, we'll be a source
of growth, uh, for our economy,
um, consequently, uh, you know,
in jobs and at least most of AI
is not going to take over here
in the near, near run or near
turn. Thank you for that. Um, I
just want this committee to know
that I was with a couple of
buddies of mine from high
school.
uh, this, uh, last week, and
between the three of us, I
think, uh, between our kids and
our grandkids, we have over 100
that were responsible for, so
we're doing our part. We've
encouraged our kids to do their
part. We're encouraging our
grandkids to do their part. My
last question, um, Madam Chair,
what's the global impact on the
world with China in the next 20
years or by the year 2100, uh,
Beche, uh, so I'm sorry, could
you repeat that? What's the
global impact on the world with
China either by in the next 10
to 20 years or by the year 2100.
So, so, you know, we focus on
that 7 to 1010 year time
horizon. We do it for a lot of
reasons, number one, that's the
historic length of an economic
cycle. It's also a pretty good
estimate of the shelf life of
one of our council members and
certainly the shelf life of our
investors on the team, so that
it brings a whole discipline.
If, if you know the investment
that you're making today or
you're approving today is gonna.
come to fruition before you're
gone. It brings a discipline to
our process.
Uh, so we really just focus on
that 7 to 10 year, 10 year time
frame.
Uh, I, I think the most clear,
uh, um, it, uh, implication is,
uh, is reduction in supply
coming out of China, it's gonna
have to be made up somewhere
else.
Europe's struggling with
demographics too, um, you know,
a lot, a lot of what you're, a
lot of the manufacturing that
European does is heavy. It
requires a high skill set. Those
people are old and
aging out, they all look like
us.
Uh, they're aging out of their,
their jobs and they're being
replaced by the zoom generation
that doesn't have that skill
set.
So Europe's kind of got a
problem of stepping in the
breach, um, probably got to
happen here.
I, I think that would be the,
the most clear.
Thank you, ma'am and thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Um, Mr. Smith, I will
just tell you that, um, when I
was on the PERA board, I had a
really great teacher, um, Bob
Gish, you probably know, and uh
had the pleasure of being the
chair in 2009.
Yeah, um, but one of the things
that I really learned about all
of that, um.
process that we went through,
um, with our portfolio, um, was
just understanding the dynamics
of
sort of
you know, the the investments
and and the the job that you all
have to do in terms of.
you know, adjusting markets and
adjusting investments and so on
and so forth. Um, you mentioned,
um,
one of the things that you
talked about on your on page 16.
You mentioned world markets, and
I'm just wondering, are you
referring to emerging markets
there or what, what are you
referring to exactly when you
talk about world markets,
because you didn't mention as
part of your portfolio.
uh emerging markets, and I'm
just wondering like what the
makeup is of your portfolio.
And I pro you probably don't,
you may not have that.
you may have that in your mind,
but if you want more time to
respond to that, that's fine. I
just would like to kind of for
the committee.
understand the the the portfolio
makeup that you guys have.
Yeah, so, um, we are, are, uh,
publicly traded equity portfolio
is a 50/50 split between um US
stocks and and foreign stocks.
Um, and we've got a total of 4
40% allocation for 0 allocation
to public traded equity. Uh,
it's a little toward the low
end, mainly due to the US
valuations. It's uh, so of that
40, it's 20 US 2024 and uh we
actually liked the evaluations
of foreign stocks pretty well.
Uh, and, but won't, but to be
specific to your question, when
we talk about uh Forest stocks,
we're talking about all Ford
stocks, which is dominated by
the developed markets. Um, I
think foreign markets are
probably
15% of the global XUS um market.
Um, we, you know, we have a
market weight, maybe slightly
above that right now in the, in
the portfolio, um, but a lot of
that's active managed, so our,
our active managers are looking
and saying, yes, we like these
stocks in Poland or we like
these stocks and, and, uh, you
know, uh wherever in the
emerging markets.
Um, so we, we, we don't have
much indexing there to where we
just accept exposure to whatever
country Morgan Stanley decides
to put in that index.
OK, thank you for that. Um, and
just understanding the diverse
diversification is so important
and and you mentioned that in
your discussion, and I, I
really, really appreciate that
you talked about that, um, one
of the things that I
think when you were talking
about China's economy, and, you
know, they're changing
demographics and so on, um, and
it seems to me, and you may want
to comment on this, um.
it seems like
just worldwide, we're becoming a
lot more global in terms of uh
how we invest, and I realized
that that goes against.
you know, some of the comments
that were made, and we need to
invest in the United States,
which I agree with, by the way,
um, but.
do you think China's gonna have
to make new alliances in order
to make up for some of those
differences. I mean, I know this
is a hard question to answer,
but I think it affects our
economy and their economy and um
so those alliances may have to
change at some level.
Yeah, yeah, Madam Chair, um, so
China's problems don't end with
their demographics. They import
most of their energy.
uh, not most, they, they,
they're import more than half of
their energy. Um, the import
more than half of their food.
The basic things, uh, you know,
so, so here in the United States
we produce more food than we can
use and we were a net exporter,
we produce, we can produce all
of our energy needs, uh, you
know, at least our, our
traditional plus plus
renewables. We can generate
everything we need here. Um,
China's, uh, defense, uh,
they're, they're, they're
geographic position is pretty
tough, you know, uh, uh, they,
they can be, you know, attacked
both over land and over o
ce an s and we've got two big
oceans with not many people
close, and those people that are
closer our friends. Um.
uh, so we've got nat, we've got
natural defenses here in in the
US uh that China doesn't have,
so they, their problems don't
really end just on on
demographics. So that's why we
think big change is coming to
China even over that 7 to 10
year period, even though it's a
blink of the eye in in history,
why we think big changes, uh,
and, and we, we analyze our our
Chinese investments uh closely.
uh, and you may see some change
in the portfolio, um, here in
the not too distant future uh
relative to China. Since you
mentioned
defense, um.
do, do you see the United States
investing in space technology.
at any level, yeah, Madam Chats,
we're, we're not, our team
doesn't follow that too closely,
we're a little more terrestrial
based in our. Do you see that in
the future, maybe? Uh, oh, I, I,
I, I, I could certainly see it,
yeah.
OK. Well, I appreciate your
answering my questions. You do
remind me a lot of Bob Gish, by
the way, um, with your, uh,
discussion and I very much
appreciate. I think we're gonna
be waiting until, I think it's
next week when the feds meet.
um to discuss
how all of that is gonna affect
your investments, so we'll be
watching that very closely. Do
you have any final comments? Uh,
no, Madam Chair, thank you,
thank you for your attention and
I've been presenting to this
committee and its predecessor
since 2011, so I appreciated
getting back in front of you.
Appreciate you very much. Thank
you. um, for the committee's
sake, um, we do have lunch
coming in and we um have a
couple of lunch sponsors,
including Robert Romero, Dan
Weeks, and Charlie
Marcus, some of our lobbyists,
so if you see them in the
hallway, you could thank them
for your lunch today. Uh, again,
we are going to be working
through our lunch because I know
that some of the members have
other committee meetings today
this afternoon, so, um
to respect that, we are
we also have a quorum at this
point, and before we lose our
quorum, I would like to turn our
attention to our minutes
2.
there's a motion by Vice Chair
Senator Bobby Gonzalez and a
second by Representative Lujan.
Anybody opposed
Speak now or forever hold your
peace.
All right, uh, let's see.
We are going to go on, I'm
I'm pretty proud of us today,
guys. It's 11:15 and we are an
item, our second item at 11:15,
an overview of the volunteer
firefighter retirement program,
and I will have our guests
introduce themselves and
welcome.
Uh, morning, Madam Chair,
members, uh, Director Hugh,
executive director with PERA.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
Randy Varela, Steve Arm
Marshall.
Go ahead,
thank you.
So we're pretty excited to uh be
before you today, Madam Chair,
this is uh
a topic that doesn't really get
in front of this committee too
much, uh, you know, we, we focus
on our bigger plans, but this is
uh just as important. Uh, so
before I get into the, the
presentation, I was gonna ask uh
the state fire marshal to just
kind of give an overview on
volunteer firefighters and kind
of how important they are to our
communities.
Uh good morning, mentor, Vice
Chair, members. Yes, um, it's
very important, uh, as we move
forward.
we're losing our younger
generation to our rural areas
and we're losing volunteers, um,
from 2015, uh, 2005 when I
started with the Fire Marshal's
Office to know, uh, we've seen a
great drop in volunteers
throughout the state. We
currently got some stats back in
April of 2025. In the municipal
areas, we have 1,133 volunteers,
and in the county departments,
we had 3003,1
75 volunteer firefighters in the
state for a total of 4,401. Uh,
that's a great draw from back in
in 2010 when we're seeing 7,
8000 volunteers in the state and
in the state, we currently have
paid firefighters. We had 3,137.
So the volunteers pretty much
respond to most of the calls
throughout the areas, especially
in the rural areas. And that's
why it's so important that we
continue to support our
volunteers and see who
initiatives we can get for them.
So we can continue to improve
that and see if we can keep our
younger generation in our
communities. I know that in the
future, more than likely some of
these departments will have to
go into a paid status due to the
amount of calls that they're
receiving throughout the state.
Uh, we do run a lot of EMS
calls. I think 90, 80 to 90% of
the calls in the state are EMS,
uh, the other 10% are mixed with
structural firefighting and with
uh wi
ld land and car accidents. So
that's a brief on what we're
looking at and why we want to
increase the retirement and
support our volunteers.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
Madam Chair,
on, uh, slide 2, this has been
before the committee multiple
times, so you all should be
familiar with it, uh, kind of
gives an overview of uh the PE
fund, the Parafund, uh, your
total fund value, rate of
return, um, active members
retirees are unfunded liability,
um, but I wanted to compare
because we account for the
volunteer firefighter fund
separately. It's a separate, uh.
statute, uh, so if we just look
at the, the volunteer
firefighter fund, um, I, I wish
the parafont look like this, so
they're, they're worth $88
million. Um, we had bestsued the
same exact way as we do all our
other investments, so they get
an 8.66% return, um, they have a
healthy surplus in active
members compared to the amount
of retirees that they uh that we
pay out. Uh, we have, I, I don't
have the exact count, but I know
it's over 360 volunteer
firefighter departments
out there, uh, they're funded
ratio. I like I said, I wish
this was the regular paraf fund,
is at 172% currently. Um, they
don't have an amortization
period because they are
overfunded. Um, the accrued
liability that they have is 51
million. Again, their total fund
value is at $88 million so they
actually have a surplus of 36.8
million. So there is no unfunded
liability for, for the volunteer
firefighter plan.
Uh side 4, Madam Chair, uh, as I
stated, it is a separate, um,
part of statute from the regular
para plan. Uh, it's under NMSA
10118, uh, the, the plan was
created in 191983. Um, that's
what governs, uh, this plan. Uh,
there's also a separate set of
statutes and MSA 1011b that
deals with survivor benefits uh
for these members, um, and the,
the plan itself is, uh,
provided funding through a
$750,000 annual appropriation uh
from the fighter protection
fund. Uh, no volunteer pays any
money into it, no, um, volunteer
fire department pays money into
it. It all comes from the state
of fire protection Fund.
Um, and Perra we administer this
plan, but it is in partnership
with the, with the state fire
marshal's Office if we have
issues getting records or uh
there's concerns about
inaccurate records, we reach out
to the State Farm Marshal's
office, and they usually take it
over from there.
Um
slide 5, Madam Chair, I just
listed the definition straight
out of the statute, uh, and, uh,
what a volunteer firefighter is,
um, and really the, the crucial
part of it is it is a
volunteered non-salaried
firefighter we've got a salary
firefighters, non-salaried, only
non-salaried are covered and to
get service credit, uh, they,
they don't get monthly service
like, uh, our other plans, they
just get annual service and in
order to qualify for those, uh,
for that credit. Uh, they must
attend 50% of all their schedule
drills, 50% of all scheduled
business meetings and
participated at least 50% of all
emergency response calls member
is held responsible to attend.
Um, you know, we have some
volunteer fighter departments
out there that I believe get
tens of thousands of calls a
year. So obviously, you know, we
can't hold these people to be
their 50% of the time for for
that many calls. So it's what
they are responsible to uh to
attend.
And finally, uh, the person that
is responsible for relaying that
information to us is each uh
fire chief from the volunteer
department, uh, as I said, they
do it annually. We open up a
reporting period that usually
runs from January to March 31st
of each year, and that's when uh
the chief is certifying uh who
meets those requirements to us.
Uh, once, uh, you meet all the
requirements on site 6, Madam
Chair, and you get to uh be
eligible for retirement, um.
we have a minimum retirement age
of this plan of 55 years old.
Um, if you're 55 with at least
10 years of service, you know,
you qualify for $125 per month
if you serve 25 years and you're
at least 55 years old, um, you
qualify for $250 a month.
after you start receiving that,
uh, benefit, you are still
allowed uh to volunteer, uh,
you're just not getting any
additional service after that,
but you can get your, your, you
know, 125 or your $250 payment
and still be a volunteer, it
just doesn't increase in future
years.
Um
we also have a thing called the
Deferred retirement in, in all
our plans. Uh, it's, it's more
prevalent in the volunteer plan
because, uh, you know, somebody
starts volunteering at say 35,
and they do their 10 years on 45
and they have to leave the state
or, or they just can't be a
volunteer anymore for other uh
commandments, but if they have
that 10-year period, then at the
time they reach age 55, we will
pay out, you know, that $125
monthly benefit. Uh, so we've,
so we've got, uh, uh, uh decent
group of deferred
um
members that will get a future
benefit.
Um, we do offer survivor
benefits, uh, volunteer
firefighter does uh does pass
away. Um, the spouse or their
dependent child um is allowed up
to 2/3 of the benefit they were
receiving. So, I think if you're
at $125 that's, that's uh $83 a
month, uh, if you're at the 250,
I believe is about $112 or some
something somewhere in that
neighborhood a month. Um.
and I do want to point out, uh,
volunteers are not, uh, given a
cost of living adjustment. So
that $125 that $250 monthly
amount, uh, it never, never
increases. They do not, they are
not eligible uh talking with uh
with uh Mr. Barrele here, um,
you know, we, we've had
discussions over the last couple
of years. So he's had ideas on
how to increase um enrollment,
uh for the volunteers, uh, in
one caveat that this is not an
official proposal. We just
wanted to give the committee a,
a sense of if we increased kind
of what that cost.
Um, the first scenario you can
see uh increases the 10-year
mark to 150, 20 years, 200 to
275 per month, but it also uh
puts a 15-year tier in there,
um, and reduces the max from 25
to 20, um, if we were to do
that, uh, it decreases our
funded ratio from 172% to
124.5%, um, which that's just a
one-time cost, but to fully fund
the plan going forward, we would
need an increase
uh, in the $750,000
appropriation up to 1.4 million
going forward.
Uh, the second optional
scenario uh increases it a bit
more, uh, 10 years to 175, uh 15
at 250 and 20 years at 300 per
month, again reduces the maximum
25 to 20. Um, if we were to do
that, then almost nearly wipes
out the entire surplus, goes
from 172% funded to 108% funded,
um, in the future cost to
continue the client at that
funding level goes from the
750,000 to 2.7 million um
recurring in the future.
Um, and they both scenarios keep
the minimum retirement age of 55
before you can qualify for for
benefit.
Uh, slide out, slide 8, Madam
Chair, just gives you some basic
statistics, um, you know, 1500
service retirees, those are the
actual firefighter that or
volunteered that retired, um,
their average age right now is
about 72 years old. Uh, they get
$1800 a month. Um, their average
service, we, we don't
really calculate that for them.
Uh, we're paying out 180
beneficiaries, average age 76.5,
just over $1000 annually, um, in
our active members, and Randy
mentioned the actual volunteers
currently we define our active
members differently. These are
people that just have credit,
um, maybe they didn't have
credit last year, but they got
credit in the plan and they are,
uh, we account for them in our
liabilities, uh, the average age
is 42, um, and average service
is 3.5 years.
Um
Redy asked this question and I
thought it was interesting. Uh,
80% of our retirees um get the
$125 amount. Um, so most of
them, you know, either they
don't work the full 25 or they
just take it immediately when
they hit the 10 year and uh 55
mark, um, and then 20% get the,
the other $250 benefits.
Um, and I did find it actually,
uh, you know, interesting, you
know, 7,493 is what we consider
active in the plan, 6700 of
those have between 1 and 9
years, so, so it is a, a very uh
not big amounts of years in this
plan.
Um, and, and we do have some uh
good resources on our website.
We've got some videos, uh, we've
got brochures, if, if you were
interested, uh, talking not only
about the overview of the
volunteer firefighter plan, but
also for our fire chiefs and
their departments on how they
can report and kind of the
issues that they may be facing.
Uh, we've got instructional
videos, um.
for them and our outreach team,
uh, is kind of the group
responsible for, for our
volunteers. Uh, they travel
around the state, they meet with
volunteer fire departments.
They, they're the ones that who
are responsible for uh the
annual firefighter reporting,
um, and they, they do a great
job.
Um, and final slide, Madam
Chair, we throw this in every
year just showing where, where
the money we pay out, where it
goes into New Mexico, and with
that I think uh Randy and I are
happy to answer your questions.
I do have Senator Cedilla Lopez.
and Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you to both of you.
Uh, Mr. Varela, you mentioned um
what is the
uh, Madam Chair
Mr. Vice Chair, members, uh, we
currently have 4,401 volunteers
in the state that were reported
in 2025 under their fire fund
application.
So what we do every year, uh,
when we send out their fire fund
application that's due on April
30th.
We have some questions and
there's where they have to note
how many volunteers they have in
the department, how many active
volunteers they have, they could
actually have 40 volunteers, but
they only have 10 that are
actually active and responding.
So,
and the numbers vary when we're
out there because uh like you
see the volunteers uh work, they
have a hard time responding at
times because of their job. Uh,
some of the calls are during the
day and they're working
somewhere at night, so it all
depends. So, so I see the drop
down to the 4,401.
so we
collected back in 2025, April
25.
Madam Chair,
I knew you had like
was that for the pain? No, for 3
years ago, 4 years ago,
something like that. OK, back in
2010, Madam Chair, Mr. Weiss,
back in 2020, I believe we have
somewhere around 7700
volunteers, 7700.
Yes,
somewhere around 2010.
2000 or 1, the fires are still
gonna be there.
You know, how can we work with
that.
Anyway, thank
Thank you, Senator, Senator.
Thank, thank you so much. I have
a soft spot in my heart for
volunteer firefighters, cause my
father started the volunteer
volunteer fire department in Los
Chavez, back in the day, um, and
so I, I just really admired
those men who decide to organize
and protect their community, and
there are more women now back
then it was men, um, but I know
that there are more women
volunteers, um, and I have a
couple of questions about how
this works.
and slight.
um
on slide 5, there are minimum
requirements in order to get on
the list. Well, is this an
average like what it, which,
what would happen if you have
like
you do a lot more like 80% in
one year and then the next year
you do
20% of the requirements just
because of the way um life is.
Is it they have to meet this
every year?
Then then members of the
committee. Uh, yes, so the, the
way this works is uh on their
run reports on their calls. So
it's what the chief holds him
accountable to. So if this
members or if this department is
getting 100 calls a year, and
this member works Monday to
Friday or work 7 days a week and
he can only respond at night and
he only runs 2 or 3 calls. He
meets the requirements because
that's what he was held
accountable to. Oh, I see, so,
so the chief has discretion to
kind of work with this.
Oh good,
because I just remember, you
know, people are farmers, people
have jobs, people get jobs, they
change jobs, and it just, it
just changes, um, they didn't
have back then they didn't have
anything like this, um
but, um, I just knew it was a
different group of people every
time, and then
this was done obviously my, my
father used to say no masses
symbolico. In other words, this
is just a token.
Um
this token becomes less and less
meaningful as time gets on, goes
on, because $150 we were just
chatting here, what can you do
with $150? Doesn't even pay
utilities these days, um, and so
was there any thought in
addition to, I mean, you, you
talked about increasing it or um
and I think that that that's a
good idea.
Um, I mean, you
do you think it makes sense to
increase it a little bit more
significantly, cause even the
increases you're talking about
are still symbolical, still
tokens, and or is that the
intent to just give a token of
of
of appreciation so that
these individuals should not
think about it. It's something
that they can rely on in their
futures.
Madam Chair,
um, like I say this, this wasn't
an official proposal. It's just
if we look to increase it, these
would be the cost, um, if the
state is willing to, to, uh,
provide the money to increase it
even higher, I'm sure Randy and
his group would be be thrilled
with that. Um, I, I will say
we're just kind of a
off topic, you know, we, we
still send out probably 400
paper checks. We've, we've made
a big effort to get away from
paper checks, get people on
direct deposit, um, and, and the
majority of those checks that
come to us are $125 250.
They may not be able to do a lot
with them, but I think this is
kind of our members play money,
um, that, you know, doesn't go
into the joint account that the
spouse knows about, um, I think
this is our casino money or
their beer money. Um, so, so
symbolic, yes, symbolic, I think
they are putting it to use.
Um, so I mean, I guess what you
because it is part time.
um, and I guess it is just an
expression of appreciation and
people appreciate being
appreciated. So, so I see that,
but it's just as time goes on,
it's, it just seems like Lisaola
or something, I don't know, I,
I, you know, I'm just uh
I just look at that money and
just, just think I know how hard
it work how hard the work is,
and also potentially dangerous.
Um, you know, the volunteer
firefighters this last year in
Valencia County were very
active.
Oh, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, we also at the Fire
Marshal's office give out a
grant every year, and in that
grant, uh, we have the
departments apply for $25,000
siphon.
And if they apply for this
stipend, they do get the stipend
to the county, and then the
county administers that stipend
on how they're going to manage
it. So they can pay the
volunteers $20 per call, $30 per
call, or $10 per meeting. So
it's really up to the county how
they do that. They do provide us
the policies and procedures
prior to applying for this, and,
uh, 100% of the stipends are
approved when they apply for it.
And who funds the the the
is it the county that funds the
facilities?
So the fire fund covers
uh the facilities. So the fire
fund is collected through 3% tax
on your insurance. And that
comes to TRD and then TRD
transfers that over to the fire
marshal's office and would
distribute that money on a
yearly basis. Um, last year we
distributed $77 million to the
fire departments, and we gave
all $33 million in grants. This
year we're able to increase it
to 100 million distribution to
our department. It also dropped
the grant down to about between
22 and
26 million
But I think in the drop on the
grant in giving out a little bit
more on the distribution, all
the departments get some of the
money versus if they apply,
they're not sure if they're
gonna get a grant.
So it kind of covers both ends
on that. But we do have that
stipend and uh if they apply for
it, they do get that stipend.
Do the volunteer, uh,
departments compete with the
paid department. No, they do
not. Uh, most volunteer
departments uh in the state,
they all have their own
department. We do have
combination departments out
there where they're volunteer
and come in Asian, and they do
share the department and they
work well together, and they
train together.
So that's,
that's a good thing. Yes, that's
the important thing.
Well, I appreciate the
presentation and I also very
much appreciate the work, um,
that these firefighters do, and
I, I thank you for it and Madam
Chair, before we move on, if I
may, um, tourse Adilo Lopez, I
will say that uh the, the
benefit has increased in the
past, I believe the last time,
uh, that it was increased, it
was former uh Representative
Roche, uh, that passed it, I
believe it was in 2012 or 2013,
1 of those sessions, so it's,
it's been a little over 10 years
since, since that's happened.
From what to what, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, I think it was
from $100 a month to the $125
and I think 225 does the 250.
Thank you. Good to know
Thank you, Senator. So we have
Representative Duncan,
Representative Lujan, and
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll,
uh, I'll try to keep my
comments and questions brief. So
I'm gonna use simple math here
cause I can understand that. So
you've got an average age of
about 43.
We got a problem on our hands.
Specifically in the rural parts
of the state. You got a big
problem.
Um,
now, um, our Marcel, Mr. Farm
Marcel, can you tell us where
these funds come from?
that these departments get
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
can you repeat that again, sir?
So can you tell me where the um
volunteer firefighters fund
comes from.
where that allocation comes
from. Uh, this comes from a 3%
tax on your insurance. OK.
Um, and then what does that pay
for? Can you?
I think for their operations,
OK.
And for the department's
operations, Madam Chair, yes,
OK. Um
and then if we look at
increasing
um
the firefighters' fund a little
bit, and I'm certainly not
opposed to that either. I was a
firefighter in high school. I
think they had off it in high
school.
I think our high school kids and
our mid-school kids ought to
ought to clean their own schools
for that matter as well, and
grow their own vegetables, uh,
but that's another, another time
and another story. But we are
not getting the volunteers we
need, and if we don't train
those kids.
to volunteer, we're not getting
in the 2025, 30.
us with gray hair. So I, I guess
if, if we're gonna do that,
we're gonna pay it. Then um I
would say then that ourpera.
we still have the funds to do
that. Am I correct in saying
that?
I'm sure not. It wouldn't be.
I mean, it's, it's funded
through the fire protection
fund, so so that's an
appropriation given to us that
funds that. So, so we've that
appropriation increased, then we
could increase the benefit.
OK.
But we're still overfunded.
in the uh Madam Chair and
Representative Nuncin for the
volunteer firefighter plan we
are correct. OK, so that's,
that's where I'm drilling down
as a volunteers, so.
even if we were able to give
these folks a little bit more
uh retirement
uh, then you would not need to
come and ask more money from us.
to fund this. That's my
question. No, no, uh, Madam
Chair, in, in the first year it
would take effect. It it
essentially, you know, reduces
the surplus from 172 to whatever
amount, um, in just that year.
So to fund it at that level
going forward, we would need the
increase in the, the
the appropriation to, to fund it
on a go forward basis. OK. So,
so thank you, Madam Chair. So if
we, let's just, let's just say
we went from um the tiered
approach of 10 years at 150.
Um, we'll be down to 124. That
100 or 125, let's say. So would
we still be at 125 in in 26, 27
now, Madam Chair and
Representative Duncan, uh, we
wouldn't. OK, so that, that
appropriation is 750 wouldn't be
sufficient to fund that increase
in future years. OK. All right.
So then the ask would come.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for the
answers. So Representative Luhan
had to leave uh Senator
Figueroa, and then we're going
back to Senator Sidia Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think Representative Duncan got
a little bit to my question, um,
which is the $750,000
appropriation.
The page
what are we on here? Page 4.
is where you explain that comes
from the fire protection punt.
and it's moved over to the
volunteer.
um
to the volunteer retirement.
OK, how is the fire protection
fund itself.
funded Madam Chair
Representative, the fire fund is
funded by the 3% tax that we pay
on insurance on our homes,
vehicles, anything that we have
insured.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. Then what is the status of
that fund right now? How much is
in it? What's the trend been for
the last few years, and could it
afford an increase to 1.4
million, um, in order to look at
proposed increases. Madam Chair,
Representative, the fund has
been growing, uh, every year for
the last 20 years since I've
been in the fire marshal's
office
Uh, like I stated earlier last
year, we distributed $77 million
this year. We distributed 100
million. So we could sustain the
1.4 million.
going into the retirement, uh,
that 1.4 million would affect
the grant fund and the
distribution. It would take away
from those two funds.
Madam Chair, thank you. Um
do we know how much those two
would be decreased in order to
pay for this proposed change.
Ah, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, just by the 1.4 million, uh,
it'd probably be, uh, half of
the 1.4 on the distribution and
half on the grant fund.
Kate, Madam Chair, um, thank you
for explaining that, I think,
uh to continue a discussion on
that kind of a proposal, we'd
want to hear from the folks
affected to be sure that, um,
well, to hear if there's any
opposition to distributing the
money in this different way.
because it's a really valid
purpose.
Um, but if we're gonna decrease
the grants, what kind of effect
is that gonna have in the long
term, but I appreciate your
explanation of how the money
flows. My last question is just
clarification on page 8. The
chart says the active members
for volunteer firefighters are
7,493, but I believe you said
about 4400, so which number are
we really working with?
Uh, uh, Madam Chair, and, uh
um, Senator Figaro, we, we at
Parra define them different than
uh Randy and I'm sure Randy has
uh more accurate numbers of what
we qualify somebody as a, as an
active member or somebody that
just has service, um, in the, in
the plan doesn't necessarily
mean that the volunteered or
were an active volunteer last
year or years prior. It just
means that they have service,
um, that they will get credit
for out of. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for the
clarification. That helps. I
think I
would circle back, Madam Chair,
to Senator Serio Lopez's
question about what's what's the
purpose, this is, if this is
symbolic appreciation, or is
this a recruitment tool? Do we
think this would have any effect
in recruiting volunteer
firefighters, because it's, it's
a pretty small thing to have any
effect on recruitment, um, and
looking at the average age of
average age of the active
members on this chart. And
again, I don't know
if the average age of that 7000
matches the average age of the
truly active 4400, um, but 42.8
years old, if we're trying to
get them to extend their service
and another 7 years to hit that
10 year mark.
Um, that's pushing it for
volunteer firefighting,
especially if we're hoping
they'll extend to
1520 years. I think the
demographics are against us.
The
average, um, pop the population
rates in our rural areas are
going down, and the young people
population in our rural areas is
even lower than that. So we're,
we're fighting a trend, and I
would be interested, Madam
Chair, in hearing at some point
about other ways we can try and
address.
that trend in terms of
recruitment because we are going
to need to representative
Duncan's point, we are going to
need to be able to fight fires
across the state.
Madam,
if I may, Senator Figueroa, I
believe in our uh actuary
evaluation, we do have a
distribution, um, with age and
years for active members. I can
send that to Paul and he can
share with you. So, uh, we do, I
believe we do have.
Thank you Senator Senator Cedil
Lopez thank you, and this is
just a clarifying question, and
I think I, I think I know the
answer now. Uh, on slide 7, it
says uh 172% to 124% in fiscal
year 24. You mean fiscal year 26
or 27,
you know, that's just a mistake.
It's a mistake, but right, but
I'm not sure what it is. Yeah,
Madam Chair, that's, we propose
we, we modeled it on our current
valuation numbers
are, you know, the FY 25
evaluation won't be out till
October, uh, so if this is
something that, you know, the
committee wants to hear, we'll,
we'll have to remodel it, but
it'll, it'll be in the ballpark.
Yeah, yeah, update it to
but and the fund isn't doing
well.
I take it.
Uh, Madam Chair and members, uh,
yeah, we, uh, we, you know, it's
not, it's not uh
a final um public number yet,
but we, we've did a much better
than our 7.25% return, uh, that
we anticipate each year. So in a
future meeting once it's public,
we can share that Richard.
OK.
Thank you. Well, and maybe, uh,
maybe 10 years, it's been 10
years, maybe the token needs
updating.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
so, um
kind of
I like Senator Sidilia Lopez
have a special place in my heart
for firefighters because my
father was a federal firefighter
for 30 years in Los Alamos. um
and he's dead now, but the rest
his soul, um, so one of the que
well, two questions I have is
one,
um, and, and, um
the fire chief remembers this
fire marshal, um, a couple of
years ago, I think it was 3
years ago, actually, we created
that fun to incentivize
firefighters to stay, and I, I
don't think it affected
volunteer firefighters. That was
the fund that the governor
worked with us on, I think it
was 30,000, a little over
30,000, has that
impacted
retire or um volunteer
firefighters to move into
permanent positions members, uh,
yes, I believe you're talking
about the phone where we worked
on the 25 million, uh, to
recruit paid personnel. Yes,
that has helped. I don't have
the current numbers, but I can
get those to you. But the last
numbers that we saw about a year
ago, we had enough money for 180
positions.
and I believe most of those
positions that have been filled,
but I can't contact DFE and get
those numbers for you. If you
could, I, um, I would appreciate
that fire marshal because they,
I think, you know, one of the
things that we talked about when
we were creating that fund was
how do we incentivize um
um,
these um
volunteer firefighters to move
into more of a career ladder and
so I know it it's only been a
couple of years, but I think
it'd be kind of interesting to
kind of take a look at how's
that done, but we were trying to
do, has that kept our fire our.
permanent firefighters, kind of,
you know, moving into their
professions. I mean, one of the
things that really concerns me,
um, when I taught when I talk
about firefighters and.
and police is professionalism
and and they go beyond that, and
bringing back that respect and
those career ladders. So I, I
would definitely like to see
that.
that information if possible I
think I'll get that for you.
This committee might be
interested in that also, um.
let's see, uh.
also, um,
and, and maybe Greg, you can
talk a little of this. I don't
know, um, what are the
incentives
to become a permanent
firefighter or volunteer
firefighters, and I realized
some small communities don't
have that, uh, ladder, but are
there any incentives that the
state offers regarding that or
the cities, municipalities or
the counties.
Uh, Madam Chair representatives,
I don't know of any incentives,
but I know in some areas are use
water, for example, Mota County,
uh, out of those $25 million
they received 6 full-time
positions for firefighters, and
they did hire 6 full-time
positions, and I believe those
were some of the volunteers that
moved up to the paid positions.
So that was one incentive with
that money that helped out in
that area, and I believe that uh
Tao is doing the same thing, the
town of Taos, has it got two
positions. And, but I will get
you those numbers and all the
information on that.
OK. And um. My final question is
having put this on the agenda,
are you all looking for a
sponsor for this, is that what
what I'm hearing.
or
reading between the lines
Uh, Madam Chair and Randy can
jump in if I may say anything,
um, I think this is at least
just kind of gets the
conversation started, um, but
yeah, if, if anybody wants to
spearhead this, I'm sure we're
happy to.
help and support. I just thought
I'd put that out on the table in
case there are
folks that uh want to volunteer
here. um, well, we appreciate
you all, uh, presenting to us,
it's really nice to see you,
Fire Marshal again before us,
um, so we do have
LFC here with us. We're gonna
take about.
I guess, let's see, right now it
is 11:52, so about 12:30.
we will come back, so we're
going to take a lunch, a little
lunch break, bathroom break, and
then we'll come back at 12:30
and I think at uh and I see Jen
Jennifer in the audience. So
we'll start again at 12:30.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, members.
