done yet a county got rain last
night so ever I know we're all
extra excited we're going to go
ahead and start the meeting this
morning for legislative finance
committee want to go ahead and
invite up
county commission chair charles
are superintendents thank you so
much for being here come on up
please
and marin ricas wanted by you up
as well
and just as a quick reminder
committee and get we have uh
from now until nine for opening
remarks which will be remarks
and then questions
commission chair will invite you
up along with marine ricas
and perhaps we might.
And it's great to see our
district attorney
will go ahead I know since time
is short will perhaps go ahead
and maybe we'll start on the
school side superintendent ruise
if you might kick a soft please
come on up mister chairman yes
sir.
We'll start with our schools
thank you superintendence uh
demos chavers and democrat for
being here and we'll start a
superintendent ruise please go
ahead good morning can you hear
more than we go
they could
churn athen small appreciate the
the invite this morning and the
welcome to less crucials on
behalf of the schools of public
school it is truly an honor to
host you and think the
legislative finance committee
for your unwavering commitment
to public education across new
mexico special thank you also to
mister sunday lu for making this
conversation possible and giving
us the opportunity to share both
successes that were proud of in
the challenges of working hard
to address challenges that I
know resonate with districts
across the state and i'm sure
we'll hear some more for my from
my colleagues here I will
express her since you're
gratitude to the legislators who
have supported l c PS through
direct capital outley
appropriations senator soles
brandly hambling steinborn and
representatives ferrari rubio
and cadena your efforts along
with the work of this committee
have resulted in critical
investments from salary
increases for educators to
funding for transportation
instruction on materials and the
continued expansion of community
schools these policies and
appropriations matter greatly to
our student's family and staff
in the realm of finance lcps has
made transparency and
accountability a priority and
proud to share for the first
time in district history we earn
national recognition for
excellent instant procurement
and budgeting to the strategic
financial management we have
saved over twelve million
dollars these savings have
allowed us to significantly
improve our staff health
benefits movie from the state
sixty forty and seventy thirty
models to more competitive
eighty twenty and ninety ten
options this that only helps us
retain great educators but also
honors our commitment to those
who serve our students every day
and the instructional side are
focused remains clear.
Accelerating stood in
achievement especially in
literacy and math we've
implemented evidence base
instructional practices expanded
professional development for
teachers and leverage real time
data to inform instruction this
past school year we've seen
growth across all student groups
assigned at these strategies are
working what are commitmentals
beyond academics we prioritise
mental health by investing in
behavioral house specialists
expanding social motional
learning and embedding trauma
informed practices we know that
academic success is deeply tied
to emotional well being and we
are committing committed to
supporting the whole child like
this which across the state we
are facing new pressures federal
funding is expiring or stain
flat what cost continue to rise
driven by inflation growing
student needs an increased
compensation for our educators
programs and make a great
difference particularly
particularly in mental health
and academic recovery these
programs are at risk as these
funds are constantly being
targeted to sunset we also face
challenges sustaining athletics
fine arts and student activities
that keep students engaged in
connected with transportation
cars being a significant concern
rising insurance premiums and
the cost and instruction of
materials add yet another layer
of complexity.
Despite these challenges our
mission remains the same to
serve every student and family
with integrity innovation and
equity we deeply value the work
of our legislature and this
committee and we look forward to
continuing to advocate together
for the resources needed to
ensure every child the new
mexico has the opportunity to to
drive and thank you again for
your leadership and I appreciate
the time they very much support
ten reasons superintendent.
This
is
good morning when as yes well
i'm not a follow that minds not
quite like that because i'm the
little fish in the pond you know
here and done in a county and I
guess it's a good that i'm
between the two of them because
i'm the little one but good
morning when as yes i'm like to
thank the committee for allowing
me to share a little bit about
the hatch valley and you know
we're located in the chilly
capital of the world the best
time a year this time a year you
know with the with the aroma
then the smells that you know
rosing green chile a little bit
about has been public schools
we've got intended to rate of
about ninety two percent and one
of the things that we really
worked on is worked on a trading
culture her kids want to be in
school and that we feel like
we've really moved in and gained
and that area are enrollment we
have a declining and romant last
year we ended the year with just
under eleven hundred students
but since twenty twenty work
down about a hundred and seventy
two kids and so of course you
know and you have a decrease
evening enrollment you know
budget that impacts the budget
as well so we've been trying to
get the best bang for a buck and
everything that we do graduation
rate a little disappointed we
went down from ninety two
percent the previous year to
ninety percent but we're still
right at ninety percent of our
kids and graduation rate and so
we're probably very very proud
of that that our academics we've
been focused on two areas one is
to increase proficiency but the
other is to a decrease the
number of kids scoring and level
one because we don't get those
kids out of level one they're
always going to be behind
academically and so that's what
those are the two areas that
we're really focusing are scores
are now where they need to be
however we do have three years
of solid growth with our scores
and I I did have a hand out that
I gave uh the staffers and I
hope that they they will share
him with you but we're.
We we do have three years a
solid growth and so we know that
we're on the right track but
it's taken a smile to recover
from the pandemic and the
pandemic uh just really really
hit as hard hit our kids hard
and and so we're still
recovering but we know we're on
the right track I want to just
highlight our CTE programs
because that's one of the things
that we work really really hard
over the years and and this
committee and senators and
representatives that have helped
us to to really think outside
the box and create a career
pathways that are unique and too
not just a hatch value but to
the state in new mexico and
being that we're an agriculture
community just only made sense
to really really beef up or are
agrogram and so I knew this year
in our elementary schools it's a
we're going to be composting and
and raising worms and so that's
going to be good for for the
little rate but over the years
we've also have implemented
verified garden towers in our
elementary schools and kids it's
a learning tool and so kids
actually get to a monitor not
just the growth of plants and
and
vegetables that are growing in
there but also what it takes as
far as the ph level and and so
when you get little first
graders talking about ph levels
and the assidity and alkaline
and all the the vocabulary is
just incredible at our middle
school we got a a green house at
the legislature helped us fund
that and so that is going up
it'll be up before december at
our middle school and our high
school we've got a freight farm
and i'm if you're familiar with
freight forms but it is like
when those shipping containers
that's retrofitted to be able to
grow crops you're round in a
controlled environment and so
we're the only ones in the
stated into mexico that have one
of these and also their high
school is our bitternary clinic
and animal learning lab and we
just got that off the ground
this so last spring and we're
getting a going we partnered
with the doctor she mocker from
here in los cruces to be able to
provide.
A vet services but but more
importantly increased career
pathways for our kids and gives
them hands on learning and so as
far as I know I think we are the
only high school in the stating
to mexico that have been around
clinic on campus and it is it's
modeled after
um same kind of model of school
district in arizona kind of the
arizona and so that's where we
took the idea and and
implemented and and the hatch
valley I do in a highlight or
educators rising
we were at one time the only
bilingual chapter and the
country of ed rising and I don't
know that we can still say that
and and I mean that we can see
that in new mexico now uh as as
other chapters have come up with
our bining but it was a wave for
us to take the language and
really add value to it and so
we're raising kids were growing
kids that are going into the
education feel where
specifically
in the areas of bilingual
education I was just sharing
with a a superintendent democrat
that US news just released their
high school rankings yesterday
and and so i'm i'm glad to
report that at spelling high
school is considered one of the
top and the top one third of
high schools in the state of new
mexico and and I can tell you
that I can tell you the exact
numbers but I know done in the
county high schools or or doing
very very well and
I try to catch uh uh gadsten
school district because ours are
populations are so similar as
far as our demographics but it
seems like every time I take two
steps forward they're taking
five steps ahead of me and so we
were ranked last year or high
school number five I believe we
drop to number seven because he
had two of his high schools are
just out past us and so
you know encourage you to look
at that US news rankings
it it it does say a lot it uses
data from two thousand twenty
three and and some of two
thousand twenty four.
So it's little outdated however
it's the same metrics that we
use across the state in the
mexican across the country
challenges I just want to bring
to the committee's attention
attention.
Some of the issues that we're
having with kids that we do have
been i'm gonna say that we have
the best students and and the
state in new mexico not fence to
get center crucials but you know
we do have the best kids and but
you know just like any other
kids and any other districts and
and I talked to superintendents
across the seat in new mexico
one of the things that we're
seeing that is very very
troubling is the amount of
dating that is going on with
kids and you know specifically
there that we've seen more and
more kids that are eighteen thc
and so that that should be a
concern for everybody has as you
know as we continue to move
forward funding areas of funding
some of the things that and
ignore should already talked
about you know federal funding
and the decrease in in federal
funding but I do want to bring
up you know the the s e g and
and the nineteen b five
we have even though we have a
declining population a student
population we have an increasing
sped population and because of
that we've got to answer
services that is falling in
short funding for answer
services falling short and so I
just want to bring that to you
the intention of the committee
and and last this is my thirty
second year in education and and
in those thirty two years i've
worked by legal programs either
directly or indirectly and one
of the things that that I
continue to see that i'd like to
bring attention to is how we
fund how we find specifically
dual language programs
dual language programs are a
little bit different in end we
only get credit for three hours
and what I was told at one time
is the only reason we the reason
we get three hours is because
it's part time program you know
based on a six hour day only do
it for and that's true for other
program models due language
programs are there full six hour
programs and i'd like to just
bring that to your attention
because it does cost more to run
a dual language program.
It requires additional staff in
and an additional materials
because you've got to have both
english and spanish materials
and the costs you run abiting
the program a dual language
program this is a lot more a
significant than the other
models that we have and so I
just want to bring some
attention to that
and dual language we know that
according to research is the
best model uh to to operate you
know if we're talking about my
legal programs and so
but I just wanted to bring that
to your attention and and and
just let you know that you know
it it does fall short when
you're running at a dual
language program thank you so
much thank you for your support
a lot of these innovative
programs that we've been
implemented in and hatch or
because of your support I just
want to thank the committee
because we're doing great things
for kids and and where where
we're changing lives or model is
to improve the quality of life
for our kids and that's all
renewing and you guys have a
part in that when you support us
financially so thank you very
much thank you superintendent
superintendent
mister chair community members
thank you for the opportunity I
don't want to i'll echo some of
the same things that my
colleagues here have mentioned
lot of the same struggles
federal funding is a similar
component that I would say i'm
very concerned with the the
impact is could be significant
on us and and what I would say
is there's a lot of unknowns
with it right now um do a
language as a superintendent
chavis just shared even a when
when you think a dual language
and hear that term understand
that there's multiple models
underneath that and so a true
door language fifty fifty model
taste takes a spanish component
and in english component so
obvious it's twice the cost you
can still have a dual language
program and call itself
contained that's one teacher
that's less research again say
that's a little less effective
than a true dual language fifty
fifteen models we have to
understand those components of
it.
And and then you ask yourself
what what the serves your
community the best some of the
things that gadston you know I
appreciate my colleagues here
sharing some things
I think we have worked really
hard and focused on
making sure the students finish
you know get across the finished
graduation rate we're really
proud of three years in a row
we've posted the highest
graduation in graduation rates
in district history and based on
our research when the next room
gets released it'll happen again
our proficiency rates are up the
current I provided a hand out to
you and and part of that is I
don't I don't want to beat up
beat everybody up with data but
I also want you to know that
nobody at that in the in this
chair and superintendence is
afraid of accountability we
embrace it we want to show you
where a numbers are and we want
to show you that we can move
them
academically I think we've made
the right decisions in the right
steps for a community I am in a
declining enrollment so i'm
having to make some pretty
significant decisions we're
working on a three year
financial plan to ensure that
the district can maintain
programs but also right size
what we're doing that has
involved we've already
consolidated two elementary
schools were probably working on
two more over the next three
years so we we are watching that
very closely I know one of the
factors that hadn't come up yet
but this committee watches is
cash ballots
and and I want you to know that
as promised something you'd have
been on this committee a while
you've talked to me about my
cash balance it's grown over the
last probably three or four
years this year is the first
year it's decreased in fact
that's true state wide the state
wide average of cash balances
has decreased for me
as I promised you are we're
adding six grade stem academies
to all of our middle schools
gadston middle school
construction project has begun
and we funded about a hundred
percent it's above adequacy and
all middle schools over the next
five years will have a new six
great stem academy as a part of
that model.
And again I appreciate the
opportunity i'm always open for
any questions
thank you very much
superintendent democrat and
thank you to the superintendents
for being here I know we'll have
some questions and cher souls
thank you for being here today
next we're gonna go to our
county commission chair uh
commissioner chair
good morning chairman spon
committee members
thank you for calling done
county home for the majority of
this week
like determines that my name is
christopher shelder nondashand
i'm currently the chair of
donate county boarded
commissioners I have also called
done in a home for almost twenty
years
I moved down to finish school at
mse.
And it has been a joy to live
here and call his home in serve
the people that I love
our commission has been very
busy over the last twelve months
we have on boardered new county
manager mister scott andrews
we've been working diligently on
trimming down our ici p list to
be good stewards of state
funding we're looking at going
forth to bond for a gobon tier
done yeah to work on quality of
life initiatives.
And the band will sue to balance
the needs and quality of life in
our large predominantly rural
community role and sprawling and
support future economic
development opportunities
specifically
we have updated and reformed our
icip list which was really big
for our commission as you know
icip processes across the state
or.
Are loud and busy in the full of
information and once in needs
our approach this year included
we removed any projects under
five hundred thousand dollars to
look at other funding to get
those funded and finished
quicker we pause most facility
projects pending the outcome of
our master plan that we're doing
here locally.
We're primarily focusing on
projects and wastewater flood
protection in public safety.
As a result our total list one
from eighty I c I p projects
down to ninety projects leaving
enough room for additional
capital outlay projects by
legislators
our top five I c I p projects I
just want to know quickly is the
south central was water system
reabilitation plan though brown
diversion channel construction
which is our dragonfly flood
project real time crime center
the rtc fire rescue and south
central wastewater labor
renovations and expansion which
is all primarily utilities and
flood projects like I stated.
Our priorities are reflective of
what our community is working
through and where I want to
share some of our best practices
in november twenty twenty three
we adopted our county strategic
plan.
Which is what we're funding in
what what we're finding is as
that we're basing everything
that we're doing here with our
budget at dona as well as our
projects in the future based on
the strategic plan which used.
Vital conditions which are kind
of best practices if you well
and I know that earth is in
county manager missius uh shared
some of this yesterday but
reliable transportation natural
thriving world base needs or
health in safety human human
housing meaningful work and
wealth life long learning and
civic belonging or the civic
muscle component I myself chose
a humane housing
and natural thriving world so
natural tharaving world is going
to be that clean air access to
to water so I all healthy
ecosystems
and housing we're looking at
adequate space for you and your
family safe structures and the
affordability concept component
of that as well without
gentrification segregation or
concentrated poverty.
Some other things that we've
been doing is.
We've we've had a couple
disasters in the last few few
weeks
july twenty twenty four the b o
c c put out a a ducklard and
declaring bottom flooding a
disaster but we did something
really unusual and really unique
we put a monetary relief portion
on that disaster proclamation
which bright money into people
that were displaced whether it
was for a short time or a long
time and by doing that.
It helped we saw people needing
that assistance right away and
as far as I know it was the
first one done in the state
where we actually were able to
set aside money
to take her the situation right
then in there we were waiting
for the state assistance we
weren't waiting for a few months
to come in we were able to give
people that that relief and it
was huge and were very bust in
to be in that point that we are
able to do that we had money out
within the next week to make
sure that people had somewhere
to go.
Um some really great news is
that female moved into our
bodied el zero community center
yesterday they are starting that
process meeting with
constituents meeting with
property owners down there to
make sure that they're being
taken care of after the bottom
floods and when you think about
it that was six hundred homes
that were that we're touched by
this disaster so we have a lot
on her plate and we're doing it
as best we can.
Talking about the one hundred
forty million dollar bond
referendum that we're putting
out and will be making big
strides I just I apologize I am
entire today we've been doing
our community meetings and I was
in mosquito last night meeting
with residents talking about the
bond talking about how this is
going to affect their community
and left up what they've been
working on locally uhm
so some potential investments
from that go band which we tied
directly to our strategic plan
is going to be quality of life
and when you uplift quality of
life economic development kind
of surrounds those projects so
we're looking at improvements to
our current community centers
are current facilities that we
have bringing more life culture
and diversity to those centers
looking at doing more outdoor
and indoor recreation maybe some
regional centers
i've been really interested in
what hobsded with the core
facility it's fantastic and I
would love to see maybe one or
two of those here and donata to
bring that indoor recreational
that center of excellence um you
know having a space for you and
your family to grow and uh
thrive here in done a county
we've also looked at doing some
some improvements to our donate
a county fairground southern new
mexico fare is huge for us down
here and we want to kind of
bring an uplift that experience
if possible as well but not only
that we're also looking at some
major improvements and
investments into our road
infrastructure or water and
wastewater infrastructure is
what is those flood projects
that I mentioned earlier.
This band kind of started and it
a couple several months ago in
after everything that's been
happening in our community we we
are having to shift a little bit
our priorities to really meet
the community where they're out
and what they're needing right
now
at our next meeting our
commission will take action
on this combined to put it on
the ballot for november seventh
um with that being said i'm
really excited to share these
exciting things with you all I
think we're moving in the right
direction we are we're thriving
here in donation I want to say
thank you for coming down and
thank you for spending the week
with us so appreciate it
thank you very much commission
chair and I want to recognize
our district attorney mister
feder none the macias thank you
for being here and thank you for
your work
and now will turn over to mary
and recase and I also want to
give a special thank you to
marin ricas to city manager and
the entire team but especially
mayor thank you for allowing us
to use this facility and for the
city really supporting it so
thank you very much mister and
more without will go to you
or thank you chair smalls and
good morning to everyone and
welcome to the city of los
cruises were so happy that
you're here and as I mention the
on monday when we talk to the
water natural resource committee
and senator accomplished
reminded me here in las cruces
are the message of alliand hatch
valley we we have five seasons
we have our normal springs and
summer and winner and fall but
we also have chilly season and
you are here right now in chile
season the best time to be here
in this area so so I hope you
enjoy I hope you have a great
visit in a great time I mean
here before you today with an
attitude of gratitude we we we
thank you for all the support I
believe last year we've got
close to
seven million or so in the
capital outlay.
Uh funding that we use for
infrastructure for housing for
public safety and and will
continue will continue to move
in that direction and everything
else you know the city of last
cruises has a theme that we say
are moving forward on the
lantern concar renewal caring
you as a term of india men love
and affection and
I o hope we've demonstrated that
with the hospitality with a
convention center and with the
swag that was provided that
they're hopefully you all enjoy
and that again thank you to the
city manager and his staff for
providing that those those give
aways and and and goodies for
you all
but moving along with with
caring your umm we've we've
partnered with the last christ
as public score they have the
theme of the for reaching having
students that reach their
potential in our thriving in the
school so we've partnered
renewal
driving concarn you and we go to
the schools in the
superintendent school board
members mayor council we all
recognize students that are
thriving with garanial and it's
a great partnership and it's
something that we're were very
proud of in our community that
we have that relationship with
with our schools back in march
twenty one
is a tragic day for last
crucials we had incident at one
of our local parks were three
juveniles were were were killed
in the senseless killing with
with a firearms and it really
shocked or community and it was
devastating and one of those
things is is partnering with the
schools
attendance the program that I
know they are advocating for for
a career technical education for
civility.
And program that that is
something that we totally
support here in los crucials
because we care about our youth
we care about our youth in this
community and this is a great
panel to hear what
superintendents are doing
throughout our our city in our
county and and knowing that we
can all partnered together but
we need some help we need some
support we need some funding
especially for that c t program
and here with the city of los
crucials we increased our g r t
a point three two percent for
public safety critical
infrastructure that so that
would help us and we're moving
in that direction and will
continue to move there but we've
all we we always need this
support and we're very thankful
for the support that you give us
and we look to see how we can
help the squales and the youth
and our community as well so
again thank you all for being
here we're happy you hear enjoy
your your visit in your time and
thank you.
Excellent thank you very much
mister we've got until nine so
we're going to go right to
questions starting with senator
chairman.
Thank you mister chairman
appreciate being here thank you
all and it's next year the good
news about education achievement
and that all three districts are
and I live in this area I know
it well but our functioning so
well if you could each talk a
little bit more and uh challenge
you talk in hatch but more about
the specific CTE programs that
you've got and how they're
matched with needs within the
community and and moving forward
for as my first question.
Center to thank you for the
question what I would were to
share with you in in gas and are
you going to keep in mind that
gadston encompasses nine small
communities and trying to meet
the needs of those unique so the
northern half which I would call
the gast in feeder that is going
to be very traditional
you're gonna have to have a
great agg program which we do
you're gonna have to have
probably a nag structures or
welding shop type programming
are welding program is done a
fabulous job
with that yourself see colonary
now we've tried to increase like
biomedical pathways and project
project lead the way with those
engineering pathways and we
tried to plant those in each
school okay
senators has also a very
traditional welding program and
culinary
again that particular it comes
down to your teachers a lot of
times and and in centuries a
have a very strong individual
are a couple individuals focused
on projectly doing such
engineering pathways can in a
chaperelle who have a fabulous
journalism type program that
allows those kids and
opportunity and multimedia and
all kinds of pieces of that so
that that's what I would share
about gasting in our c t
pathways and thanks I know we
don't have a lot of time so just
kind of very quickly and had you
kind of shared the the two that
i'm aware of the the uh
container farm type of thing in
the veterinary program but
superintendent uh senator soles
want one thing we have very
similar programs that ah travel
just mention but when you need
one that that I wanted to
mention is our aviation program
where it offers an opportunity
for kiddles to be able to uh
graduate or or a pathway to a
pilots license and and again
take it to your support for that
program and it's it's it's
offering some you know just a
unique opportunity for kids and
the lasting allowed to that is
our goal is also to be able to
to focus in on the building
trades.
To be able to offer that
opportunity across the district
right now we have a program and
organ mountains is very
successful with the building
trades we partner with the
buildings association at the end
of the year we actually
participate in building a home
like a habitat for humanity type
type of project but we won't
offer those opportunities
because we know that that is
where uh the the uh the growth
is going to happen in the need
for for employee employment or
employee opportunities and
that's where uh as marine
vehicles mention being able to
support a a cte center here here
in the in las crucials to offer
those opportunities across the
community.
Thank you mister chair and panel
can still on education but it
also pulls in the city and stuff
to talk about the summer
internet program that were
couple you had been going very
well and glitches this year but
the plans for that moving
forward.
I I can speak a little bit and
then i'll turn it over to our
county and city partners uh just
a great opportunity for kids to
be able to get those work work
out of work experiences that
county has been a great partner
and being a fiscal agent with
the the support of our
legislature and and the one
thing that I would as far as
some for support and advocacy is
to be able to expand and utilize
the those dollars not only in
the summer but to be able to
provide opportunities for a kids
throughout the year and so that
we can offer those opportunities
not only for the two and a half
months etcetera that that that
there were limit to although
it's a very
valuable experience and
appreciate also our business
community here in the in our
city but also to expand those
programs or that that those
resources and the budget to be
able to utilize that throughout
the year
and just like to just add that I
just want to recognize from on
the most serious because
under his leadership we were
able to grow that program that
one of the things in moving
forward and some of the hiccup
so we had this last year that
that I would like in the the
county to understand is that and
hatch it's going to look a
little bit different because we
don't have the industry that did
fifty similar industries we
don't have you know the industry
where we can do these career
pathways you know and so a lot
of times with with our kids even
we're replacing about fifty kids
fifty to eighty kids just
depends on on the year
however our work experience is
going to look a little bit
different than what's offered
here in in
las crucials and and that's
something that that we have to
take and consideration and so
our focus is really really
focusing on work ethic soft
skills and in that type of thing
you know hands on and and it's
gonna look different because a
lot of kids are out in the
fields are working agriculture
the work in the sheds that
working some of the businesses
that we have in the village but
we don't have you know some of
th.
The big industry that that last
christmas doesn't so it needs to
look different we need to have
some flexibility to be able to
run it for in the hatch valley
little bit differently
I think senator and committee
members what I would what I
would what I would add to that
is.
We had this this last year for
all being clear we had a
significant reduction of the
amount of students we were able
to employ and those unfortunate
and under mr maciasus direction
and and really it was his desire
to see that grow and expand and
the opportunities are believed
yesterday the committee got
taken a little filled trip down
in my area and you see the
potential of what might be there
and I would I would encourage
everyone to see this as an
investment in her youth and and
the hope is then our youth
during the summer or throughout
the school year they don't have
the time to be doing things out
of community that aren't good we
want to doing things in our
community that are good and so
if we all see that as an
investment in the amount of time
we can spend on it I think
that's important
thank you mister chair I don't
want to take up too much of the
time but just one last question
dealing with affordable housing
which I the place things we have
somewhere around several
thousand of our children that
are and house at this point and
struggling with that what kinds
of things do you need as far as
help from the state to help
leverage affordable housing
construction and things in this
area and that may be I know the
country is looking at that with
your geo bonds uh so that's more
of a city county but what are we
doing to ensure we've got
affordable housing for people
which is so much of a root of
other social problems when
people are on the house
thank you mister chair center
souls.
The county is definitely
starting to get better at
getting in the housing game in
in the past we haven't really
done that we've been working
with our community partners like
terrorist also missy valley
public housing and others to and
the city of loss christmas as
well as of late to hope with
that housing.
Issue in our community the
county is now listening more so
to community what the needs are
and I think we're making the
right steps in the right
direction to start leveraging
those private public funds as we
did with terrible sale and I
think when we're looking at
bottom in the future there is
well we're really thinking about
what the future of housing is
for our communities so it's
something new to the county that
we're getting involved with but
we're excited to start looking
at that through the go bond in
our community partners.
Yes chair and senator soles yeah
the city of los cruises is more
than forward with with housing
we've had several projects that
have just recently
been completed we have some that
are in in the construction fees
right now and we have several
that are a shovel ready to move
forward I think at the last
though either a work session
that we had I think just what
we're moving forward and an
update with housing we had like
four hundred and fifty five
units that are or are in the
works and so it's it's looking
real good for los crucials were
moving in that direction we
appreciate the support that
we've been receiving from our
legislators and in the state for
funding and we're we're just
going to keep on growing we we
have some infrastructure that's
fake in place and our community
and with the development of four
thousand new homes forty percent
of those are going to be
affordable housing that that
development is dedicated for so
we're we're just continuing to
to move forward with housing
have to give a shout out to our
or housing coordinator naturally
green she's doing a super job
she's always on top of it and
ready and always moving forward
with partners to to get these
are how was in projects
accomplished
thank you mister charges to last
comments first our three school
districts are great places for
students getting by lingual
certificates in all three of
them that where we recognize do
a language and speaking to
languages is an advantage and so
I know we're turning out watson
in that area and when invite
anyone on the committee you're
watching uh the earth yesterday
here I think it's our saturday
of october twenty fifth twenty
fourth there is a big public
reception with the air racers
and stuff if you're in los
crucials please come you won't
be disappointed thank you.
Excellent thank you very much
senator soles next we're we've
got five more folks center woods
of silver from seven garrett
reps of dow incentive since
thank you.
My question has to do with
what's the total g r t rate for
the city of las crucials.
And if you don't know that I
don't mean to put jones but I
did I just wondered about
finance in the lot of stuff here
and I was wondering how much of
it is finance to the g r t.
Yeah those are some numbers I
don't have the exact specific I
don't know where it eight eight
point something
with with the increase of the
point three to the that has
taken place where we're we're
somewhere it eats something I
don't know if we have staffed it
here
eight point six two five
thank you chris
and you said some of that are
special and increments.
What what special incrementary
do you have right now what would
with that
increase that went to the voters
for an increase in it was it was
for public safety and critical
infrastructure and that's what
that point three two is which is
estimated about eleven million a
year that it would generate for
the city of los cruises and how
much that michel chair sorry to
leave the out of the discuss
mister
on the road fund how are you
financing your roads.
You're you're have your cities
street your your your seek quite
a bit a road construction around
large crucials how is that being
finites is that state how we
money
grant cher small and senator
woods that that it can come from
different funding sources when
we're looking at uh state roads
that's DO t department of
transportation state funding
when we're looking at our public
are are streets that the city
maintains and takes care of
that's from our general fund
that comes from our grt.
I have the city manager here
he's got all the the the exact
details in data
chairman small
legislators you can't don't want
to be our city manager thank you
mare so we have a mixture of
funds as the mayor mentioned we
have a grt uh bond that the
legislators
are are elected officials
approved and then I went to the
voters and that that was passed
this past year that raises about
a hundred and eighty million
dollars for us
every every year it's about
eleven million dollars that that
we accrue but we can use that uh
uh to bond for a hundred and
eighty million these are one of
the things where we come to you
as a city where we don't want to
come with full open hand but we
want to do our part into what we
can for critical infrastructure
in this year to it's only for
critical infrastructure there's
no personal cost that a pays for
so this is critical
infrastructure as a mere share
this is for roads but in
addition to that even before
this year to bond we had to
something which all cities have
its the assessor to so this
happens as a cycling bond that
were forty two as a municipality
we get every two to four years a
certain allotted amount that
comes to about ten million
dollars in addition to what we
get in our regular tax revenues
from property taxes and
guarantee that this is something
that we're able to sustain along
with other municipalities in the
state thank you so so with their
mission chair ensure
how bachelor water writes.
Have you got adequate water
rates for you grows.
Our water writes
chairman small uh legislators
are our water rights right now
or
are threatened we have um
we we have done don't work
it's a complicated issue and
what you don't want to do that's
fine okay okay
on your your.
On the county
what what is the
what is the debit card grt
in the county and the city how
much difference is in the two
grt
I would have to look at the
exact number it is a lower g r t
than the city we also encompass
a lot of other municipality is
as well and and how is your
funding
from the state highway
department on your road I are
you getting enough local money
local
state money from the road
department from dot
do you want the political answer
would you hit the factual answer
on we have great working
relationships with the stadio
team we have a lot of ongoing
projects here we would always
love more more of an influx of
money in our community of course
to work on those
roadway safety issues my
district comprises a lot of
highway twenty eight highway
twenty eight everyone's favorite
bicycling activity on the
weekend it's a two lane highway
and it goes straight through
strong and farms that the
beautiful roadway and it goes
through all the historic law
areas between you know it goes
through all have patricks school
district and there's huge safety
concerns there people are
getting side swiped on their
bikes there's not a bike lane
it's it's not a safe roadway and
I I think when we're looking at
those things we could always use
more money but the thing is as
that we have a great
relationship with an mdot we are
able to go to them with our
comments questions and concerns
their incommunity getting that
feedback and they're they're
responsive to us so I have to
say where were in a good place
with that but we would love to
see more investment in in our
bigger projects okay one last
question mr chair.
In the county
is there enough property
turnover but you're able to keep
your mill rate pretty steady or
you have in two
to
increase.
You look to be a very much a
growing county and with that I
would expect a lot of turnover
of a real property
and I would expect that you
should have to you you shouldn't
have to increase the property
tax too much
to cover your expenses uh this
yes or no now will be time i'll
get you off the hook no worries
mr chair yes are we are a large
growing county or mill rate is
very steady I believe our madam
assessor
is looking at doing a rear
prison program internally
over the next few years but our
mill rate is very study the
unincorporated parts of the
county is low and we are having
a lot of property turnover that
is keeping that mel rate pretty
study as well
thank you very much thank you
thank you very much we're gonna
go to percent of silver then
represent
think you chair think you offer
being here this morning I
appreciate it as of one of the
few people here and that's based
on last cruces and also glad
that you all are here talking to
this committee age one and
continue the conversation that
senator soles brought around e
have talked to
a number of you are will be
talking to you shortly in the
next couple of weeks about it
but some of the data that we
heard in the last session was
a case for making cte
night recurring in the budget
and partly because we couldn't
track and we couldn't tell from
the data whether the kids that
are in cte are graduating at
higher rates because those kids
with a graduated at those rates
anyways or if it was actually
making the difference and so
superinking out of recent I
meant and there's data from last
crucial's public schools.
Where he can call the date of
school district pulled the date
of all the categories of
students that are of fallen to
the martinez yazi
decision and that those kids are
graduating at higher rates when
they are in a te program and so
I I would wonder you know is
their data for both hatch valley
schools and forgets independent
school districts that can that
can show that similar data
because I would like to make a
case for why one cte increases
graduation rates I believe it's
an anti crime program and and
then all the the men in my
family I I consider successful
because they were in CTE there
and auto vica there were an fa
and I come from a family of
farmers and mechanics and so
how we're building out that
pipeline for folks is really for
students is really important for
me side wonder if you have
anything to speak on
the data that were creating so
that we can make a case for
making that line item or a
portion of that recording thank
you chair.
Thank you representatives silver
definitely as we pull the data
and and and and the research
shows across the country the
success of c t programs in and
graduation rates I know the
state there was a report i'll
also hear in the state of new
mexico that showed that we took
a loaded little further in in
las crucial's public schools and
analyze are again understand
student groups such as you
mentioned with the martinez yazi
and our data also shows that
kiddles that participate and at
least complete two we call them
completers which is at least two
courses of the pathway are
graduating at a higher rate than
their then the you know the
kiddles that are not in in that
program is
is to increase that that
participation part of that is
also the work experience that I
spoke about earlier that's
another huge piece and in the in
the summer and again having that
opportunity to expand that
through what the year and soul
at and I spoke about the cte
center is not just about the
center it is all again offering
the opportunities for our
students to have those those
experiences and be able to do
that personally my youngest son
went through a c t program and
was hired and is as is doing
great and and novada and so III
I truly believe in that but not
just that the data speaks for
itself
mr chair representative so
I just want to say I I started
working c t programs back in two
thousand and twelve and one of
the things that stood out in as
far as data and what you're
talking about is
we were receiving perkins fund
way back then and and we
continue this is a back in the
damning district but now i'm in
the hatch district and it's the
same thing we're required to
figure if you receive a prokins
funds you're required to track
the data to
disaggregate the kids that are
directly involved in a c t
program and as a superintendent
just mentioned.
You know the the more that the
kids do the completers the more
successful they are and so since
two thousand twelve and tracking
their data and and it it doesn't
kids do have a higher graduation
rate they do have higher
proficiency scores and all
around it's just it's a it's a
good program student success
that's one of the the areas that
and that's why became so
involved in cte because from way
back then when I started working
to I saw the benefits and then
the impact that was having on
our kids
mr chair representative so the
only thing I would add is and I
would encourage you to spend
time with mister chairman she's
very humble gentlemen but he is
truly a c t expert and if you
need to pick someone's brain
about it he definitely is the
person to talk to but like he
mentioned every one of us
tracked those and we call them
completers that data is very
easy to access
think your chair thank you
superintendence I also for the
record when I know a progratuate
of the gets independent school
districts so go panthers
and is a final question is for
commissioners saldo if members
the
in terms we
someone parks on that there is a
yesterday there are number of
residents who are concerned
about their water quality and
crew and wondering what the
counties i'm strategy is for
improving the water systems out
there for that community
and
and is that part of the go band
strategy as well the future
thank you mister chair
representatives so that yes so
thank you for going down there
in the community thing for
taking all of see I think that
was great
as far as what we're doing the
county is meeting on a weekly
basis with the city of someone
park and crew to start looking
at that process and what that
looks like i'm as you know the
county started the process.
Earlier this year too
to separate from crewer and to
relook at that water system in
the way that we can bust her
those residents
the go band does have a large
portion and does have a very big
narrative around infrastructure
that being water wastewater
broadband in the roads and it is
the full intent of the
commission as well as county
staff and county administrators
to make sure that we're writing
that wrong and we're doing so by
first getting into the community
understanding where those issues
are working better with crewid
to understand what we can do to
kind of
up left them to give them the
tools in the resources that we
need to to get that done we did
hire affirm their currently
looking at all the system in
system wide what's in their
white what we can do to kind of
fix those issues for the short
term but looking at the long
term strategy of where the money
needs to be putting those
investments in that so yeah
that's one hundred percent of
part of the go bind we're trying
to figure out how big of a
percentage of the go band that's
going to be and over the course
of the last three weeks we've
done I think I was number ten or
eleven in the community meetings
and I have another one tonight
and we're getting that
information from the community
and we are hearing the users of
cry and their needs and we're
definitely taking that to heart
for the future but we're doing
everything that we can at the
county I know that the city of
someone park is
going down that pathway with us
and i'm hoping that we come out
and serve crew better in those
residents
great think you chair and think
you offer being here today thank
you
next we have reps have gear it
then reps have dow and incentive
to buy a stand and senator the
nearest since he spent time down
here
sorry are upset out please.
Wish to change the me
arto next year's side apologies
for a seven gerard and then
represent apologies from some
thinking this you check thank
you all superintendent
challenges you've had me
I but thousands of where was for
science projects and that's very
profound what you shared my
first question is all three of
you mentioned the introduces of
dual language funding so I just
want to say several of us here
on house education senate
education lac and shortly i'm
going to be when you see me
texting it's not social i'm
gonna text john sano and just
has wait elia to take a deeper
dive because those programs are
video and
my other question is for
superintendent jamsea I know
that there's a lot of taiwanese
people moving in the sanitary
said that they had asked if the
school could be started has
there been any talks of a dual
language chinese language
program.
Sorry mr chair up a
representative there there has
been some preliminary
conversations around that and
and just like anything we've got
to figure out as I mentioned our
student roman is dropping and so
i've got to figure out the
financial forecaster or guess at
the financial forecast of this
typically in public education we
look one year out i'm trying to
look three and four years out
and this is going to be a trick
and as you mentioned
funding any form of the dual
language program is expensive
and it depends on the model and
with the declining enrollment
i've got to be very thoughtful
around so there is definitely
consideration
we have great partnerships with
the senator that's a terrible
foundation and they do some
terrific stuff for kidos and we
always want to do the work to
serve them and and serve our
communities
thank you and just I mean it's
an indication of our world as
small and new mexico
connected to east asia at friend
of mine from phoenix is korean
but the old school in ring code
which is the earn representative
so it's interesting what's
happening thank you
thank you very much for
represent get wall
let's go to senator to biason
and then we'll come back to
center civilized.
Thank you mr chair i'm at super
antenna I am really intrigued by
the sixth grade stem academy
could you explain the structure
of that and who attends then
just a little more information
about that program mister chair
senator absolutely so what we
you know that the way we've
tried to grow this and and we've
tried to build it to where um
currently we have are our
elementary models as a case
I I spent a lot of time as a
middle school teacher I really
wrestle with six grade being in
elementaries i'm not sure it's
the right fit so this would give
us a chance to change that model
to a six eight model with our
middle schools now the stem
academy the pieces of this is we
want we definitely each
anyone that's actually assigned
to six script to the academy has
to have some form of a stem
endorsement so we're going to
have to build that out we're
already working on those pieces
we want it to align with our
project lead the way and so what
we've done to try to build that
is we have partner with legal
education pre cathrooms through
six to make sure we're getting
some of those hands on pieces
but some coding components
already built into that we have
a drone program that starts at
her uprelamentary and would
would then tight right directly
into our middle schools and so
those are the kind of the pieces
that we've tried to use the
hooks for the students and we
want to make sure we put the
right staff in front of them
we're gonna we're looking for
hands on tight projects more
project based learning and that
takes a little bit of work in
terms of professional revelement
and tremendous amount of
planning for our teacher so you
can't
assume teachers
can naturally do those type of
things and we don't want to make
those assumptions we want to
plan for it
mr cherry superintendent cell
are you telling me this is a
separate academy children have
to choose to go to this academy
or is it all sixth graders
mister chair senator all six
greater this opportunities who
are very excited we're only it
we're we're gonna do it in
clusters of gaston middle school
be the.
First middle school completed
and the the the elementaries
that feed that pattern will be
the first screens at the first
ones and step academy shape real
middle is in design process
that'll be next and then senator
lesson will be the third
thank you mister chair and
superintendent if you would give
me your card before you leave
today i'd appreciate that thank
you excellent thank you very
much
we'll go to europe sent down
them will conclude with center
line thank you mr chair and
thank you for the presentations
I have to brag a little bit
committee on hatch valley um
they are a designated
agriculture full agricultures
were focused what is the
official name of what you've
adopted for your school
designation
I don't know if we are benefit
all earn fizal designation or
anything like that we did get
the branding of the mex got true
for a free farm and the
the letter said we're pretty but
we've been producing them there
but we're also looking at other
crops thank you mister chairman
and and thank you superintendent
we I I it's very very impressive
that particularly the veterinary
and clinic can you give us an
update where you are on that and
if you've gotten to the point
where you're able to address the
street domestic animal or I
guess chickens to I don't know
if they're domestic animal but
are you are you being able to
partner with the city or the
village of hatch and resolve
some of those issues that are
cannot
left in the dust with their
remote locality in the county
yes
I just wanted to say the
this is it's been a vision it's
been something that we've been
working on one of the things
that I truly believe in is how
do we bridge between the schools
and and your community because I
can believe it needs to be a
partnership and so one of the
things that we did have is we
had a we had a lack of better
reservices and so anybody that
needed
to have their animals looked at
they'd have to drive with you to
last crucials to see damning and
bill was emergency overtell
passal.
And so so what we did was we
looked at this as an issue
because there was a lot of
screen animals straight args cat
that sort of thing and so
so we thought while keyword if
if we could create this versa
center and be able to create
career pathways for our kids but
also benefit the community it's
a win win situation and so we
did open up in the spring we
don't have kids and they get
we're working on that now where
having to work through some
scheduling issues but they are
providing the services currently
and so what that will do is it
not just small animals but also
grooming
we have a dog grooming
component do that and so we're
we're fixing to launch that as
well but we just finish the
first space of this and that's
the small animal piece the
second phase of this is going to
be going to construction in the
next month and that's the large
animal facility and so will be
able to not only service so
you know people with small
animals in and the community but
also a ranching
Have licensee issues you've got
to
Industry
Couple things that I would add
to that is just stable stable
funding
you know in the seg as well this
capital outlet for any type of
you know building type of a
project so those are the two big
pieces that I would better would
add to that
all right thank you general then
thank you chairman
so if we go back to the staffing
issue if if removing more kids
into a cte program
or are we taking kids out of
other classes where we can move
maybe a teacher over from
something else and move them
into the program you know is
that a possibility there and if
so how how is the ped department
working with with you as super
tenants to bring back CTE as it
is a main focus.
But what I would say is it
wouldn't necessarily take kids
out of out of other classes in
in when i'm hearing here chair
and a senator
in regards to the staff in what
we have some staffing to
leverage and unnecessarily this
would be more like an elective
tight pathway that we would
incorporate also with her with
our grad rates i'm sorry whether
will the new graduation
requirements another component
that's included in there as an
option you know is an option to
for us to be able to incorporate
I would say wouldn't that we we
will not be able to leverage
other teachers potentially
that's something that we could
potentially analyze I don't see
that at this point what was the
other the second party to
question I apologize just how
the mister how the ped
department
are you working with the pet
department to get these programs
started again and up and running
uh mister chair
right now these are non
recurring funds and that's where
that's where the challenge comes
in right so it's it's not
something that we can depend on
every year
for us for it as far as this
cruises public schools one of
our challenges is a capital
outlet when I mention having the
centralized type of cte
environment for a kids that take
capital outlet money that is not
accessible through the current
model that we have or funding
model through for that we
currently receive
okay thank you and mister chair.
Be an on senate finance and
being on LFC
this is a hot topic for us and
and if we can help you navigate
some of that please let us know
I I think everybody in the room
things that it's very very
important and and we need to get
back to that I don't want I want
to make sure that we don't
forget the the kindergarten
through fourth graders we got to
get them to learn how to read
and write our rates are horrible
I don't I don't want to focus on
on ct so much that we forget to
drive that that reading and
method mathematics chair and and
center really quick on that when
you say reading a writing that
is incorporated throughout your
and actually this is real real
world type of application a math
real world application of
reading etcetera so it actually
at the research really shows
that it does increase the the
the stood and outcomes within
reading rating math etc within
those programs as well
yesterday I totally greek I I
think that is that's the thing
that we have been missing for a
few years so but I appreciate
you gentlemen mister chairs
thank you thank you central and
they're certain I used to have a
very quick question here it'll
be real bring thank you mister
chair thank you general and sort
with their thank you
Setting back home so are pretty
proud of what he does but i'm on
school board unit so just a
natural quickly talking about
the cte if you made partnership
with industry so if you've got
welding and and it is I cause
are you looking at the
we at the junior called years
ago would be all the tump up
dumpster thanks for the
community while the the people
would bring in the mate to play
the they pay for locks settling
for while iran we would build
them it was their material there
product but we use the welders
in the class to build and i'm
just wondering that there was
real benefit for us we've got to
see ts call and hardener i'll
support but it it all the
communities came together to
help on that it has grown so
much the school district no
longer has any opening so we're
gonna have to build our own even
though we participated but
there's that much demand for cd
but i'm just going on that
financial side if you guys
heading partners with any of the
industry leaders.
You know and chair
senator here in las cruces what
we've done is o we have AAA
committee of of a folks around
the the community and and
specifically unions we met with
their unions the different uh
the the trades there willing and
ready to to support and help
financially it's a tough peace
now we've had some partners that
would you know they keep going
back to the cte center that are
even willing to build and help
us bill the center where we get
we're parameters in our
challenges are is within the ps
a fa piece etc right so but but
that I can say that partners are
there we have several we we have
a committee probably of twenty
different organizations and
entities that are ready to
support and see the importance
of this it's now and the funding
side to be able to get this
going back partnerships in
regards to curriculum
partnerships in regards
to electricians coming in a
working other teachers and our
students and giving of the real
world guidance and experience so
that is ready to go it's just if
we build it there will come I
guess sort of a thing
thank you for mischange I guess
hobbs is
because they do not have
capacity stock thank you
thank you very much for your guy
goes thank you all panel as we
really appreciate it and look
forward to
continuing this week working
very closely together and thank
you to the members for really
great questions and engagement
with that will turn loose and
thank you all very much and
we're going to go ahead and
invite up our
mister jorgenson
for the funding of performance
through the higher education
funding.
In mr you can point us for the
right tab
thank you good morning mister
chairman members my name is
conner jorgenson i'm v LFC
analyst for higher education
we're going to be working off of
this packet it's behind tab c in
your binders the title of which
is funding performance through
the higher education funding
formula.
It will go ahead because we have
sort of an echo in the room will
ask folks to take the
conversations outside
and what maybe
yeah go ahead and war maybe our
staff can help guide folks
outside we can continue uh the
collaboration there
and will turn it over to we'll
turn it back to you mister
jorgenson
thank you mr chairman so
if you'll turn to page two we
can jump right into the
mechanics of the higher
education funding formula
so I want to just make a couple
of
points before we get into into
actually how the funding formula
works.
The first point that I think is
important is that the funding
formula is a base plus
allocation methodology that
means that it's always going to
protect the current year based
funding and add to it running
the the funding formula will not
result in any institution losing
funding it will only add funding
the second point is that the
formula is not defined in statue
it's not like the public
education funding formula the
formula is worked on every year
by a technical group that
includes LFC and dfa staff as
well as egd and uh institutional
representation so they form a
technical committee and
recommend changes to the formula
on an annual basis but you do
not have to change statute in
order to change the funding
formula the last point is it the
funding formulas dealing only
with ing so that's instruction
in general funding for base
operations it does not cover
rpsp funds so those are your
research and public service
project line items and it does
not cover categorical funding
that would be things like
educational television and
athletics those are their own
line items
so getting back to that sharp if
you start on the top right hand
side you can see the prior year
base that's what
the increases are based on so in
this case for FY twenty five it
was eight hundred forty two
point nine million dollars was
your ing base if you go one box
over to the left a policy
decision was made by the
legislature to save we want to
increase ing appropriations by
two point five percent that came
out to about twenty one point
one million dollars in new money
so that's what we're talking
about flowing through the.
Formula is only that twenty one
point one million and new money.
So how does it get broken up and
divide up through the formula
you go one row down you'll see
that new money is split twenty
percent of it you'll see that on
the right hand side of the page
goes to mission specific
measures while eighty percent of
it goes to shared performance
measures shared measures are
broken up into two different
buckets the first bucket is
their institutional performance
premium this is the side of the
funding formula that
institutions have to qualify for
based on performance in order to
get an increase the second
bucket is the standard
allocation that's a straight
market shared distribution
of the funding in the formula so
if you're turned to page three
you look with a little more
specificity so how are those
allocations made
so again starting from that
top right part of the chart you
can see there
the sixteen million dollars in
shared measure funding
that's broken up half and half
that was a policy decision made
by the legislature to send half
of it through the institutional
performance premium so if you go
to that first box on the left
hand side you can see that was
eight point four million dollars
so that's what we're talking
about in terms of performance
funding directed to higher add
institutions out of the overall
twenty one point one million
so how is that broken up and
when we say performance what do
we mean the next box down you
can see the performance premium
allocation by measures for
institution there are four
measures that determine
performance funding
the first is end of course
student credit hours so that's
just how many credits and
institution is delivering.
Those credits are waited by a
couple of factors taking into
account upper division versus
lower division
and then
other factors like
whether these courses are stem
courses health care courses or
humanities courses those will
have different costs associated
with delivering them
and then there is three measures
dealing with the words
you can see
hw that's
that's awards so that'll be
degrees or certificates in the
stemfield health care or work
force that all
your second measure
a words to at risk students at
risk is defined as pell eligible
in the funding formula so if a
student can receive a palgrant
their counted in the measure of
at risk awards and in total
awards so those are your four
measures that are determining
institutional performance
premiums and institutions have
to hit certain benchmarks in
order to qualify for that
funding i'll get into those in
it couple more slides but I
think to take away here as if
you go to the blue shaded box on
the bottom you can see that five
point one million dollars out of
eight point four was distributed
through institutional
performance what that means is
that not all of the institutions
were qualifying for that
performance increased funding
so that leaves you three point
three million dollars and
unallocated I p p funding
that amount is just gonna go
right back through the standard
allocation so if you'll turn to
page four.
The standard allocation this is
how
the standard allocation is
mapped out
you can see it's going to go
through those same four
performance measures that are
used in ipp accept rather than
having performance thresholds
where institutions have to
produce at a certain level in
order to qualify this is a
straight market share approach
so the way to think about it is
if an institution is providing
five percent of the overall
credit hours that are delivered
they're going to get five
percent of the funding available
for that measure through the
standard allocation.
Um
why does that matter in a
certain way
because this is performing
sagnastic so the overall number
of credit hours could be
declining for the whole state
that will not affect funding it
is only your share of the
overall performance that affects
funding
one of their issues that has
come up with the standard
allocation that the legislature
has wrestled with in the past is
how much funding two deliver
through the standard allocation
versus the performance premium
because any increase for
standard allocation as you can
see in that chart will probably
come at the expense of something
it'll very likely be at the
expense of the performance
measures.
If you'll turn to page five.
This is the the other part of
the formula we had discussed
earlier this was the mission
specific performance measures
so twenty percent off the top
in that allocation winds up
going to mission specific
measures in this case it was
about four point two million
dollars for FY twenty six
there are also four
measures that determine these
allocations the first of which
is research which takes up over
half of that allocation
that is only four research
UNM and msu will receive that
funding based on us aren't a
percentage split distribution
that's been predetermined
next you'll see
and that blue shaded box on the
bottom i'm the left hand side
there is thirty and mp sixty mp
in this case stands for momentum
points these are both measures
that are sort of intermediate to
add degree awards
so in the case of mp sixty
this is the number of students
attaining sixty credit hours
which is half the number of
credit hours to a bachelor's
degree so the theory being with
both mp measures that
institutions should have an
incentive to get students
through those that first half of
the degree because that's where
your attrition rate is the
highest if you can get him
through the first half it's very
likely uh or they are more
likely to actually graduate so
that's what you're seeing is mp
sixty
which applies only to
comprehensive colleges and
universities and then mp thirty
that's the thirty credit hours
and that applies to two year
colleges finally there is one
measure of dual credit all
institutions are eligible to
receive funding from this
measure
and it's based on the number of
dual credit hours
that they deliver.
Okay if you'll turn to page six
would like to talk about the
performance funding on there
um
for those I
measures so how do we define
performance for the funding
formula so when we say that an
institution has to compete for
eligibility what does that mean
on the table on the left hand
side here you can see there's
four qualification tears that an
institution can
hit in order to bring down
additional performance funding
so the way to read this table as
one the left hand side level one
there is a criteria of greater
than ninety five percent greater
than ninety five percent of what
that's your benchmark so what
we're comparing the institution
to is there a highest output in
a given measure over the last
five years so take student
credit hours we look at the
annual production of student
credit hours over the last five
years what was the highest
number they had
that becomes the benchmark if an
institution produces ninety five
percent or more of the credit
hours in that measure the need
qualify at a level of one
hundred percent
it's the same for
all of the institutions one
thing that I find notable here
is if you go down to tier three
institutions can still qualify
having produced eighty five
percent of the benchmark so that
in other words they can present
or produce fifteen percent fewer
credit hours
then they then their benchmark
and still qualify for funding so
this isn't necessarily a super
high bar for the performance
funding another thing that's
changing the dynamic on th.
Performance is it for until the
creation of the opportunity
scholarship new mexico was
losing enrollment for about the
last decade meaning that every
prior year cohort was larger
than the current year cohort so
those benchmarks were very hard
to hit
simply as a as a function of
declining enrollment so I think
a policy decision that's going
to come up for the legislature
for this coming year and for the
technical group is are those
institutional performance
criteria set properly or should
they be increased to reflect the
fact that we've have about four
years of increasing enrollments
larger student cohorts degree
production is going up student
credit hours are going.
Okay if you'll turn to page
seven we've kind of gone through
the mechanics
of the funding formula so how is
this actually working out
however institutions funded
compared to
one another and compared to the
sectors that's what the slide is
sort of getting at
can i'll take you through the
through how to read these tables
so starting at the top laughed
and you can see the institution
the first one up is new mexico
tack
the next column over just to the
right as the FY twenty general
find ing budget column after the
app is full time student
enrollment and that's getting
you to the FY twenty state ing
per student spending which was
eighteen thousand seven hundred
dollars
you follow that row over
for fy twenty five you can see
the again the base funding the
fte account and the ing funding
per student has increased now to
twenty seven thousand six
hundred dollars
every institution as I said
earlier is has had a budget
increase over this FY twenty two
fy
twenty five period however those
increases on a per student basis
are going to change very
dependent on
your actual student enrollment
so in the case of new mexico
tack veyout paste the changes at
UNM and n m s you because
they're enrollment actually went
down over this time which drove
the per student
spending up
that sort of brings me to
another point
that has come up multiple times
on redistribution in the formula
it used to be that the funding
formula had what was called a
redistribution mechanism it
would take current year
appropriations clave and back
and then redistribute them.
Through the funding formula
there were a couple issues with
redistribution the biggest one
is that it does deliver cuts to
certain institutions so it makes
financial planning very
difficult the downside with and
getting rid of something like a
redistribution mechanism is when
you lose it if you have say
persistent enrollment downturns
what winds up happening is you
fuel inequity as certain
institutions are going to grow
faster than others but their
funding isn't going to keep up
with those enrollment increases
at the same time if you're
having declining enrollment your
funding is not going to be
reduced to reflect that work
load
okay so I feel trying to page
eight
so how does new mexico compare
to the nation overall you can
see the state is highlighted
that red bar to the right hand
aside new mexico is currently
the third best funded higher
education system in terms of
state and local government
appropriations to it so it's
very well funded new mexico
sitting at around twenty
thousand dollars per student
relative to the US average of
eleven thousand uh seven hundred
dollars however new mexico also
has among the lowest tuition in
the nation so
when we look at all revenue
sources the state local federal
and tuition revenue new mexico
is ranked eighth overall in the
nations i'd say the state has
provided pretty robust support
to new mexico higher red
institutions.
If you'll turn one more page
I wanted to make a unknown about
those other revenue sources
particularly tuition
tuition is not accounted for in
the funding formula and tuition
policy is not set at the state
level it set at the
institutional level so every
single institution can decide
what level of tuition it wants
to charge its students
the state now is the majority
payer on that through the
lottery and the opportunity
scholarships but again does not
control those tuition rates so
what are those tuition rates
look like over a time that's
what this table is dealing with
so just don't go through
briefly
the way to read this table as
you can start on the left with
the institution name so the
first one up as new mexico tech
you can see that is then broken
into two rows so you're looking
at your tuition and fees on the
top in your year over year
change below that if you go all
the way to the right hand side
you'll see the fy twenty one to
FY twenty six change and they
think what it's notable here is
you see a lot of differences
even in the same sector so
for the research institutions if
you take a look down at nsu we
can see their tuition increase
two hundred and fifty six
dollars over that five year
period or six point four percent
go one one row down you can see
that over that same time unm's
tuition increased by about
thirteen hundred dollars or
twenty nine point three percent
so you're getting disparities
between the institutions based
on the policy decisions that are
happening at the institutional
level those are not accounted.
For in the funding formula and
other words of an institution
decides to dramatically increase
its tuition there is not a
mechanism that
would reduce the funding formula
as a result it's similar for
property property tax valuations
as well which are
all over the board at the moment
so if you'll turn to page term
these are a couple
considerations that we've heard
over the last several years from
up from the legislature and I
just wanted to go over a couple
of them so the first one is that
currently there is no
there is no definition of
adequacy for funding higher
education institutions in other
words what is a reasonable
minimum
budget that an institution needs
just to survive that's not
defined anywhere that's not
defined uh for the purposes of
the funding formula
another issue that's come up as
the
this committee has put more of a
focus on retention and higher
education
the state routinely comes in
around forty seventh to forty
ninth over the past five years
in a how it ranks for a student
retention on the four year
sector very lower attention
last year the legislature made
the decision to
add additional funding to create
a retention bonus part and try
to move the needle there I would
note that retention is not a
measure in the funding formula
right now.
Increasing performance premiums
that has been the preference of
the committee over the past
several years three years ago
ten percent of the funding
formula was determined to buy
those institutional performance
premiums two years ago that
increased to twenty percent and
last year the decision was made
by you all to increase that to
fifty percent so I think the
question there is is that
sufficient desert
does the committee feel
comfortable with those levels or
should there be more of a focus
on performance less above focus
on market share than some of the
other feedback
we've gotten and then finally
the question on the mission
specific measures has come up um
does this dilute the performance
funding
can this be discontinued or is
it necessary to the funding
formula so those are some of the
questions we see on the out
there on the horizon
i'd also say the last time the
funding formula had a
significant change
was the twenty twelve twenty
thirteen time frame
several big things have changed
since then I would say mostly
course delivery your pivot
online education has really
changed the
dynamic for a lot of four year
and even two year institutions
in higher education as well as
the sort of emergence of cte
programming at the two year
level many of the the programs
are offered on a non credit
basis the higher red funding
formula does not count those non
credit courses in it currently
so there's probably room for a
refresh on the funding formula
we've seen some of our
neighboring states recently like
texas and nevada have both
completed it and others are in
the process.
Mister chairman with that i'd
like to turn it over for any
questions great thing you so
much miss majority and saying
this is a great report and we're
just saying the doctor or to
mister silly having the policy
options spread throughout and
then coming back to those I
really appreciate we're gonna go
straight to questions first with
the replacement chat field
center souls and go from there
thank you mister chair could or
the last words it came out of
your mouth spoke to my question
is she probably well known
credit hours it's deared my
heart all this the different
types of cte that were uh trying
to bring back into our systems
from hired right on down you
know well plumbers win miltechs
uh solar
engineer all the people that
make are our systems work dear
to my heart
I I have noticed all along you
weren't talking in terms of
degrees awarded to receive
funding but in a credit hours
tell me how we can fix this
credit hour staying
in the start getting credit to a
schools that may turn out mostly
credit hours often times
thank you mister chairman
representative
but I would say
i'm a credit hour is the
legislature has made the
decision you all made an
appropriation
through growl
last year to fund work for us
training regardless of creditor
non credit so right now a lot of
that non credit training is
being funded it's just through
an alternate funding source
I think the I think the bigger
longer term question is
does it make sense to keep that
in a growth fund or at some
point should this be considered
part of the overall higher
education r.
Curring funding base
right now the funding formula
the architecture of it doesn't
really support that
but the legislature does have
those tools at its disposal to
make
to make appropriations through
other mechanisms to fund those
credits and that's what's
happening right now.
So mister chair
grows three years
mister chair yes
I I would think it would be it
would be who was in three years
to have a formula change that
allowed us to give give a
to move that over into our norm
of funding a stream if we deem
correct if we decide that we
don't need any plumbers wellness
solar people than we're just
going right all of that and with
otherwise I I think we need to
look at how are we going to
incorporate this into the
through the main funding street
thank you mister chair
thank you representative senator
source thank you madame chair
counter you said several times
through here policies decisions
made by the legislature
where are we voting on those
policy decisions like that and
half percent of new money is
going to be spent on that eighty
twenty fifty fifty who where's
that being made
mr chairman and senator
those are made through the
general appropriations act the
the changes to the funding
formula ultimately determined
what's going to be in that ing
line item that's then put into
the gay and and acted upon by
the legislature
thank you
again you I looked through very
closely on both the education in
the higher ed and I don't recall
that you'll those particular
things that are put in there
other than their those are
policy decisions that are being
made not financial I chair
education all the education
bills are supposed to be
companies senated
none of this stuff comes through
there
the policy options I mean they
also go through the ed
committees you've got a whole
sor- set of policy options.
Will those now if we're going to
make changes to the funding
formula well through the
education committees or is this
going to be policy decisions
made in the budgeting process
mr chairman in the senate are
currently the set up as
they go through a budget process
and that's what again yields
that in g line item
I I understand i'm but as i'm
talking at the policy options
here these are this is policy
not budget those policy options
you know and i'm kind of putting
this out in general need to go
through the committees on the
policy site we dealt with the
same thing on the k twelve where
there's lots of policy being
built into the budget when those
policies really ought to be
going through the education
committees and then through
finance afterwards where I don't
think they have been and so just
into the few drying up push hard
those need to come through here
because it matters in higher
education uh kind of more of a
specific question I didn't see
where it talked or where you
talked about how are the med
school the law school and
graduate programs funded which
are major parts of our research
universities that aren't can't
really be separated from the
undergraduate programs how are
those funded
mister chairman so the medical
school in general is not funded
through the higher education
funding formula
the
what you'll see when you look at
lfc budget documents is
typically if there's a two point
five percent overall increase
that flows through the formula
um the practice has been to
match that for the medical
school those are specialized
training
programs in terms of a words
and believe those are worth
counting the awards and their
and they are.
Showing up in those three
performance measures.
In develop the graduate school
programs that at all of the
research universities in quite
quote the comprehensives also
have grad programs how are those
funded
and mr chairman senator I think
the the awards matrix in the in
the funding formulas go from
certificates to doctor and I
think that like post doctoral
certificates so that's where
those would be counted
so can can you show me on the
the main funding formula here
where does it count because it
talks more about sixty percent
the thirty percent or third
sixty credit hours thirty credit
hours where the graduate ones we
rewarded for universities
that turn in those out
mister chairman I think it's
page two the total awards and
i'd be
happy as well to go over the
actual funding formula
matrises with you but I believe
it's in the total awards
damage w arts so that ipp and
standard allocation those
sections.
You said so the the pink bugs
down the but very bottom the
stem each w with this damage w
standport
thousand science technology
engineering mathematics health
care and work for us
and those are those are awards
ok we have graduate programs in
accounting in the yeah they
don't fit into those where are
though where do universities get
credit for degrees they're
turning out in those various
different areas yet which will
box does that get counted as far
as the
mister chairman and and senator
ah two places one is a words
that's total awards irrespective
of discipline and the other the
other area would be a student
credit hour so that end of
course student credit hours
that's looking at all student
credit hours are delivered
okay yeah i'll look through it
lots more carefully it I mean
most of the discussion has been
about undergraduate degrees and
undergraduate programs and
things and and those are in
university so closely
intertwined with you know
faculty are teaching in both
programs uh
it's important that you're those
are all waited and get credit uh
cut by miss cherry conner again
back to the two point five
percent di- does this committee
vote and say we wanted a two
point five percent do they get
an option to saying it's it four
percent who makes that decision
or choice or is it just handed
i'm not on this committee
usually i'm i'm a a filling I
think for center gonzales this
time so i'm not as million so
you could please
yes mister chairman and and
senator like all the budget
recommendations it's the
the committee set those those
spending targets once we have
that then the funding formulas
run on b.
That i'm out amount of new money
and that and that gives you the
allocation the per institution
allocation
so mister chairman connor you're
saying the committee sets that
so at some point they are having
a discussion that that i'd be
two point five percent as posted
two percent or three percent
that is correct okay i'll watch
for for when that is set for for
this year that's excellent just
as a quick note where we're
we're we do need to transition
again to we have another hearing
and believes starting at ten I
know we've got a number of other
folks I guess we've only gotten
through to so back to you thank
you and I apologize for i'm
trying to learn an understand
just kind of reiterate the same
thing is I hope any of the
policy options go through the
education committee is not just
the finance committee because
the policy ought to be set there
where the budgeting is set here
thank you
appreciate that and appreciate
the opportunity me jointly as we
proposed and think that brings
really good opportunities for
folks to work together in which
we've seen with water natural
resources this time around will
go next to represent vincent
represent garage replace dunkin
and then reps have doubt and I
think we will need to keep it
short there's obviously a lot
that we can do offline next to
representative
thank you mister chair i'll be
real quick
hey conner i've i've read heart
attack algorithms i've read
stroke algorithms and this
outgoing of them is actually
more complicated than a stroke
or a heart attack why do we make
it so complicated
mr chairman and representative I
wish I had a better answer for
you
know and i'll in all seriousness
I think
when they when the funding
formula changed over this is
there was a policy decision made
that said
we no longer want to deal with
sort of inputs and we want to
start looking at.
At outputs outcomes
and so certain things were
gotten read up from the old
funding formula so we think
about you know things like
campus growth square footage so
the old formula was sort of a
awarding larger
campus footprints and the policy
decision was made that
we should be focusing on more on
student awards
and those actual like credit
hours being delivered
and I think
I think there is also a
a big drive to want to increase
the rewards for improvement and
that's where the I came in
honestly I think part of what's
happened is that we faced
you know a decade long
enrollment decline which sort of
gave rise to the unallocated I p
p issue
and it really sort of
complicated the the overall
formula
thank you mister chair and i've
got through four more questions
but i'm gonna reduce it to one
on page four
the market share approach means
that additional funding will be
awarded the institutions
regardless of change and
performance
it doesn't matter how they
perform they get the money
anyway on mr chairman yes so on
the on the standard allocation
you could have a scenario where
the overall steep fell
precipitously rate in say the
number of awards produced or the
number of credit hours produced
the standard allocation is only
looking at each institutions
share of that
so if so if your share remained
the same if you are still
producing the same five percent.
But the overall number had
fallen by eighty percent you're
still going to get your your
five percent
allocation through that and I
think that's the the sort of
downside with market share is
that it creates on the one hand
it creates stability on the
other hand it can set up
dynamics where you're still
getting increases even though
the overall output has gone down
you must chair thank you car
thank you
thank you mister chair two
things at first of all I think
we need a solution community
colleges uh of the fifty states
maryland was first in community
college it's new mexico with
second santa fe was seventh on
the list of forty south eastern
new mexico college and carl
spread with nineteen cm twenty
second san jo
close thirty seven and I think
we really need to be proud of
our incredible community
right along my question is how
does the hire education
institutions participate in
these changes to the funding
formula I have a number of their
people in my district and
colleges my district and I think
there's frustration because a
lot of what you're talking about
in all the changes they're the
ones that really need to be in
the room not just a h d LFC can
you speak to that and going
forward how will they be
included because obviously we
need to do some work on the
formula
absolutely mr chairman and and
representative guarantee so the
the funding formula technical
committee includes
representatives of the
the association so the branch
colleges the four year colleges.
And the independent community
colleges are all represented by
an association and that
association is represented on
the technical committee as well
as there's a couple of
institutional folks who also sit
on that committee so that's the
that's the make up or that's the
representation from the
institutions that's what we see
i'm a technical company
okay case at my shoulder I guess
I just like to see a more robust
involvement on that thank you
thank you very much them get
represent dunkin and rips of
down thank you mister cotton
just a quick question for you
you'd mention the student in
completion
can you just briefly tell me is
that because we're taking under
water basket weaving lack of
funds what's the cost of that
mr chairman and representative
do you mean lower student
completion rates
yes sir
mister chairman I think there's
there is a lot of
different
i'm at and I think it's very
hard to sort of marry it down to
one issue.
I would say like a bright spot
as retention rates have started
inching up since opportunity
scholarship was enacted so I
think it's
definitely fair to assume that
some of our retention problems
were basically financial in
Education semester in and out
we also have a lot of
data that starting to come in
like lumina foundation is
looking at this pretty
intensively and there are
finding that force
for a lot of students
many of the barriers are not
actually financial at this point
we're looking at
um more sort of like mental
health issues stressful wife
events things of that nature and
I think new mexico students just
like students across the country
they're dealing with a lot of
those
those issues that are non
financial in addition to the
some of the financial barriers
that you miss chair thanks color
you know me let me go out on a
limb here as I always do I don't
feel too bad for people who have
to pay for their own college I
paid for my college as well as a
whole lot of other people can
hear paid for their college when
we don't require her thinks for
more kids they don't they don't
do hard things when we allow
them to
in some cases get out of those
things then we expect that in
them as adults as well and that
shame on a so thank you thank
you thank you very much
will go now to representative
dickson
thank you mr chair thank you
conner for the the presentation
just a couple of questions on
the last page well actually the
second last page sorry I can't
find the pitch number the policy
options mister chair conner it
is the last major revision to
the funding formula was
conducted in twenty twelve um I
would be really interested to
know how that process worked you
know if it was through a task
for us you know if that's
something that you could provide
later on I think that would be
really
helpful and then mr chair
conner.
Some of the items that you have
highlighted as potential policy
options some of them are
uh measurements so inclusion of
first year student retention
measures is that something is
that something that we would put
in statute or is that more of
the performance metric like we
do with agencies
mr chairman and representative
dixon
we can contract that through the
aga process were currently
reporting retention measurements
in that
through the quarterly process
now
for inclusion in the funding
formula that would require some
additional data to be
gathered in some other technical
work to be done
um in order to include that
retention measure.
Thank you is to character your
counter to its more
administrative is what i'm
understanding it's not a
statutory change yes mister
chair that's correct okay thank
you thank you that just helps me
you know as we think about
uh potentially revising or
altering things whether or not
it's legislative statutory
policy or something that is
worked on through the budget and
performance metrics thank you
mister chair
great thank you very much for
upset dickson I don't see the
other questions this is a great
menu for us and in collaboration
with other stake holders and
education are broadsweat I broad
said it's takeholders at a time
where we have funding and is the
director else reminded me where
also really thinking about
financial planning it's not just
money going into this year but
we're thinking in terms of
finishing out this decade into
the twenty thirties this is a
very opportune time for us to
take on a number of these bigger
challenges and counter your work
here is really helpful and
important we'll turn you loose
and
ask for uh
miss carswell and also
mister kinsley to come on up
mr chair we're not turning
connected to
the tired
not leaving that table
they need water coffee.
We'll get some someone okay
great alternatively thank you
mister mister chair members of
the committee where behind tab
de and your binders.
Um so we're gonna talk about it
the student housing landscape at
new mexico higher education
institutions now
this is a little bit of a new
subject for this committee
because we have traditionally
night paid the state has not
paid for
student housing capital projects
so we started thinking about
state participation last year
for a few different reasons one
we know many of our student
housing buildings are aging
um an institutions have been
reporting telepc that revenues
are having trouble keeping up
with the maintenance and
replacement costs for these
buildings we also care about
housing because
adequate and help and quality
housing can contribute it to
student success by promoting
engagement in campus life and
academics and housing is
frequently a part of higher
education institutions strategy
is to promote retention and even
graduation
so in the subtle bullets are
behind teb d i'm gonna take you
through some kind of high level
information that describes
student housing needs in new
mexico and then mr kinsley will
get via university specific
perspective for animation
so starting on page one of the
bullets you have
when we think about student
housing needs we could be
talking about it to few
different things why we could be
talking about do they have
enough housing so is the supply
basically meeting the demand we
could also be talking about the
need to improve quality
and modernise facilities or
replace them
or we could be talking about
whether institutions have the
right kind of housing for their
student population.
So i'm going through some of the
trends were seeing at our
institutions starting on page
one with the that you can see at
the bottom of this page
first of all all of our for your
institutions offer housing and
some of our two years do as well
the two years that offer housing
include san on college new
mexico junior college and newly
northern new mexico college
starting the semester
so you can see in this chart
that occupied the ceil at most
of the institutions is currently
pretty high nearing a hundred
percent at almost all the four
years or in the case of you on
am even exceeding a hundred
percent accupacy we've also seen
a significant increase in demand
for student housing sense
covered so you can see this in
those you can see that in this
chart with the two thousand and
nineteen numbers vs twenty
twenty three iron
if you're all turned to the next
page.
Another way that we see that is
in weightless so intrict
interestingly no institution
reported to lfc that they had a
weight list in twenty eighteen
and at least four of the four
years now have some form of a
weight list the weight lists are
most
unm
and animals you although animals
you has recently reduced its
weight less significantly and
minister kensaley can talk a
little bit more about that
if you'll move further down page
two we also wanted to start to
think about what condition
housing is in at our
institutions and you can see in
the table at the bottom of the
of this page that the deferred
maintenance backlog varies quite
a bit at our institutions and
it's not necessarily directly
related to building age.
So in the table you can see that
new mexico highlands has the
most significant maintenance
backlog and the oldest buildings
with a about a hundred and fifty
thousand and deferred
maintenance per student bad
interestingly eastern mexico
university is housing has a
similar average age but they
have virtually no maintenance
backlog and that's due to a few
different factors one they have
recently taken some of their
oldest buildings offline through
demolition and
also
because their buildings are old
have actually been paid off for
a long time and so they're
revenues are basically able to
keep up
with her maintenance and they
are pretty proactive about that
you can also see some
significant differences in you
and am and m s u.
And now if you'll turn to the
third page
so you know the reason that the
state has traditionally not
participated in funding the as
capital projects is because
housing is a revenue generating
enterprise
and so when we're thinking about
the capital expenses both for
both for up cheap and
replacement we wanted to look at
what institutions are doing with
reads and you can see that in
the chart at the top of page
three so most enter institutions
are charging between twenty
seven hundred dollars and thirty
five hundred dollars per
semester with new mexico junior
college being a notable
exception to that and really are
charging much lower rates.
We've also seen an institutions
have made monest increases since
two thousand and eighteen
although these are look to be
much less than the increase as
we've seen in the overall
housing market
and the reason for that is
institutions appear to be trying
to keep their housing rates
somewhat below market or in some
cases potentially significantly
block market.
Okay so finally I wanted to talk
a little bit about sort of where
I thinking is going on potential
state participation in housing
so
as some of you probably know
the state why capital outlay
process pays for some capital
costs at higher education
institutions but it's limited to
ing projects so housing and
augula projects have not been
included in that.
When the legislature considered
and passed house before forty
nine last year that would have
provided a mechanism for some
state purchase patient in
housing projects but that bill
was very towed by the governor
so at the direction of this
committee
we are working with institutions
and the higher education
department to kind of reboot
that bill and we'll be bringing
it back to you for your
consideration.
And
one thing that we're trying to
do is kind of further define
what the states participation in
housing might look like
and so we can have more
discussion about that today and
bring that back to you
one I think one thing that we
want to think about balancing
particularly when we're talking
about
replacement of these buildings
is a affordability concerns so
institutions should be able to
dep finance these projects to at
least some extent and the states
roll might be in subsidising
construction costs to maintain
affordability for a students
and I will alternate over to
mister kinsley now and then will
all be available for questions.
Mr chair members thank you very
much for having me here today
and i'm chris kensley on the
interim vice president for
administration and finance here
at new mexico state university
and first I just want to say
thank you to the chair thank you
direct me
it's been great to work with
miss car as well and and this
issue because as she mentioned
this is and this is new and you
know with all the other many
needs you know to bring this up
it's really great
as she said it bears repeating
though I think this historically
has not been an appropriate
thing that it's been fully
funded by the charges that
institutions charge says
students the student housing
fees and that's really the I
think the interest of of all of
us and and those fees
so over the next slide and why
does housing matter just to
journal it's a key student
success strategy from the
beginning of new mexico state
university is you know that's
where the premier traditional
residential university here I
went back and looked it's at
least since nineteen oh nine
maybe we were residential before
then but I couldn't find any
records on that but it's been
over a hundred years and that's
and it is important in for all
the student environment reasons
that a list on slide really and
recruitment if you're set trying
to recruit a toward student and
say why should you come to a
traditional school that
residential experience the life
the liveliness of a campus is a
really big a really critical
role and as kelly mentioned
other even you know some of the
two years skills are doing as
well it is just becoming a very
important factor cost is
becoming then asked so a big
thing when we look at the fact
that most new new mexico.
High school students coming in
are having their opportunity
scholarship cover the tuition in
most fees housing is the never
one cost so I looked at our
financial aid the average
estimate for on campus housing
is six thousand hundred and
eighty dollars off campus is ten
thousand eight thirty six and
when I talk about accupate see I
think cost is a driver even we
require we require that first
time first your students live on
campus but we're seeing even
greater demand from those upper
year students and I think that
is driven a lot by cost so
his calling mentioned in twenty
twenty four I just started in
august and so we had a ninety
percent occupancy rate and we
did have a big weight list for
those up for your students at
four hundred twenty seven
students so we had some internal
discussions and the president in
the region supported making a
change which is to say allow
those up for your students
primarily soft sophomores to get
on a different waiting list to
say if we don't have enough
housing for you we break her
housing and do first your
housing up upper year and then
graduate housing family star
housing are you interested in
getting on the list even though
your software to have a bed and
are in one of our freshman hours
and we have quite a few students
take sign up for that
opportunity so we back filled
first years with soft moors and
so accupacy right now looks like
it's going to be quite
considerably at prolly net
ninety eight percent and the
weightless has been reduced
about eighty and that was we
could have had a much bigger
weight list but we don't want to
give students fall to that
you're gonna wait list you're
going to get housing we try to
you know manage that so if
you're on the weight list you
will get housing
going to the my next.
Slide i'm thinking in talking to
her house in staff we could
reach a hundred percent or even
more and sometimes i'll get the
question well how can you be
more than hundred percent
capacity well you double up a
room you triple up a room that
doesn't necessarily increase the
student satisfaction but you get
one more student in who really
is looking for housing
from a finance perspective and
we'll talk later about binding
the banks the finance people
they love to see a weight list
they suit love to see your cut
you're over capacity because
then they know when you build
your next door you can fill it
up pretty pretty easily from you
know because you're over
capacity.
I have then a choke just showing
sort of historic trend and
accupacy we looked at the last
two years the projection on the
current year which would class
is starting today those numbers
will start to solidify over the
next few weeks
following eighteen we put that
in as a comparison and you can
just see the long term trend has
been upwards last year it dipped
just a bit i'm really noticed
entirely sure why though i've
study there and I think we're
going to again will stay at
least at this level of accupancy
and it may go up.
Now challenges so if the gold
and I would say similar to our
goal is to just maintain right
now our three thousand three
hundred beds on campus to meet
the demand and to meet their
expectation our regions have set
the policy that first time
students live on campus because
it is very beneficial it is
going to be a challenge when we
look at a capital renewal needs
we've had several studies
estimated costs to replace
modernised upgrade that all
their house in stack two hundred
twenty million to two hundred
eighty million depending on
timing
i'll are somewhere for all this
stack is built was built in the
forties in the fifties and some
of it is in relatively good
condition but it does need some
modernization.
I'm going to go to the next so I
am not going to go all the
details of this paid seven
comprehensive housing condition
needs study I just want to make
a few points if they may again
this is sorted by type of
housing whether it's for first
your housing students or those
upper class and graduate student
housing you see it's fairly
evenly to buy divided fifty
fifty on the number of beds.
That facilities condition index
the the higher the score the
worst it is a low score it's
like off low is good high as bad
and when you get to it that that
tells you the building is
basically almost unusable
rule a thumb number is when you
start getting developed point
four oh you want to think about
replace versus renew
only a few of her housing does
survontes village in the time
for it in saturday are
approaching that point four o
but when we look at the
requirement index that's that's
talking about that monitoring
and i'll just give a brief
example you know some of these
buildings bill is in the in the
fifties they may have just a
couple of outlets and now modern
code would require you know so
many alerts per square feet of
wall space but these are
grandfathered in but we think
about the needs of our modern
students with all their
electronics and you only have
maybe one outlet and if you're
sharing a room you each get an
outlet these are the type of
practical things that you know
if you've lived in an older home
their wonderful and some ways
but they're not so good and they
need some real renewal needs are
coming up and it's just not
those smart things you know it
is the normal the windows are
old the roof needs replacing if
you to our campus we have a
beautiful campus you get too
close to some of the housing
like this this decent paint this
needs impatching it needs a
whole lot of that.
We any issue has tried some
innovative things to cut down
and cost we entered it into a
collaboration in twenty twenty
two it's a dexo whose national
firm that does many things that
comes to natural end in twenty
twenty seven we are looking
careful at ways on that
agreement to reduce costs or
even return to some self
operations for some of that
point because it has not reduced
the cost the way I think the
institution is hoped and then
just looking ahead and I just
have a few sides left and this
is slight ten so the key for
housing and i've been in this
housing space pray the past
twenty years are different
institutions and different
places you have to look at the
big picture you do have to
balance those charges to the
students you have to look at do
you have the rate business model
in
and you really a key is having
that right staff to manage it
day to day both the you know
that's the key to why student
housing on campus makes sense
you have those resident
assistance that the residents
hall directors those people
right there they're making sure
that somebody is caring about
those students where they live
especially for the first time
students they're away from home
and it's in its really really
important important part and I
think it and m issue we have
they were really strong in that
component the even though the
buildings themselves summer good
summer older but we really do
take good care of our students.
So in terms of like options to
say how do we get back and track
whether housing well the
traditional way would be to do
housing revenue bonds supported
by student fees
the normal practice there is if
you do traditional bonds you say
well your newest housing has to
cost just a little bit more than
your current highest price
housing the numbers just work
out that way and of course you
don't want to charge you know
you want to charge this a little
bit more for your best housing
and you kind of goes down the
scale late there and then p
threes have come in to vote
proudly in the last fifteen or
twenty years.
The traditional approach in the
p three have some commonalities
you both for both you have to do
a market demand study in this
case we're gonna have great
demand here at n m issue because
we know it from the waiting list
but you still do this study and
see what's going on in the
market where our
private businesses where they
setting their apartment rates
they try to look for comparables
that helps you set your rates
and make sure that makes sense
whether it's AP three or market
demand where we stand right now
it in a missue our debt services
close to six million a year or
last time we built in twenty
nineteen and I have looked at
the numbers and we will talk to
our financial advisor but I
don't think it's going to be
prudent to add another dorm at
this point we would probably
have to wait another five or six
years to we see that that debt
service drop off or we're gonna
be charging race that I think in
my own opinion will be too much
for the students so and if we
look at AP three approach if you
we didn't it takes a little bit
longer you have to negotiate
with the partner now once you
get the things negotiated they
can build a little quicker but
but in every p three I have ever
seen the race to the students
are going to be even higher
because they're a private
company and they do have to make
you know whatever their costs to
capital this and so that's a off
setting factor but a true p
three the p three takes the
reason for some reason
occupier to see what drafts say
in twenty years they bear the
risk not the university the p
three deals are longer
traditional bars might be twenty
or thirty years AP three is
going to usually have a like the
term thirty five forty years it
could even be fifty years and
that's another way they could
make sure that the p three
partner gets their return to
capital and then.
Uhm I think my less slide is
miscars well mentioned hb four
forty nine from a perspective of
the universities have been
having us self either finance
these are p three these you know
in in recent decades memory any
level of state support could get
us over that hurdle to so we can
move forward with some
replacement housing
and then status quo I do have to
say that as I I am a cpa so what
if we do nothing well those of
you who may be familiar with
call village which thanks thank
you legislature providing this
money for an acting down cole
village of seventeen million so
far and we're going through the
approval process now to use
those dollars but it's a nice
sore it's been abandoned for
over ten years that was former
university housing the housing
authority has nowhere near
seventeen million dollars it may
cost thirty million dollars
ultimately to demand **** other
buildings we have have been a
better shape can't hold from the
third thirties that are campus
that was immense door saving
garcia annex that was a dorm we
also have brilliant hard
governor care others that was
his door i'm now it's an
academic building so this is not
a new problem per se but I think
it's just particularly a cute
right now in new mexico state so
I do again appreciate the.
Lfc considering this you know
there's practice these problems
and i'll stand for questions or
a turn it back over kelly if
there's others okay great thing
it was cars well thinking vice
president kinsley will go
straight to questions
for observe at a chat field
so that it
thank you aren't for your
presentation i've just curious
years ago there was a
evidence evidence based study
that said that students who
remained in and college storms
for two years had a higher
graduation rate is that still
true
so mr chair.
Representative I believe it's
true I have seen some of that
data from other institutions and
it can be ranged between five
and ten percent I was asked
their question and an issue has
not conducted that study I hope
that we can it would probably
take us a couple of months vic
to do a true good academic study
so I don't have that data but I
believe that that is a generally
a true statement a lot of
studies have indicated
that
thank you for that and.
Are I want I want to understand
this the sims in this in in the
study that says uh let me see
new mexico islands university as
a most significant maintenance
backlog and the oldest buildings
which with a hundred and fifty
seven thousand and third
maintenance person student bed
could you explain that sentence
to me.
Sure
so in general but we're trying
to quantify here is the cast of
the maintenance that these
buildings need that has not been
done so
in the first column of that
table those numbers you see the
higher it is basically the more
investment that is needed in
those buildings just to keep
them kind of into maintain them
and good shape and then in the
far right column we to try to
get a better sense of scale
between the institution between
the institutions excuse me we
divided the total deferred
maintenance cast by the number
of beds they have so that gives
you a sense of like who has kind
of the most deferred maintenance
relative to the number of bads
that they're actually supporting
and highlands is at the tap of
that spectrum among our
institutions followed by msu and
then unm
I hope that answers your
question representative
it does explain the chart but it
that isn't that that isn't the
cost of what highlands needs to
to do there
to refurbish these buildings
right.
Ah mr chair representative that
is the cost that they need to
refer bashed the buildings
replacement costs could be
different than that however
per bet per bed we're talking
about and yes and sorry so that
the total cost for that
institution is eighty six
million deferred maintenance
okay
I you know I look at highlands
in northern because yeah they're
in my close to mind that those
are the two that serve my
district
and I know I knew that we did
their refurbishment at already
which is capital out it really
didn't take that much shirt to
fix up that dorm in el tower
because it had there had been
several work before
I guess I guess i'm just looking
at to wishing hos and and in our
twenty years ago it was like six
thousand a year to put a.
My send through and living in
the doors through UNM so now it
looks like that costs his
doubled
about twelve thousand year I
don't know what the food car
sorry if you have a cafeteria
plan how much is that a semester
is anybody know.
I'm trying to get the overall
costerior food and housing you
know what does it take a student
to get through a university and
representative I
I don't know
i've had they have a cost of
attendance as federally required
for all institutions a little
berry
but that that data is public I
can get you it's okay I I can
get it to you don't have to come
i'm just saying it's going to
cost at least probably twelve
thousand eight year first
student I don't think salaries
have doubled in twenty years but
maybe they have but i'm just
trying to get a measure of how
much it costs our students
certainly are students from low
income households to to go to
college and I know we have free
tuition but we also have these
housing and food that they have
to pay for so I just trying to
get overall class to see how how
we're going to help work these
things out so that's
that's all I have mister your
chair thank you great thank you
very much for presenting
representative of the chat field
and then representative
thank you mister chair
mister chair I apologize for not
knowing the names of the various
housing units in village the so
I think you may have spoke to
this a little bit
but I want to ask it anyway
when we left on a tour yesterday
uh someone pointed out the
window at some housing units
that were very old and born in
up and they said this is some of
the units that it makes per
state has been willing to tear
down and uh the we talked about
a little bit there was as best
as in the floor tiles which is
not all that hard to
get rid of
what is the cost of tearing him
down
does that reduce the cost by
having land to build new unit on
are the are they irreparable are
you spoke about.
Some of that but i'm not sure if
we're talking about the place I
was looking at mr chair
representative yes that is what
I was called villages exactly
the what you are referring to
and and it they are a hundred
percent a repairable after
having been abandoned for so
long they were born it up people
broke down broke windows they've
stripped them of the fixtures
stripten of capper and I have
never seen facilities so fall of
specitics so that it requires
that special mitigation one of
the first conversations I had
with miss carries was how can
this has costing four times as
much as the most expensive
demolition we have ever seen and
it it has to do with there's so
much especials it has to be
specially mitigated but it's
worse than there the trouble is
these things are belt like the
pyramids they are bunker like
but you have to get by here and
send people in with those has
made suits get the tiles out get
the ceiling tiles out get all
the asbestos out before you
could even damn them I think
it's costing we did one is a
test and just the interior of
like a eight unit thing was a
quarter of a million dollars so
are estimating that it's going
to be half a million dollars now
we're going to be after we get
go through the approval process
through eighty DFA will put it
out to bed what we're going to
do is say whoever can bed and
say they'll knock down the most
for the dollars that we have
we're going to go with that so
sort of it's not a low bid but
who can do the most work for a
fixed amount of money we're
hoping there some contractor out
there to can be a price of doing
one that would be great because
again i'm a c p a and I can't
believe how much that the car
start but these really are that
bad.
So mister how many units are
there
for a cold village else gives me
mister chair representative
i'm
six there's about thirty and
each one has between six and
eight room you know rooms they
were apartment style so there's
sort of they're not a
traditional hall they are like
sort of little mini many units
hence your number of wall ago
which was seventeen million to
clean up the mess as that true
seventeen million right now or
estimating will get us a little
more than halfway we've got a
third party estimator that says
in total it's going to be about
thirty million dollars to to
take an all down so mister chair
other than the legislature what
are the options
well missed mr chair
representative the aptions until
we did get funding from the
legislature was does still let
it sit there and deteriorate and
it's been sitting there like
that and a prime location along
I tend is a real I sort to the
university in the community so
mister chair how much funding do
you and i'm sorry a problem
rehash and something that uh
we get a lot of numbers fed to
us in the here in our trying to
sort this out how much
legislative money do you have
currently to for this demolition
mr chair represent currently
we've been appropriate seventeen
million dollars and we're
planning to deploy that we're
hoping we can knock down at
least half and maybe a little
more but right now we're going
through we've just went through
the rate to the regions actually
this week were going to acd in a
couple weeks then hopefully the
fa to get approval of course
they will be scrutinizing this
because it is a very very
expensive demolition.
But that that is the answers one
make sure i've answered your
question.
Mr chair
my question is answer thank you
except thank you very much for
saying chat field next we have
representative dow and then
center guy goes in
representative little okay
number seven think you missed
thank you mister sharon thank
you for the presentation i'm i'm
doing the math in my head and
from connor's presentation and
the slides that we have in for
the handouts we have it takes
six years for as student the
average student in new mexico to
get a bachelor's degree so I
would think that that puts some
pressure on the housing as well
um
and i'm thinking about new
mexico housing your mexico
housing new mexico mortgage
finance authority has funding
for first time or low income
moderate home buyers you know to
help them with down payments
they take a financial literacy
quarter as they help him with
appliances taxes escrow those
sorts of things getting people
in the homes i'm wondering if it
would be more strategic for the
saving mexico to you know
provide the housing for the
first couple of years for
students because we want him to
have that experience and we want
them to be able to to increase
our graduation rate but maybe in
some of its folks I when I was
knocking towards graduate
students were in university
housing you know throughout my
district to incentivise them
towards home ownership and I
think a benefit for this
committee to think about would
be curing from capital outlay
that we're spending a thousand
to three thousand dollars for
per square fit for construction
activities at universities where
new mexico housing authority is
spending two hundred to two
hundred and fifty a square fit
for residential construction and
then I would think it would be a
benefit and would help keep
people in the communities where
they got their degrees and help
build capacity in places like
sakoro or must crisis and
where we have our you know
universities and some of the
rural communities throughout the
state has anybody looked at
partnering with new mexico
housing authority to get some of
these.
Students older students and to
help permanent housing ownership
missed mister chair and
representative we have a animal
shoe is not contact in new
mexico housing authority though
that is a very interesting idea
we have reached out to both the
city of last crucials and donate
and a county in connection with
the demolition of this very
large site to see is there some
type of partnership is there
some type of program that could
also you know
you know help build up that area
whether it's some type of
residential your housing is it
some type of retail what else
can go on this site because it's
like twelve or thirteen acres of
of land that is the one thing
that new mexico state has I
think there would be advantage
on campus versus of campus we
have eight to nine hundred acres
right here on the main campus
thank you thank you mister chair
but also you know being a good
storate of tax payer funds you
know we have to look at what it
costs to build on the university
and I think on a low end counter
correct me if i'm wrong a
thousand dollars a square for
the up to three thousand square
fit for university builds um in
considering it takes a student
six years to graduate with the
bachelors degree it seems like
that we should also look at some
accelerator graduation programs
I mean I know we don't give
money i'm not suggesting that we
should be funding out of state
with our lottery and opportunity
scholarships understand where
keeping jobs in the state
we were circulating money in
state but grandcanyon university
for example there are tuitions
lower and they graduate most
people with the four year degree
in three years so maybe if we
looked at some accelerated
graduation programs we'd stay
that save the state money i've
just was looking at everything
we're hearing in looked it up we
have the highest cost per
student.
For higher education in the
nation
representative of her error you
had asked we are spending fifty
three thousand a year per
student and if you add capital
seventy one thousand per year
per student and it's not tied to
work first development because
opportunity and lottery is free
with no no requirement for a
high demand job or service or
work in the state even or you
know where you get your agree so
I think we could have higher
outcomes build our work first
quicker and answer the housing
problem if we put her heads
together and worked between
agencies.
Mr chair representative down
just kind of building off of
work chris was saying
it's an interesting idea you
bring up we haven't had specific
conversations about like mf home
ownership support we have had
some very you know just brain
storming conversations with
institutions as we start to
explore this program about
whether you know sort of
satisfying the demand for a
student housing might both
include on campus housing as
well as kind of near campus
housing that was purpose built
for students but maybe multi use
um that could draw on some of
the other investments as well as
local strategies that you guys
have made to support housing
development more generally thank
you mr chair and and thank you
for that and I think about
student housing they are going
to pay for that or their parents
are going to pay for it or tax
payers are going to pay for it
vs a partnership where we can
promote home ownership build our
communities I would love to see
new mexico tech has some of
their graduate students stay in
the community after their
graduate graduate i'd love to
see some of these graduate
students in saquora county
owning homes instead of staying
in in aged you know campus
facilities but I know i'm i'm
taking a long time on this but I
I just had one question from
conner and on the money that
could you tell us if we've lost
anything on research and
development it's not part of
your presentation but have we
last anything in the federal
reconciliation act on research
and development and what are we
doing the back fill it
thank you mr chairman and
representative so the federal
funding question has come up a
number of times what's made it a
little bit of a moving target is
that we've had a whole lot of
grants get frozen and then
unfrozen a whole lot of programs
have been in that in that
predicament so we're working to
try to track
where we're actually losing
money versus the.
Announcement of
funding loss and I don't have um
the actual like a dollar amount
answer and I can't really speak
to wear what are programs
exactly would have lasted as
something were tracking and we
will have that information
by the you know december
budget recommendation
thank you mr chair
thank you great questions we're
going to go to vice term when
you also
think you will quick and we gave
sixteen million dollars to to
them all these rate
seventeen million
in this last year two hundred
thousand unit to demo right just
best us for mediation right
mr chair senator it was over a
couple years but yeah seventeen
million total suffer
I mean
you're gonna have to get rid of
them at some point right in the
cost today it's probably cheaper
than the cost five years from
now so you may have to just look
at that but I mean
it
been an entrepreneur that I am
here I pulled a brilliant dot
com right here's a ted bent ten
bedroom unit two and three
bedroom units seven thousand
square feet for nine hundred
fifty thousand
there's alternates out there for
the university to explore maybe
it's not on campus and it it's
not ideal I don't I don't know
where
twelve ninety three mission
where what drive is right that's
under a million dollars for ten
unit projects you're not going
to build the project like that
it on campus but you got to
figure out how you can do that
in the email in the mean area of
demoning those dollars and
rebuilding them and so there's
options out there animal for you
to get loose in the language on
the capital for you to explore
that there's a couple other
units I I don't know calls I
mean.
Last cruise is that bad there's
another one with ten units one
bedroom for a million forty
so there's options out there for
housing it seems like increases
just what the university was on
their built in two thousand and
nine I think.
And so there's options out there
but no matter what you're gonna
have to to demons so today's
dollar is going to be less
expensive in that mean
tomorrow's dollar and then you
go to side what is going to cost
to to do that and I don't know
if you're former public private
partnership to rebuild those and
manage it in and build that I
rise or are how you do that
but you gotta get that change
because
would we say the housing in new
mexico's not been student
housing hasn't been done since
the sixties are the seventies
and you go anywhere else where I
am new mexico business means
trip and we looked at hair shoes
high rises and everything they
have there for their students
and it's a completely different
scenario and it changes a
student spent tell you when they
have better living quarters and
and a nicer place in the media
rooms to sit in socialising so
you guys got to figure it out
but you got it come with some
good numbers in capital across
according to what I was told in
kelly correct me if i'm wrong we
gave him the money in then it's
going to be double of what what
it was and.
So don't give us a guess give us
some good numbers so we can base
our numbers and we can move
projects along because now we
underfund in you and if you
demon
then you could be looking for
more money but we need accurate
numbers as you come forward into
this technology and it's needed
everywhere probably needed at
western I think the
the president insirent in
western prime mini upgrade you
have highland new mexico tech
all need student housing and so
we've got to figure it out but
is it going to be all the state
to build it or we're gonna be
going to be relying on some
other some of the universities
to do that as and work in this
modem
less students on campus or
they're doing half and half
online and half on campus or
your housing needs going to be
as great as you think they're
going to be and and what is the
future hold in a declining
population of students and
universities gotta get a grasp
on their student population is
declining in their overhead
costs can have to decline at the
same time cause a state cannot
come back in in maintain the
same amount of teachers for less
students so it's a long better
conundrum but you you've got it
don't realize that you're just
handcuffed to that there's
options that we can get you just
got to realize you can ask for
this excellent thank you very
much poster
we're gonna go next to senator
gagas
mr chair and I I want to start
by thinking of presentation I
wanted to give a caveat love the
fortunately proud of mse what
they do or they're at a grand
other started two day
but this weekend I was looking
for housing beyond it sure like
certain minors already looking
at what it would cost to build I
was looking just to find her
location her last couple of.
Faster secure it is nice where
do you live I say we my
granddaughter at thirteen forty
wells which is right across the
street from the demolition while
they've got those flat top
houses and stuff in I was trying
to understand did not know i've
been on school work for way too
long I do
horse on a construction I don't
do vertical but the thought of
how much it's going to cost ten
years from now we built a gym
agent we're gonna dedicate on
thursday or open to the public
in unis at three hundred dollars
or foot and it is over a
thousand dollars corporate so my
thing is having a five year ten
year twenty year plan I would
hope that you get good addresses
as soon as you can even if it's
one building at a time to use
that seventeen million because
it is an eyes for from the
highway I didn't realize it
belong to us as for a state I
thought it was probably a
secondary housing facility but
it's one of those things we
would love to help you find a
way to do a tried there again I
was looking for an alternate
place from my granddaughter to
live while she was here except I
got out voted it's one of those
same times actively on the web
looking at that
trying to find an apartment
complex that that I could
ceterate but it's one of the she
wants to be on campus and saw
the kids love the opportunity to
guys have here the the facility
that we're in now wifi is not
very good and it's real really
close orders and then just the
overall s techs but uh I just
wanted to say that I feel for
you I see the especially sweep
on a specialist
demographic and the lovington
area at all if he travels as far
but we've had that in your
schools every time we do an
upgrade we have to remediate
them and the.
As best but just one legend that
if there are anything that I can
do to have tried to help out
trying to think through who else
in the contracting area that
would come this far from or
island there's a lot of times it
gets to in your locals handle it
and it would cause so just one
to proud of the facilities
might as my granddaughter from
but I just love the area
we hope the best
mister chair state take you
senator in if I may I too I had
two
two children at the same time
looking for a housing in a
different town my son that I
found good value housing for my
son he loved it for my daughter
I was overrided
here to be had to be a little
better so there are no thank you
that I was actually looking to
buy my wife will we buy later
we'll sell in she doesn't want
being real estate so I could say
to women's world I just live in
it thank you
thank you
okay I don't see any other
questions uh miss carso I think
we'll ask for you to keep
working on this along with
with conner
as we look at options
particularly I think it was
announced yesterday that the
first tranche of the money that
the legislature dedicated around
housing was allocated by the
executive seems like there's
some new opportunities and
really good comments from the
committee around exploring
different models both public
private partnerships
partnerships with other
uh municipalities or other in an
mfa which was another great idea
so lot of interest thank you all
and very much want to know that
the initiative of lsc and the
partnership from msu as well as
as their institutions has helped
shine a light on something
that's.
Quite important and really
interesting that as we're doing
more and more online education
the on campus housing is coming
through shining through as one
of the most important parts of
student success
retainment etc so things that we
might not have expected that
you're reported shining a light
on thank you very much
okay
with three minutes on the clock
we're gonna transition in two
our uh
yet let's members let's grab a
quick little break a couple of
minutes we've made it thank you
all we made up a little bit of
time one vital representatives
from unm and n s u members feel
free to grab something use of
facilities what have you just
couple of minutes and we'll get
started right at eleven oh five
if not right before
I have one week i've had it
unless bother by
crisis utilities.
The.
All right we're gonna go ahead
and get back started.
Yeah it's great to see you
we've got the presentation why
ask everybody to grab their
seats
that's right we got the
it is a little chilly we'll see
a few beanies appear I think as
we go through this hearing
but it's a one a thing by share
minos for making sure that we've
had this hearing why I think
directors believe for working
with folks members we see a
presentation here it's a joint
presentation and great to see uh
acting direct athlete director
burgers
and
uh mr lowo athletic director
together great to see a joint
presentation we know that our
state really prospers when both
of our uh both of your
institutions our institutions
are performing at the highest
level possible and it's really a
unique time where we have the
ability to uh to to dive into
the so without further do we'll
turn it over to the two view and
go from there
good morning thanks so much so
yeah just i'll start mister
chairman by chairman and
director silly just thank you so
much for this opportunity to
come here today and members of
the committee
as you mentioned mr chairman
it's it's a privilege to be up
here with my colleague here
amber and at at a really
important and critical time for
college athletics across the
country
but certainly here in the state
of new mexico and you know we
were we were just joking while
we may be rivals for three hours
on a saturday or when we're
playing each other uh in
basketball or whatever else it
might be um I think for us you
know this partnership in this
unity and division one athletics
in new mexico is something that.
Now more than ever we really
need to to lean into and
capitalize so I appreciate you
amber at the opportunity that to
be up here with you and look
forward to to diving in so I
don't know if you want to know
thank you I appreciate that we
have been able to work so
closely together and present to
you guys the co branded
presentation because I think
that when we talk about the
landscape of division one
athletics in the state of new
mexico it does include both
institutions and we do have to
work together except for one
rival reweaks.
And I appreciate this
opportunity to be here and to
show that collaboration in this
presentation
rates are just as as you mention
mister chairman we we provided a
a copy of the presentation so
we'll try to do our best to
guide you through as we move
along but just a high level of
review of what our our plan is
today so the first and we've
split it up the first thing we'd
like to do as we'd like to take
that the members through at a
high level just to changing
landscape of college athletics
and what it means certainly
across the nation but again here
locally in new mexico and so
it will cover some of the topics
that I think we've all heard and
read about the house settlement
in rural talk a little bit about
some of the federal legislation
that's being discussed out there
i'll touch on the transfer
portal and then both of us will
actually and we have different
situations but we're both
experiencing some of the the
effects of conference free
alignment at what it means for
us and how it impacts kind of
our our process moving forward
and then lastly i'll talk a
little bit about our overall
financial position our budget
summary and have have some of
that those conversations and I
know amber will do the same so
without unless you have anything
else help i'll kind of dive in
to the next slide which is the
title is just the changing
landscape and that's the house
versus nca settlement and so I
don't I I don't think it'd be
overdramatic to say that that
this is probably been the most
sized make shift you know
certainly maybe in the last
twenty to thirty years that
we've seen in college athletics
and again just set a high level
there was a a class action
lawsuit that was filed against
the nca and that the premise of
the of the lawsuit was the
plainess were seeking damages
for a restrictive nca rules that
did not allow them to earn money
from their name and is in
likeness and that was from
september of twenty sixteen to
september of twenty twenty four.
And june as of june sixth of
this year the judge in
california actually approved the
settlement and the settlement
went into effect starting on
july first and so there's two
very distinct that there's a
number of different layers that
are part of the house settlement
but I think the two that are
most pertinent for the
discussion today there there's
the back damages portion of the
settlement and then there's the
ford looking and junked of
relief portion of the settlement
and so just to focus on the
former before I touch on the
later so the back image is
portion of the settlement what
that means is if you as an
institution and a few chose to
opt into the settlement which
you and ended and animals you
did as well that meant that you
were part of the backed images
settlement and so for the next
ten years we are expect to
forfeit about five hundred
thousand dollars of her nca
revenues each year so about five
million dollars over the course
of ten years to help contribute
to the fund that will pay at the
harmed class that settled as
part of this lawsuit and so that
will be a reduction into our
overall revenues we felt it this
year was the first year and so
that's something that certainly
is a good thing that these young
men and women that participated
years ago and were harmed we're
able to collect but
unfortunately for us that means
that we realize the reduction in
our revenues and so at a high
level that's that's the back
that the backwards looking
portion and then when we talk
about the forward looking piece
of this the injunctive relief
that's really I think that
that's gotten the most fanfare
from a federal from a state
level even to the local level
and what that means is that
schools are now evil to
compensate their student
athletes for the use of their
name imagine likeness you hear
the the term revenue sharing has
been thrown out there and what
the settlement is established
was the following.
The settlement established a
permissive cap of of twenty
point five million dollars
meaning it's not required and
but should you choose to elect
into it you can share up to
twenty point five million
dollars of revenues with your
student at least for the use of
their and I now want to be very
clear and I put it in the
presentation that uh while our
power for institutions those in
the acc the sec the big twelve
the big ten all of them are
sharing up into the cat twenty
point five million for schools
in the mountain west like new
mexico and certainly for amber
at n m s u together we're going
not going to be anywhere near
that cap and so often times
people see the number twenty
point five and they say okay
well that's what you're going to
be doing for us just with our by
our budgets in our finances and
our revenues we're not going to
be there that the one thing you
know I do want to make clear is
that you know i've i've been
asked what does that mean does
the n c a give you money or do
they help you with this in the
answer to that is no this is a
new expense and that all schools
that have if chosen to opt in
which is a vast majority of them
that we have to find solutions
for we have to generate
additional revenues to offset
that and cover that and so
that's created a certainly a new
wine item and everyone's budget
that we have to manage and we
have to mitigate and so those
are the two main pieces of the
house settlement and I know
we've probably all read and seen
others you know are you know
people comment on it and there
are some other smaller and
salary impacts that we can get
into more specificity later but
I just wanted to touch on the on
the major impacts and things
that we've been seeing in the
news and so i'll turn it over to
amber to cover the federal piece
so my goal is to provide just a
clear overview of the federal
landscape with with relation to
college athletics and
specifically i'm going to look
at the score act and then also
the executive order on saving
college sports.
You see there I have a few
bullet points about the score
act but ultimately this is a
federal proposal and it's going
to create a uniform nil standard
and this is proposed to replace
i'll live the pat work of the
different state legislation.
This is going to maintain the
student athletes non employee
status it's going to provide
legal clarity for institutions
these are all agreements must
still have a valid business
purpose in this act prohibits
any direct pay for a play
the oversight on this authority
is broadened for the nca with
federal protections and this
insurers consistent application
across all levels as you can see
here the goalers to
more appropriately achieve a
level playing field
the act outlines requirements
for institutions academic career
mental health support I want to
point out these were previously
required by the nca
so that's not going to be a
change if this act goes into
effect the coverage of medical
expenses for up to three years
that was previously required by
the nca was required for two
years this would increase that
to three years and then the
degree completion programs again
this is something that the nca
has already required of us as
member institutions
this actually require all of our
institutions to maintain sixteen
sports by twenty twenty seven
currently fbs division one
institutions must have sixteen
sports so again that's not going
to be a change that we would see
with this act and this is going
to increase though financial
transparency this is including
public disclosure of student
fees and restrictions on how
high revenue schools may use
those fees and it's important to
point out just like fernando
said earlier new mexico state
and you and m are not going to
be part of those high revenue
institutions.
So there will not be the same
restriction on those fees unless
we were ever to spend up to the
twenty point five million dollar
cap which we do not foresee that
happening
on the executive order saving
college sports this order
compliments the efforts just by
emphasising the preservation of
college sports and these
opportunities this is
specifically in women's and
olympic sports this is going to
again prohibit third party pay
for play which is already
prohibited in college sports
right now
this is going to direct federal
agencies to provide clarity
which we are hopeful to receive
that student absolutes are not
employees
it's also going to call for
safeguards in revenue sharing
models to insure support for the
non revenue sports which I think
that you can see that you and m
and new mexico state has a
commitment to provide support
for our non revenue sports.
Great thank you
transition into the slide that
has the title the transreportal
changing landscape so just to
talk a little bit about that if
we think maybe fifteen twenty
years ago
you would it was very simply
this if you transferred you you
were going to have to sit out
right so it really limited the
amount and and the frequency of
it and and we've sent changed as
you see in the chart that's on
that slide to virtually it's
it's become free agency now
since twenty eighteen that the
restrictions have really been
loosened and which is you know
we're in an era of players
student athlete empowerment
which I think is wonderful are
still naturally to do so well
for us but but because of that
the guard rails have really been
loose and and you know at unm we
experience that this year we had
transition and our basketball
amounts basketball program we
had a wonderful season and we
lost our entire roster all
fifteen student athletes that
are on our team that want a
championship last year were no
longer on our roster in and
that's the reality and that's
the reality that we face at our
level but across across the
board and so you know for us as
you can see you know what does
it mean for it for you and m and
n m s u now that student leads
have the freedom to transfer and
to be eligible immediately and
it's turned into to free agency
for lack of a better term
retention is as important as
recruitment now it's it the days
of recruiting a student athlete
and having them stay for four
years is something that to be
honest as has become unusual you
don't see it very often but in
order to do that we're going to
have to really elevate our
retention efforts and so we have
to fight to keep our talent and
we're very proud of the town we
get but we have to fight each
and every day to ensure that
they stay in our programs and
that we can develop them because
that the numbers indicate.
That when they stay in our
programs for three to four years
they graduate at UNM almost at a
ninety percent clip and that's a
really really important
obviously the holistic
development of our student
athletes as paramount and so how
do we retain our student
athletes obviously by providing
them all the services that we
always have as imprementioned
great mental health support
nutrition strength and
conditioning athletic training
but the reality is now part of
retention is nil in revenue
sharing and that's just the
change that we've seen over the
years so i'm sure we'll touch on
that more a bit later but I do
want to quickly just shift into
just conference realignment
that's hit near india to to us
at u n always been a topic of
conversation certainly as we're
here talking about division one
athletics in new mexico
conference realignment is
something that's real and so I
think at a high level what I
just quickly like to do and
you'll see it on the slide is
just answer the question that I
get quite often is what drives
realignment white wire schools
looking to leave and why
hesitant impacted a conference
like the mountain west and so
very very high level so tv
revenue is without question one
of the biggest drivers for for
our budgets in college athletics
and so the way it works is
conference is actually aggregate
all of their memberships tv
rights together and they take
those rates out to the market
and they sell that and you know
partners like fox in c b s in
the spn they purchase those
rates in so a big majority of
what our budget is made out of
this is is because of those
rates and so when those
contracts expire that's when
school start to shop their rates
around and that's exactly what
happened in the mountain west a
little over a year ago and i'll
touch on on what the results of
that were so conferenced
realignment is really driven
exclusively by tv rates in
meteorites as I mention those
are huge parts of our budget.
And so if you go to the next
slide it it it talks about
conference realignment and u and
n and what does it mean for us
so about a year ago actually I
think almost to the date here
five schools in the mountain
west decided that they were
going to leave I know that was
voice he states saying you go
state utah state president state
in colorado state in the reason
why they chose to leave was
simple they are chasing bigger
media payouts for comparison six
their projecting in the new pack
twelve to earn somewhere between
ten and fifteen million dollars
in meteorites where as we
currently in the mountain west
are earning about four to six
million and so as you can
imagine four million additional
is real it's real dollars it's
exposure it matters certainly
for your bottom line but it also
does for the optics
and your your institution and so
in response to the mountain west
added five institutions you
huawei grandkinian in a non non
footpoor membership you see
davis non football as well and
then northern illinois in
football only and then what I
did was on the next two slides
really just for reference more
than anything III made a
comparison because everyone
talks about the regional the
regionality of conferences and
so as you can see the current
mountain west conference as it
exists today is is fairly
regional I think overall where
we're in a good spot but as you
can see because of reality and I
know amber what will touch on
this as well if you look at the
future math we become more
spread out i'll obviously with
the edition of northern illinois
at some of those we're gonna you
know we're gonna have some
additional costs have some
additional realities that are in
unintended consequence of this
conference realignment and so
just just really for reference
and so you guys can see and the
membership can see what what
that means for for us from a
regionality standpoint and then
i'd be remissive I didn't touch
on this I I get asked this
question quite often but I i've
been asked by some.
Some of the members here is well
why why was unam not considered
for realignment and and there's
three main distinct reasons as
to why we were not that the
first is our football
performance
you know are recent results in
football right wrong or in
different has shaped the
national reputation
of unm athletics in the second
bullet point on that slide is is
very important football the
success in football is the
single biggest driver in
conference realignment decisions
we have a very very proud in
amazing basketball history at
UNM and that we will never short
change that but the reality is
football success is the key
driver to conference realignment
and sell the really
unfortunately for us is we've we
haven't had this success the
requisite success needed from
from the optics perspective and
then to continue on on the
football infrastructure piece at
we need to make better
investments in in our football
infrastructure university
stadium I think is a wonderful
venue that has great bones it's
it's just old it stated it
doesn't black or excuse me at
lacks a lot of the amenities
that we need to serve our fans
and give them the the tools in
the resources they need to come
to the game and enjoy a game and
so you can see in the recent
past schools that have invested
in their infrastructure the
colorado states in the world the
san diego states in the world
the voice he states in the world
two things happened at one
success followed when you invest
in your infrastructure typically
successful follow on the field
but also in part of these
conference realignment
discussions
they were you know it helps it
help them in those discussions
and then lastly and I know we'll
touch on this more but just the
overall investment level at u
and m and i'd like to turn your
attention I have a chart here
that just shows our comparisons.
Versus are of mountain western
pack twelve peers and the
reality was is that the decision
makers that were looking at at
who was right for for
realignment and will continue to
do so when they look at our peer
comparisons as you'll see on
this chart we have we have about
a fifteen million dollars gather
from our operating budget this
year fifty four million to the
average of our peers in the pack
in the mountain west and the
reality is is that's not going
to be solved overnight but for
us it's clear that if we want to
advance if we want to be part of
the discussion when this next
round of real alignment happens
we have to to to put our pedal
to the metal and we have to make
sure that we're investing at a
level that that's commenced to
it with the with our
expectations right our
expectations are to when
championships to make new mexico
proud into graduate our student
athletes and set them up for
success after sport and so that
this gap effects everything it
affects studently services
obviously our competitiveness
but everything else beyond that
and so I just wanted to to point
that out and I will turn it over
to amber to cover a little bit
about her perspective on it
never goes date doesn't
necessarily have the exact same
story when it comes to
conference through alignment but
you can see here the travel that
our student athletes are
experiencing in our current
conference usa i've placed that
landscape there for you to take
a look at you can see on the
left there there's highlighted
to institutions that are leaving
conference usa they've made that
announcement in the leave in
twenty sixth and then again and
twenty seven
now what we're aware of is that
you know this current wave of
conference real linement has to
an extent settled but there will
be another wave and that's what
we are all preparing for is that
next wave of conference real
linement we want to be prepared
in terms of our football success
in terms of the infrastructure
for our facilities that we are
exactly where we need to be.
In that discussion
now the institutions that are
leaving conference usa they're
leaving for a little bit of a
different reason
ute will get that larger payout
they're heading into the
mountain west so they're going
to see a larger payout when they
had into the mountain west but
there are also going to see a
bit of a more regional travel
schedule which
when you look at the next slides
that we're going to go over when
you look at travel you're going
to see that our travel and you
are nems travel is not that
dramatically different.
What does that impact that
impacts the student athlete
experience and that impacts are
student athlete welfare so I
think that that's important to
point out where you tap is going
to experience that increased
media rights payout they're also
going to experience and enhance
student athlete welfare
experience because their student
athletes are going to see a
little more regional travel
lizing and attack me the
decision to leave and there's
will be in twenty seven but they
will go into the sun belt
conference where they will have
I believe it is for business
regional competitions within
their conference
they will save around one to one
point two million dollars a year
on travel because they will have
that regional travel and when
you're looking at travel and
you're looking at your budget
the one million dollars price
tag is not an enormous price tag
but it does make a difference in
other areas that you are able to
invest in your student at least.
New mexico state we've had
institutional support we've
invested in turf for football
the practice field with your
support football locker room
agimemorial stadium though needs
continued investment and
upgrades you'll see on their
next side where a new mexico
state still trails our
conference usa peers there is a
smaller gap than fernando has
pointed out with unm but we
experience about a two million
dollar gap below the average in
conference usa
like a reference
thank you so I will i'll quickly
cover our just an overall
financial summary on on our our
position in terms of our overall
budget and so if you'll turn to
the slide that that says you in
a method expedited summary on
the tab that that's real start
and so i'll start with just some
national context again I think
we've all seen out there the the
headlines the stories about you
know athletic departments are
running massive deficits in and
the links that they'll go to to
to try to solve those deficits
and so you know it's a point of
real priorities I mentioned in
my in my remarks there are
excuse me on the slide we've
balanced our budget and you and
m for five consecutive years we
just finished FY twenty five we
were able to to do that and very
proud of that in in in how we've
done it you know certainly a lot
of the discipline a planning
responsible management having
the hard conversations in being
very strategic about about what
we're doing but but the reality
is just like in business
responsible management is not
enough for us to continue to
push to get to the level that
that we expect to be at and so
as we look ahead we are
projecting a balanced budget for
this current fiscal year and FY
twenty six and as I mentioned
about conference realignment we
expect that there's going to be
some shifts in our revenue
sources.
And and numbers associated with
that as as we look at fy twenty
seven in beyond so we'll have to
certainly evaluate that as we
look forward so as I turn to the
next slide i'm looking at the
piech heart of our revenues then
this is from this fiscal year
this is our budget that was
approved by the border regions
this year just a few months ago
and I want to point out before I
get into the specifics there's a
chart on the side that breaks
down our revenues by by
percentage and I think there's a
couple of really important
points in their number one we
are extremely proud and that
that we support our budget with
fifty five percent of self
generated revenues that's
conference distributions that
ticket sales that's our
licensing our parking our game
guarantees are fundraising
amounts and so we're supporting
over half of our budget with the
with self generating revenues
and I also want to use this
forum to do something that i've
done in the past but but I think
it's absolutely appropriate here
and that is to think
our state for the support that
we get as you can see a portion
of what uh of of how we succeed
is certainly the support that we
get from our state and so I am
just so appreciative of that and
so thankful um of the belief in
the commitment to having a
championship level program at
unm at the state that supports
with and so I just wanted to
make sure that I was very very a
specific about that but as you
can see you know we've we've
divided up but in our pie chart
so in more specificity i'm happy
to answer any questions in the
in a session if there are but I
just wanted to to provide that
and then on the expense side as
you'll see again we balance
their budget we're projecting
fifty two million and expenses
against fifty two in revenues
and you know for those of you
obviously that run business are
are businesses are main expenses
our labor right are people that
make the engine run we invest in
our people I think we have great
coaches.
Great staff great support for
our student athletes and then
outside of that you know our
mean buckets of expenses are our
student costs which would be our
scholarships our nutrition you
know things of that nature cost
of attendance and then on the
service decide that's officials
pay in other sorts of things
that that make that up and so
again happy to dive into
specifics as as we as we open up
for questions but again really
want to thank the support of of
those in this room and happy to
follow further.
You know as fernando pointed out
you know a lot of athletic
departments are facing financial
deficits but I listed here a lot
of those athletic departments
across the country are operating
in multi million dollar deficits
the last two years new mexico
state we have worked very hard
to deliver a balanced budget
we've implemented mind for
oversight processes we've
established weekly meetings with
university finance department
but we've gone back and we
raised football season ticket
prices and institutional
assistance in order to be able
to achieve that balanced budget
when we look ahead we're a
little bit different we're not
projecting a balanced budget in
FY twenty six without
institutional support
we went through an exercise on
our campus and realized that
it's been ten years since we
raised men's basketball season
ticket prices so we're doing our
part and we raised those men's
basketball season ticket prices
we also plan to make a sizable
payment toward our deficit and I
think that this group here
especially needs to hear that
from new mexico state
on the next slide you'll see
that we have our revenues and we
placed everything out here in
much the same way so that you
can really see exactly what we
are working with but I do want
to point out on this slide if
you look at the other charts the
numbers don't match up that is
because on the other charts will
utilise the ncaa numbers the
numbers that we must turn into
the nca we wanted this group to
be able to see the numbers that
we presented to a gd so when you
look at this chart you're going
to see that the twenty seven
million is a number that we
presented to eighty d.
Four hour revenues
and then you see there I
approach this with a great deal
of gratitude because we have the
nine million dollars in state
support that we can present on
our revenue side and then the
last slide that you'll see here
is our expenses and you're going
to see that our expenses are six
million dollars in the deficit
and we will not be able to
balance that budget unless we
have the institutional support
which we do have again I
approach this with a great deal
of gratitude the support from
president fairmay who has said
that he will provide that
support for us but we have to go
out and we have to increase our
fundraising goals and increase
the revenue that we are bringing
in in order to achieve that
balanced budget that you would
like to see as well
and with that I believe that we
will stand for a questions.
A great thing that you off this
is fantastic will go straight to
questions uh wrapping up a new
sorry with center to buy a send
bucker in going from there and
then vice vermonious etcetera
twice thank you mister chair and
thank you both for a great
presentation uhm mr lowell you
and I have had a lot of
conversations around the topic
of athletics and i'll be really
clear and and transparent here
that my husband and I have
coached five or five s which
brought and I l t u n um we've
also coached several people
within coaches within the
athletic department over the
years and we've been season
ticket holders for decades so we
are bought into the idea of
helping you and i'm
particularly through the
athletic program and having been
a reason the south i'm really
familiar with the al alabama
football program success story
and they started really in many
ways where UNM is today and now
they're one of the premier
football programs in the country
and they grew not only from
within and donations from a
lamie I think after a two
thousand and nine twenty eleven
and maybe twenty twelve when
they had championships one
championships they had record
breaking and rollment afterwards
and applications because of the
success of the football program
and it's something that we are
struggling with and have
struggled with over the last
many years here it I in alba
kirki in particular
i'm looking at what are the
economy is that the scale of
economy that grows from a really
robust football program and we
have building within the
university we have more research
opportunity more scholarships
when we're talking about the
struggle with housing it can
help with that and then you have
all the answery businesses that
grow in our community because a
basically the free marketing
that we get around the country
and potentially around the world
for growing a world class foot.
Fall organization and while we
have an amazing culture here or
specially centered around
basketball that's my family's
love but if we don't step
forward and really take this
football program to the next
level we will continue I think
to slide down that scale when
you say we have a fifteen
million dollars gap I think over
the next several years that gap
will only continue to grow and
we will struggle and we have one
of the best universities I think
in this country with such an
amazing and rich culture that we
deserve to really take a deep
look at this topic in figure out
how do we support you and m
athletics specifically football
and the same with new mexico
state and sitting on senate
finance when you talk two
million dollars I mean that's
really nothing in the budget
quite frankly I mean that's
that's a very low number for
someone to come forward and ask
for and fifteen million dollars
actually isn't that big of a net
either and if that's what it
takes to take your programs to
the next level I think we are
not only to our students and
their future opportunities but
to our community is at large so
it's really more of a statement
but if you have anything you
want to say in response to that
yep mr chairman senator to buy
some first off thank you thank
you for those comments in and I
think you know to me and I see
this is as as an often as I can
you know I believe that we're
the front porch of the
institution of the flagship
institution of this state and
what we're certainly not the
most important I mean the things
that are going on on our campus
or unbelievable we are the most
visible and with that comes in
immense amount of responsibility
in pride and I I was speaking
with senator schendo yesterday
and talking about how some case
studies of you know the
university of colorado were you
know coach prime was hired in
the success comes in you see
increase in admissions and
applications in just the
overall.
Value of the degree I think
athletics has the unique ability
to unite people bring people
together and enhance the campus
life you know we are the part of
the fabric um of the institution
and I think is successful
athletics program is important
to that and into your point
about football you're absolutely
right we have a built in
advantage with our basketball
program our basketball program
means so much to so many people
in this great state and we will
never sacrifice that but
strategic investments in our
football program are necessary
for us to advance our mission
and to continue to move it
forward and that means getting
people in the stance you know
last year we were over four
million and in basketball sales
and ticket cells and football we
were a fraction of that and so
some of our biggest
opportunities for growth on the
revenue side are is through
football and making that more
accessible and more appealing to
to our fans to come for us to
help but also from an optics
perspective we need people in
the stands at university stadium
so when people turn on the tv
they think well there's
something really good going on
there and so I really do
appreciate uh what you've what
you said in your perspective on
it because I I take an immense
amount of responsibility
ensuring that the athletic
department serves as a good
front porch the institution so
thank you senator device
mister tere senator device and
thank you for those comments I
appreciate that and when we look
at what it means to be an aggie
and the gritz that it means to
actually succeed as the under
dog I think that for us as a
landgrant r one institution that
represents exactly where we are
as the front porch for our
institution you know in
four of our sports we are top
three and conference usa for
attendance numbers and that
really says a great deal about
what we are doing to promote.
All of our programs but in
football were sixth so we need
to increase what we are doing
that again memorial stadium and
we can see what happens when we
invest in our football program
when we have a ten when season
and we experience success
we see the investment pay off
and I think that that was a
great deal of investment from
the state and that pay off was a
big time success for an in
mexico state university and we
Talk about
the two
positive benefits that come out
as far as with the community it
builds community it builts pride
and as we're talking about
especially in certain airs of
alba kirky we want to create
that sense of pride for among
our students
in for our communities
I also think that it's going to
support local businesses right
we're talking about it we're
looking at
saturday or afternoon more
talking about getting ten to
fifteen thousand people to fill
these stadiums how we can
benefit from our local
restaurants or hotels and by by
working in investing in this
it's kind of summer to when we
invest in the small private
public partnerships and so I
think that we need to do this
mister chairman and community I
I also think that we need a
little kid a funding mechanism
so that we can support these
programs with funding and it not
be at the expense of increased
fees to the students I don't
want it passed along to our
students and these other types
things I think that we need to
to look at this to take it a
merc and see how we can fund
these types of initiatives you
know as as the two um
flagships for new enemies here
in your m I I think it's
important but I also haven't
forgot about highlands and
western and eastern it as we
begin to build these programs I
think that the rest of the state
will benefit from the investment
that we make into our athletic
programs and specifically our
football programs
mister chairman my last question
in this is a question
mister what kinds of activities
are you doing to to basically
increase as far as attendance
you know because I wanted to be
that if a family has an extra
hundred dollars.
That these you know you know
think that attending a lowball
game or a aggie game is a great
way to to spend that money and I
don't want it I wanted to be
more than just a game I wanted
to be an experience in people
spending quality time to get
there so mister chairman him to
mister what can you talk about
what we're doing and if enemies
you would also like to respond
about what we can do to increase
and bring folks to our stadiums
mr chairman and representative
back up first before I answer
the question I I do want to echo
your sentiment that two things
one that an investment in
athletics is an investment in
the economy certainly when
people come to our events that's
hotel rooms that are filled
that's restaurants that are
being you know people are
visiting in all of all of that
and so I do want to echo that
and I also do when echo your
sensiment you know on we're here
speaking on behalf of the
division one institutions in in
this great state but I firmly
believe that you know our
division to institutions
everyone are rising tired raises
all boats and so I think a
healthy athletics programs
across this grade state I think
we'll have a a meaningful impact
to the quality of life across
this state and so at the answer
you're specific question mister
chair and and representative
back you know we've taken a
really unique approach
specifically for football to try
to drive engagement from our
fans at the reality is is
there's the old added that the
definition of insanity is
repeatedly performing the same
actions expecting different
results and so I have challenged
my team to how do we look at
things differently and I think
some of you may have seen in the
last two or three weeks we've
we've looked at two different
initiatives to try to drive
attendance number one we took a
section of seats in our stadium
that we weren't selling uh
inventory wasn't moving and so I
asked my team how do we make
this more accessible to it
creating the next generation of
global for both ins and in that
was by allowing someone to
purchase a general.
Mission ticket they can now
bring their family there to uh
twelve and under you can bring
your kids to the game and then
to take that one step further we
also looked at our concession
prices you talked about someone
having a hundred dollars you
know if we're charging thirteen
dollars for a bottle of water
that doesn't work that doesn't
work for the community and so
we've looked at how do we make
our events fan friendly family
friendly to be more specific and
so we've looked at are
concession prices by lowering a
bottle of water and is no longer
that right you can buy a hot dog
for a reasonable price now and
really targeted that so we can
get the next generation of
lowball fans in and I believe
accessibility is critical we
have to open our doors to people
that have not been to our games
in the past in once we do that
in they come and we've talked
about it representative back we
got to make sure we're doing our
part right we can't have lines
that are forever we've got a
serve our fans and we've got to
do things outside of our stadium
so that when people wake up on a
saturday they think coming the
lowball football game is what
they want to do so we got to get
him up out of bed we got to get
him in our stadium by activating
it and then we've got to do some
of the initiatives that were
doing this year to make their
experience really great inside
the stadium thank you for the
question.
Mr chair etc thank you for the
question and the opportunity to
respond I think that I echo a
lot of work for an indo is
saying in terms of addressing
the lines with the concession
stands making sure that the free
and experience is what the phone
experience needs to be in terms
of providing someone the best
experience that they can have
when they come to a game at
again moral stadium
but we are also partnering with
the hispanic chamber of commerce
for our hispanic heritage game
promotions like that or
important for us and making sure
that we embrace lost cruces and
we embrace everything that last
crucials and the state of new
mexico is four hour our football
program experience you know
we're opening our gates earlier
and when we open our gates
earlier we're hoping to cut down
on the lines of the concession
stands and in an effort to
encourage folks to come in to
the to the gates earlier we are
offering concession incentives
when they come in we've got
family friendly pricing while I
did mention that we have
increased our season ticket
prices we've still had to keep
our families in mind and make
sure that we were accessible to
everyone in los crucials in the
state of new mexico.
The other thing that we've done
is we have re launched our
little aggies club and this time
we've made it free
we have partnered with white
sands federal credit union and
they are offering an opportunity
for their junior savings account
to be the ticket to get into our
events for free we are
identifying a football game we
are identifying a basketball
game but then all of our other
events those those students who
have that junior savings account
will be able to get into those
games free in addition to the
fact that they are learning some
financial literacy while they
get to come and enjoy an aggie
basketball game more and again
softball game or a soccer game
so we're looking at what we can
do from a a community standpoint
we are also
launching a national fundraising
campaign fundraising cannot be
just local any longer we have
been talking with the same folks
over and over again about the
same dollar over and over again
so we need to launch a national
fundraising campaign to make
sure that we are casting wider
nets to continue to support our
student athletes in the best way
that we can
thank you mister chairman and
thank you for that time in a
week and talk about this all day
and just when we know that what
we're up against our most
recently in boston we had a
conversation about n I l
and the person of one of the the
representatives from georgia's
air and the cost of n I l for
just a georgia football team was
fifty eight million dollars for
that one program
so when we're looking at that we
need to make sure that what kind
of what were what were dealing
with and so you know I would
love to be able to go to a
football game in his tennessee
and n f l jerseys I see.
Again and lowball jerseys and
building that pride and I think
that you know i'm hopeful that
maybe we can continue this
conversation and that we really
make an investment in a
difference that's going to help
our next generation of ages of
lowballs and cowboys and
everything else thank you mister
chairman
thank you very much
we'll go to next to vice
chairman you're again we're
gonna we do have a lunch with
president for me so well
in checking away thank you thank
you mister chairman you know you
have to go back and you have to
look at the history of some of
the stuff you know I I was in
the press one time for taking
ten kids to the losing this
footpal peam in the united
states and that was a low box
right and it changed slowly but
the turnover keeps happening
right and for whatever reason
it's it's going to happen.
But there's certain things that
the state did several years back
we wrote off the debt
for you and and that helped them
balance our books.
In a msu chose not to do that I
think we stuck that somewhere in
house bill two later on in miss
you still chose not to do that
to write off the debts we could
get a balance statement that was
equal and so we're really going
but you look at the the revenue
numbers and union
makes fifty two and spends fifty
two and a machine generates
twenty seven in spends roughly
thirty two million dollars a
year a four million dollars down
you can't run athletic program
and be competitive and run a
deficit you have to figure it
out I don't know where the
leadership was not to figure
that out just run a deficit and
will just keep doing that I mean
it doesn't work doesn't work at
any business model doesn't work
in anything else nil is
completely changed it's now in
the high school
you can
somebody today talked about
their kid running tracking in
got watches and choose and close
and everything else in and is
earning money in high school
so athletic world has changed
completely
the question that **** do we
want to be competitive or do we
not want to be competitive in
the n I
was with some people in texas
last week and they all texas
tech fans they're spending three
hundred million dollars on their
now they're going to try to buy
every title they can in the
united states there's no way
you're going to compete with
that right
but when we say oh we don't
treat schools equally or
we don't treat them the same the
populations are different that's
one rate
and so in certain years in a ms
you got
a larger increase than you and m
in some years your name got a
larger increase than
any issue
and
the population is different the
marketing is different that
tendence is different in in the
stands but
if we want to continue this and
and I will say this to the
region to union.
We did opportunity to help drive
people to school and the union
regions went in there and passed
student fees for athletics so
they could give it out the
opportunity that's not what we
intended rate but they've wanted
more money and more revenue and
what do we do do you want more
kids in intendence for college
and now the states already
adding that number back to that
maybe fernando you know
how much that's gonna generate
when they added that additional
fee to tuition
mr chairman invised chairman
yours
yes sir so in this fiscal year
and you'll see it in in my in
the revenue of report here so
the student fee number that's in
there in our pie chart and
that's inclusive of the student
fee additional revenue this year
so this year it'll be around one
point six million in additional
revenue uh for us in our budget
and then in the next year in FY
twenty seven it'll be around two
point five additional so one
point six this year and then two
point five in the subsequent
fiscal year and so then you you
got your state money
you actually got a you know two
point five million if we average
it out over the next year right
but it's really going to be in
additional money because you
took the opportunity dollar
amount for tuition and you added
that as a fee and so it's
costing us more per student at
unanimous and it is in the issue
now should it match you do that
aminance that's up to them but
if you run in a for harp four
million dollars deficit every
single year you better figure
out how to get yourself out of
the whole or just buy a soccer
team in college good.
I don't think anybody unless you
want that
but you gotta have to figure it
out and then do we want our
athletes to be competitive we're
not going to compete with the
texas tech we're not going to
compete in sec right we're not
going to compete in those arenas
but we can win in certain
conferences I read the right
conference I mean everybody will
have a different opinion on the
athletics I mean the usa
conference is the easiest lowest
conference to win in and it's a
small market so any issue is not
going to be competitive compared
to what what a market where they
end before what conference
certainly before the US a.
Some bill
and what maybe do you know the
revenues when they were in that
conference.
At mr chairman vice chairman no
I don't have the revenues for
when we were in the wack I do
have folks here with me who
could answer those questions if
you would like.
I'm probably getting two hundred
text messages to tell me which
one and how much they made but
i'm not gonna rely on my phone
but new mexico and schools need
to say if they really want to
win and that's the question rate
in what's going to cause us to
win in what conference do we
really belong in and I I believe
that unam should have been in
the pack well it's not the pact
in what's a pack twelve or
something and the president who
was headed the conference didn't
push us that in that direction
ordered generate more revenue
only play hawaii in those other
games are high costly games it
that we don't
generate a lot of revenue from
and so
what do you guys want and she
what do you want achieved as the
athlete director in n I l money
and making new mexico
one the stand out something and
basketball were kind of always
low
mister chairman and based her
munios great question in the
timing is certainly appropriate
because when I look at the
future specifically for for the
lobos I firmly believe in amber
mentioned this in her remarks
that we're in a five year window
right now where frankly I like
to call it in audition because
in twenty thirty twenty thirty
one twenty thirty two there's
going to be another round of of
of realignment and consolidation
that that much is a certainty
when these tv deals come up for
the bigger institutions and
bigger conferences insult I
think for us while we're in this
period what is being competitive
mean is exactly what you were
alluding to is what we ever be
able to compete with the texas
text of the world and all of
that georgia is representative
back I said we want that but we
need to be extremely competitive
in our conference in the
mountain west as is as it exists
right now.
Because I firmly believe that
when we continue to when
championships this year was a
perfect example were able to win
six conference championships the
most of any school in the
mountain west that's that helps
that helps perception it shows
that the investment is paying
off that we've got the right
uh process is in place and I
will say you know what do we
need to pay for nil or rev share
I think really is dependent on a
lot of factors you know the
benefit for us is that because
we're not sharing up to the cap
if in when we generate generate
more revenue we can poor that
into our programs and we will do
it strategically and all by the
way we will certainly never
short change our olympic sports
that of the four of six
championships we won this year
four of them were from our
olympic sports who were very
proud of those and so will
continue to be strategic about
it but we need to see this
moment right now you use the
word competitive we have no
option other than to be
competitive we have to do
resourcefully responsibly
collaboratively and if we
continue to have this build on
the success we had this year i'm
confident that where will end up
is exactly where we need to be
in this next round to realign it
thank you mr chair vice german
I may new mexico state was in a
little bit of a different
situation and that we didn't get
left out of the conference for
your line move we were able to
capitalise on the success that
new mexico state had in the what
conference enabled in order to
jump up to conference usa
so that is a direct
representation of what we can do
as we continue to remain
competitive in the conference
usa and the conference that we
are in right now in order to
make sure that we are best
aligned for what is the most
appropriate next month for us if
there is a move that's
appropriate for us when that
next wave of conference
realignment comes around.
I will say that our coaches have
expressed to me two hour
president that there are happy
with where we are with nil right
now but we all recognize that
we're going to need to continue
to increase what we are doing
with and I l to keep those
coaches happy and able to
compete with then conference usa
I think that we've seen the
increased level of competition
in conference usa in that we
were not able to step in and
when the same number of
championships that we were able
to win initially in the wack
so while we continue to increase
what we are investing in n I l
we're going to have to continue
to invest in each and every one
of our sports so that we do
maintain the success that are
olympic sports have experienced
in other conferences while we
are mindful that we need to
invest in football because that
will drive conference
realignment
well i'm not just talking about
football right it's across the
board I think an emissions
soccer team on the national
championship two or three years
ago
there so the soccer team when
the national championship two or
three years ago the women's
I thought they won the national
maybe you know tell us they were
on the whack championship away
but I mean that they're going to
be specific thing you need to do
but revenue generation is all
football in basically that's
where your money comes from
there's there's very clear if
you want to have the other
sports those sports have to lead
off with it but I I mean you're
gonna have to come back and tell
us
okay what do you really need to
do to be competitive right we
don't have a billionaire like
texas tech had we gave him three
hundred million
we don't have the corporations
like georgia does
to donate to get money.
And and we got it figured out
because we all want to go win we
don't want to go watch losing
team I I think any issue had
made some mistakes when kill
left in in the loss diagonal and
some other players that was
their mistake and in the week
and talk about the background of
it but you guys caused that
system to fail when you had a
coach that took either two ball
games
and hadn't been that successful
and I don't know how many years
those are some of the costs that
you go self inflicted by doing
that
and won't we don't want to play
it that if you want to be self
infliction it's a waste of our
money in so waste of our time if
you want to go try to win tell
us what is going to take and
tell us how to help you
structure it correctly but the
union regions need to make sure
that students aren't in student
athletics that want to go to
college and just want to go to
college and.
Want to get free tuition to do
that you can't increase the cost
of athletics for us trying to
get students to succeed in
through free college that's a
completely different program you
we got to figure it out but
you're going to have to lead us
in this direction
it's a moving target in i'm not
expert in it you guys are more
experts and am but but we got it
figured out and we got to figure
out how to recruit players we
got to figure out how that works
an interesting conversation.
Last night in in today in in
talking about nil with one of
enemies shoes the biggest
donors.
Is why don't we create farm
teams for these other
universities why don't we create
a farm team for texas tech and
make them pay the nil and let
the players advance and see how
it rolls out and conference it's
an interesting scenario but just
something to think about mister
chairman thank you very time
appreciate it but please come
back with some more detailed now
that we kind of folged in.
And how in him issue is going to
not run a system in debt
that's what in the machine is
forgot thank you early thank you
very much we've now entered over
time we're a little over a time
but what we'll go to and again
thank you to vice are manuals
for main sure we've had this
conversation as one we very much
want to continue where to go to
represent dixon center linear
and then represent garrett will
close this out here
and
thank you mr chair I was going
to have a
response in alignment with your
overall time but i'm not that
savvy so
and chair and directors thank
you very much for the
presentation I appreciate it I
hopefully just have some quick
questions that won't require a
lot of
you know hopefully their shorten
suit
where in the paychecks what is
institutional support comprised
of.
The.
Mister chairman representative
dixon so direct institutional
support is a number number of
different factors but mainly
those those are transfers uh
from main campus that help us
support various operational
needs and so for us you know
that that would help with some
of our grant need some of those
those items there's a number of
different categories there's
also
that service right that were
we're working together with
campus on two to pay back our
debt service on on the pit for
example and so when we make
those payments in those
transfers occur that's what gets
representative in the in the
institutional support category
think you must return thank you
so is part of institutional
support is part of that funding
though directly from the state I
mean does it come from the state
to a different part of you and m
and then and app is what i'm
wondering
mr chairman and representative
dixon I believe I would I would
have to clarify with a hundred
percent certainty but I do know
that as part of our at u and m
part of our process when we talk
about institutional support we
go through our budget leadership
team which is chaired by a
president and deans and others
and so
the transfers for that do come
from campus where the source of
those funds reside i'm i'm not a
hundred percent certain on that
think you
miser chair directors are the
student fees what percent of the
student fees are paid for out of
packet by students and what is
covered through scholarships and
other means
mister chairman and
representative dixon so for our
graduate student population
there they will pay for the
athletic uh fee and all other
fees out of their pocket and
then for our undergraduate.
A student population those that
are on opportunity scholarship I
don't have the exact percentage
on me obviously those
individuals would not pay out of
pocket but we do have uh uh a
percentage I want to say
somewhere in the twenty to
twenty five percent range of
students undergraduate students
on our campus um that would pay
those all mandatory fees
inclusive of athletics out of
out of out of their their pocket
thank you think you mister chair
how many student athletes are at
unam and at an msu and what's
the percentage of student
athletes as compared to nine
student athletes.
Mr chair representative dixon we
have just about four hundred
student athletes at new mexico
state.
I would have to do some quick
math to tell you at that
percentage is but we have just
over
fourteen thousand students
at new excuse date
mr chairman representative
dickson we have about four
hundred and fifty student
athletes and I believe that last
check our enrollment was
somewhere around nineteen
thousand if i'm not mistaken.
Thank you mr chair thank you.
I'm interested in the memo that
was a given term members in our
binders mr chair from a prepared
by connor during
the in the table on the back
page um
we have a history of general
fund appropriations for
athletics and in fiscal year
twenty six the year over year
change for unm was thirty five
percent and I don't remember a
significant discussion in have
seen about that I could you know
so i'm hoping someone can remain
to me what the thirty five
percent increase was for.
What will get that
was an increase in their
recurring budget of three
million dollars that was added
and senate finance and ended up
in the final hospital to.
Thank you mr chair thank you
director
can I get more information
they'll on with the three
million dollars
there are appropriations coming
out of the house to help offset
a non recurring for three years
for both schools to help offset
the need for their coaches and
other people to help with
outside fundraising for their
basic operations and that was a
a kind of an attempt a growth
tape of attempt to get them out
of the need to give it get them
out of the whole and the senate
I chose to make three million of
that a permanent a recurring and
then there was another non
recording amount for ms you
thank you mister chair thank you
director
that's our sizeable increase
couple other questions
for the directors
how much additional funding are
you anticipating needing to ask
for from the state in the coming
years there are a lot of factors
that it sounds like are in flux
and but is there a sense of how
much each of the universities
are going to need in additional
funding are we talking one
million are we talking five
million we talking ten million
over the next couple of years
just to start having us
percolate.
I'm some of those issues.
Mr chair representative dickson
and I think that as senator
munios vice chairman knows
pointed out we're operating in a
deficit at new mexico state and
so when we have that deficit
we're going to need to increase
that revenue by six million
dollars in order to just say
that we are going to be flat.
Mr chairman and representative
dixon so
I think as as vice to a munios
mention you know that diming in
to what is necessary to be
competitive um in in the the
correct of institutions that we
compete against is something we
really we have been and will
continue to to dive and I think
as you look back speaking
specifically for you and then
we're about fifteen million off
of the average amongst our peers
that we certainly know that
that's not
that that that's not solely on
the state to help us close that
gap we've we've got increase our
revenues we've done it we've set
records every year but I think
broadly speaking looking at
getting us closer to the average
for us to remain competitive and
as vice chairmunio said you know
set ourselves up for the next
round of realignment I think
will be critically important and
so how we look at that in in any
sort of funding model certainly
speaking on behalf of you in the
methodics I would love to to
partner and have those deeper
conversations in transparency
transparency behind what we need
to be successful thank you.
Thank you thank you mister last
I think this is my last question
so um
representative at a mentioned
the economic impact of athletics
and I think that's a
very important part of the
discussion as well I would
really be interested you know we
get economic impact reports from
a variety of organizations in
the state you know we always get
one from c n d los alamos
different
different types of industries I
would really like to
see and economic impact report
on athletics are to the state I
think that would be very helpful
um thank you
fifteen minutes over time
so we're gonna go to center in
there and represent it thank you
mister chair i'll give it very
very short in this ice bowl that
we're playing in today it's a
little chilean here
the freezing
and and I just I want to can
play after center munich first I
want to
come in both of you for come to
the table and setting there
together and working on this
packet together I think that's
part of the problem that we've
had is
we're not only ribles on the
field but were rivals in the
business world and that's what
this is and and we've got to run
this as a business it's an
economic development in my
opinion it's an economic
development and
we need all of the universities
to work together to make this
happen
in day support center munios
we can't run in a deficit we
cannot do that it has to be ran
like a business and if you do
not
if you run as the deficit for
more than three years you're
going to close your doors.
And that's not what we want so
by everybody come into the table
and figure this out I think is a
great idea
treated as a business
you know supply and demand the
one thing that I I really want
to caution and and make sure
that we're not doing is is
raising ticket prices and
raising everything.
Because it at some point that
line hits
and people quite coming
regardless
I think the conversation today
is good because we've got to
decide do we want to have a
successful program at those
schools or not
and if we do then we've got to
figure out a way to make that
happen and I think both of you
have the right idea and you're
working towards that.
Because it's not all about the n
I l.
Um we did have some great
conversation and I think I think
there are some ideas there that
we can play offer
we're not all going to get
patrick my hon come through our
school and solve all our
problems
but I do think that
the way you guys are reaching
out and working towards
making the the program
successful but financially
successful too because it's
going to have to go hand in hand
and so I I just want to commit
you guys I don't really have a
question because we're short and
I I think both of you for for
coming today thank you very much
center linear
thank you mister chair thanks
for putting this on the agenda
this is a presentation I didn't
know I needed and
my only question is those
fifteen people that left the
football program is there any
common reason that made them do
that.
Mr chairman in representative of
it so there's a number of
different factors one obviously
there was a handful that
graduated in there as
eligibility expired
but but the reality is for you
know three or four of our better
players and they left to be paid
one of them went to ucla the at
two of them went to save your
followed uh coach pitino when he
went there and then one of them
once university of miami and as
I mentioned in in my
presentation the recruitment and
it used to be all about
recruitment in our retentions
the more important our word you
know that we have to focus on
and so you know what's
interesting and I saw this done
of indent who was one our best
player last year he was back in
alba kirky last week and he was
so complementary of this time in
new mexico and he loved the pit
but as senator to the near just
said in vice chair munos and you
know it's become a business and
we have to be very mindful as
athletic directors to not that
let that cloud our judgment
because ultimately what we're
here force to graduate our
student athletes to make them
productive members of this
community hopefully they stay in
this grade state when they
graduate but we do need to be
mindful that in order to keep
our players we have to have the
resources which is now money to
be able to compensate them but
it's not always going to be
perfect and we may still get
beat but we're going to try our
best to be competitive within
the resources we have
if I may please go ahead
representative garrett.
From new mexico state when when
we have student athletes that
leave our program they're
leaving our program for a
significant pd and I want to
point out that there's been
research that's done about the
transfer portal that shows that
by in large over sixty percent
of the student athlete to enter
the transfer portal leave for a
lower level institution
and that just goes to show you a
unm and new mexico state
we are actually performing as
that developmental program our
coaches are developing our
student athletes and the p four
programs are coming in and
recruiting our student athletes
offer our campus at a higher
rate than they are nationally
according to the research that's
been done about where a student
athletes end up from the
transfer portal.
And if I could mister chair
senator near I would like to
point out and maybe make it a
slight comment about our
budget and the budget that we
turned in to et that was in an
effort to be transparent that is
one of my core values and I
believe that it's important for
us to be transparent I believe
that in the past we had perhaps
inflated what we expected our
revenues to be and this time we
were able to just turn in
exactly what we thought that we
were going to be able to achieve
in revenue so that we were not
on the back end trying to ask
for institutional support but we
were on the front end turning in
a transparent budget so that you
see what we are up against your
in a near out.
Thank thank you very much thank
you very much i'm guarantee
thank you both
great questions from the
committee clearly a lot of
interest
you know this is two to three
percent well yeah two to three
percent of the student
population I think these are
and
we've gotten a clear sense of of
the interest from the committee
the importance to the
institutions into the state at
large.
It is great to be here today
we have to do this together
particularly and
acting athletic director birds I
appreciate very much sort of
that perspective
uh director lower thank you for
being here going around the
finance committees are doing
things frankly even between the
chambers this is a chance for us
to get on the same page.
Because it's two percent of the
student population it's probably
I think I look forward also to
the economic study up because
when we think about the billions
of dollars in places like
artificial intelligence and
others and
these are of incredible
importance.
And we're going to treat it that
way as long as we work on it
together going around or not
working on it together there are
so many other pressing
challenges and opportunities.
That uh and budget we have
strong we're in our strong as
fiscal place ever.
In a unique place to actually
attack these challenges in a
better way to get there and and
so that's
very clearly through this
hearing is that we have to do it
together which I think we're
excited to do okay thank you
both very much look forward to
very much more members we have
lunches right behind us we have
our new president in mexico
state university on the first
day of classes is carved out a
significant amount of time to
visit with the committee so
gravel lunch use of facilities
or what have you do a couple of
jumping jacks if you need to
warm up
but put on your beanie but I
would ask that we make sure and
take time with the president
he's taken time out of the first
day a classes and excited to
dive in there so president come
on up
we'll get some lunch and we'll
make sure some refreshments are
there for the president.
Yeah.
I'm ready to go.
That's called she's call it's
great president thank you so
much for being here we'll ask
everybody to grab a sea or take
the conversation outside
in take it away on the first day
of classes
thank you chair smile I
appreciate it and with no
disrespect to the people who are
rocking around i'm just going to
start I have a little bit of a
prepared speech for like seven
eight minutes and then I mean I
hope that that will generate
some interest in in the asking
questions i'm much better at the
cute I mean I prefer the to
going into a little speech but I
think it's also useful to give
these these a little bit of
background to what is happening
so first of all I do want to
thank you for having us here
today uh I want to begin by
saying that
one of the pleasures of my last
few months has been to actually
go on the impact to work to all
of our extension are offices in
thirty three counties so i've
been in each one of your
counties i've met people and I
i've met some of you at these at
the stops it's been a refreshing
view of what the sake represents
and as a language university I
really think it helps me
understand what my role and what
car rule is the university can
be so thank you for that but
yeah first day of classes lots
of excitement i'll give you a
little bit of data so I know
you've been asking about
enromance and we are currently
and usually there's just a bump
of one or two students in the
last in the last couple of weeks
but we're currently nine hundred
and eighty two students up from
last year at this time as an
overall system with the less
cruises on campus in roman for
undergrads up by a hundred and
thirty students and uh global up
by about four hundred students
at the undergraduate level all
of our colleges that so our
community colleges are also up.
The only place where we've seen
retransmit is a graduate student
and that is mostly international
graduate students who have had
so we are sixty students down in
that in that uhm but very good
trend also is an item I was in
here but I think rcfo did
address that are campus housing
is almost at capacity right now
which is a really good sign uh
it tells us something about you
know how students really want to
come back to campus and for me
that is a
a plus it's also something it
says something about nmsu as a
university that we truly value
the campus experience and we
have as I think uh uh
representative it rare a
mentioned earlier we have
extended online on campus
housing two second years and
that those numbers as you
suggest that do
also help increase our retention
which is something that we are
pretty attentive to right now
just giving another another
detailed that i'm very excited
about over the weekend we had
our largest participations of
freshman in our complication and
first year walk at over a
thousand students that's about
forty percent higher than the
previous high which uh for me is
exciting and as a as senator
soles know we just launched the
eighteen eighty eight leadership
initiative for the freshman
class this is something that we
started this year to prepare a
students to develop and learn
the qualities we believe are
going to be necessary to succeed
in their post-graduate careers
we are going to do more
programming throughout the year
we invite leaders from different
areas of are economic spectrum
and also political and
industrial uh leadership to talk
with the students and the idea
really is.
To
build it up so it becomes part
of our curricular and
expectations for students where
actually we're going to have
slight modules that are inserted
in their educational careers.
So literally in my view we're
putting the college campus back
into our strategy and and I I do
think that
this is gonna be one of the main
goals that we have.
I
don't want to say anything about
anybody else but I do want to
say that this university is the
premier in my view residential
campus university in the state
and that we want to double down
on that because we think there
is opportunities there to give
students a different kind of
experience and as you probably
have already heard
this is probably some of the
impetus but uh behind wanting to
create multi display hub at the
center of campus
with classroom and research
activity that emphasises both
creativity and future threatens
friends in learning an education
and i'll give you a little bit
more to that in a few seconds
incidentally we're also
beginning to formulate our new
strategic roadmap because we
just completed the leads twenty
five this past year
so
me might want to know what
direction i'm going with and how
we are going to do it we're
going to do it collaboratively
we are planning to do stay
colder and shareholder meetings
throughout the next few months
to get uh indications especially
from our partners outside of the
university for what they think
we can provide in terms of our
service
but it but let me come back to
our mission because I think that
still gives us the north star of
the direction we want to go so
we have three fundamental goals
as a lane grant to educate the
citizens of the state to produce
research and innovation that has
impact in advances the economic
will being of the state and to
provide public service to our
citizens by making that
knowledge available to everyone
across the state.
So education of our citizens
aside from the already mentioned
eighty eight and eighteen eighty
eight leadership initiative
which as I said will embedded
our university practices were
doubling down on student success
I heard the committee loud and
clear less year when it asked
how come we have not improved
our retention and graduation now
comes over the past few years
despite all the investments well
my message to the campus and
yesterday's complications and in
meetings with the college has
been we need to be to obsess
about students success in the
next few years
we cannot be satisfied with the
current status nor can we
continue to apply the same
methods to how we support our
students as you heard athletic
director loval
the definition of madness is
continuing to do the same thing
and expecting different results
so
I will say that think to the
tremendous efforts that are in
roman management officers global
campus and marketing have done
our
let's call it the growth funds
population first year over all
retention numbers are already up
by one point five percent for
this year and our overall
student for attention is up one
point two percent
in fact that we are hovering
around seventy five point five
percent of this point and that's
a good news for us but I want it
over eighty and so that's the
goal that we're going to be
aiming for.
My message has been clear I
think to everybody retaining our
students begins with the first
events ruction with testing
early helping early focusing on
the adaptability and belonging
of our students secondly my
second goal and this i'm going
to come and ask for support and
this is something that i've
talked with some of you before
is I want to elevate a
cooperative education not
extension
in experiencing learning across
our colleges with an emphasis on
creating opportunities for paid
internship and curricular and
credit barrett bearing
opportunities the intent is
three fault one is to give
students the opportunity to
experience hand on the career
they want to pursue while
working and finding out which
companies they like as well as
be paid so they can defray some
of the cost of attendance that
are still not being covered by
the opportunity scholarship or
the
latter rescue
it gives employers the
opportunity to explore an
experience which students best
fit their needs and company
culture with the account outcome
that they are often ready to
offer them jobs once they
graduate in by foreman's
situation students who did
cooperative education and deduct
employed at ninety six percent
rates out of college
finally and this is a is back
and forth employers having seen
the skills are student brings to
bring to their companies or to
their jobs can provide feedback
on the areas of strength of
weakness and our educational
preparation which then can allow
us to change our curricular
offeringings accordingly all
very good things in my view
because it shows the cooperation
between the educational world
and private and public sector
that needs us
finally cooperative education is
a predictor of greater student
success because students see the
pathway to graduation and beyond
and we want to ensure that the
program which is typically
applied of to four year colleges
is also available to to your
colleges so we're talking with
our community colleges about.
How we make those available to
their students as well i'm very
excited about this you know
we'll probably put some funding
but we may come and ask for some
funding to establish a central
office mike former dean of
cooperative education is coming
in october two for a few days to
help us sir organize and
rationalize what we're going to
be doing in that area at least
to get it started so very
exciting about that
I think the second mission
obviously have the language
institution is to provide
research and innovation
that helps the state economic
development and hopefully in the
last couple of days you've had
the opportunity to see where
bringing great expertise to
areas that are important for not
only the advancement of the
state but nationally
and that the linchping of our
commitment to that is going to
be and again I need to thank
this committee and what you've
done last year it's gonna be the
institute for a I and machine
learning which we want to
situate in the center of campus
again the creation is and in
this also matches the the
creation of the first bachelor
of science degree in a I and
machine learning which we're
going to be launching and twenty
twenty six so very excited to
get this because we are betting
on this institute to help us
align and exploring correct
both innovation and advances in
the different colleges with the
futureistic opportunity and
challenges offered by rat rapid
development of the eye and chair
small you and I had a little
conversation about that because
it is only going to accelerate
and we need to figure out how to
get that under control at some
point
and again some of you may have
had a preview of that last week
I know that last week we had a
meeting a group of our people
had a meeting with new mexico
language committee and are
experts in the college of
agriculture showed the uses of a
eye in advancing the need of our
agricultural.
And ranching constituents
the same can be said of the work
you also started seeing just in
the last few days that and
you'll hear again today with
water research but
the physical science lab which
is really important to for our
collaborations with department
of defense uh biotech cyber
security aerospacer advance
computing and more we are there
and we are committed to
providing the support that needs
to be provided to the state uh
but mo- for me that creation of
the institute also has an
ulterior motive the development
of curricular offerings across
all the fields of knowledge we
offer to enable students in all
fields to familiarize themselves
with a I principles because a
basic knowledge of the
advantages and pitfalls of a
machine learning application is
already becoming and we hear it
time and again a requirement of
our industry and government
partners I just had a
conversation with a cfoceo of
uh past electric and she has
talked to me about how she
really needs to option all of
her work force in death in that
area.
Finally the the last of our of
our of our goals as a land grant
is to provide service to our
constitutional and I mentioned
that the impact of the the the
tour that we took through our
extensions offices we heard
then we can upper game and we
want to create a conceit
couriers of system where all the
parts are integrated into a
better hole so we're bringing
our extension directors to
campus we're inserting them into
our recruiting efforts we're
also updating our information
and with collaboration from the
colleges begin we're beginning
to get engineering alight and
the allied health professions
involved in partnerships that
also allow us to leverage our
four h and ffa to expand the
opportunities for learning away
from campus
so equally important and I see
this again tied both through the
eye in the public service is the
skilling reskilling and
upskilling of those who want to
enter new professions find you
work opportunities or simply
desire to enter the fork force
without a traditional degree.
Collaborations between our two
year colleges and an emission
global are already moving forth
those conversations in addition
by partnering with industry we
are creating special provider
opportunities for example after
visits that I had with the three
crosses hospital electronic care
giver and a pass electric
leadership we are establishing
university to business moves
that make animals who global the
primary partner for the
educational opportunities the
companies offer their employees
and this is something that I
know is of great interest to a
number of you so I I want to
conclude well I was going to
conclude just by saying
questions are welcome but I do
want to point out that
at the end of my comments that
you're going to actually yet
like you should be brought some
ice cream okay the ice cream is
called firm a paradox so I have
an ice cream named after me that
I didn't ask for but it came and
the the paradox apparently is in
the matching of the scotty with
peacons in the ice cream so I do
want to
think are student ambassador
from the the college of
agricultural consumer
environmental science who along
with the uh asus student
recruitment specialist leondra
berarus are going to be serving
that ice cream to you and with
that I conclude my remarks and
i'm open to any questions thank
you again chair and everybody in
the committee for allowing me to
speak about mse excellent thank
thank you so much president for
me and again on the first day
classes we really appreciate you
taking the time to be here will
die right in starting with uh
vice chairman when you also and
then as there are other
questions thank you mister
president kitchen haven't
noticed we already are in the
ice box it might be more serving
to hot certain hot chocolate in
here
and anybody that needs a coat
similar near gaming his credit
card and i'm going to go to
marshalls.
And if you have a color
preference or size you should
let me know
since we can't get the air
conditioners turned off in here
it is rather cold I just hope we
don't all go home and be sick
all weekend with it sixty two
degrees in the thermostat so
hopefully they'll fix that
mister president let me ask them
questions are you engaged in the
budgeting and committee
in an an intimate.
A mr chair and senator monia's
app I I am the question that the
I I guess I would ask you is is
to
is
at what level do you do expect
me to be engaged because I do
see the budgets well I I mean
look at any issues at least
you're eighty months nine months
here right roughly in the time
frame and as we head towards a
session right we know there's
gonna be shortfalls and those
budgeting I mean how engaged are
you are you in the meetings are
you engaging in in the overall
budget are you engaging in
certain departments budget where
it was the engagement that you
want to make changing I mean the
student retention are those
budget that department is
student retention student
graduation are you involved in
those budgets at all
chair small and center communist
yes i'm absolutely engaged our
in fact among the things that I
have been working with our cfo
and budget people is
rationalizing the way our
budgets are done because as I
mean and I appreciate the
question because I too have
found or a budget sometimes to
be difficult and are keen in the
in their ability to be
transparent so I have been
requesting that two things one
is that we do quarterly reports
on our budgets which in the past
which apparently was a thing
that we did in the past and it
was normal but hasn't been done
so that's something that we are
going to we are working on and
secondly I do want to have a
ability to see the budgets
across the board for they are
even every month for certain
areas of the university as we
move forward
so you're you're engaged across
the board and in all the
departments in their overall
budget
cher small the senate and we
just know I I don't micromanage
at the level of every department
I will tell you one thing that
however I so this is that that
the weirdness of our system
which I want to eliminat.
And it is precisely to bring
transparency to our budgets what
I can tell you is that I know we
have money in our budgets I
can't tell you necessarily where
those moneys are so this is the
the thing that i'm trying to
change I also have I didn't
mention it before but even
though we don't we are in a in a
stable financial situation this
year we're doing an exercise to
redo set the in every unit in
the university budgets by one
point five percent in their
permanent budgets and one
percent and carry forward one
time budgets the reason is that
in my view our monies are not
distributed to the areas that
need to be a promoted or
supported and also we need to
think about what could be a way
of being more strategic in the
use of moneys that we have and
in the sunsetting possibly of
certain programs that are no
longer functional but I do not
go to the level of the
individual college or department
and now that.
Athletics you realize today that
they're forty running a four
million dollars deficit
how do you plan on on fixing
that problem for an issue
athletics.
Food
check I would ask the same
question if it had been
the college of engineering but I
haven't heard any other deficit
spending and that's why i'm
asking
a small center tomorrow yes
aside there is by the way
interestingly enough although we
don't have uh we don't have real
problems we do have a structural
deficit at the university of
which i'm trying to address
which I actually want to uh it's
a two point five million dollars
structural deficit we are part
of the process with their with
this exercise is to reduce that
you know if I I with regards to
the question about athletics I
think there are there are a
couple of of questions that I
think that representative dixon
said something about this is
looking at what is the overall
impact economic impact of
athletics on the university you
know interestingly enough we are
looking at a program that at the
level of seat of the conference
usa even suggests that we are
underfunded by a couple of
million dollars should we have
you know additional support that
would cover a lot of that gap
but at the university we **** I
mean I have been engaged in you
know we we got a million and a
half from the from this
committee last year I am putting
up another one point five
millions to close the gap for
this year and obviously we need
to think about how are we going
to do better and the future the
one area where I am intervening
then this is something that is a
common now at the level of
universities nationwide we are
going to separate the pull of
five or one c three that is
going to be focused solely on
athletic moving forward in my
estimation of our fundraising
efforts although I can't to
speak for the foundation.
I believe that we are under
under
fundraising in that area by two
or three millions and that's
probably how we could clue close
most of those gaps right now if
we did we had zero we had zero
fundraising development officers
that were fully dedicated to
fund raising an athletics at my
former institution which is a
bigger program there were eight
and they were moving to thirteen
if I was just doing the numbers
games of proportionality we
should have three and a half
fundraisers in athletics so yes
you put another expense there
but also your expectation is
that you're going to be able to
cover much of that gap that way
trying different things is
really important and also the
other conveniency of their serve
of this is going to be to be
able to do the nil and the cost
separate and avoid certain costs
well I know you and ended an
economic impact study on
athletics and I I don't think
the at eighty got to answer that
question i'll offer them issue
has done one or not
but now you're telling me here
about the six point five million
dollars deficit structure
deficit pay between athletics
and the other two point five but
those are the things I I want to
see how if you've got financial
control and been in the
financial meetings in the
university to see with what
other structural deficits are
problems that we have in order
to do let you know your job and
target money where you want it
to grow where your needs are
that's where my question has
come from but if you're in the
budget committee
or monitoring the overall budget
to see if there's deficits in
the egg department or something
that that have to be managed
that
that's what I wanted to ask in
so that's where my question was
I don't want to drag it out too
long because there's other
people that have questions but
that's what we got to figure out
where you're at and do that.
Athletics brought the to light
you're going to have to fix that
because we're not going to give
you four million dollars every
single year to to fix your
structural effort because then
the the stover spend again will
be in the same boat again
they go to figure out how to do
that
so well in the sorry chair small
center tomorrow I am aware of
these issues I am actually as
they said moving some funding in
that in the direction of support
for athletics and as I said my
request is really that everybody
ups their game with regards to
fundraising to
great or revenues so that that
is something that you know will
help and i'm hopeful that when
we come here we won't have
another conversation like this
the other thing could really
quickly is the endowment money
that we sent to the institutions
and the institutions and I think
animation was one of them that
took that money and put it in
the foundations I want a full
adding of those foundations now
that you might state money with
it because.
That money was supposed to help
higher new.
Professors get new nursing
scholarships get all that done
and now it's gotten blended in
the foundation money by one of
full audit on the foundation
money I want to see where every
dollar of that win and now that
we're gonna be able to look at
the foundation will look across
the board and see where they're
spending their money and they
did it to themselves and you may
not been here when it happened
but I I will expect that maybe
within a month or so
cher small center communist I
actually have a pile this big of
all of the things that you're
asking I could actually take all
the time to explain to you this
these were covered money that
the state gave to heat hd then
entered in a contract with nmsu
and these funds were then given
to an emission as endowments I
wasn't here none of the
signatories of those documents
are actually around but I did
follow the trail so I can give
you all of the information you
need I don't know that when I
want to do it here but my
understanding is that the
agreement between and i'm assume
and the foundation did two
things it did not assess the
five percent fee that the
foundation typically assessors
at the front there fee that was
assessed to the by the
foundation was its investment
fee which was one point three
seven percent there were also
some details with regards to
that money that
were
based on foundation practices I
I don't want to control but we
can have staff handle that in
for missing anything we can
always
do whatever we need I don't have
any problems they have I have
that information I don't I don't
mean we would catch up but
there's other people that
there's great thank you vice
chair all divided with a couple
of quick questions and president
you talked about the multi
disciplinary center can you tell
us a little bit more about that
particularly as we approach a
geo bonding cycle.
Where some of these larger
investments should be
considered.
Cher small thank you for the
question so the the the goal of
the multi deposit disciplinary
center is precisely to take
something and this is my my
concept take something like the
institute for a eye on machine
learning which to me is going to
become the linchpin of a lot of
our strategies moving forward at
least with regards to how we're
preparing our students moving
forward and set it into a
location that is central close
to some of the other places
where students come and make it
both a
place of learning and research
so they would be some labs
creative media things that are
attractive to different areas of
campus so they can interact and
create new relationships and I
mean that I know this sounds a
little bit philosophical but new
relationships and new creative
opportunities for people to meet
in the middle of campus at the
same time we wanted to be a
learning environment so
classrooms and lab spaces no
drop no wet labs wet labs are
problematic but classroom and
lab spaces that are functional
and that are movable because we
know that things will change so
do we we don't want a structure
that is a traditional structure
in terms of its format because
those then cost money to change
around we want to active
learning environments for
example where people can move
their classroom around active
labs where the labs lab sections
can be moved around again and
close to where the center of the
campus meets also the ingress of
students and community into
campus so that the idea is to
position it in a place where
near for example the the uh
student union that that the
corbett center but also along
the international m.
All where students tend to come
in and out of campus but opening
it also to university avenue so
that it becomes a place that
congregates
the idea for me is we have a lot
and a very dispersive campus is
start rationalizing our campus
to bring it closer together and
centrally and make that the goal
because as i'm talking also
philosophically about wanting to
be a system I want us to be a
campus that can actually work
together towards our future and
and that's really that the idea
thank you very much for that
president and the
artificial intelligence the a I
center as one of the components
when we began this tour on
monday we start by at the
agricultural modern dag
modernization center in sar from
me processing all the way
through a number of other areas
and what really struck me was
that artificial intelligence was
really a component of each of
those processes so something you
know foundational to the land
grant mission is now being
integrated into every component
and it really makes me grateful
for the committee in your
leadership last year in the
center for for excellence for
artificial intelligence and
seeing that only sort of growing
now
the anything that we so with the
multi disciplinary center that I
guess would be my hope that
we're able to take steps towards
that in the upcoming year uh
just sort of given that these
capital the g o bonds come
around once every two years time
is of the essence is that
something where where it's
reasonable for me to hope I hope
for that yeah we've already
started actually some work in
that direction we have a engaged
decker to start giving us ideas
for what you know concept.
Surely this might look like so
we are we are
we have started that process
another process that we are we
do need to do with regards to
both this building but as a
university is actually doing a
analysis of our usage of our
spaces that's something that
we're way behind in doing
because in my view but when we
so stored seeing a heat map of
utilization of space utilization
we're going to be able to sort
of say okay if we bring this in
what can we bring out and that
is you know my view is that
there's too much that is not
used for the right reasons and
we want to be able to use this
building for the right reason so
figuring out where does this
building take away
I actually mean bad practices in
our campus in the sort of
diffusing things around and and
not focusing on things the third
thing is that we had a master
plan that ends and I think
twenty twenty seven that we
started I guess ten years ago
and it was a ten year master
plan we can't wait to start
revisiting it and that's also
part of the project so looking
at the area looking at what the
concept of the new building
would look like has already
started we want to bring a
consultant which we you know
we're happy to do to an analyze
the use of space currently both
office space a lab space and
student space and then do the
redo the master plan because the
building by itself is not going
to help us sort of figure out
who we want to be moving forward
for the next ten years so I
think that's that's the plan and
we're moving on all of those my
hope is that you know when we
come up for the legislative
session you will see a much more
complete and detailed plan for
what we want to do.
Great that's wonderful thank you
for that excited to see in the
help as we go through that
I don't know I I know we're
we're sort of right on time for
for starting other presentations
will go next to senator woodso
I just want to put out it.
Appear say on user thank you for
going across the state boosting
ever counting ever.
Egg group ever egg uh
counting that would be call on
that extension stench and off
extension officers in that was
search of uh a fine thing for
you to do as the president of
the university to go out there
in and spin your time with those
people in charm who the vast
words in uh let them have some
feedback in you made them feel
often important sir
you are hopefully you you got
some feedback from them that
showed their importance to you
and the i'm sorry I couldn't
make those that whole tour with
you
but I did enjoy the time that I
did spend with you and with your
group so thank you for that that
was that was stepping out and I
appreciated that so small and
senator would thank you for
those remarks it was actually
it was a pleasure and I do want
to give credit both to our
extension
I so should dean but also to my
team that stepped up as well I
mean there were sixteen
seventeen people who came have
every one of those stops and we
did hear a lot of good
information and we as I said it
really is helping us integrate
ourselves better because the the
mild my feeling was and you
confirmed it as well is that our
extension officers sometimes
feel thereof in the frontier and
no one is paying attention to
them and we do need to pay
attention to them
that mr chair that shows that
that research we do here goes
both directions they
dissemination of research out in
the field and so important and
agricultural is still a big part
of this state and and they need
that contact both ways thank you
mister thank you mister
president thank you very much
senator woods.
Okay
I that's a wonderful way to wrap
up this opportunity to share I
don't know if there I don't see
any other questions outside
rapid edit I apologize please
thank you mister chair I just
wanted to
echo a senator woods comments
are extension agent done
martinez is a real leader and
rear becounter and the extension
office is a really important
part of our agricultural
community and reariba county and
I I couldn't say enough good
things about him and and your
officers and I too agree for you
to go out and visit every single
one of these extension offices
and I think there's how many
twenty six thirty three are yeah
it's in every county thirty
three over the state it's
extraordinary and and
and was recognized by our
community so just to shut out
and I thank you for your
leadership and that's hard
that's a hard job to do when
you're an incoming brand new
president so I really truly
appreciate that
thank you very much
representative
mister president I think we'll
turn it back to you
reserve down please and thank
you mister chair I just you guys
still my thunder I just I mean
truly it meant a lot I people
were very impressed and most of
all they felt heard.
I think it was really critically
important and I hope that you
know you're new to the state you
got to go to all thirty three
counties and your representative
small chairman small we are
hosting the hatch chili first of
all the end of this month so I
hope you'll make it down there
because people are going to ask
you red greener christmas and
you'll get a chance to really
solidify your your choices there
cheer a small representative
down can I just say when one
thing so I do like it spicy so I
will I will take the heat uh and
i'm ready for it so thank you
very much
as thank you very much for
present down thank you for your
leadership particularly around
our grandchildren industry and
okay I think that that wraps it
up president anything uh we've
said this is a great opportunity
to visit I turn back to you for
anything you'd like to wrap up
with and then we'll go to our
next panel check your small and
committee i'm i'm always really
grateful to be given the
opportunity to speak on behalf
this of this institution when I
came here I think there I could
feel a lot of them sort of
disarray confusion but we're
really getting a a whole done
this I think the just even the
last few days with the students
the enthusiasm that I see around
is is infectious I believe that
we are moving in the right
direction we're doing a lot of
good things the new strategic
direction is going to be a
crucial moment and we will and I
will say this now and I will
repeat it during the process we
will come to you as well to ask
for your input on where you want
us to go because it's crucial as
a land grant institution that we
follow with the state
once but also that we are good
stewarts for the money that you
give us so I absolutely we are
committed to helping the state
achieve its goals.
Thank you very much mister
president and one will turn you
loose as we're asking our water
panel to come up here misraisely
white mr heo also want to
recognize center steinborn
who's done a great deal of work
particularly in hatch in other
areas that he represents fact
there are some signs that is
your driving buying one where
the other night twenty five that
the senator was instrumental and
making sure is there an addition
to many other things.
You guys take it away which I
router.
Thank you mr chairman hello
members of the county my name is
tarnia true here in the deputy
state engineer for new mexico as
the chair said we're going to
provide a very brief high level
overview of water management
issues with the focus on our
agency but will scan other
agencies as well and then we
will also be participating with
austin a little bit further down
so will be available to answer
questions in both of those
contexts just to kick things off
I wanna really emphasize the
fact that the office of the
state engineering the interest
extreme commission work hand in
hand with our sister agencies
throughout the state on water
management issues you'll hear
more details from the
environment department in a
little bit but we also were
closely with the agriculture
department with m nerd and a
with entities like the water
trust board which brings over
sixteen different agencies
together to to manage the
applications and the water trust
board financing process that
you're well aware of
our offices inner sect with
eight different interstate
compacts and we we manage the
water is collectively and
collaptively with the our sister
states.
We are also a involved in
numerous adjudication processes
and many of those um are in
progress many of them involve
indian water rates settlements
and wanna just provide a little
plug for our teams that have
been working on there was
settlements over the past few
years we have recently
finalised our state travel
collaboration act report that
details the progress and each of
those settlements at the the
completed or in progress
settlements it's a high priority
for for our agency and it
definitely advances the
adjudication process that we're
going through in many areas and
we did have some slides
available for you you know the
first page of our slides we
always start out with the
snapshot of the drought reality
that we're facing and
you know this
is what we've seen over the past
several months of this year but
it's actually what were
predicted to over the next fifty
years and the planning process
that were going through is what
we're going to more details on
umm I went a highlight that the
governor issued an executive
order relating to drought and
railed fire response on me
twenty second that order
convened the drought task force
and may and we met on may twenty
eighth and then again in
meetings and june in july the
work of that task force
emphasises are continued to coop
collaboration among all of our
state agencies too think about
what resources we have available
to our communities I want to
make a specific point it's not
last on us that drought and
bloods are two sided of the same
coin and that we are also
engaging particularly on the
emergency response efforts with
our sister agencies when there
was flood and emergency
conditions arise.
We are are preparing a report
back to the governor with
recommendations on how we can
improve our drought response
actions throughout our
communities amanat at penn and I
are going to take team on this
presentation and move through
quickly
kick it over to her with some
planning updates
thank you mister chair and
members of the committee it's a
pleasure to be with you today
hanorison white and the director
of the new mexico interstate
stream commission I want to
start by acknowledging the
funding that the legislature is
allocated for water initiatives
across all the agencies in the
last several years we're going
to be reporting on that more in
the presentation later this
afternoon with with mr davidson
this is a quick snapshot the
tiny and I are going through we
really welcome you to follow up
with us for additional
information on any of these
pieces I think the next slide in
our packets are slid for it is
intended to emphasize we have a
lot of good direction and how we
can best utilise that funding to
bring the greatest good to
communities across the state and
that is a commitment and our
duty there's been a number of
reports in the last and plans in
the last number of years that
are informing our decision
making including the water
policy and folks infrastructure
task force report in twenty
twenty two a number of you all
engaged in that effort it has
been a very solid guide for us
and next steps.
Or state water planning
processed in receipt stream
commission is super helpful and
then we're going to talk a fair
bit more today about the
governor's fifty year water
action plan which provides a
very solid roadmap to a tackle
i'd be impacts of climate change
in new mexico and so i'll hand
it back to tonight to give a
little more detail about what's
in fifty year water action plan
and how we're moving those
initiatives currently.
Thank you and we actually just
ran over from the interim water
committee where we were
presenting on this subject
earlier today and the eleven
elements that were developed
that were compiled as part of
the governor's fifty year water
action plan work in combination
with many about other ongoing
efforts such as indian water
right settlements that I
described the regional water
planning efforts that they are
in our state stream commission
is kicking off but we wanted a
highlight
a bride spectrum of actions that
we want a priorities over the
next several years to make sure
we can address this potential
harder dryer future that we have
so the plan is organized into
three main categories the first
categories water conservation we
start with water education
across our communities and in
our schools we work on
agricultural conservation
efforts and new mexico state is
a big participant in that
they've there in the process of
reviewing
responses back to a grant
program that the legislature
authorized and funded for five
million dollars this past year
and they presented on that at
the interim water committee this
week as well.
We are working to prioritise
municipal conservation and
tightening up all of our
municipal systems for example by
catching leaks we are and I know
the environment department is
going to provide more details on
this so we're perfectly won't
we're purposely very brief in
our descriptions but as hannah
said happy to go into more
details and then we recognize
the need to conserve on a system
wide base so making sure where
addressing high priority issues
that arise in our interstate
context for example in the lower
rear ground day there is a
settlement agreement that we're
working on to make sure we can
um manage though the water
resources in this in this basin
numerous examples throughout the
state of what we're doing on a
system wide basis the metal
category from our fifty year
water action plan is development
of new water supplies we are
appreciate the authorization and
the funding that we have for the
new strategic water supply
program we presented down that
this morning and a next door as
well we are going to be kicking
up grants for that program a
grant and contract funding
opportunity next week for that
program and so the environment
department will house the
information for both the grant
application process and the rfp
for the contracts next next week
we are you we were here next
from
cc timmons and more of our aqua
for mapping projects so
leave that to her and then the
final bucket is for water
quality and watershed protection
so we again rely on our experts
at the environment department
for many of those elements and
our partners at emerge in the
forestry department arm are
guiding a are forest management
efforts and are making progress
with respect to the forest
management plan that they have
all of these.
Um have significant funding
needs and we're very
appreciative of the progress
that we have been able to make
in a funding many of those
priorities as we'll see in our
next session with mr david.
R particular agency priorities
are tied into three buckets a
one is to modernize our agency
efforts second were prioritising
rio grande which is lower and
metal rear grande efforts and
then where thinking about the
future in planning for our
future water security efforts
with respect to water
management modernization we
recognize the need to do things
like meter monitor actively
manage or are water uses
throughout the state we
emphasize they need to have
secure staff and i'm
appreciative that here in las
cruces we have great regional
apparences for both the opposite
state engineer and the
interstate stream commission to
manage locally we need to we
need to improve those resources
in in all of our are offices
throughout the state and
umm
one of the other priorities we
have is to increase our
enforcement capabilities and
that was an initiative that we
had support for at the last
legislative session and didn't
quite get it off of through
through the entire process but
it's a priority for our agency
as well
in a willer provide a small
details on the rear ground
things tonight i'm the next
priority to cover again just
really briefly is investing in
the real brand day this does not
mean that there aren't critical
needs across the state and we're
certainly a cognisant of that
from an interstate compact
perspective new mexico is a
party to eight interstate compox
obviously the real grand a
compact is of particular
interest and particularly
important to this area of the
state we're hoping that at your
next meeting will be able to
provide more of an update on the
potential settlement and taxes
for new maximum here in the
lower real grand that will
invest in the communities down
here for a long term sustainable
plan.
But we also are investing
heavily in active management in
the middle valley and that's
going to take additional
resources but it's critical to
both insurer continued
compliance with the compact but
also get more water to elephant
reservoir which also gets more
water to this part of the state
so this is a significant effort
on our part and something that
were investing in heavily
including as mistrue hero
mentioned enhanced enforcement
metering and measurement and
then the last priority are on
slide nine there is planning for
our water future we feel that
it's very critical that we not
wait until the train rack of
climate change and increasing a
rotification happens but we
really plan ahead and plan a
head in a way that makes sense
to our communities and the
values in our communities you
are passed in the twenty twenty
three legislative session what's
called the water security
planning act that's an
incomplete reinvisioning of new
mexico's regional water planning
process i'm i'm pleased to say
we've made great progress and
implementing that act we've
kicked off the rule making
called for by that act a couple
months ago are that prices
including public comment on the
proposed rule is opened through
the september so if you're
interested I highly recommend
that you take a look at that
and then once we complete the
rule in the guidelines called
for by the act this winter or
start standing up those future
regions beginning early next
year
and I should also say this slide
highlights indian water eight
settlements I think resolving
those indian water rates claims
is critical not only for those
tribal communities but for all
the other water users in those
basins the funding brought in by
those settlements has
significant implication both
state and lots of raw funding
for not only the tribal
communities but everyone who
shares in those resources and
then just the last slide here
shows the the timeline of
implementing this act I think
what I would like to most
highlight for you all is that
what the act.
Calls for in addition to a sort
of more dedicated and ongoing
regional water planning is that
the state work with the regions
to prioritise projects for
funding and the reason that
we're excited about this and
particularly relevant for this
committee is in the past or
regional water planning process
and statewater planning process
would often end up with a list
of thousands of potential
projects without any way of you
for you all they know which are
most important which will be
most impact for so one of the
things will be working with the
regions on his prioritising
projects and then we are
required by the statute to
report annually to the
legislature on not only the
progress of the planning process
but those priorities for funding
if you're interested in that
process I highly recommend you
check check out our campaign
website that's mainstream and m
dot org if you haven't already
there's lots of updates there
related to the planning process
and how to engage and also
opportunities for water
education it's where were
implementing part of the water
education campaign called for by
the fifty year water action plan
and then last day were just make
a little plug for the next panel
as well that planning process is
really going to depend on
awkward for mapping are more
than half of the water used in
the state comes from groundwater
some of those aquifers are
really well known some are not
very well known and so in order
to support communities planning
for their water future
understanding what they have in
terms of groundwater is going to
be a critical component and I
think with that unless tiny or
something else I know we're
short on time we would love to
talk to any of you more about
any of those components or
anything else you're interested
in at any time thank you so much
mister chair thank you both very
much and will look forward to
both being here and we go
through the panels we're going
to go straight into our next
panel this was just sort of the
overview and then the course uh
able to take questions so.
Wall invite up
miss timmons
I know we have
miss falling stared from
climate resilient water climate
resilient water systems.
I don't think we're going to
have mister john sylvia that I
understand it from blue brian
jealous of everybody who got to
do that tour yesterday
and then I don't see.
Be at and I get it sounds like
doctor shoe will be here shortly
from m m s US maybe we'll go
ahead and start uh mister
misterman's with you
and then go to miss following.
Thank you mister chair and and
members of the committee I
really appreciate the
opportunity to be here today
and I come do with extreme
gratitude ah for all of the
support toward building the
states new program for apple for
characterization and am happy to
provide you updates whenever
needed we're just getting
started right now
and appreciate the trust that
you have and as for this long
term process so i'm here from
the new mexico beer geology
sources so
I think particularly for all of
us and for the I if you can
explain the investments that
have been made particularly this
past year and gets quite helpful
because
sir yes and I there is a packet
of sides coming around which
will talk toward the end about
the financial capacity of that
in particular.
And i'll hopefully head on the
other those points so we're here
from the beer of jalady which is
a research and service division
of new mexico tech up in sacro
and may contact info is right on
the front side so you're welcome
to reach out to me any time
just to give you a a little bit
a background and get sure mines
thinking about what the task
ahead for characterizing her
alcohol is really looks like I
wanted to introduce you outside
two to the different programs
and hopefully there is a few
extra hand outs if folks in the
audience need a happy there
should have been a few extras so
i'm the out for mapping a
monitoring program is really a
task for the state to
characterize our groundwater and
our aquifers and that serves
more than half of the drinking
motor supply for a new mexico
grandmother level monitoring is
else an important component of
that and i'll talk more in
detail about that another
program that we manage at the
bear of geology is the water
data initiative which began in
twenty nineteen after the water
data act was passed and that
work is convening multiple c
agencies as well as local and
federal and um any municipal
partners who wish to join to put
together our states water data
and make it more accessible and
usable it's been a really great
learning and clabbation
opportunity for us that build
stories across for a
characterization and then as
many of you know we are so host
the water education program from
the beer of geology that is a
program intended to provide
background content for
legislators for a staff and
state water leaders really the
intent of that is to focus on
increasing the awareness of many
of our water issues are really
getting you out to the field
sites to see what those issues
look like and I want to just go
ahead and put all on your
calendars right now april
twentieth to twenty second next
year is our next water leaders
work for a shop and that'll be
based in rudo cell at the end of
the mountain guards hopefully so
that is our plan.
For next year for the water
education program.
I'm moving antislate three are
looking at what are our program
does at the bureau of geology we
are here to serve new mexico
where the only seat agency
that's non regulatory
specialised in this kind of
multi disciplinary water science
and research our program
officially began the arch for
wrapping program back in two
thousand and six and we have
been working under a combination
of funding sources that includes
federal state local regional
projects and fill in traffic
sources that geology of new
mexico i'm one of these days
some is going to stand up and
say please don't tell me it's
complicated anymore but I do
like to really point out to you
that geology map of new mexico
with all of its different color
is creates this amending
landscape that we have and also
creates really complex aquifers
in the subsurfer so other than
colours that you see on that
surface map are even more
complicated in the sub service
broken out by faults instructors
and you can see a crash section
across the very bottom of the
side that is slacing rate
through the southern part of new
mexico that here through last
truces and it shows the
complexity of some of these
subsurface basins transacted by
many faults that disrupt the
subsurface units that hold our
aquifers making it a little more
tricky to really characterize
exactly how much water is in
them and how it's moving so
that's just kind of the context
of what we're working with here
and as you've been hearing
in the panel before moving out
of slate for the governor is
fifty your water action plans
specifically asks the bureau of
geology and new mexico tax to
work on a characterising our
major in minor argo first both
the fresh and the bracket water
to characterize on the major
arguments by the year twenty
thirty two and building a state
why ground what are monitoring
network which includes at least
one hundred dedicated monitoring
wells by twenty thirty seven and
that works towards improving the
groundwater mapping and
monitoring efforts for the state
under the new water supplies
section.
B three about water action plan.
And I think that would I want a
highlight from this in slight
five is that there's fifty year
water action plan really
highlights two of our biggest
challenges around ground water
one of them is that many of our
aquifer is here in new mexico
have not been fully
characterized for the past
several years we've been working
with existing data we've been
working with private domestic
wells and ranch wells and and
irrigation wells to get
information about ground matter
and do water sampling and many
of the funds that we've had
available to us
have been small grants after
focus i'm very specific regional
questions and so when you look
at the map on this uhm slide
five the the polygons of
coverage show that we've done
some work in those areas while
not complete total argo for
mapping in the context of how I
consider it
there isn't work that we can
build from in all of these
polygans and so what a complete
apple for map really includes is
the geologic and header geologic
unit characteristics that helps
us know how well water moves
through some of these
permissions not all of them are
good with hers.
We'll know how deep the wider is
below the subservice so we can
plan how deep we need to draw
in which we ground water is
moving and those are prefers
knowing more about aquifer is
also helps is quite a fail
exactly how much water there is
by knowing where the boundaries
of the aquifers are and what are
the impactful structures as I
mentioned false in that cross
section as well as where it is
recharge happen in some places
there's very very little
recharge in other places we have
substantial recharge happening
and that's replenishing the
aquifers so then the last part
that really makes a complete
account from app is knowing in
detail with the water quality
looks like with the full
composition of that water as an
hopefully when doctors you
arrives will hear more about
that and this really matters I
think when we think about water
planning and water for
communities we want to be able
to carefully manage what limited
fresh water we have we need to
have this awkward for mapping
complete in order to protect the
water quality we have to know
what water color do we had to
begin with if we want to explore
alternative water resources and
and potentially areas where we
want to do agree for recharge we
need a detailed map of where
that would work and what units
are receptive to that into
basically having this
project under way I think really
puts new mexico and an advantage
er among many other states that
already have this work done
and the second big thing I am
moving out of side six that the
fifty or water action plan
highlights is that one of our
other big challenges is that we
aren't actually monitoring
groundwater changes enough
across the state of new mexico
there's huge gaps specially the
map in the center highlights
that light of places and rule in
mexico that we have no
information on what's going on
in those aquifers the symbols
are net center map are um a time
slace looking at how set time
frame and if the water level
over that time frame increased
or decrease.
So any place that you see orange
is a decreasing groundwater
level and the blue triangles are
increasing water levels over
that about a year time frame.
And a lot of the places that we
might have water level
measurements we may be aren't
measuring frequently enough so
if we want to know what the
trend is we actually have to
measure it as a certain
frequency at least annually
ideally more frequent than that
in certain areas where things
are changing more rapidly and as
I live to at the beginning many
of the wells that we're
monitoring are actually reused
well so there are somebody's
house domestic well or an
irrigation well and using those
doesn't necessarily capture the
full depth of the apple for it
strilled to where they got to
water and they had enough for
what they needed uh so if we
really want to know what's going
on in deeper units or with some
of these other
multi layered aquifers we really
need to draw wells for the
purpose of monitoring those
aquifers and not grabbing
somebody's water level after
it's been pumping
as you someone a highlight the
water levels that are shown on
this and the ability area where
you can see increased in the
outcome for their that raises is
primarily due to the
service surface water and
reduction in pumping and the
area so using sound one chama
water has helped abecure bring
wider levels up a little bit and
then now grandmother level there
in clovis area has been dropping
for years over there since two
thousand and eighteen.
So we want to manage this ground
what a resource we really need
to do more of the measuring of
it to do that better
slate seven I won't be laborer I
think you've heard plenty about
this but
the water claimant report that
the bureau of geology compiled
really highlands many of the
challenges that we have ahead
it's gonna get tougher with
regard to water and this report
while a bit gloomy in terms of
increasing temperatures and
increasing a redity and
reduction and service water
availability i'm it this report
is really a wake up car for us
in a call to take action so that
we can be ahead of that and be
proactive on our water
resources.
Uhm so moving on to slide I just
want to set the vision for where
we're going with all for
characterization and that is to
have complete regional october
characterization so region by
region will work through the
state compiling all of the
existing data reports and models
looking at those we can then say
where the data gaps and work to
fill those many of their the
data gaps so we know about are
in rural parts of new mexico and
at depth most people are
drilling wells for the purpose
of water supply and they're
probably in the five hundred to
eight hundred foot depth we want
to start to know what's going on
at deeper units in terms of
water we need to drill for that
purpose and so that's a big day
to gap that we know already
exists
we will use that data to build a
conceptual and functional models
and then have full
characterization of our
groundwater reasons both afresh
and the wrackers water and then
for ground what are monitoring I
like to think about this in
terms of so we're going to drill
well hopefully fill these data
gaps and while we're doing that
we're going to collect abundant
data so we're going to be
drilling for exploratory
purposes and then setting those
aside for monitoring purposes
with with no water rates needed
just using it for monitoring
makes it a little bit easier to
to set up those whilst
and so then they'll be set up
with the limitary so we have the
frequency of monitoring needed
and and potential for water
quality testing as well.
And that gives us a data to work
from so that we can continue to
update models and information
needed for decision making and
reporting.
So we've already started this
work i'm slide nine highlights
some of the subservice data sets
that we've started to compile
were leveraging many decades at
previous work and also the data
that's been made available
through the water data
initiative so when you look at
the map in the bottom left hand
corner with all of the different
colored polyguns you can see
that
basically what we did was put a
bunch of reports together and
asked certain hydrogeology
questions of an uh
an aai engine and it highlights
the areas where we have a lot of
information available to us in
the areas where we have very
little information and so we're
really working from things like
this to a start to quickly
compile the data that's existing
and fill in those data gaps
and and part of the work that
we're doing is also collecting
all the relevant board hold data
so all of the wells that have
been drilled whether their water
wells are oil and gas was we're
using that in making it
digitally available so that we
can interpret that and build
three subset first geologic
framework models.
Moving on display ten the new
data collection is really what
we're launching on to right away
this year are the big part of
the work that we're doing is
clicking a physical data i'm
particularly airborne electrical
magnetic surveys and i'll talk
more about that and where that
looks like here in a moment
we'll be also collecting a
groundwater levels in many of
those areas geochemical sampling
and geologic mapping and then
hopefully sometime next year
beginning with drillings to new
wells and this is a substantial
part of what the new finding
that we received is going
towards as this new data
collection component so looking
at slight eleven the project
areas that we hope to jump into
this year this has been gated by
our.
Thank you
fresh water this has been gated
by our
we have a steering committee of
higher geology experts that have
helped the help us thing through
regions and the highest priority
regions so this map on flight
eleven shows five regions that
we hope to work in this year the
associate basin the member space
and the lower rear grand the
middle rear grand and persons of
the animals valley around the
southwest corner of the state
and the galleries to collect a
bunch of new g and physical
surveys so that we can really
start to characterise the fresh
and bracket swatter down to
about fifteen hundred feet and
this is our pilot year so we're
figuring out the rate
contractors and vendors that can
help us with that figuring out
and the work slow for our team
and building the the various
components that we need to
really nail down to what those
water resources look like so
we're planning these surveys and
compiling a a large number of
data sets I want to dry your
attention to in the map the
little star that says sta teresa
standard terracer unless cruises
where we are now causing the
next slides like twelve and this
highlights some of the work that
we can draft from based on a
project that the receipt stream
commission has been working on
with um consulting company and
terror so the images that you're
seeing here are really
preliminary results of a
cemetery sir aerial
electromagnetic survey and so
flying over this region this
little area with helicopters
back and forth they were able to
create these subsurface images
that really help us to pin down
different zones where the water
is found the the water table and
then how it transitions and
potentially more brackish water
and so the idea here is that
this is giving us better detail
and helping us feel in between
where we have wells
to to really start to moup out
with the subsurface units look
like and this project well not
exactly the same as what we're
going to do it's been a real
good learning opportunity for
our team to watch how this
happens.
And learn from it and and work
to refine the service that will
be doing i'm much broader areas
of new mexico.
The.
Okay honestly thirteen
this is just kind of a recap
that you know with the funding
available this year and into the
future we hope to really provide
the same with the answers to the
questions that are pending about
our water resources and by
building a hundred well plus
more than that hopefully
grandmother monitoring network
we can have details on what
ground water levels are doing
and no ahead of time before
water systems go out and have
that data online and available
for for visualization uh we'll
also have detailed subservice
models and.
Various tools that these models
can help us work with for what
it water management and what are
planning purposes
and I see the legislature and
various state agencies as well
as the executive of us as a
primary state holders the
information that we're producing
is for you and if there are
questions that you're not
getting answers to I hope to
hear from you or just getting
started and I do really want to
make sure that this is this is
working for the state of new
mexico
side fourteen is a snapshot of
the budget that we've had since
two thousand six minutes program
initiated uh the blue buyer is
the awkward for mapping programs
steep budget under a new mexico
attack under higher education
and so that hubbers around
previously have been around two
hundred and fifty to two hundred
and eighty thousand dollars of
state funding which we more than
matched each year to accomplish
many of the projects that we had
on that figure earlier this year
this past i'm sorry fiscal year
twenty five we were able to hire
two new staff and we are in the
process of hiring for.
To sex more depending on who
accepts her offers
so and this year i'm really
excited that we're working with
a seven and a half million
dollars non recurring budget and
that has been as I mentioned our
pilot funding to really help us
figure out this work flow so
that we can continue this for
many years to come to get to the
completion which is basically a
slide fifteen or gold to map all
these applications
sooner than twenty thirty seven
if I can arbit by by that year
for sure with a hundred new
monitoring wells the budget
recap here is that this year we
have one point one five million
and recurring for a fiscal year
twenty six at the bureau of
geology our target while not
entirely settled yet we haven't
submitted our budgets I just
want to highlight that this is
our target is to ask for an
additional one million in
recurring funding for this
program so that we can finish
out hearing the staff needed in
various other um data challenges
that we have to deal with
uhm and then the non recurring
target for next fiscal year
assuming that we continue to go
in this direction with non
recurring would be a twenty
million dollars
for our program to continue to
build this out and the table
that I have updated which is our
kind of estimates for the next
several years to get a twenty
thirty seven is broken down on
slate sixteen for you and the
the idea here is that we're
spending a substantial amount of
money to drill these wells to
really characterize what's going
on in the subsurprise to pair
that with the geophysical
surveys so that we now exactly
what the shape and size and
volume and quality of our
aquifers are drilling wells as
increasingly expensive as many
of you now so we expect that
that's going to be a substantial
portion of the effort for this
project
so and I think that's all the
slides I wanted to ti.
Through there's a
last slide with them follow
chart if you get into that sort
of thing and I will handle us.
At this point two of my other
panelists thank you.
Good afternoon everywhere
chairman smile members of the
committee my name is gradual
falling stad and I work for the
environmental defense find as a
senior manager of the climate
resilient water systems program
and I want to start out today by
thinking the members of this
committee and the legislature
for funding stacies program last
year to the tune of seven point
five million dollars it's a very
important program that edf is
very excited to support
the environmental defense found
is national ngo and we basically
work on building solutions for
communities on the ground
with locally driven initiatives
in that van edf helped convene
an informal group card than a
mexico groundwater alliance
actually stemming from the
governors infrastructure and
water policy task force report
and their call out for the
importance of grandmother for a
new max account.
The alliance has sent and worked
hard to co author a three sixty
grand water a report and that's
worth coming here in september
and really that report a month
like three by the way sorry
about that that report is
highlighting the knowns and and
knowns that we have across the
seat of new mexico which
with boston earlier as well as
stacy has highlighted that we
have large data gaps across the
state in terms of our outrefers
and her account from mapping and
understanding the extent in the
value of those water resources
in addition in the report
highlights the water used by
categories report from twenty
twenty which notes that twenty
four out of thirty three new
mexico counties are relaying on
ground water eighty seven
percent of our community water
systems are also depending on
was solely on ground water and
fifty percent of the ground
water use in our state is
dedicated to irrigated
agriculture these are all very
important components of our
state are pair attention and our
economy
unslied for the the grandwater
report is also highlighting that
there are groundwater declines
that are occurring across the
state and these are impacting
our communities in some cases to
craze this levels this includes
the high planes are preferring
the organiler the members base
and albuquerque and the
assancier which happened to be
some of the areas that states he
has focusing on coming up
she also focused she also
mentioned that there are
significant data gaps and we
would like to support the ask to
help fill these data gaps
because we can't monitor what we
don't know and we can't manage
to not monitoring.
In addition to that both tiny
and states the highlighted that
rc is getting harder or drought
is getting longer and our water
resources are declining so we
need to plan now proactively for
water security moving forward.
Additionally we would like to
support business of specific and
locally driven groundwriter
management that man matches the
basin characteristics once we
have the day mapping as well as
the local economies and the
values of each community
unslied five i'd like to
highlight in this report that
we're really bringing to bear
the voices of new mexico
communities and the challenges
that they're facing with water
and groundwater in particular
some of these challenges include
capacity whether that staffing
or infrastructure challenges
either or local needs and access
to water when wells go dry or
systems have aging
infrastructure and we would like
to highlight that we have
traditional knowledge systems in
the state pressure to sharing
and try well and probably
knowledge that helps as manage
our resources better into the
future with these changing
conditions
I am slide six and seven we
would like to highlight some of
the ground water management
champions of our state thus fire
and these include the
high plans occur for or the okay
across her and let down a
clayton's
program that ogilized land and
water conservancy in curry
county she has a pro active
voluntary market based model to
conserve agricultural lands
while
recharging the alcohol we'd also
highlight in the report the
picus valley are teaching
conservation district and
arambolics program this is
located in chavis and eddie
counties and this is a locally
driven
ground water management program
that stams from a follow
dudication of groundwater rates
and ensuring that new mexico is
meaning it's obligations to the
pick up our control
we as a highlight the lower real
grandday water conservation
program which hanner antinion
both highlighted earlier.
This is an important program
stood up by the ac in the osc
and it's a voluntary ground
program that financially
compensates agricultural
irrigators to stop buriating to
recharge the archiper and meet
compact deliveries.
And lastly we highlight the
combated delicious most mutual
domestic water association with
the help of the rac they have
proactively planned and created
community education program for
water conservation when their
wells went dry and they had to
hall water into the community
for a number of months.
On flight eight we'd like to
highlight that the future of
ground runner in new mexico
really depends on informed
better decision making through
science and the need for
architect mapping and
characterization in order to
drive better planning we'd like
to also in courage locally
driving groundwater management
that's based on holistic
groundwater bsn characterization
that also adapts to claim it
change.
And last unslied name edf is
advocating for fully funding the
alcohol mapping program at the
bureau of geology we'd like to
see modernization of groundwater
governance at the local scale
we'd like to support our tribal
communities and our world
communities with technical
assistance and capacity building
grants for better water
management for our future so
that we can prepare for water
resilient and water secure state
think you're happy to address
any questions as they come great
thank you very much miss okay
doctor should were thank you so
much and again wanna say a big
thank you as an msu professor on
the first day classes we
appreciate she had taken time to
come and flows yours.
Thank you mr chair and also
other committee members it is
really a great honor to talk
about the brexit water
developments are the word
conducted at the new mexico
state university and also to
support the state's effort on
strategic water supplies so
for the presentation and slide
the two you can see that the
brack scrum water and month that
actually is developed to baser
guerrilla for chart gallergy
based settings and the others
are so it shows that to you
mexico we have a broad brackish
grung waters that could support
the economy could developments
at providing a new valuable
alternative water sources so
through the practice water
development and the brackets
should are ground water
dissonation program we can
meet the new opportunities for
economic development at so we
will now compete ways that are
all located the water for
municipal uses at agriculture
and the photo communities so for
the brackets of one water acre
first you see different to
colors even though this is black
and white you can see that very
well but it shows that to the
tds is total disabled the
started concentrations at
various ambound that different
acrifice so in other two
developer this available
resource we need to understand
what to add a constitution in
that water in other two are
utilised it.
So there are challenges related
to developing the practice water
equivers our faulty solidation
is first to to understand that
the water quantity and quality I
think is they say mentioned
about the ground walker mapping
effort that will help us to
understand that the the levels
and the depths under the month
of a ground water I prefer we
have and the at the end of you
will be very happy to support
this effort to understand the
the water quality in the is
acrefirs and when we develop a
bracket show ground water design
nation one of the challenges is
that concentrate management so
how do we manage those that
waste the streams generated
through that the solidation and
the the third is opportunity and
the challenge is that the cost
because developing practice up
water for dissalination the cost
of treatment is higher than we
use the conventional fresh water
but we have very limitated the
fresh water so
when we treated this brackish
ground water the cost will be
higher and the other hand that
is also generates a lot of a uh
values of using this water too
supported the economic
development the industry
agriculture communities and the
environment so there needs to
not only consider the cost about
ourselves think about the
benefits of developing this
opportunity
in twenty twenty four and that
early twenty twenty five under
the enemy d and enemies your
partnership are we have
contacted the extensive research
to characterize the new mexico
brackish grand water and the
desalination for fifth full
purpose applications at this
stady is allowed to buy doctor
room really and the uh william
hired custom and also sim on
scam and other securities and
the students are to do the
packaged analysis and the non
packet analysis.
So are the next slide five in
order to charge rise a
groundwater I prefer we start
here the ways of the historic
efforts you know in your maxical
what are the data already
available so we work to wait
there aren't the obvious of the
state to engineer and med and
the other agencies to look at
our older papers reports and
acatonic are data and then to
see what are the data available
and though actually we found
that a good data but very
limited because those data are
mostly focusing on untested teds
the solidity level and also the
major ins in that water and it
can be not provide the enough
information for us to understand
what as a constituents are there
any emerging constituents in
that water so through this
partnership
we identify that nine since
sites to take of the samples
from and this is in claboration
with namely we as a bureau of
geologies through a stacy and
water utilities and some of
farmers and the renters so we
went there to take the water
samples from their wiles so
about a from these nineteenth
sites we clacked the twenty
three water some posts are
following the standard simple
collection and the analysis
protocol we take duplicate
samples and then we take a blank
samples of from those sites so
the results that would be a
robust and are defensible
slay the six shows that's a we
took a multiear approach for
brackets water curtairization we
analyze about a three hundred
and the lights so for the tier
one is with the uh field of test
when we went to the field and
then we started to merry the
temporary true over the water
disabled oxygen ph electrical
conductivity our oxidation
reduction potential under the
tribute and after that we
followed as a standard protocol
for sample collection.
We brought us back the same post
to enemies you we also send a
samples to thirty five the
commercial lapse to analyze
these constitutions and these
include a money a clean they pay
a total suspended salaries
totally desire of the
salazarness of canny cook carbon
and the then for the methods
were in the lies the twenty four
matters are including a ruminum
arsenic baron
barron and others for the I nice
we're analyzed a seven major
initial water we also analyzed
the five radio in new clients
those of reading in your clients
are regulated the in the US epa
drinking water standards and for
thirst three were analysed
ninety four month how can you
components and also a hundred
twenty semi valid how again you
could come so some over the
constitutions are regulated in
the drinking water standards we
also analyze the twenty five r p
five has come pounds perfect has
come pounds are emerging
companies that the uicpa test
put the regulations for the
drinking water standards in
addition all these pocketed
analysis we know what we want to
know are you not related to the
constituents at the end of you
will also use the very events.
An electrical tools lcms to
characterize unpackaged analysis
those are known compounds in
potentially in the arm ground
water so a slay the seven are
some highlights awe submitted
that the reports to anamed very
extensive reports including all
the simple detail the
information due to the time
limit I will just give you some
highlights about the ground
water quality so the first one I
want to highlight is total
disolve the sallies t s meter
grandparents are in average it's
about eight thousand million
grandparents and the it's a
various between seven hundred
sixty seven two fifty five
thousand meter grandparents so
some water are near the fresh
water in slightly practical
water range but sam are we can
even carry to bring because it
even south here than see water
and there are the next to
highlight is the total again the
carbon and the sun water I
really could high quality water
except that it has some sought
the tds the toc is about zero
point one eight million
grandparents that is very clean
related to againix and but sam
are under the influence of for
agriculture activities are ways
the to see about eighteen minute
grandparents that means we need
to treat that water to remove
those authentical competitors
related to the vocs volatile
again you compound ninety four
compounds analysed and is a semi
vocs one hundred twenty
compounds and the lies all of
them are very low concentration
either not detected or below the
concentration of ten pp all of
them I have below the uscpa
drinking water standards so that
means that water and is not a
compemited area by the august
competitors
slide eight shows the radio new
clients in those are samples we
analyzed the majority of them
have.
Very low radio new clients on
either below the detection
limits or very little
concentration but a uranium was
detacted are exceed the drinking
water standard but it's only
intolerance are basin
and the gross affair growth
better I also concerns and we
found them
being a exceeding you know in
violation of the drinking water
standards in captain at polarisa
and high place based on for the
uh redm two two six and the two
to eight are we only found them
exceeded that drinking water
standards in captain and the
toller raised that basic so
those are needs to be removed
before we can use them for
beneficial utes a prefast
compounds prefers compounds are
a concern everybody you know
have concerns related to those
compounds we analyzed a twenty
five compounds
for the psba we identify the in
ninety four percent over the
compounds but it's not regulated
when we look at is it a jan x
jags there was identified in
forty seven percent over the
compounds and
only a very low concentration
but there is one sample beyond
the drinking water standard is
ten parts per trillion it's
concentration is forty two mile
at ppt and another one is AP
four p four hours identify the
in seventy percent over the
compounds and we is the maximum
we detect here that about
hendri's thirty five and the the
drinking water standard is for
pp so those compounds needs to
be removed treated before we can
use uh that water
slay the ten is the summary of
the ground water carterization
so in some grand waters and
poster we identify the aluminum
arsenic chromium iron.
A mandates and lad and this.
Celinium were depacted above the
drinking water standards and the
for the p first compounds we
only found the actually even
though we detected some that in
very low concentrations but the
total per fast compounds were
detectated the highest inger
channel down on
that's in their last cousins and
also in the tolerator basin near
the white sense missile range so
actually the sources of the
contamination of the pufat
compounds are not very clear in
general for example for where to
send its related to the
firefighting phones they be that
the training for
firefighting so those could
contaminance at the ground water
and the arm for the trandall
doubt
on basin it's maybe related to
the waste water and because in
prefast compounds we use it in
out there your life and the in
the super waste water we have
those pew fast compounds though
those crew the conteminant our
ground water as well
so in general ground while to
quality in terms of tds south
concentration it is highly
variable and the if we implement
the salination technologies we
can remove all those are
competitive including the past
compounds.
Full bracket one water
desanination and that is a
mature technology implemented at
some full skill for over fifty
years and their over four
hundred
disarmination plans in the
united states for ground water
branch one water dissonation we
can use practice water rivers of
small s and the latches to
bracket water dissolution plant
in the united states is in our
parcel and the yesterday the
water and the natural resources
committee visited the cabinet
hutchinson designing nation
planning our parcel as a lfc
also visited that facility so it
is a proven technology in
general we can achieve about
seventy two eighty three percent
water recovery that means that
if we have a country the percent
of water coming we can get about
the seventy percent to our
eighty three percent over the
water as fresh water as a
primite we can use under the
rest about thirteen to seventeen
percent of the practical water
will become the concentrate that
when used to dispose it a
property because of that
concentrate it will accumulate
out the contendence in that
bracket should ground water in
general we can use depot
injection such as a to the kb
hutchinson desalination plans
the panel the prime about a
twenty two miles for department
injection and we can also use
evaporation panel for example in
your mexico we have a solar
energy we can use solar to
evaporate our
brian and then later the salary
is generated could be a
landfield and then another
option is to do the zero
equipment discharge and the
brian balarization surfers water
discharge and the search is hard
may not be a good option for new
mexico
the next next to slide at twelve
show the same current angle
effort.
Are at animals you were
developing high water recovery
dissonation technologies to
recover about ninety five
percent off the water and then
we will convert the solids into
and that we have a currently
funding the projected by the
bureau of recommendation to
recover the calcium magazines
and along them silica in the
bracket should well water to
become a cement because we have
a significant amended
development and also it requires
a lot of kosher you know it so
that's a one option for brian
balarization and that we also
converting out the sodium and
claura the english bry into saw
the truck side and the hedgel
creek claric asset into this
valuable minerals and acid and
base for beneficial use so um
the picture you'll see here are
actually our ongoing payload to
testing project as is that
keeping hutchinson designing
nation plant hopefully we can
also provide the options for
implementing practice what
decidination in your mexico so
we can have a good solution to
managers of crime
slide thirteen summer rises our
major remarks for a brackish one
water designation again it is a
mature technology it is a
readily improvement in your
mexico to ugleman to water
supplies but again concentrate
disposal is a greater challenge
are to implement it i'm going to
research at and mse is a focused
on calculation of practicing
water quality including emerging
comperitence such as peyfast
compounds and also to develop in
a way to technologies to further
polish the water quality now to
only for drinking are and the we
can also treat the water to the
ultra pure auto level to meet
the water demand for example to
develop a data center to develop
a semi contact in that truth.
And so those you're not
applications will need ultra
pure water actually we also have
that the pipability to you know
simply meant the water and also
valer rices appry for beneficial
use of those waste of streams
and monsue has a very strong and
extensive expertise in practice
water development and the
desalination and the we have the
funding from the state we have
very grateful for that for
meeting dollars to support the
strategic water supplies and we
can you know provide the
expertise in the disarmination
as I mentioned that we can't
assist in doing fisability study
pilot the demonstration of the
disarmination technologies and
also we can help ways that the
public outrage at the occasion
are in the arm you get is a
communities into develop the
practice water supplies away
that the engagement of the new
mexico water resources research
the institute the aa consoles
research are computing advisory
council and also the work force
development you know in new
mexico we need a skilled
operators and the engineers are
to support the water supply and
the also we have the agriculture
per mental station information
technology corporative extension
and then we also have the
faculty uh to support the
students researchers to support
out its effort the point of
contact at a fall the practice
you water dissonation and
support hub is lead by doctor
tender shab and his contact
information is in the slight.
So again going back to the next
display that you can see I was
effectively members and the the
researchers students that we
have bury or the events to and
the letter collab to support the
water political analysis and the
also to do the water
destalination technologies and
also ground water you know had
your challenges study and the
model simulation
so against us to summarise we
have very a good infrastructure
in place and then I think and
the letter will capabilities and
the the work force to support
the bracture water decilination
what would be very happy to work
away as a state agencies and
then ed osce is eh europeanity
and the everybody to develop
actual authority salination and
the uh with that's that you have
my contact to under the last
slide and also dr tender shops
aren't compacking information is
there I want to acknowledge
again the support we receive the
from the state uh to support us
for the water resources
development to thank you I would
be very happy to answer any
questions excellent thank you
very much thank you for an
excellent panel will dive
straight in the questions
starting with four percent at a
from san franti ah
representative chap field in
from there reps edata please I
am thinking mr chair thank you.
I would like to note that all
the way all the people who have
been presenting her women I
think that's a real change
water management for this state
I guess i'd like to start with
tanya our deputy secretary in
your presentation i.
I just I just wanted to talk
about
how we're gonna about I regional
water planning efforts and I
know I know we have I know you
have put out a regional planning
document with the regions are
and I can't remember exactly how
many regions we have in this
state could you remind me.
Thank you mr chairman and
representative her error a
minute take team with hannah as
usual and the interstate stream
commission has um put together a
a draft rule so hannah need to
mike maybe i'll do this fancy
walk around okay
thank you mister chairman
represented very okay so new
mexico is done regional water
planning since nineteen eighty
seven when the original statute
passed we currently have sixteen
regions however in the proposed
rule that we are in the middle
of rule making on right now are
proposed rule includes nine
regions so again the public
comment on the proposed rule
including the proposed new
delineation of those boundaries
is currently open our portal is
open for public comment we
include you to take a look at
the proposed rule you and others
and provide your comment that
will go in front of a hearing
with our interstate stream
commission and mid october for
their action by the end of the
year so we're looking or
proposing fewer regions and
we're also I should also say
those new proposed regions were
in part informed by the work are
at new mexico tack related to
awkward first summaries so how
to group i'm and report out on
the state to aquifers cause we
wanted those to be as in line as
possible thank you
thank you mr chair and thank you
hannah for that and I would just
like to add that I know we we
planned for a creating regional
in a water region spec we put no
money there and and I and I hope
it gets down to nine so even
with even with two people at you
know two hundred thousand a year
dedicated to regional water that
would make a huge difference in
how we how we kind of combine
all the silos in our regions the
asset kids the mutual domestic
water systems you know of the
soil and water conservations
district.
Is someone was there to be kind
of an honest broker in in
looking at all those
perspectives I don't think i'd
really cost that match nine at
two hundred thousand year would
be one point eight million on a
recurring basis and I think
that's what we're going to need
to really
to really strengthen
the role of regional planning
how do you do have anything to
say about that
again mr chair and
representative of her I I love
that suggestion I think we want
these regions to be as a
empowered as possible and they
think having dedicated recurring
funding on for those regions in
particular to allocate for
priorities within those regions
would make a lot of sense i'm an
again as they mentioned earlier
were look looking at this
process is something that would
be much more ungoing and it is
and priorities resources for
implementation thank you so much
for that and I will in my last
question will be for a as stay c
and I again when I thank you for
your leadership in awkward for
mapping for obviously for all
the work that's been done
through new mexico tack has been
invaluable
just so that this committee
knows I wouldn't have that
girlfunding you know two hundred
thousand over a three year
period I gave two hundred
thousand to a new mexico attack
to start the account for mapping
and really becoming we knew
nothing about how deep are
occupiers where it will still
learning that that process is
still ongoing but but the new
research that you see coming out
of real read but I think is is
because of that grow funding
that we are allowed to get so I
think the leaders of this
committee who made that possible
I think it was really important
to have three year funding and
and I know that last year that
the house
did three year funding as I
recall a for new mexico text
occur for mapping can you tell
me how much their house passed
and then what happened in the
senate.
Thank you mister chair
mister chair and representative
horrera a
to my knowledge the funding that
we have right now is that we
have a had a small allocation of
new funding this year as
recurring budget to new mexico
bureau of geology that's been
allocated to argue for water
cities in general and then seven
point five million in one year
funding for aquifer studies
including bracket shwater topics
as well so it's when you're only
right now to my knowledge and mr
chair and committee and what I
would would i'd like to say is I
think three year funding is
really imperative in this in
this kind of work because the
problem with one year funding is
that you're you're hiring very
high highly skilled scientists
and a one year on a one year
contract.
And who's going to move from a
really solid job to a one year
contract when you're doing
important work so I I would urge
this committee when we when we
look at the future funding for
this year's budget
to talk about how we ensure that
that we can keep a solid staff
over at least a three year
period to look at these
station would you tell me how
the hiring where you're hiring
years at and how that's been
going in and letter the problems
uh mr chairman representative
area definitely hitting the nail
on the head with challenges that
we're having right now we've
been going through the interview
process for the last three weeks
and several people have
commented that they're not
comfortable to move to a
position that is only when
you're of funding so it is
making it harder and it's
pushing us to
have to work in the private
sector and hire contractors to
do the work that we would like
to have staff build a recurring
work for us that we can i'm
for the next several years to do
this work every time we start
over with a new contract with
the new vendor we're basically
starting all over with new
knowledge base and it definitely
slows us down in the work that
we're trying to do that's a good
point thank you.
I think you missed your chair
that's how I have thank you
panel
thank you represent it next we
have a representative of uh
lenti and then our present field
thank you mister chairman good
afternoon and thank you for the
presentation to this afternoon
III want to begin by obviously
stating the obvious that it
doesn't matter where you go in
this state that water policy and
water security planning is
extremely important and that
every part of this state whether
it's ground water or surface
water and those rivers that
might be in your district are
extremely important that are all
interconnected uh as we look
forward to
our future right and i'm gonna
try to keep my comments more
financial aspect because this is
not the water committee I get
that but at the same time for
those of you that drove down the
middle of your grand you see a a
dried real grand for the most
part and the urgency seems to be
more important now than ever
before because it's in the
mediates in the print it's in
social media the list goes on
and on and people want to know
what what's going on is is it is
it is it a global warming is it
over use of water and I have to
have to admit that in my
lifetime that it seems like late
seventies eighty the nineties
were the weather's years in this
state's history right and we
become a custom to having that
access to water or abundance of
water during those several
decades and now we're becoming
too a point where a reality is
hitting us that maybe we've we
we we have a lot ourselves to
become used to having that
access or excess of water to
either recreate or to have
industry reliance on and now
we're trying to figure out what
maybe we need to take a step
back and figure out what the
priorities really are and what
they used to be because before
you know though those what use
right the reliance in this day
primarily for any river and and
even the aquifer in the state
was.
For agriculture period right I
mean I not many people owned on
the boat right before before the
seventies and it may be the case
that even after twenty twenty
five and onwards you may be
seeing a decline in people
owning boats because there's no
gonna not gonna be anywhere to
to float those things right and
so we have to think about
managing expectations and what
we can really expect to have now
into the future and how we do
that as it relates to
our policy as a release to
dollars that this state will
provide to those commissioner to
this agencies that are going to
try to create the best policies
possible or how that we can
begin to have real and frank
discussions about uh and and and
and I see the signs I saw them
yesterday up from the audience
and and from me to you I I see
you i've read your science and
you are being heard and I
recognize you because many times
we we see these are me with the
let's not pay them much
I hear you I I hear the urgency
I understand the urgency because
as a farmer as a farmer that
comes from indigenous lands that
is what's in our blood that's
what's in our soul that's our
root to uh this land itself and
so when we talk about how we can
proceed into the future we have
to make sure that yes we left to
live in a in some cases of the
capital of society where we can
say let's take advantage of of
the businesses that are at our
fingertips and that's make sure
that we can create a population
that can expand and double in
size or triple in size but after
the time we forget about well we
have a reliance on that awkward
or that water and what does that
look like now into the future
and so when we talk about uh
investments into a water
security right we have to make
sure that we have things in mind
in this legislature that we can
affect change and that would be
in many cases of policy policy
is relates to perhaps the
domestic water was.
Our policy is released to other
things like like industry
or in many cases are reliant and
and interactions and
collaboration with the federal
government right and how they
are
for the most part in rivers the
soul agency that's responsible
for making sure that we have a
floating river right in in many
cases I know the fact that when
I used to sit on the middle bank
and service it issued board of
directors right it was always a
frustrating aspect when we had
issues in the real grand and and
the federal government never
moved fast enough they never did
the work in regards to trying to
remove silt they never did the
work in regards to trying to
remove it based on species and
here we are um years later
and i'm reminded that
i'm a graduate error for the
late nineteen hundred and
when I think about that I was
given a job by the sandy a
problem water resources
department and at that time my
job was a water resources
technician and I would go out
there and and measure the flow
the river and I would go out of
measure pizzameters and and and
see how the water levels were
anyone talked about the year and
I I wonder why I was doing this
and the manager at the time and
the people at the time of the
attorneys at the time would tell
me what it's in preparation for
the judiciation
the adjudication that's going to
be coming and here you are in
point twenty five and we don't
have an adjudication yet and I
think it's because we're scared
to understand and really know
who has what
and until we understand that and
have settled that
we won't get anywhere any time
anytime soon so expect to be in
this discussion for a long long
time because it could be a
another thirty years until we
have this discussion and and I
may be long on by then but the
point being is that this is not
a fast process right when we
talk about the education and and
the presentation that was made
on the water security planning.
Act implementation I made
mention of indian water right
settlements right I mean we we
we look at the amount water
right selement that took decades
and it's expensive it's
expensive and it's a comment by
the federal government it's
expensive and a commitment by
the state to make sure that they
can play their fair share as
well and so when we talk about
investing into the future we
have to make be mindful that
there are three parties when we
talk about water rights in this
day a water policy in the state
right yes it's the state of
mexico but it's also for large
and important tribal governments
in this day as well as the
federal government in this state
and we're not always the most
efficient at at moving the
needle or making sure we can
develop policy or expend dollars
or or identify projects but the
point i'm i'm saying now is that
we're in it for the long haul
and I think until as as the
technical side can marry itself
with the policy side and we can
people ourselves to making sure
that we can develop good strong
water policies that takes into
account not the weather's years
in the state's history that the
seven big seventies eighties and
nineties but what used to be
before then and what will be now
thereafter because that's gonna
be the future of water in this
day thank you mister chairman
thank you very much next we're
gonna go to present for them
but I have to agree with my my
friend repeatedly let me get
some word to wish them there you
know mark point said that in new
mexico whiskeys for drinking and
water for fighting it he would
write steve reynolds said water
runs up your money unfortunately
stopped absolutely right
I just want to talk a little bit
about the october thing we
better mapping the alcohol these
two new mexico and the.
Conjunction with new mexico
check in doctor kate for eleven
years eleven years in a
she's a good prayer that i'm
proud to be on the edge of that
deal made you're not only either
death to water with measure
whether it's going up or down
the age of the water some of
three thousand years old it's
amazing to me that that we can
tell all of those things I
didn't get to go yesterday to
the cabinet hutchison
do you sell by it but I would a
couple of years ago and I loved
it I loved it I thought there
was an item
that was doctors in her folks
that same here so we saw some
problem here in mexico state
some of them work in over in the
decel plan learning whilst going
on I see that it's referred to
requires australia's in these
documents I was told at the
detail plan that it was former
dos most
sort of be in the kind of guy my
asking what is former most being
the kind of fault today where
they said it's the opposite
reverse
thank you
the the good
thing that I come out of that
tour with was that the cost well
it did twenty seven point five
million gallons a day is what
they produced at that time
twenty seven point five million
galanzo water day I think in
three eight professors
approximately gallons is at two
nine hundred and seven thousand
so
just take about twenty seven
point five
million gallons of water or I
think it will water pass alright
so that is awesome but the cost.
It is two dollars per thousand
gallons I guess you all I better
watch my numbers because you
just want all that to yesterday
and I might not remember from
here to go but that's I thought
I remember two days two dollars
for thousand galance that is
usable water that is why you can
afford to drake what you depend
on how much you love you to be
against
that's usable
for thousand gallon we need to
pursue this
it's important that we have
water for people important that
we I mean worse for let's get
some order for everybody
and as we do that i've heard a
time or two talk about water
sharing.
No i'm gonna these guys are all
like that because I think that
always have on this we function
under the doctor of fire
appropriation
those water rights are a
property right and under the
doctor appropriation there's not
sharing there the highest
priority gets all their water
didn't the second half prior
third highest right on down the
line there are a secure and
irrigation district the the
water right
is.
Lied is held by the sake of the
or the argasion district so
within those test weeks they can
take it as put that water right
up a little bit you know they
can trade it out by your
order
last year my but it's it's
different
that that that right is vested
in the argasian district in in
the rest of the world arrives
invested in the individual so I
all that right now city has the
right to condition that water
and sometimes they might have to
maybe they can have a part of a
right
we talked yesterday about the
need to to water people and
maybe haven't found some of our
farmland
the water the city has right to
convince that water they need to
pay for it it's like a but
conditioned your house or
highway can go through it you'd
like to get paid for it and in
that way water needs to work in
a let the system sort it out
that you know that the let the
most important water will bring
the most money I was working in
this area.
Probably fifteen or twenty years
ago I think one baker footage
water was working like thirty
thousand in celebrate i'm not
sure where it is now
but that was that's a lot of
money if you could deal with
somebody right to one acre for
the water you custom a lot of
money
Versions and create basically an
image of what the subsurface
reflection of the materials
looks like and that helps us see
is it sand is it clay is it
gravel and and then if there is
water if it's fresh water or
salty water and so by doing this
hope is that by doing this over
a particularly over what we call
your basin so that's and clay
grabble is really ideal for this
kind of survey you're northeast
part we're gonna try out the
associated basin to explore how
well it will work more of the
bedrock with hers but the idea
is that by by flying with this
over the olympia basis were much
more easily be able to interpret
between wells and and then drill
we can help confirm what we're
seeing and that type of survey
so much
the water data it was
invented created and I worked
hard on it to consolidate a lot
of these regional water plans
all the multitude of water
information that we have across
the state one of the things that
we have is logged from oil wells
that have been drilled now
little a per c o two here's the
king and i'm told it's the o two
wells they didn't have they were
not recorded by law to log those
wheels i'm curious if that's
true or not and the
I know that we use satellite to
calibrate transparation tariff
for example
do you use the oil
and known existing data from the
well logged to calibrate your
electronic mary
right from the helicopter that
i'm curious about that yes
mister chair and representative
chapel that that's exactly what
we do and and I I don't know the
interest specifically about zero
two wells and if there's log
information to go with those but
we absolutely do use any of the
welling gas well that we can get
a cancellation.
One of the difficulties is that
a lot of the downhold data is so
some of its available through
the oil conservation division of
the energy generals and natural
resources department.
In a scam form what we really
need is digitalised well locked
so we're working really hard
right now to get digital data
and in some cases we have to buy
that data because the oil and
gas industry kind of uses that
as it's propatary information
it's it's information that they
have paid for and therefore
they're they're trying to
protect the resource that
they're exploring the other
issue with some of those well
acts is that the i've seen times
don't start the data collection
until much further down and so
what we're looking at is that
upper zone and not the the very
deep you know eight thousand
feet down is less of interest
for water resources so yes we're
absolutely putting those data
anywhere that we have well logs
we are putting that into that
picture as we collect the aerial
electoral dinetic surveys the
other thing that we're also
doing is we started a process to
digitally the water while data
into a more
readable format that we can also
put into the models and use
those wells as well so when that
project area senator race the
area there's only handful of
wells in that area to explore
and to pair with the atm data so
that's why they're hoping in the
future to explore some down here
drill some also that they can
confirm what they're seeing on
that but where we have lacks of
wells we can use that
information absolutely
told me we don't love that first
thousand
thank you for your hard work i'm
very interested in interested to
see this
new technology about read about
it some but you see so many
things that you think I don't
know if I want to put my money
into that but
uh there's a lot of most
managers would like to know
where that permanent look so
early as where the poor space is
that hold that water thank you
thank you representative
I have a few questions and then
well keep going with our uh
we're supposed to wrap up about.
Two thirty so we're we're going
to have to go quickly
first depend
definitely engineer we provided
the third largest recurring
increase was for the office of
the state engineer to hire and
retain staff how is that working
thank you mister chairman we are
greatly appreciative of the
funding that we've
acquired to add to our staff and
we're we have that hiring and
progress the
miss recently wait my half
something from ise's perspective
but where where continuing to
hire as quickly as possible as
as I mentioned earlier it's
going to our highest priorities
to modernize our offices and
modernize our efforts and in
order to do that we need to have
people in our offices on the
ground reading the meters
enforcing our
orders and that sort of thing so
could check that's great thank
you deputy engineer I want I
also stay again it's wonderful
to have you back into mexico
after a story federal career and
as we're going to our budgeting
season it'll be important to
really understand with as much
clarity as possible because
again it was one of the highest
priorities that particularly in
h c that we said is grateful for
our senate partners uh doing
their work there as well
secondly
mister the
conservative two questions won
it sounds like artificial
intelligence and the
really large scale data and
l l m to make sense of that data
that's playing an ever greater
role in the work that you're
leading to understand our
aquifers
yes mr chair road word daveling
and it at this point.
The the fact that the matter is
in terms of our ground moderate
data were still quite limited so
it isn't like the big data that
you see and maybe
some of the other industries are
healthcare sector it is small
data and where definitely
utilizing the tools that are
available to consolidate and
make the work more efficient for
sure but there are still a huge
data gaps
great okay thank you for that
and in terms of the I think as
we go forward into it sort of be
and dialog with you and and all
of our stake holders
are the we know that there is a
three amid that's high three
figure investment need and the
falling map are awkward
one of our questions of the
committee has been
since we have so much non
occurring money now how much can
we front of that that is if we
can use scale up instead of
doing ten million dollars a year
worth of work is there a sort of
a near term where you can scale
up and do twenty or thirty or
more
we we will follow what you sort
of tell us so it's not we we
won't sort of fit round page
into a square hole but we
definitely want a communicate
clearly that we can find on in
it really sort of for the next
couple of years as aggressive a
time frame as you can sort of
utilize in a field or also
carrying the point that you've
made and represented it as made
which is particular on the human
capital sign we need multi year
certainty for a folks to take
those positions
thank you for that question
mister I I think that
you know the table that they
provided in the last couple
slides of my presentation has a
pretty good breakdown annual
budget what I think we can
handle this year has been a
really good taste and.
Trial for our team are staff at
the bureau of geology and new
mexico tax to and it works
through this process with a
seven and a half million so I am
anticipating that something on
the order of twenty million and
a year is absolutely reasonable
and we could probably go a
little more if pushed and I
would also suggest that if we
can do something as
representative around suggested
where we do a three to five year
time window we can be much more
effective in the hiring process
and staffing and getting the
work down with some long term
cut duity of staff members to
help us address the issues
that's great thank you very much
that's awesome
moving on uh
it really feels like many of the
things that you put in there we
are really executing those
recommendations
is there anything around the in
particular even around the end
of my water right settlements
even as those sort of language
in congress we've appropriated
well over thirty million dollars
for that the past two sessions
sort of give ourselves a
christian to start really
preparing and partnering both
with tribes and then nearby
adjacent non tribal communities
any other modern is asian of
local ground water governments
that you want to maybe put on
the rate our screen and
understand that most of that is
voluntary working with we're
working with I see
yeah I would
at cherish bar thank you members
of the committee I would
encourage the coordination that
you already heard about today
between the acronmatic program
and the regional planning and
how to incorporate all of the
data and the data water act that
in the data that's coming out of
both supplying demand side of
water use and water supply
in terms of better planning and
I would also incorporate the
impact of those wide of the
current waters.
Supplies and demands coming into
the future and how those will be
diminished as stays his report
notes by twenty five percent and
what are the contingency
planning
impacts of that and how can the
state best support these areas
especially there were all
communities and low capacity
areas to write size
their efforts and claiming but
also their efforts in building
out infrastructure and water
systems that consisting these
challenges.
That's great and I thank you for
that that that makes me think
about the two hundred million
dollars that we sent to the
water trust board this past
session which will be looking
for a report and ask our staff
to bring that back the more that
that's used in innovative ways
to support communities in their
goals that's the single largest
appropriation of the water
trustport in
pretty sure the status ever made
particularly not to the trust
fund but actually to the project
fund actually
doctor to
moving there
I think that the biggest
question is how to we continue
to support your work
I see doctor shop back there
it sounds like really the team
that you're part of and in mini
cases are are the leader and
have created here's the pre
minute team to
one understand what's in all
sorts of different
varieties of water wherever that
water is from in the state of
new mexico we can rely now on
your team to tell us what's in
there and then components to
work to really
see where that water fits into
the many needs that we have
and I know there is significant
support you talked about that
that the legislature is
dedicated we want to continue
that
and we certainly don't want
or well I think we have to
acknowledge that so much of the
research and leadership that you
have done we have sort of a
limited time window because many
other states are looking to sort
of capitalize economically on
the work that you have glad and
that we funded which is great
for them but we want to do that
here
finally misraised the way you
were the fourth most
biodiversity in the country.
As we talk me through how
this updated approach is going
to not only protect what we have
but enhanced the violent
diversity that is in many cases
very tied to our water ways.
Is to chair and there are the
members of the committee would
really appreciate it as far as
support from the state
for our practical water
designation research and the
related to the funding that we
received we will support the
grunt water my pin working
species
especially looking at the water
quality that constituents how we
will treat this water to a safe
level for faithful per person
applications you know
training for especially
industrial uses because we fully
understand the concerns red
eighty two center teresa area
you know the water needs for the
data centers that is the new
water demand the sector and even
including renewal energy
production such as hydrogen
production so our goal is to
utilize this the practiced gum
water very efficiently and
effectively so will one answer
effect our community needs and
fresh water needs
so
that's great I I i've i've taken
us a little bit over time I
turned it over to mister white
just for brief comments or thank
you very much doctors to
anything specifically around in
franking surface wider supplies
how are not only protecting what
we have but enhancing the
biodiversity that central yeah I
think you for that question
mister chair think it's a
critical one cause we all are
going to need to be very thought
full about what happens with
that increasing limited
increasingly limited supplied I
think there's a lot of
opportunities that in one of the
things that tends to happen is
we all just focus on what's in
our box rather than connecting
the dots and so I think that you
know I really appreciate that
enhanced collaboration and
coordination across the natural
resource agencies that came out
of the fifty year water action
plan we also have incredible ngo
community in this state
particularly it'd be an
environmental sector interest
and just as one brief example of
how we can better connect.
The dots from your area here in
the lower real grand i'm really
proud of the collaboration
that's currently happening
amongst the state first local
stakeholders including my
elephant irrigation district the
US bureau of reclamation and the
national efficient while they
foundation it's created an
opportunity for us to look for
circumstances in which they can
be multiple multiple benefits
for example if we're looking to
capture storm water to recharge
awkward first those from what
our capture areas are ideal for
enhancing habitat and so we're
we're working on that
collaboration and
environmental sector
representatives to the low real
grand water lines that were
convenient together with
reclamation and others and will
continue to look for those
opportunities not only in the
lower real grand but elsewhere
across the state and thanks for
that question thank you and
appreciate that it really means
working together although it
sounds like to me we haven't
settled on the ways forward and
as we consider what funding to
dedicate concrete or not
concrete examples and projects
are going to be essential
collaboration is keep but
getting to something that we can
invest in on a shorter and on
the most efficient time frame is
essential right now so and thank
you thank you for your
leadership there great so now
we're going to continue down our
list we've got representative
garrett center steinborn center
words and replaced dow.
So
thank you so much
the process of learning the fact
that the five ticket there and
we have all this is marvelous
right now understand that the
ground round waters because they
can't refund a **** like three
thousand years of water once you
use it it doesn't get replaced
so I just think it be
to really
we need a ten year investment
not what you're about three
years and more more education I
answer left country here because
they couldn't part of their
until beans anymore and I grew
up in los angeles where we had
plastic things in everything to
collect water and that was you
know that's over the last fifty
years so I just urge your
committee to really really
serious about the effort on the
ground water especially for
thank you that's it.
Excellent thank you very much in
well taken
next we have senators.
The.
Thank you mister chair we're
testing the back of the bus
technology seems to be working
thank you mister chair and I
just have just really a kind of
a comment and I I think kind of
a bullet and it's doctor she
always break a little news even
kind of buried in a miss of a
lot of data and your reporting
on the level of keep us
I particularly dangerous
piefasts that shown up in the
ground water your basis near los
crucial specifically where in
alan
but we've read recent headlines
about
in close and the blood supply
will leave it there but next
year
but this is a really serious
serious issue and are
just curious you know i've heard
from a colleague that you would
said it may be we can clean that
up through treatment which is
great
so that's why really important
piece of information but I guess
if not with standing treatment
that we know that there is a
high level of that type of
people in it around the ground
in the land maybe wildlife
etcetera which graces a lot of
public policy issues from the
issue of water
and consumption and not if it's
not being treated is it set fair
fair to say that very dangerous
substance.
For consumption in
in all of its forms is is that
correct
yes definitely a pifas compounds
are toxic compounds if we
consume like without the
treatment so that is why the
uscpa put the new regulations
and people as compounds and
in new mexico environment to
department is I was still not
working on the past issues but I
think the good news is ah we can
treat it we can remove over
ninety percent or even nineteen
eight percent of the people ask
components through the rivers
are small since technology that
will be useful bracture water
designing nation
and then of course we can also
confide from the source you know
we will
fast compounds we will not use
eighteen hour daily life because
the pifa has come funds we
detect the army data to
firefighting training for
example an industrial
applications and also visible
was water has a lot of people as
compounds then that's why I
would detect it and I think we
need to it was the multiple are
strategies approaches to control
the perfast car and pans to
comploy it and also to remedy
thank you I agree totally and
you know here in the state we we
just banned band certain
certain name products and we
band or or gave the environment
part of a regulatory authority
over or over the the
firefighting phone but you know
the department to defense his
fighting list on that
this is a brand new law so just
can't I think your data just
kind of valid dates and it
should be kind of a headline for
people that this is not
perfectly this materials in the
environment it's showing up in
humans is very dangerous it's
one thing preventing it in
treatment but it's another thing
once it's concerned and all of
its other forms that it exists
that aren't going through
treatment and the best way to
reduce it is to keep it from
being polluted in the first
place.
The source wire pollution it as
is the case with a lot of
contaminants and that's why we
we fight things battles and have
these conversations but anyway
i'll leave it there and thank
you thank you so much for your
good work in in all of you for
your good work thank you mister
chair thank you very much
please chairman quickly.
State engineer health question
to you on page five were you
talk about the forty million
appropriations on new water
strategies could you see an
staff the parameters the
sideboards that you
put out for those people to
apply for those applications and
terminal whose winning awards
and
give a statement to those
winners as to what they plan to
do with that money and the war
that was given
thank you mister chairman in
senator woods
and monday the state engineer
and the environment department
are going to be publicly
announcing the funding
opportunities for for the
strategic water supply program
and we're going to have two
lanes one is an application for
grants and that's for public
entities and the other lane is
for its rfp process so that we
can issue contracts and I would
just think the legislature for
authorizing that program we're
using as a guide for both the
grants and the contracts but
statute the legislation that you
are passed that tells as exactly
what parameters we need to
follow from the grants and the
contracts and i'll i'll just be
clear part of that guidances we
have to comply with every
environmental standard that an
immediate hass and every la and
regulation applicable to our
office the state engineer we're
also going to be looking at
community benefit plans if it's
a contract in situation and
where coordinating with the
economic development department
to as part of that review.
So that we can encourage a
benefits to communities and and
provide the benefits of new
water resources to encourage
economic development so to
answer your specific question on
who they repeat panel is we're
going to have state engineer
and med environment department
new mexico tech new mexico state
and economic development
department and indian affairs
department as part of a team and
that we have experts design
needed as part of that team to
review the proposals and go
forward with the contracting our
goal and I feel competitive we
can meet this is to have
contracts and grants awarded by
the end of the year for the
initial appropriation amount
which was forty million dollars
and if you just give me that
point system they are on all
those subject matters because
you describe terrible and
I know the turns going to be
exactly number you can put it on
each one of them in scoring and
you're going to have an exact
group that gives those words and
all that information will be
helpful
in mr chairman and then it would
all of that is going to be
posted on a special design
needed page from the environment
department's website
specifically for the strategic
water supply program okay good
deal on page seven
kind of on peak seven
you were talking about
developing current and forcement
mechanisms on the last point I
guess that was your part or is
that the state engineer okay
tell me tell me when you talk
about
correct and forcement
mechanisms.
Elaborate just a little bit the
chairman is upset that i'm
taking too much time so quickly
and no apology my father was
pleased this is important please
take the time I was getting her
short her answer to
mister chairman and senator was
the short version is we have a
enforcement provisions as part
of our law that were and acted a
hundred years ago they haven't
been updated in a hundred years
and we need to think about what
we do today in terms of
incentivising people to follow
the la and that use water
they're not entitled to use.
So our office is asking for
increased information
capabilities increased paddle
penalties and we want to make
sure that we can follow up a
proactively when we do see
biolations out there in the
field.
So much chair would help
statute.
Mr chair and senator with what
we have proposes an amendment to
the existing status.
So it's going to be rural change
to the restriction.
I'm so i'm sorry sir.
So you're not going to amend the
statute you're going to to
finalize their change the rule
slightly to to
use the same statute.
To
qualify though
a little more what you're
talking mister chair senator
what's we will need a statutory
amendment we will need the
legislature to help us with that
effort.
Okay
okay one last question with
chair
I would like to have someone
sent me
what it actually what the farmer
is actually assessed by great
foot.
For the
computer gating for the real
grandcard face and district for
the arturely.
Irrigation district in the
country should african and the
cross band should i'd like to
know what farmers are access
even though they may not get
that agree they're still
assessed and i'd like to know
that cost because so many times.
With that water
covered former.
So i'd like that if you could
get that for about appreciate
that in mr chair thank you for
your indulgence appreciate it
absolutely thank you very much
center with what conclude with
representative
thank you mister chair and thank
you for the presentation I I
have a question in regards to
the first presentation i'm
assuming
what part of water management
and conservation practices is
vegetation management removal of
non need of species not just
sweets etc.
And thank you mr chairman
representative doubt in the
fifty year water action plan I
would put that under bucket
number eight four where we talk
about trying to make sure our
systems can be as efficient as
possible and is well managed as
fast as it.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you for that in the
different collaborate
collaborative meetings that you
guys have has anybody mapped out
the federal and state and
private foundation resources
whether it's in our cs reveal
more br who provides resources
for
vegetation management.
The.
Getting rid of the bottlenecks
along the the rio grand
how are you guys looking at
assuring that we're maximizing
the dollars that are available.
Thank you mr chairman and
representative I think it's a
great suggestion i'm looking at
my partner down there
we're always worse driving to
try to compile information and
work with our partners in these
large systems in particular and
I think coming up with a piece
of paper would be a good idea
thank you mr chairman
representative died in that's a
great question one of the things
that we're doing at and receipt
stream commission is using
investments from the legislature
on channel improvements in the
middle valley and then using
those to leverage additional
federal resources particularly
for a vegetarian vegetation
management and settlement
management
the good news is were working
very sort of collaboratively
across the various partners
particularly in the middle
valley with the focus of getting
more water elephant viewed as I
emphasized earlier the federal
government has awarded a hundred
and forty three million dollars
for the santa cash a reach so
that's just about elephant
beautiful war but then in
addition to that i'm really
proud of the partnership the
state is entered into with the
middle of grand a conservative
district we wanted to kind of as
you're as your suggesting look
at what are all the resources
how do we get them at play in
the river channel in the most
expedient way and with the most
benefit so recommendation would
be working on that standard cash
and then we the state together
with metal real run the
conservative district would be
focusing on further upstream
reaches so that we're covering
our basis as best as possible
and also we have a little bit
more agility between the state
and the irrigation district to
move quickly those kinds of
channel projects and happy to
provide you more information on
that as needed thank you thank
you mister chair and thank you
for that and parallel for that
are you not being contractors
that are qualified to do the
work standing by to do the work.
Had the equipment to do the work
so that we can make sure that we
are scaling up these projects.
Thank you mr chairman
representative doubt yes so we
both work with we have a
technical services agreement by
which we can pay the US bureau
of reclamation to do it they
have a tremendous amount of
equipment but we also have our
own state contractors and just
in the last year we increased
the number of available
contractors to do that channel
work from there was just one
that we were using and that
treated some problems of
scheduling sometimes that we now
have three or four that are
available and more quickly get
out on the ground to do the work
thank you thank you mister share
and thank you that an are you
leveraging in our agency
agreement so that you can speak
this process whether it's all
water districts counties water
districts are safe years are you
leveraging your interagency
agreements absolutely so I
mentioned earlier that
cooperative agreement with a
conservative district were also
working pretty closely and the
chama area with the east real
reverse soil and why
conservation district which and
and perer is very familiar with
them but trying to sort of see
who are who are the players that
we can bring together to to
collaboratively address the
issues in pool resources and so
we're advancing those kinds of
agreements throughout the the
middle real grand
thank you mister chair and thank
you for that and I I mean I got
a brag on the eastern rearing
about some water conservation
district because they're even
leveraging use conservation
court teams and in environmental
they're using work for
investment opportunity dollars
and so I mean it we can't make
it rain but I really appreciate
the cap collaborative nature of
what you're doing and I hope
that we can scale up and get
more delivery to elephant view
and throughout the state and I
wanted just to comment elephant
irrigation district and middle
of conservation district for
being here today it's such an
important topic for so many of
us in southern new mexico and
happy to see if you're
listening and let us know what
we can do to help you guys.
Thank you
absolutely I think you very much
representative down
mr chairman
please I just have one point in
this this actually response to
your prior question as well
about our collaboration the
strategic water reserve is an
opportunity for us to build on
these partnerships bill than
these efforts in the channels
and in a variety of context and
we appreciate the new guides and
new authorities that we have
from the legislature of that as
well that's a great point thank
you I think it's a really
excellent panel thank you
members for great questions and
points in great work let's help
bring us to this point okay we
will ask I know misrisely white
their director raised the right
to say
invite it
secretary kenny
and asthma pity state engineer
mr health you have to stay more
than two presentations
the automatically at least get
coffee and water that's a good
there was some ice cream earlier
and mister davidson thank you
for being there.
Members is yeah obviously we're
a little bit behind schedule if
we need to we may have read or
or so to take up the federal
funds update
at another time
none that this is sort of our
water okay now we're on
investments to increase water
delivery mister davidson kickers
off for melancholy and we'll go
from there thank you mister
chair members the committee my
name is austin davidson and I am
your natural resource analyst
the presentation will be
starting with is behind tab f it
will look something like this
and it will be labeled recent
legislative water appropriations
i'll like give you all second to
get there.
Excellent mister chair members
the committee the legislature
has increased the recurring
budgets of the opportunity to
the state engineer and new
mexico environment department
which you can think of this two
separate parts of the water
world of the state specifically
the office of the state engineer
being the water quantity agency
in any environment department
being the water quality agency
and community the legislature
has increased their budgets that
recurring budgets by sixteen
point three million dollars over
the last three years or roughly
thirty one point two percent and
the legislature over that same
time period has provided one
point one billion and on
recurring funding and that
figure includes severance tax
bond earmarks specifically the
new mexico environment
department's general fund budget
has grown by forty five percent
or ten point three million over
that three year times fan and
then the office of the state
engineer has grown by twenty
point nine percent or six
million over that three year
times band and in addition to
those recurring increases the
legislator gave to them over
that same time span those
agencies received a hundred and
eighty eight point five million
in recurring dollars for water
infrastructure resources
protection and management in in
addition to those two water
agencies there are other
entities across the state who
invest in manage the state's
water specifically like the
presentation you just heard the
new mexico institute for mining
and technology received seven
point five million for awkward
for amount being in the new
mexico state specifically
received eight million in the
last session for practice to
start a nation project and also
over the energy minerals in
natural resources department
received eight million to be
placed and then distributed from
the states supplemental land and
water conservation fund these
not occurring funding is in
addition to also the land of in
chairman legacy fund that you
all heard of presentation on in
august and specifically that
permanent find.
Also gives recurring funding to
various conservation projects
like the new mexico environment
departments river storage of
program also land and also soil
and water conservation districts
do the new mexico department of
agriculture and also enter its
forest and water shed programs
the state also provides
consistent on occurring funding
through the new mexico finance
authorities water trust ford who
received two hundred million
from the last session for water
projects that you the
legislature authorized in this
fine was also supplemented by
fifty seven point eight million
and severance tax find earmarks
that are also set aside for
water trustport projects now
mister chairman members of the
committee the remainder of this
presentation gives you a
breakdown of the non occurring
and recurring increases in the
twenty twenty five twenty twenty
four and twenty twenty three
legislative sessions into all
walkie through some of the
highlights from each of those
sessions so starting in the most
recent one in the twenty twenty
five legislative session you the
legislature increased the osces
recurring budget by one point
two million to support district
office lease increases contract
work you also appropriate at one
point five million for the
osce's salary increases for
appropriately placing workers
and that for the new mexico
environment department they did
not get a recurring increase but
you authorize the creation of
the complaints and enforcement
division turning to page two.
Of this presentation you'll see
there that the legislature
appropriated three hundred and
twenty eight point three million
and non recurring funds in the
twenty twenty five session and
that went to water management
litigation infrastructure
planning and quality now
drilling down into the three
hundred and twenty eight million
in a mexico environmental
department received fifteen
million to the role
infrastructure loan program for
low interest loans for water
wastewater and solid waste
projects and they also receive
two point seven five million for
regionalization of water systems
and the development of its
system operator work force for
the office of the state engineer
the legislature appropriate
twenty five million to support
indian water right settlements
litigation and projects and five
million for the implementation
of the water security planning
act and just like you were
discussing earlier mister chair
you also created the strategic
water supply with forty million
into it and that goes
specifically to rack
desalination projects at the
bottom of their page you'll see
a breakdown of the recurring
increases for the twenty twenty
four legislative session in
particular in the mexican
environment department received
six point nine million and
recurring increases or a twenty
seven point one percent increase
in the majority of that was five
point seven nine million five
point seven million which went
to the agencies I appropriate
replacement projects are chapter
that the secretary can also give
more information on
additionally the office of the
state engineer also receive two
point seven million or eight
point nine percent increase and
the osce and price was
specifically for program
expansions across the agency
security water security planning
act implementation turning to
the third page of the
presentation in the twenty
twenty four or legislative
session you the legislature
appropriated ninety three
million and non recurring
appropriations for specifically
water and in particular seven
million to the water quality
management fund.
For development and
implementation and
administration of the state's
water and surface water
permanent programs and for the
officer the state engineer you
appropriated twenty million to
support indian water rights
settlements litigation and
projects and five million for
water rates the judiciation and
you also appropriated fifty
million to supplement be fifteen
nine that was going for water
trustport projects and finally
mister chair at the end of this
presentation goes over the
twenty twenty three legislative
session and those increases and
so specifically in twenty twenty
three the legislature increased
the general fund to the media by
two point seven million or
thirteen point five percent and
this was for hiring people
contracts with the engineers for
the water and resource
protection division and support
for its hampen candidates
permitting monitoring and
enforcement operations and the
office of the state engineer
received an increase of two
point four million or eight
point eight percent and this was
for supporting the efforts of
the water resource allocation
program for non recurring the
legislature in the twenty twenty
three session gave two hundred
and sixty point five million in
water appropriations and
brilliant down into that number
for the office of the state
engineer they received ten
million for critical dan
infrastructure ten million for
riverflows into elephant ute
thirty five for the lorio
grandwater supply automatation
and then turning to page for
they also received seven point
five million to the strategic
water reserve to lease sandwich
water rights from the career
patching nation and for purchase
of other water rights for the
new mexican environment
department they receive ten
million for emergency drinking
water ten billion for the rural
infrastructure revolving loan
program and fifteen million for
the eastern new mexico water
utility also in that same year
mister chair members of the
committee the higher education
department received fifty five
million thirty million as
general find twenty five is
other state funds so they could
provide matching funds to state
research universities to support
applied research.
And one of those many fields was
also in wire research so mister
chairman is the committee with
that alternated over to the
secretary of the environment.
Good afternoon is share members
of the committee thank you for
having the environment
department here today
you should have a twelve page
side presentation in front of
you
it is a side presentation it's
also available on our website
under the comments and testimony
read on the front page if
anybody in the audience are
watching online wants to follow
long as well
mister chair up move through the
the slides rather quickly but I
I would like to give a kudos in
compliments to our local
analysts really appreciate his
digging in and understanding our
department so well it's a
complicated agency with lots of
budgeting hundred and twenty
five budget sources are funding
sources it's not easy and I
appreciate his historicity to
stick with it
so mister chair appreciate this
committee again investing in the
environment department we're
doing so much better than when I
started in twenty nineteen but
we're here to talk about water
so i'm directly into slide
number two
and just as a reminder some of
the investments you just heard
about whether it's staffing of
our people are investing in our
programs are represented through
our water protection division
our water protection division
has remained relatively
unchanged in the in the last six
and a half years it's four
bureaus they do everything in
our water protection division to
focus on ground water which you
heard about today and other
panels
surface water as well as
drinking water
the other part of our program
that still people don't know
about the bout is the
construction program spiro where
we administer both federal funds
and state funds that you heard
about the rip fund that is a a
nimble fund that you all have
put money into greatly
appreciate that which is soon as
you put money in we leverage it
out the door.
So that one is a hundred percent
utilised I will at just ask the
same mister chair and and
members of the committee with
the construction programs bureau
being that it's a financing
bureau with federal funds we
have money in the amount of
roughly a hundred million
dollars in any given time to
give out but under the champ
administration or threatening
threatening to eliminate those
funds so the greater utilization
we can show the better.
With respect to slide three
again a little bit of
understanding here how we break
down our budget through the
water protection division it is
one of our largest divisions in
the department you can see what
we spend on both personnel
contracts non contracts a little
bit of other expenses there and
highlighting for you that even
though you've made significant
investments in the environment
department and in the water
program we're still about
seventy two percent funded by
federal funds again those are
some of the federal funds that
are important for our operations
and yet on the chopping block a
little bit with the federal
administration we've been doing
extensive lobbying on the hill
with all the other environmental
agencies to make sure that those
monies continue to flow to
states even if the federal
executive is drinking.
On the side number four I
believe we're on this is where
we get into maybe organizing the
the discussion around our
funding into the water action
plan the fifty year water action
plan
so i'll go through the at a high
level spot letting a few things
here for you
uh how we're spending money in
the fifty fiftieth water action
plan
any d is leading on a six of the
eleven priority action areas so
moving around this little
diagram side number five you'll
see is highlighted yellow it's
the a three action to reduce
leaks mischery this is one of
those really fantastic success
stories that I think you know I
just really like to spend a
moment on with you you know we
saw what was happening in the
oil and gas sector we can detect
my thing leaks from space now
we asked herself why can't we do
the same thing with water I mean
it's a very simple question a
lot of that technology is being
devolved here in new mexico and
sure enough we can and what we
found is that with an investment
of two hundred and eighty three
thousand dollars in contracts we
were able to effectively find
leaks in the amount of two
hundred a little excited
swimming pools and and help
those communities fix those
leaks this is just a pilot to
communities we're going to do
this state wide the idea being
that repairs are paying for
water that never reaches their
taps concern us all or that
water that's allocated for
drinking water comes up but
never reaches treatment even
this happens on the was water
side of the house this is one of
those areas you're going to see
a spend a lot more time in the
company that we're using a
stereo
not only puts boots on the
ground but they work with local
utility departments to say here
this is where we think the leak
is within this line.
And they've been spot on so
really good success with that
first fifty year water action
plan item moving around a little
bit quicker you heard a lot
today about item b one outside
six with the strategic water
supply
I know senator woods as in
questions about it but we will
be posting everything to our
website and a lot of information
will be available on monday
but again thank you for your
investment in in the forty
million dollars that ultimately
reached arts I could have
agencies to launch the strategic
water supply i'd be remissive
that the our partners here
weren't highlighted for their
diligence and their effort to
work with my team and get
everything aligned for that
bracket water investment we're
making as a state
moving around the circle of
slide seven item b two
weeks you may not know this but
we've been a pretty big leader
in the southwest about water
reuse and today we have about a
hundred ground water permanent
south of about nine hundred and
fifty that focused on water
reuse that that's a great step
forward over the the past
however many years but we need
to increase that water reuse so
things like portable and non
possible reuse the treatment of
practition produce water those
are all areas which the
environment department continues
to focus on and we had been
planning and continued to plan
to bring rules to the wtc next
year focusing on many of those
areas we appreciate greatly the
work that you heard from mse
doing the science
federal epa has historically had
the office of research and
development the developed
science base standards we don't
have that analog in the state of
new mexico the environment
department doesn't develop those
science based standards we
typically rely on experts to do
that and animals you have been a
great partner for us in
developing that science.
As we move along here clean up
of ground water moving on to
slide eight items see one from
the fifty year water action plan
you help those get sent a bill
twenty one through the
legislature
this is a great bill for a
number of reasons that I won't
get too far down the the path on
but again helping us establish
responsible ownership of when
people neglect you clean up
their their ground water you
provide it is a twenty million
dollar appropriation i'm happy
to say that that money is now
incumbent as of july first when
we receive the money we put it
in for uranium mining clean up
and a couple other sites to come
carry is getting some of the
money that truck terminal there
i'm so really happy that we got
that in place in the work is
beginning as we speak in the
remediation of of sights that
really didn't have a path but
for your investment in our are
work on the so thank you for
that collaboration.
Moving on to slide nine or
service water permitting program
we just presented on the water
natural resources committee
across campus earlier this
morning
really just highlighting the
dates here for you in the
investment you've made by this
month you'll see the draft rules
going out for public comment
and then ultimately we'll bring
them before the wkc next spring
you've in the past few years
have put eight point three
million dollars to that and
again there's some step
questions going forward about
how we're going to fund that but
it will tackle those at the at
the time we move forward
together on that
and lastly I don't need to tell
you much about aging
infrastructure you have
addressed this and other
committees have addressed this
but let me just highlight that
on slide and the aging
infrastructure slide
we have put it you know
the current environment
department's budget is about two
hundred
and
twenty five million a year there
give her take recurring money
we put out typically that much
money if not more in in water
and solid ways projects so
highlighting on here since
twenty nineteen we've invested
five hundred and fifty million
dollars some of those in london
some of those in grants for six
thousand three hundred and
thirty nine total projects
there is more to do clearly with
water quality standards not
being made a drinking water and
water quality not being met it
waste water she can see there's
a billion dollar investment
still needed but again we're
working with communities through
capital outlay water transport
and other
areas to get that money deployed
in an investments made.
So finally the last two slides
are really about a river storage
program not somewhat dotted line
over the fifty or water action
plan for sure but
wanted to just highlight our our
river storage and program this
is I think representative dow as
the question about removing
absolute cedars and things like
that this is that program that
puts money directly into
communities higher contractors
does great work all across new
mexico we have fifty three
projects that are completed and
twenty two projects that are
under way there's a lot of our
money you'll see that was
allocated to this on slide
twelve but also capital outlay
dollars
as well this is an area that
could stand for further
investment we've typically put
this into icip investments in
for searching capital
improvement projects but I think
what you'll see in our twenty
seven budgets to mention is this
coming there is a special
appropriation and moving it out
of that capital bucket and with
that mister chairman mr by share
members the committee i'm
finished with my presentation
thank you.
The.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you mister david and all echo
secretary can he's gratitude to
this committee through the
refunding of important water
initiatives and also the work
david said in wrapping his brain
around the complex water world
that we all work in I would like
to just comment from interstate
stream commission's perspective
a lot of the large dollar
amounts on the briefing paper
from mr davidson came to us so
i'd like to just comment briefly
on some of those large dollar
items and then really were here
to answer your questions in
particular you'll notice on that
breaking paper that are thirty
five million dollars special
appropriation from the twenty
twenty three legislative such
and
that in conjunction with thirty
million dollars in capital for a
little real grand account for
sustainability was a major
investment from you all to
supporting solutions here in the
lower real grand
I won't know the elephant in the
room here is that we're in the
thick of negotiating a subtleman
and our interstate litigation
were very much looking forward
to getting that across the
finish line hopefully my
colleagues were just out in the
hall on final calls to resolve
these documents that are due to
be submitted to the special
master in the US supreme court
next week i'm to the extent we
get there were very much hoping
to come back to you all your
september meeting or sometime
later this year to talk you
through this settlement how it
manded and what the implications
are from the financial
standpoint both for the state
but also for local statement or
so very much looking forward to
that conversation we were
pleased to get that significant
funding in twenty twenty three
because it helped us implement
solutions and advance of the
settlement that we knew would be
needed regardless of the
litigation outcome and so chunk
of that money have gone on for
major priorities in the lower
real grand including a water
conservation and if she does
initiative to develop additional
water supplies including the
previous panel highlighted the
area.
Electron magnetics or be there
or office conducted so looking
for other water supplies
identifying potential for
importation of water extensive
work and effort and
collaboration with elephant
irrigation district related to
store modern management so
looking at our existing systems
and where there's opportunities
to use existing infrastructure
to capture high storm events and
use that to recharge the awkward
for also investing an additional
data collection across the board
monitoring modeling and
community engagement so
appreciate but significant
investment of the thirty five
million mr davidson's briefing
paper all that about four point
six of that is accounted for
through the period of the
appropriation for the various
initiatives that we have moving
so thank you so much for that
huge investment the other
significant dollar amount in the
briefing paper is related to
indian water rates settlements
and i'd ask what stated you're
talking about here to just speak
to that item
thank you thank you mister
chairman and members of the
committee I think that
investments it was referred to
earlier the investments that we
are making in indian moderate
settlement funding from a state
perspective it two things one
leverage tremendous amounts of
federal funding the amount of
federal funding pending with
respect to the currently
agreed to indian right water
right settlements is on the
order of three billion dollars
and federal funding but the
statement also contributes to
projects around the ground in
our communities today and so we
are moving forward to implement
programs and projects that will
help communities
implement the water rates
settlements when they are
finalized in and approved by
congress but also help with our
water management efforts.
On the ground today that we did
receive we have received two
recent appropriations one of
twenty million dollars and one
of twenty five million dollars
those are good down payments
toward the optimal amounts that
we will be needing in that
regard I also wanted to just
bring us to a back together in
talk in terms of all of the
water funding associated with
some of the fifty year water
action plan priorities so across
oliver agencies just didn't last
years session we were able to
receive on the order of three
hundred ninety three million
dollars and those are non
recurring appropriations to
their special appropriations
across the variety of agencies
that we've tacked to you about
today the largest of that was
the water trust board
appropriations the infusion of
two hundred million into that
water projects fund and of
course we're working very
closely with our agency partners
and in the finance authority to
implement those programs and in
that
in that package so across what
are conservation cross new water
resources and across water
quality and water should
protections we've increased the
appropriations for those high
priority areas are very
appreciated that effort but
we're not done yet so hang in
there.
Thank you definitely stated here
to hear all those comment
briefly on a couple of the other
large dollar items and that will
get to get to your questions
here and also I should say on
the texas being new mexico
settlement we are working in
lock step with the new maximum
department of justice they've
been very engaged the attorney
in general in this in this
process i'm looking forward to
hopefully getting there and then
briefing you all next month the
other large dollar amount items
that are flagged on here include
the ten million dollars for real
grandday channel work that goes
to the the question earlier from
representative down really
focusing on how do we improve
the river channel such that
there is better conveyance but
also attention to habitat
you can't always get everything
you want everywhere but I think
we can do it much better job in
having better convents and also
better habitat particularly in
the middle valley of the other
item
deputy state enjoyment in the
strategic water reserve earlier
so not the strategic water
supply about the reserve is
something that run through my
office at the interstate stream
commission allows the state to
own our least water rates to
support stream for and we
received and twenty twenty three
seven point five million for the
reserve we have a remaining
balance there of four point six
million but we're currently in
discussions are with water
rights holders both in the
middle bally with pre nineteen
oh seven surface water rights
and in the same one for
potential purchases the value of
those water rates are currently
being appraised but I would
estimate between those two that
were
Million for the reserve and tool
will be increasingly important
as we see a water supplies
diminished particularly to
insurer and protect ecosystems
but also for a compact
deliveries are very critical to
all for a new mexico
and I think the last one I would
highlight is the funding for
plan planning and planned
employmentation both for the
fifty year water action plan
much of that funding is being
targeted to action item one
eight so water education but the
appropriation we also received
this year's legislative session
was for implementation of the
water security planning act that
is going to support both the
rule making process that I
highlighted earlier but in
parallel to that rule making
were really investing and tools
and templates for the regions so
how to hope them navigate the
planning process how to help
them navigate tapping into
resources whether it's state
funding federal funding other
resources for plan
implementation
appropriation always was also
for enhanced online engagement
and information tools and so
there's a tie and there to water
data act but how were we at the
state providing better water
related data and a more
accessible way through our
website and so those are the the
key things were really excited
to be moving and I i'd see if a
But center otherwise thank you
so much.
Great thank you very much we
heard some of the thunder uh
director this is concluding
there so what's what straight to
questions I know we have the
senator steinborn and then more
from there
than a wood
thank you mister chairman just
one question for secretary canny
you kind of alluded to would you
give us just a very brief update
on the on the twenty million
dollars for abandon your radio
mind clean up the status of
those projects.
Um miss chair and senator yes
thank you that question
so with the twenty million
dollars we have three iranian
about in your indian mind sites
selected employment is up now
it's
I think all their own state
trust land and and someone some
of them spell into private land
but uh most side number four red
love number number one and
schmidt declined mine are are
the three if those have a
meaning to folks a
the on all three of those we
have had our money in cumber in
july or august we've had kick
off meetings with the
contractors in july and I guess
and what you started work on
site with uh with the either in
project planning or on site with
the contractor
mr
very again I I think one of
these just stands out to me
mote number four
and I just want to sort of say
but for this body's
appropriation or the
legislature's appropriation
the the amount of radiation
coming out of more number four
is equivalent if you were there
for one year you have the
equivalent of
thirteen years of radiation.
So I
when when we put in terms like
that you know I I think you
because
you know folks who live in the
air work in the area or or
otherwise in in proximity
are being dosed at exceptionally
high levels and the water in the
land etc
and those three minds are our
first for a into this but there
are additional states that you
can carry chuck terminal that I
mentioned before and the former
refinery blue field i'm trying
to think of what we will be
needed to rx refinery blue
villed currency and are there
other two sites that were
cleaning up for things like
um
hydrocarbons or other types of
organics that are in in the soil
uhm so yeah all are kicked off
other moving well and then we're
going to use a little bit of
that money to see if we can
identify any surviving and
to place means or lawsuits on
them if we can shift the burden
over to them for funding the
clean up
thank you thank you mister
chairman secretary thank you I
just think thank you for number
one moving quickly I know that
was a question that legislature
has had appropriate health how
quickly can we move on at near
showing that you can immediately
jump on it and never to you
showing the great environmental
health risk with persist two
thousand seven mexicans because
of this generational
contamination.
And that we can really make a
difference and not just to their
help to water as well because
some of these threaten water
supply and that's why it's also
urgent from water perspective
that we do a large skill project
thank you mister chairman thank
you sector thank you very much
the the let's see range
continues for the second day it
rained on yesterday get that
three gone there was over to use
thank miss chair
sector kenny on page three you
were talking about your
categories your spending
categories here and you've got a
contract support for forty eight
dollars is that to contract is
that what that means because
what i'm asking is is non
contracts support and can give
me the difference in those two
yeah thank you
mister chair and center words so
i'm slide three white what at
this really car relates to is
the first it is the two hundred
the personnel services the
second row of their contract
support is three hundred so
we spent a lot of money.
With consulting firms are
contract firms to do everything
from sampling to analytical
laboratories and things like
that that's what that contract
support is and the non contract
support would be procurement in
other areas that is in a
contract so it could be
everything from paying you know
do it for it service is or
in state travel out of state job
for my employees
there's that there is a lot that
falls under their evening
including buildings and other
things cars those tapes program
it
okay thank you for that in home
page eight
which
this is how far back to
the waters of the US I remember
a lawsuit one time that a guy
had a piece of property
build a house on
was denied the permit but caused
of the waters of the US d m in
am I remembering right or not or
am I full of
missure and senator I never
would think that that you're
full
so
but I I think you're right
there's a I I think the story
recalling is the one they kicked
off the world is large suite
where
there was building in about a
alleged filling in a white land
where someone wanted to build a
house it kicked off
years of uncertainty
I don't know that I don't open
new mexico story that similar
but I think the point being that
with senate built twenty one
passing are working on surface
water discharge permanently
program for waters and see.
It will be able to be a little
bit more and what's happening
federally and make decisions
about what are waters of the
state
as a state agency with in
concert with the legislature so
I think we're on a path of
stability
compared to where the feds have
been there probably will be for
some time you know what what's
going to funny about that a
better works out right now
and
it makes you wonder
how far down the land we're
going to call this you know a
contributor to
to river and I know what you're
trying to do and I know what the
we tried to pass with for
but just to the common man you
know it's
it makes you wonder how far back
we're going to have to to get
permit for you know how far
and what permit from going to
have to get you know our are the
presentation permits
i'm sure they're they have time
why
what will the permitting process
on be much different than in the
past
so mr chairman sorry
yeah mister chairman etcetera
was a again appreciate that
question the dairy permits in
your area I i'm not sure if
there's a water of the of the
state that would be
that they would be discharging
to they currently have ground
what our permits
discharging into the ground I
think can and was the only one
that had a federal permit then
they got rid of it for a steak
groundwater permit but as we go
through this permitting process
or is we develop the rules and
we get ready to finalize them
we will have an opportunity for
the public to wait in.
And I don't
at the moment I i'm trying to
think long and hard about
whether that would change any
permitting for the dairies and I
don't I don't think so at this
point okay
the last come in I have is is
thank you for your work on that
I plan over there
i've taken a little heap from in
the hope you don't have to take
indeed from it it's a very
necessary park line and
appreciate the work you're doing
on that
shared center thank you and if
we can help help you in any
further way let me know okay
thank you mister
thank you very much center woods
next we have represented by
the
thank you mister chair and
austin I just want to thank you
for this great report it's it's
I I know I was in here when you
presented it but I read it and
it it's very helpful to just
remind us
you know exactly how much we
have going on and are mister
chair and they said I just like
to share with you that
you know markets fell dears who
heads up the square modern
conservation district in eastern
a rear river county approach me
and said the money is coming
down but it's not movie and so
what we did at a local level is
we combined to all the federal
state local agencies that have
to do with wider and water
issues and we we hold a monthly
meeting now to a clock on
thursday afternoon the last
thursday of the month and we
have started to get some of this
money moving from the usda from
you know from the foreign
service the problem is
this administration is fired a
lot of the tept edge among in
these agencies and so you have
you don't have.
Senior officials leading leading
this money or or getting this
money out of helping to get this
money out and so you have the
lower excellent and these
federal agencies that are now in
charge of these huge projects
that are really struggling with
decision making and and getting
the money out I can tell you
that it's it's starting to move
we got we got a huge project to
approve just last week with the
help of that a ricky certain at
the department of transportation
but I want to thank god hannah
for coming and tiny offer you
know all the state agencies is
they've been helping us and
coming to these meetings to
analyst starting to see the
money move and really at the
county on the undeclared
disasters and just so all of you
know it's it's it's not the
fires that's what happens after
the fires you know so we have
sixteen thousand acres burning
and then looking at fire and
still burning it only seventy
eight percent contained as other
as of this moment and that is
just going to destroy that water
shed in that in the
north west part of our county so
I I just wanted to come from it
are state agencies
secretary kenny everybody for
all the help you've given us in
trying to try to move this money
forward that this legislature
create but again you know having
the money and getting the money
out there to the people that
need it is in different things
so I always say that you know
campaigning as easy compared to
governing and that
implementation of legislation is
a hardest job of **** so I
wouldn't think i'll have your
agencies for helping us to do
that that's all they have the
same as your check they were
observed at a advice germany
thank you mister chairman this
year here mister secretary at
the middle of some questions.
And peached twelve of your
presentation our position
expired in december this year
and you have a balance of
roughly round six million
dollars are you going to get
that spent before the end of the
year or so we can your own boss
is words they consider us a lane
doctor governor and legislature
needs to maybe realize the money
so that we don't lose both
federal dollars
yeah
thank you thanks mister chaired
things quite sure
that the answer is yes and I
hope our water director genes
arm strong is listening to my
response right now and your
question
but yes the the plan is get
those out there award of the
contract was doing river storage
at work where double checking to
make sure triple checking to
make sure that they're actually
going to fulfill their projects
and not revert the money or save
the under or over span and cost
them to limit the last minute
you're you're concerned is might
concern that we have a balance
and we're moving towards that
deadline and we're we're
managing it in a way that is
more managed than most money in
our department
yeah could you get us an update
so we know if if we are in
vacuuming our special session we
can replace that money so we
don't lose the federal money
with an adjustment the budget
tried to do some of those and
there's too much push back and
others in the state engineers
office we had thirty million
dollars for damn steam award
that the money is an end of that
appropriation.
The
mr chairman incentive on your
speaker been able to move the
money associated with the dams
and be happy to provide updates
on them but we have we have
moved it
to the best that we have been
able to which is the full amount
and I would just add there's
also a chunk of open money for
middle real grand work that
we're partnering with middle
conservative district on zero
concern not being extended and
on the thirty million have you
expended all thirty million
dollars
waste if we got a move general
fund money to swap for art of
money because you need more time
that's fine we're just swapping
a dollar for a dollar was being
from one side dial to the other
but don't push it out and waste
it will just build even more in
order or shortfall the
contractors that's free money I
mean
so if that could be initially
that one to perk everybody's
ears up about that it's we're
eating that wall on the other
thing is
mr secretary you know we're
looking at you expending some of
your twenty twenty three capital
but twenty twenty four twenty
twenty five is not really moved
at all could you get us a
balance of those as we what's
not expenditive capital from
from agency and the same thing
where the state engineering in a
stream commission right because
in twenty twenty five roughly
but three hundred and thirty
million two hundred million to
the water trust port and then
you know another hundred and
thirty scattered around and
that's a lot of money and we are
all one
d cell plans we all want this
stuff to start moving in but we
don't see a movie
and that's an issue el parcel
to december two years ago three
years ago and everybody agreed
that's where to go but we
haven't.
Quite got there have the rules
for
for
for the decel I think that was
one of our issues.
Those rules
chair and
very serving us and
when you ask are the rules
written for decel
i'm i'm
struggling to think what roles
we would have to take to bring
in to the wtc
I think jan in your agency right
when we did this maybe three or
four years ago said there had
been rules and
on the quality of water in I
just on the weather at a member
hand telling us maybe in this
last session to we know where
the produce water I know the
produce water there's a
different center rules for
examination
yeah so mister chair
and wish so if we're talking
about the sale like details and
they come
we're just talking about in
texas if it's for a drinking
water than the drinking water
standards apply those are not
new rules if we're talking about
discharging into you know an
aquifer or to a stream or for
some other purpose I think those
of the rules that probably john
was talking to you all about
those reuse rules
we have one set of rules that
have gone through the wkc and
another set of rules that were
planning to bring back to the
wkc next year so that's that the
timing on those in the produced
water rule another partitioner
has petitioned the wtc and
that's before them rate that
commission right now so i'll get
you a better answer than that
but that the planet is to go
back to the wtc with the
department proposal end of this
year beginning in next year okay
I mean because
if you take out what we spend on
the.
I think it's pushed in two
billion dollars with not a drop
of water in it in all of the
line upon river water and
designation can fill that thing
up in a heart and put water in
the reservation and in help
solve goals from uh so it's on
point we have to get their right
and have to get there through
out the state because river
water has rained in northwest in
mexico all summer long and so we
haven't had the water and mister
at the lowest i've ever seen it
I will have anything on the same
line but the water the river
water it is running lower so
we're going to have to step on
the gas
role making this technical long
time we did put an extra five
million one year for produced
water rules in and some other
rules but
we never seem to have got there
and is the nature of it maybe
their card but do you think that
within the year in this
administration you are going to
get there are we push this into
the next administration
miss sharon for sure so
under this is you know we
committed to this as well with
the fifty year water action plan
one of the actions is to bring
water reuse rules forward and
are outer year of that was
twenty twenty six and here we
are right move being very close
to that now
we do think we're going to get
there with water reuse rules
that the last set of rules that
were adopted by the wtc that
took eighteen months for that to
go from start to finish laid out
the foundation for how we're
going to now they are in those
other rules so
we we we've been pushing a
challenge of mister chair but
you're not said that is real
right now is you know we're down
to one hearing officer we put
out an RFP we didn't get as many
bids as we would would have
wanted to see on that we're
trying to contract hearing
officers.
So we have a little bit of a
dilemma that we think we can
solve but I it has sort of
caused our rule makings to go a
little bit slower than then
ideally we'd like to see that we
have a fantastic hearing officer
but but we do need a little bit
more help there but again we
have the tools to solve that
it's just trying to sequence
everything now yeah because
the strategic water supply which
passed this year has forty
million dollars for for plants
to do that right for selling
nation projects and it's all
relied that forty million on
that role making you get seventy
percent clean one hundred thirty
percent by product it's going to
go somewhere and so that forty
million is relying on those
rules and so they move forward
or
we
know in ministrations wants to
succeed in some of the staff in
and we've got to get it
completely before the
administration comes on could we
don't mean they not know at
their priorities they may not
like this at all term the other
direction
will be sent here for years
trying to figure this out and so
I think that's key but the
capital issue in in the arbor
issues is make it not that if we
got a replacement we're going to
special session let's fix it
right so not you have money back
to the federal government that's
the last thing I want to do
so that's that's my main concern
but capital projects are moving
even slower now and so we're
going to have to really tamper
down what we're gonna prioritize
in the next year because you can
only spend six after the money
that's appropriate and so if you
have a forty fifty million
daughter projects I don't think
I can get it done in six months
and that will be an issue is
thank you mister chair thank you
very much
for your representative
thank you mister michael quick
can you geographically tell me
where.
Those minds right is what a
mobile mountain area
in the grand area.
Mr chair and representative let
me
can I maybe show you offline I
don't have anything that greatly
describes it because of where
they are but I would be happy to
go over with you offline if
that's okay thanks sector
thank you and want to thank you
represent them for your
leadership and support on the
end of the session as well
I don't see any other questions
on I think this panel at very
much thing mr davidson I think
this is the most comprehensive
funding role up that we've seen
represents a great deal of work
over the last number years by
this legislature and I think
even as we face some tensions
and challenges and often times
capacity challenges the team
represented at the tables and
also other folks who were key
stakeholders I very much feel
more confidence that we're at
moving towards faster and more
effective implementation and as
we have strong resources even as
it's sort of platoning adding
that should give us a lot of
comfort in confidence that in
the places where we're we're
doing good work for new mexicans
around water which are many that
we can lane in an investment and
and help more folks at a very
important time so great
questions from the committee
thank you all very much and
members what we're gonna do now
because tomorrow is going to be
quite quick we're going to
actually ask doctors directors
on the doctor
directors to leave we're going
to go to our business items so
the
using misleading is business
minutes
contracts and also uh our budget
guidelines and make sure that we
get that today without will turn
over to directors
thank you mister chairman behind
h.
And tab I are last meetings full
committee many minutes as well
as the subcommittee
subcommittee meeting minutes if
you wanted to take those in one
motion and your discretion
mister chairman great we can go
ahead and do it on
the doctor
one motion
minutes from the july l c and
the sub committee meeting
minutes
has been moved out by voice
terminal by
a number by several words and
they're any opposition to that
motion
sign uh
are minutes and subcondition
benefits are approved next would
be a tab j mister chairman this
is the contracts plan
we as you know we had to long
term employees recently retire
that we're in critical positions
mister ledger
administrative service has
manager and shared boiling our
committee coordinator we're
going through a transition right
now of needing some extra help
administrative support but more
importantly i'd like to bring
them on with some small dollar
contracts for training and
technical assistance with the
staff that have replaced them
particularly when it comes to
our budget management system and
all the it things they go on
with administratively what
misledger did with that and miss
boiling to get ready for the
session we may ask uh if we need
more hours to bring them on
during the session as well just
to help make sure we can
actually produce a bill because
they
would do all the work as staff
to make an execute changes that
you made as a legislature that
is what i'll be interested in to
the system everything worked all
the staff would go home and
those two women would stay
overnight and produce the bill
the next morning and we want to
make sure.
Sure that we understand all the
technical aspects of a time to
do that and so
I would ask for a committee
approval for those two small
dollar contracts and tab just
great thank you very much
which one are there
down at the bottom below the
table under action items
when for a little less than nine
thousand and ten doesn't need
committee approval but we're
asking for it anyways and then
one for fifteen for misleader in
so do we have a plan going
forward so staff leaves like
that that we have them trained
is or
probably on first time that this
leader was going to entire and
if we had someone selected going
to the position if we get them
trained up enough and time
instead of bringing that that
them back I mean
it is
common practice as a kind of
intour ship process with like
miss keyhol miss for and is to
keep institutional knowledge
within the office over time and
these are two critical areas
that we need to make sure that
we documents of the case that we
don't have single points a
failure within the office there
are changes to our budget system
and how it will produce the bill
this year that will work with
our technical idea IT vendor on
all fall and it's just a a
backup situation i'd like to be
able to have them around to
provide technical and training
and technical assistance for
staff if they needed as well as
administrative support preparing
for meetings and things were
were down one position so are
they gonna be trained on the new
system or we can just go to rely
I think that's kelly's position
no date well our staff will do
the actual work because we were
not hiring them to come back to
do what they did before our
staff have already are familiar
with it this is just.
Uhm as I fail safe to make sure
that we're up with how to do it
correctly in this through the
legislative session according to
that that is the intent mister
chairman
a great question thank you vice
any other questions okay i'd ask
for an option to approve tab
it's been moved by replacement
excellent saying by say that or
bicycle is there any opposition
to that motion
CNN we've approved contracts
tap k mister chairman this has
been development
for two months now
there is the original version
that you all have been seeing in
terms of
the market from last month.
Behind the next purple chase is
will be west inserted for the
revenue outlook now that the
revenue estimate is come out.
Following that we're suggested
changes from both the senate and
the house
these are
updates
many technical and nature
and I think there has been
agreement but will defer to the
chair and by share on that there
was also request to attach for
agencies use when they see these
come out the budget development
tool
and the details over what kinds
of questions they will be asked
in order to justify getting into
the grow as part of the budget
strategy of that's where you
budget growth will happen
with that mr german i'll be
happy to answer any questions
great thank you very much
directory I want to think the
members and and think the vice
chair for working through this
we took we started a little
earlier in order to have more
feedback and I think that's
really helped us is
representative here today
in this address is a number of
different areas directors league
talked about for new money
making sure that that's unsort
of a grow type of basis not
building it right into recurring
a great focus on CYFD and much
more legislative driven input on
their driven by the trial well
for some committee so it's the
big thanks to folks
any questions
with that as promotion on the
budget.
It's removed by by for money
same by replacement dixon in the
opposition to that motion seeing
we have adopted the budget
guidelines.
Okay
probably what we're going to ask
you to stay up there directorsly
we were on a good time frame to
go through our federal funds
that federal funds update and
then while transition into
public comment and then will
wrap up for today
they're close to
before we start charles could
you remind and make sure I I
think I called on me I didn't
know where if you're in the real
florida
if we're gonna go to special
session I want to see all the
arbitrary money that in agencies
that has been expended you know
as a.
Just progress first and then
come back and make sure that
those are agencies and maybe get
contracts verify right that
they're going to have those in
place to expand the arpa money
I don't know what the balance of
the arbor money that was
unexpected but the last time I
think I seem.
Inside agencies.
State engineer let's get a track
on those cases if we are going
to special session that's
something that we should swap in
order to keep free money and not
lose it so
yes sir well start pulling that
out of share this week
so tap mister chairman will move
on to a late subject of the
federal funds up to
the latest on page one is the
budget reconciliation bill that
was passed
this summer has triggered
another
budget provision that congress
has had in place since the I
believe in that early paintings
and that's called pay go
and basically congress created a
lot that told itself that if it
created
a deficit raising
measures that it needed to pay
for it with off setting
measures congress is suspended
that law every time it's
increased the deficit sense
this new reconciliation bill
increases the deficit it was not
included as part of the
suspension was not included as
part of the budget
reconciliation it would not have
passed the
the bird bath that we talked
about last time
and there has been no provision
that we know of today that has
been even introduced to suspend
it but they have until the end
of the calendar year to suspend
it if they don't then pay go
will go into effect and
essentially you'll have across
the board cuts to medicare of
four percent
and a number of domestic
discretionary funds will be
reduced so i'm possibly
eliminated the largest domestic
discretionary program that would
take a hit enough in this
current environment it is for
crime victims then there is just
a number of clippings and and
sandings.
That would basically be turning
over the appropriations power of
congress to omb to basically go
and and take that money and send
it back into the treasury so
that's what's on our radar what
we're watching right now the
next thing is there's already
discussions about trying to ram
through another budget
reconciliation bill again
remember this reconciliation
process doesn't require a super
majority in the senate
they can do it on a pure
majority vote the other thing
that we're watching for is
what's called the recisions
package you see almost every day
something come out where the
administration is trying to
freeze program spending
basically they're trying to
freeze it to offer it up to be
swept when we would call the
sweep spell this is their
recisions bill
and that's having a causing a
problem with the normal
appropriations process because
the minority party and the
senate is like why are we going
to give you votes i'm passing
you know appropriations bills if
you'll just turn around and be
able to those increases or those
changes and congress will come
back and use another budget
provision which allows them to
basically sweep those fines with
just a simple majority so it's
it's pretty big sort of
guessing game about how this is
going to play out they'll come
back in september
and there could be more changes
so I know that there's been talk
about special sessions but it's
definitely things have not
settled down in washington even
though we're where you're at so
I think that's important
information
we've talked a lot about how the
reconciliation bill impacted
big programs and potential state
need for either back filling or
some of this i'm going to talk
about is I don't believe back
fillable making up words here
but let's talk about briefly
some of the other
benefits and and and changes
outside of.
State government the first the
big one are federal tax changes
and cash transfers
the next one we've we'll talk
about later medicaid benefits
how states respond and then
other smaller things that cbo
allocates federal taxes in cash
transfers on the next page
we talked the briefing I line
that you know there's AAA
distribution mixed of who pays
federal income taxes and people
at the very high and paid the
most in terms of rod dollars
that might not be as large as a
percentage in terms of their
total overall to attacks burden
but that's where that's who's
paying the vast majority so you
assume that if you made
reductions to the tax code that
people who pay the most with
this proportionately benefit the
most and that's what the cbs
scoring has showed what I think
is interesting about these two
graphs is
the the dollar impact for like
the average taxpayer
you know around eight hundred
dollars for an individual that's
what was extended from twenty
seventeen so that's not even a
new impact that's just how
the cvo scores the the change in
law that they would have seen
and otherwise like an eight
hundred dollars increase to
their taxes for the average
taxpayer and instead they'll see
a zero zero dollar increase and
for some depending on the
industry that they work in and
how they were in their wages
make it in our hundred two
hundred dollars on top of that
for additional uh savings
because I like taxes on tips.
That's amounting to you know
basically less than a one
percent swing for most taxpayers
and a tremendous like long term
cost for the the federal
government I don't know how much
congress was in on you know how
big of a benefit this is or how
big of a cost that would have
been if it wouldn't have got
into place but the cpo.
Analysis indicates that it's
it's running about one percent
and at the tail and the topic
stream in the in the very bottom
policy can have a dramatic
impact on those households
income depending on their
ability to get cash transfers or
medicaid or if they lose it and
then at the high end
you know you know maybe the top
ten percent would benefit by on
average you know fifteen
thousand dollars in additional
tax revenue
the next slide
is an important one this was a
provision that was stuck in the
last morning when they passed it
they had discussed it over the
weekend but this is a medicaid
rural health transformation
program and basically some
senators negotiate getting fifty
billion dollars which is a lot
of money over five years which
kind of spreads that money out
but we're looking at a state of
getting at least a hundred
million dollars of that if not
we will get more feat there's a
hundred million dollars base
everybody gets some equal amount
per year for five years that's
going to be as discretionary
federal find similar to light
arpa so wanting to think about
is you have a supreme court
ruling saying that the
legislature can appropriate
discretionary federal revenue
even if the governor applies for
the grand their governor applied
for the arbor grant you
ultimately appropriate it as as
a legislature if there's any
since the urgency it would be
for you to start planning and
and potentially acting on that
sooner than later and and how
that allocation would happen
because the
application windows already open
that much guidance beyond with
the loss as we can use it for
which is pretty bride
but
the money might start flowing by
the industry december january
even before you come into the
session so that's something that
to consider you have set up a
rural.
A provider program a couple of
years ago you've loaded out
loaded it up with
well over hundred million
dollars
and will talk more about the
status of that later in my
presentation because honestly we
can't tell you how effective
that strategy's been but there's
a lot of money that hasn't been
spent from that already so the
timeline again on the next lane
this is the federal
cbo scoring again
this is against what's a
projected spending increase over
time so it's reducing spending
increases in a little bit
different than absolute
reductions to medicaid spending
there are definitely absolute
reductions to somebody if they
lose coverage or if the hospital
payments are getting cut ten
percent a year but we'll talk
about the impact of those slide
eight mister chairman
front loaded flooding states
with fifty billion dollars over
the next five years back loaded
the planned reductions in
spending increases where of the
trillion dollars nationally that
cbo is scoring as a savings
seven hundred and eighty million
of it comes twenty thirty and
later
so time to plan time to see if
things frankly change between
them and now there's a number of
different budget reconciliation
items that are designed to save
money and medicare that congress
is suspended every year for like
the last twenty five or thirty
years so that remains to be seen
I don't know if we're in the
same political environment
or not slightly we've been asked
by the the federal funds of
committee to start looking at an
economic analysis of the
shrinking you know what we think
will be well over a billion
dollars in in potential revenue
into mexico and we've estimated
that the full effects of that
will reduce employment by nine
thousand and reduced our gdp by.
Eight hundred and forty seven
million using that remedy model
that
I the legislature but
that is about one percent
reduction of both of them
one question could be wise at
least as much as the reductions
in medicaid spending and that's
because some of the money that
we put in in new mexico is
actually leaks out of new mexico
through our hospital system
through the mcos were not all of
the money that you're spending
on medicaid actually stays in
state in fact the new rate
increases that you authorized
through the hospitals to put out
the match explicitly says you
can take twenty five percent and
send it to you know your parent
corporation and not spend it in
the mexic.
The.
The next slide
you know
reductions in
rome are one of the biggest
items for potential reduce
spending and that will accrue
ninety percent to the federal
government for about body adults
that aren't choose not to work
for me to work requirements they
will potentially lose their
medicaid that's hta's estimating
upwards of ninety thousand new
mexicans keep in mind we just
coming out of the unwinding of
of covered reduced our medicate
rolls by two hundred thousand
today from the height of the the
pandemic the next art the
provider taxes these are really
specifically going to impact
hospitals not necessarily
primarily care physicians are
behavioral health clinics but
it's
these things called directed
payments that i'll get into
shortly that are really geared
towards hospitals exempted the
nursing home once
so they are not part of this
equation
the same thing for a provider
taxes they are limiting how much
a provider can put up as part of
the state match to help pay for
the money that would then come
back to them and
increased payments for medicaid.
There's other changes to
administrative processes of
having to sign up every six
months rather than twelve months
we think that will also decrease
the number of people on its it's
proven an effective measure in
the past for a controlling
environment during the budget
times but not nearly as speakers
that
the chip the savings that are
projected for their work
requirements where we'll talk
about the timelines for when
these things going to affect
because we lost I got time to
figure out maybe how to help
people get more gamefully
employed up skill and maybe
employed in industries that will
provide private insurance or
help them migrate off of
medicaid into the health
insurance exchange so just
because they may leave medicaid
and result in savings to the
federal government the state
there's time for us to figure
out how to make sure that they
can maintain health coverage in
other areas the slight eleven
gives you this is a I like this
slight alone because I kind of
give you an idea about when
things are actually going to
start hitting in most of them
are not in this nest in this
budget cycle which gives you if
you do anything coming in early
before the session it would be
start talking about what hta
needs to help plan and effective
transition for these policies
that will start rolling in you
know that the medicare provider
taxes are reduced ten percent
here but not starting till
twenty twenty eight and that's
over at ten year period.
So this is a little more detail
about directed payments in the
provider taxes.
Let's been happening is
historically medicaid would
allow states to come up with
supplemental hospital payment
systems outside of managed care
and so if a hospital had a
disproportionate number of
medicaid patience and medicaid
paid below what medicare was
paying you know the state could
come in and supplement that with
federal aid and we've had those
programs for many years
and then
with
the affordable care act the
federal government was committed
to covering millions more people
and so the federal government
said well if you have more
paying customers you should have
less uncompensated care we
shouldn't have these extra
payment systems outside of the
normal health care coverage.
And so they got rid of the
supplemental payment systems
including in new mexico but they
allowed states and encouraged
states including under the big
administration to make what are
called directed payments where
the state tells the mco how much
the the hospitals and this was
done in order to shore up the
health care system particularly
during that after covered in an
attempt to make sure like our
rural hospitals
could get rates that were more
commissioner at what commercial
payers were paying as opposed to
below what medicare was paying
and so the state took advantage
of that to sessions ago
and passed a bill that allows
the hospitals to basically put
up the state match and in some
cases double what they're
getting from medicaid as they
move into commercial rates those
rates increases have barely
started they barely started in
the late spring so the hospitals
of that felt the full effect of
all of this additional potential
revenue that they're going to
get there supposed to be some of
that money geared towards
improving staffing quality of
care and things like that but
again twenty five percent of
this money could for some
hospitals just seep out of the
community yeah immediately
that's getting started the other
is that states had limits on how
much they could have a provider
put up as the the state match
which in this case the house
bills are putting up a hundred
percent of that congress is
wanting to dial that back down
so that might as much federal
money flows back out through
this funding mechanism.
The cbo has been projecting that
states will continue to take
advantage of these kinds of
funding arrangements at a
greater rate over time
particularly they've seen it in
the expansion states where the
feds are paying ninety percent
of the cost first is like in our
state maybe seventy five versus
in california maybe they're
paying you know fifty five
percent and if california does
direct a payment they're
bringing in ninety percent well
that's a big outlay in federal
revenue going back into those
hospital systems so they are
ratcheting both of those back
there effective so the house
version has said no more
and we got grandfathered the
senate version said no more and
we're going to reduce how much
the hospitals can put up at a
match which they see as a way
just to get extra money and in
question the the president of
what it's going to be used for
but the directed payments get
frozen
and then they start reduced
being reduced by ten percent a
year starting in twenty twenty
eight so not in there the
current budget cycle that we're
about to begin
the
same thing for the provider
taxes and what the effect of the
provider tax will be as just the
hospitals can't bring it as much
match because they can't put up
as much match
so we've tried to start modeling
this out on the next on the next
page fourteen over a ten year
period
we got this includes all the
hospitals except for unam
hospital we used to complicated
hospital cost reports to
identify them their revenue
there are compensated care
amounts which have gone down
significantly as a result of the
affordable care act and then
modeled what what they were
going to get under the provider
rate increase and the provider
in the impact of the provider
taxes and you can see modest.
Reductions in terms of total
deductions a hundred ninety
million and starting FY twenty
eight
that ratchets up to one point
three billion by I have way
thirty four if you turn the
slight sixteen you can see
even at that reduced rate is
still significantly up that's
about eighteen percent above
what they were getting in FY
twenty four before these
enhanced payments went into
place and i'll be a reduction of
their total revenues of about
one point five percent a year
once they reach their peak and
fight twenty seven in twenty
eight in terms of like impact of
the entire states kind of
revenue individual hospitals
will have different swings
depending on how much revenue
they have
but that's what we're we're
modeling out of what that one
point three billion dollars
means over that period of time.
You and we have more work to do
in this area you and i'm
hospital they do receive
directed payments the health
care authority believes those
directed payments will be
a subject to the same kind of a
reductions as the the rest of
the hospitals
doesn't feel the the same way
right now and so we need to help
we need all reconcile between us
but
what I think our primary concern
should be is protecting the
significantly increased clinical
education training program that
medicate has been helping to
finance to produce more medical
professionals for all of our
community statewide so that may
be something else there we want
to think about advancing if you
do something before the session
is it's getting that kind of
information to you and a format
to to make decisions.
Work requirements basically will
need to start doing a lot of
planning there's not much the
plan about here because there's
no regulations out from the
federal government yet
and so you may be headed up my
agency saying I need to buy a
much it contractors and things
like that it's like they're not
going to be programming anything
until those federal eggs come
out and frankly there's going to
be significant competition and
price increases for it depending
on if they continue the practice
of funding those projects at
ninety percent federal phones
where we've dragged on for ten
more than ten years trying to
rebuild our medicaid information
system you know cost of just
ballooned
and all fifty states are going
to be building new independent
potential systems rather than
the federal government just
having a work requirement system
so that could get potentially
messy but you're i'm sure you're
going to get a big ask for that
as well as administrative cost
as well as for a blending new
staff to handle smaller frankly
work clothes that happens more
often
but planning money as an area
that was is worse discussing and
and considering.
Eligibility changes and slide
eighteen again doesn't go into
effect next year so half a
fiscal year impact on the budget
you've increased the income
support division budget lack
around forty three percent over
the tat last two cycles
including a bunch of staff
increases state supplementing
snap benefits and now we're
going to have to pay for snap
benefits as that sustainable to
continue that kind of
arrangement
here's the snap timeline again
if our error rates stay high
this is a present perverse
incentive we pay nothing for
snap benefits
you know FY thirty
if we make a conservative effort
to get those error rates down
and miss we pay a words of two
hundred million dollars that's a
real kind of budget buster
that's a kind of an unforeseen
thing if they
take a stability getting error
rates down to an acceptable
level we would pay nothing so
that the question is do you risk
gambling
that with the department that is
struggled with these for more
than a decade and has been under
a federal consent decree going
back to the early nineteen
nineties and not being able to
administer this program
correctly so a lot of unknown
when it comes to snap.
Federal framework options we
talked about this
not just automatically back
filling their
see some federal grants get
canceled like public television
that's not really easy thing to
throw into a growth process
that's just almost like do you
want to do it or not and do you
want to do that recurring basis
or maybe a for two years and see
what happens at the federal
level
other things where it's like an
actual government intervention
you know to help people find
employment or something you may
want to send it through process
and that's what the budget
guidelines that you just adopted
we would call for other options
for consideration on page twenty
one again
creative find to allow you to
appropriate those federal funds
that are going to be
discretionary coming to the
state.
Should we start planning to
subsidise maybe rural hospitals
through a hundred percent
general program once that money
runs out if we use it for that
purpose we've had a program like
that in the past the combined
with federal funds we
eliminated.
I compensated car at those
hospitals for their medium size
to small and most most of your
communities for less than
seventy million you know at
inflation to that you could be
looking at about a hundred
million dollars program decade
we can zero and on how much it
would take to eliminate a
compensated care in those places
the bigger ones I kind of
foresee as being able to manage
a one and a half percent revenue
change in a annual basis of
retain years through different
business activities
but your smaller ones like you
union counties and things like
that they may be it may be worth
looking into more detail about
that here's the health delivery
grants you've appropriate at a
hundred and seventy six million
already for these and these are
designed to basically subsidize
services and rural areas that
will lose money we don't know
what will happen after the money
runs out but that's the way the
program is designed sixty three
million has been spent as far
thirty four millions in the
pipeline there's another seventy
of nine million that's unspent
we've asked for more detail
about who got wet for what
purpose and what do we know
about results we haven't gotten
the level of detail that we
believe we need to give you the
information on whether this is a
a viable strategy to continue so
more work in that particular
area with the health care
authority to try to together
some of that information just
understand what we're what are
we buying with this that that's
far.
One thing we footed in our
summer internal conversations a
staff is should be advising to
port a plug on that health care
hospital program now before they
get feel the full effects of it
and redesign something new
there's two sides of that I mean
one that's a lot of money over
the next two years that were not
flow into the state before the
reductions to
is that gradual reduction over
time manageable.
Three with the federal
government through a kink and
any new program we designed
or changes if we came in and
said okay we just want to comply
on day one but we want to design
some other program where the
federal government really
participate in that they
wouldn't add about above a
hundred percent of medicare.
And so then are we going to
subsidize hospitals with a
hundred percent general find a
hundred percent of medicare i'm
not sure if that's even possible
from a billing standpoint
so that's a lot to choose happy
to answer any questions
we can
also set up another briefing if
that's the time for for more
questions and answers and I
would throw out one more thing
mister chairman that I fail to
do.
And that's our our budget
request for life see on table is
recommended for submission on
september first at flat with the
recognition that we would
continue to work with the
committee on do you want a flat
budget where we're going to
cannibalize spending and
contracts to pay for the new
really license cannibalized
salary and benefits for the big
rate increases we're going to
see in health care do you want
to do other things in terms of
support for the interim work in
the other cost can agree when it
comes to we've got time to do
that throughout the fall budget
discussions mister chairman
thank you very much directory
thank you for flag in that will
be in conversation as we go
through with the committee there
will go now though to questions
on the federal funds updates
firm with based chairman of them
down represent chat field
representative and we'll go from
there thank you
start off or we
were
for the lfc
but the church bells are ringing
for the local budget wreck if
our leadership is going to say
we want agencies to come in and
flat budgets and work and have
to play the same everybody's
enjoying this six year old five
year whatever many year increase
and so we're gonna have to leave
the way we want to leave in in
come in flat and show them
leadership that it's not only
the legislature or this
committee that that's going to
do it they have to kind of fall
online
the the biggest question to me
on the rural health care stuff.
We know that the federal
consensus seventy six million
correct I know we appropriate a
hundred seventy six million
right that's correct the first
will send us a minimum of of a
hundred
and so we should appropriate
that money
but if we have to go into a
special session for the real
health care fund right
private have some statutory
changes then we got it set the
fund up and and then the
executive can have the grant
rating the door your grants to
to give those toral hospitals
correct so mr chairman you
establish a fine you would
establish the parameters the
class established right
you have a few have a different
phone and if they were to
receive the federal funds in
coming from it with the state
hundred and seventy six that
you've already created that
finally just turns over the
appropriations authority to the
department you don't play a role
in
saying how it should be
allocated how much you go to
federally qualified health
centers for what purposes how
much you go to hospitals and how
do you find rural
so that would you be essentially
using that existing find and the
administration would take the
power of the person and
allocated
and so I that's something we
need to clarify then if we got a
create a completely separate
final and we got appropriate out
of there in the timeline do you
don't want to receive the
federal money
we think by the end of the
calendar year if not at the
beginning of january
so
we want to be ready for that
in then if that happened in
early on the session we didn't
put that in appropriations and
going to send the money out in
january we didn't that the rural
health care delivery fund
capping the twenty five percent
that should be qualified at that
flows out of state
warner costs a savings.
That if something that we should
I don't know what the number
should be
but if they're going to do
business in the mexico they the
march and stand it mexico and so
as a cost coding to that we need
to do that
mr chairman that raises the
out of the two edge sort of
trying to reduce trying to save
costs which we think the federal
government would be on our our
side in this current
administration it could be if we
go in and ask the change that
program that they just cancel
the whole thing and adds with
the departments telling us
they're worried about like don't
make any changes to it and so
then footside is what should we
repeal the whole thing and just
start planning something
different or is it really not
gonna hammer the hospitals as
bad as people think and just let
these letter what it right the
way that it's set up right now
knowing that you know seventy
five percent or twenty five
percent going to flow out of
state and most of that are
federal funds.
I I think we're gonna have some
really decision on that right
and it's going to be walking the
needle
while you're there we're talking
about the general changes the
snap program
we're waiting there's no use of
going ahead and playing the game
till twenty thirty in in trying
deal with ourselves a losing
card so until we get closer that
twenty twenty eight twenty
twenty nine deadline I don't
think we should touch now that
give us the past we are winning
leave it alone go down the road
and then as we get to that
timeline will go ahead and fix
that
it's interesting I can't think
of page my whole punch is right
and
notable reconciling change in
medicaid and state provider
taxes right
a patient revenue in there but
the reporting six hospitals
reporting and cut combining loss
of eighty eight million for the
year and
two or three years ago right we
bump them up with one time money
then bump them up for two year
money right and i'll tell you
the true story of we put a lot
of money to see in the gal
possible about thirty million
dollars to save that because
that was going to be the first
one the fall in this day
we gave him a made and shaped a
critical care hospital we gave
him additional money
and more money
and I will
we had to leave the emergency
room and unplug my wife leave
them and drive the grounds so
patient care hasn't improved
with money and
if i'm not interested if they're
not going to improve patient
care and get quality providers
and emergency room to save some
of these hospitals I stuck my
neck way way out
to put to put thirty million to
save them.
And nothing exchanged and so
when I got a load of my wife and
one in the morning and hollered
in grandson in drive sixty miles
and get the procedure done
it tells me that rural
healthcare hospitals are are not
getting providers and not
providing the quality service
and I don't know how we send
that message but if they're
successful that are reporting
the loss of eighty million I I
kind of call that bullshit
because we've given them enough
money it's a hundred twelve
million in one bill and and then
a bump up in the other providers
but III want to see who they are
see there see their providers I
want to see what quality of care
they have
because
i'll never go back to it
and bright and break my wife in
there she was under last
right because she knows what
care she's going to get to
brother risk what's going to
happen to her in the sixty mile
drive then go there and have the
quality of care that was so poor
and so
forth look into that at one of
those two hospitals I want other
quality care I don't know what
kind of providers they have what
kind of doctors they have or the
contract doctors are the
contract versus cause if we're
going to do this and and give up
more money
better have patient care and
they're having correct i'm care
of where you live tears it was
one of them santa rosa was one
of them clayton was one of them
hard surplus tales with one of
them
tell us with one of them right
so I want to see that quality of
care for going to do that but
that's that's something that
we're gonna have to do
on the medicaid.
I did some rough numbers on page
ten because I don't have late
and all the pensions of the
number as we as we've record as
we reconcile that going forward
right in twenty twenty six in
these are rough numbers in his
house for about sixteen million
twenty twenty eight hints from
that sixty thirty million
I just jumped over to twenty
five to twenty nine that totals
about two hundred and thirty
million
for those four years that's just
rough number
you look across the boarding is
okay if you do the medicate
trust fund and you have access
to it across the board right for
any need
whether it's real health care
providers or whatever if you had
a billion dollars in that
and we we say five percent
return but they're sure they had
eleven percent and you park that
money there even other three
year return you're heading your
bed out to twenty thirty
if you have a ten percent return
so that's a hundred million a
year right and so you're not
losing any money you're just
spending the returns to twenty
thirty for the next four years
and you still have the corporate
so the fun that something that
that you really can have to look
at pretty hard because otherwise
we can be spending money money
that's what have to invest in in
and keep and that's what those
legislature has done over the
last four to five years we've
taken a non recurring money and
turned it into reoccurring by
making investments in the state
we don't know what's going to
happen I don't know what's going
to happen the third word step
months intelligent
administration eight months
anything else could happen if we
can hear your best with parking
money investing money in
returning and having a return in
four years that we still have a
billion dollars with.
And that's the risk we want to
take in and see where we end up
I think this is a slow prices I
know the other committee i'm on
but I haven't been able to ten
is working on there and then as
we move forward should we look
in in center soldiers
I think their culture check
are you gonna have them look at
drafting
legislation or we can look at l
c o drafting legislation to see
how that moves for
the main recognition excellent
make recommendations but as
always recommendations in that
committee or kind of heard and
also try to start going to some
of those we should start
drafting legislation because you
know what happened is we got a
quick along the whole way before
we get there in in start doing
that the only other thing i'll
end up with this
you know public television is
good has a public radio station
that I represent in you know I
got to buy
tb to watch public television
but if we go down the slippery
slope of pack filling things
that the federal government took
away we're going to start seeing
every university come back and
say hey you gave public
television five I need because I
lost this grant saving the
lesser checking or whatever it
is or to do their study or to do
that study and then we're going
then we're going to be spending
a lot of money back feeling
little projects that are going
to cost us a lot in the end
instead of really saving what we
need to do for the future and
that's medicaid and staff
benefits in the things that
we're gonna have to prioritize
for people
as we move forward so it was
about that comment good thank
you very much
that we're going to go next to
representative.
Thank you mister chair and think
you turn
we never doubt it we have
limited health care dollars and
we want to put new mexico
citizens residents first
are you are doing any are you
tracking to see how much we're
spending for out of state night
nine citizens i'm i'm everybody
who lives in mexico prioritize
them first because we're paying
for non citizens
and we're also paying for out of
state people to travel to new
mexico for treatment for
sexually transmitted infections
transitioning minors and adults
were paying for that and we're
paying for abortions and other
family planning are we do we
know how much that's casting us
work i'm getting it legal
immigrants are barred from
public benefits for five years
any kind of public assistance
already people who are don't
have legal status or obviously
not eligible either except in
certain circumstances for
emergency care and the way that
they qualify for that has been
narrowed slightly in the fiscal
impact
very minimal compared to these
other numbers
and I would imagine those other
categories that you talked about
are are not going to rise to a
very large number for savings
either but we can work with the
department to see to identify
that well mr chair and director
I would hope that we can
prioritize new mexico seniors
say the rural hospitals are new
mexico residents and citizens
and priorities those vulnerable
citizens over people who come to
new mexico and get medicaid
mexico medicaid funded treatment
the other question that alright
it's more of a comment and I I
know this intimately for sera
county for many years donor
their smith put money into
serious hospitals to say that it
is a critical access hospital.
And some of the competing
just just like we see another
industry a federally designated
rural health care clinic opened
up even though the hospital had
one so the community didn't want
another
federal the federally funded
rural health care clinic to
compete with the one at the
hospital because we were
thinking about the lifespan and
they serve it and it's
population so I think we should
look at maybe
the community the school
district the hospital foundation
when this rural health clinic
the second one came was like
wait a minute the service the
hospital served lives beyond
they're doing primary they're
doing they have walk in services
and there are critical access
hospital but now they are
competing for services and maybe
the snitch might be school age
children will now the hospitals
not doing the physicals anymore
in the hospitals not doing those
vaccinations and a rural health
care clinic is doing the dental
screenings and the vision
screenings and we may have to
look at that because they come
to us for capitali all of those
groups come to as for capital
outlay and is one facility going
to be sufficient do you need a
consolidate though services we
are funding mobile units tell a
health like what can we do to
sustain services and in a lot of
these areas I believe i'm the
vice term as well coachers the
air ambulance are gone and so
maybe we have to go back and
look and say we may not this
hospital may not be sustainable
but maybe we should you know
bring back some of those are
ambulances so that someone with
critical need can be transported
to a provider that can keep
those services but I guess I
just want to make sure that we
are being strategic about this
and that rather than losing all
services maybe we strengthen and
support and consolidate some
services so that they can stay
in rural in mexico thank you
thank you very much for have
sent out.
We're gonna go now
to care
a problem
the question so
yes tracking is every day like
today not going to be fun
english language former services
because for english only country
that's
the dollar so if your stuff
actually every day seemed latest
hourly daily updates
yes it's it's kind of a wackable
because you see.
Announcements for things and the
press runs with the announcement
for like a presidential proposal
congress really drives the
appropriations process and
eliminating an entire program
may not be in the office they
haven't gotten to the education
budget yet so it's like in my
mind premature to be like the
sky is falling for that
particular program when we get
to the point of decision is
actually being made that's where
you all will want to be able to
react is that something that was
working that we want to just
keep all of the federal
regulations and back philip stay
or do we want like a new mexico
specific approach to address the
need maybe our bilingual program
is a better use of
an increase in funding as
opposed to the title three as an
example
we know that there is a deadline
for this year when the federal
government will make a final
decision
so that I mean
the governor's calling a special
session or not but if it's
called and then five thousand
more things happen it puts us
the risk you run if you've tried
to do that because there is a
lot of stuff that's influx this
fall that they're trying to jan
through wally while they feel
that can be for the reelection
cycle gears back up and congress
is notorious for the past twenty
years not being able to pass
them appropriations bills before
in the federal physical year
starts on october first they're
not on track in many areas to to
do that
this year and then you get into
the situation where you have
with call the continuing
resolution or it's like freeze
the budget
and then they come up with
things like pay go as part of it
a budget deal that we really
need at this time that we're
going to be serious about
deficits.
And you know it'll track
negotiations into january in
february and everybody at the
agencies and states are sitting
there like with this level of
uncertainty you can't can't do
anything so I predict that's
what will potentially be an
offer
thank you for that explanation
very helpful
great thank you very much
representative we have
representative that dickson and
themselves
will be as brief as possible
will wrap up and then we'll go
into public
thank you mister chairman I know
i'm a little bit out of my lane
here I don't serve on the out
the numerous services but i'm
just curious how many doctors do
we have in the state charles
student after
I don't know how many practicing
physicians we have off
but my staff doesn't we can get
that you do not do you know the
cast have met me all through a
physicians generally I I know
there's a range but
do you know the car still
medical malprice I don't have
those latest figures that we can
that's something I don't work
planned to try to get to you
most doctors are not independent
practition there is small
practice practitioners anymore
in some of those kind of bills
that you see it's a dwindling
pool of folks that are exposed
to them as opposed to large
practices or a hospital based
practices that you know the big
hospitals will be flooding you
know that growing cost of the
bill and mr chair and a trust I
do understand that that's how it
works at the hospitals in my
district presbyterian and holy
cross the hospitals picks up the
cost
but that's killed
and
and i'm just wondering
is it possible to hear some of
this money to half set those
costs for
for hospitals in this state
because you know and I talked a
hospital administrators it's
it's paying that.
Now that's that's killing
themselves just an idea and
again i'm totally out of my lane
so I have not get it belong but
it's it's just an idea I think I
think maybe we can help that way
that's how I have a strict thank
you very much.
Thank you chair thank you
for the report
just a couple of things that I
am
realizing the amount of agility
that the
generations from the federal
government is going to require a
bus and the agility that it's
going to be required all of our
government entities and
institutions from the state down
to the local level and i'm
wondering if
so I said i'm investment and
pensions or receipt and I am
wondering if the your point of
view on changing the statute to
allow for local government
entities to invest through the
third party clients would help
ease some of that those
generations and allow for local
governments to be more agile
they know that only
one a rated entities can invest
with the sixty with the state
investment council so i'm
wondering if you have a
perspective there if that would
help because at the time when
all of these changes hit the
state it's also around the same
time that we are revenues with
oil and gas begins a flatten out
and then decline so would love
to hear your perspective on
that.
I would say the media's
amplification of
decisions that haven't been made
as at a level that we may have
not experienced in previous
administrations and so I would
like the daily trumpy of this is
going to happen in the you know
the sky is going to fall here or
this is dramatic and then that's
feeding into obviously
preparation for the election
cycle and then it's being
amplified even more so I would
say folks shouldn't should try
not to get into the lack of all
kind of game and monitor and be
prepared for potential changes
and and like I said
the numbers that have been
thrown around once you spread
that out over ten years once you
spread that out it's you know
when percent change in people in
take home income as a result the
tax code changes one and a half
percent change in hospital
revenue over time you know is
that too much that do you can
you handle that in the normal
process it's kind of like a
question for us to have
discussions about it looks
really good you know you can say
we we cut medicaid by a trillion
dollars but not really until the
next decade so I mean both of
those things can be true and and
survive in a kind of an election
environment but it's causing all
of us
extra level of the exiting that
we've not experienced because of
this kind of like daily.
Reporting how the budget process
is going like think of think of
the albuquerque journal is
reporting on every day
you said something about the
medical budget represents duncan
said something else hf mexican
literature decision we know what
to get a change but that gets
reported as like a final thing
and people are like on the
ground thinking that this is
going to be really greater this
is going to be really bad and
that's kind of how we feel the
environment that we're in right
now.
Thank you
chair
thank you very much
will conclude it with
representatives
thank you mr chair i'll try to
be brief since I know we've got
folks waiting to speak as well
mister chair and director silly
I would really like
to
have staff help me understand
the
sort of the different costs and
benefits associated with
different types of investments
so if we are looking at.
You know two hundred and fifty
million dollars
what and that you know
potentially a ten percent return
for the five percent return
you know trust fund expenses
versus investments in economic
development and the resulting
tax revenue
I would I think just be
beneficial for me to have a
sense of
what are the
you know what do you get if you
do it this way and what do you
get if you do it that way in the
near term and long term if
that's possible I would really
appreciate it
great thank you very much
representatives and in directors
they I think it really goes what
uh many committee members what
we wanted sort of a as full of a
picture and the awareness of
timelines trade offs and tools
that we have to address very
good request and that goes as
the best ability to to work on
stuff okay directors thank you
very much thank you for the
exhaustive work think we've been
instead very well by you and
your excellent staff work
keeping track okay we're going
to go ahead and
go to public comment
there obviously a number of
folks were here thank you all
very much for being here
in terms of sort of subject
matter my sense is that
obviously we have a number of
educators who are here we have a
number of folks from the
southern part of the county and
perhaps other parts who want to
speak about water and other
practice land use decisions I
see that we have chief story
here
and from last christmas please
department are are you here to
make public comment as well
great just trying to give it up
in my mind and I I believe I see
mister mio right hundred meal.
Uh I assume more sort of early
childhood
space so what let's do this were
we're scheduled to wrap up at
five fifteen we can go a little
bit longer for the groups that
are here and again thank you for
being here for the sort of
similar subject areas i'll ask
for
you know three or four folks to
take a couple of minutes to some
rise for the group
and then be more than welling
since I i'm down here to take
extra time I think for the
committee will keep everybody a
little bit longer but we won't
be able to keep everybody for
two more hours basically
she story can I go ahead and ask
you to come up first then we'll
go ray and anybody else who's
here specifically around early
childhood education or I know
folks who have been here to
speak about water we'll go to
you next and then more we'll
make sure ask the educators as
well so
have seen during the session we
do two minutes we're going to
fight it will go to that mister
courtney i'll take the time
chief sorry thank you for being
here thank you for what you do
and over to you please thank you
for chairman members of the
committee i'll i'll keep a brief
in and my attention is for to be
positive comments instead of me
always asking for something
maybe ask you for your estimate
changes but when it comes to
recruitment every tension we've
seen those travels and law
enforcement especially in the
past five years it has become
much more difficult to recruit
and retain officers and the
legilator is made significant
investments especially
financially in recruitment and
retention and I just want it yet
maybe some success stores about
how that money is helped us and
in speaking with that it keeps
many other departments with them
the state
I have twenty six after right
out of one hundred eighty one
that are eligible to retire and
i've had some over the past few
years that it made a decision to
retire which is a good reason to
leave as opposed to some others
but many of them have not
retired because of the money
that was provided by the lights
later that we are able to use to
can incentivise in this day
another year in another year.
And so we just ran out of the
third year of the original law
force me to recruit any
retention fine which were able
to use to keep people three
years longer than they planned
on that's very good for us I
would have hundred eighty one
out of two hundred and twenty
off like instead of twenty six
year eligible retired so the
longer I keep them the better
and that's also good repairer
because a number reading so
thank you for that that's meant
I would say the the current
iteration of law enforcement
recruitment retention is not a
successful just the way it's
structured
and so if there's one thing I
would ask words attempt to
revisit the original way it was
done maybe with some additional
parameters but it was very
successful for us and it is
appreciated thank you mister
chairman members of the coming
thank you very much story mister
how many of one by true and then
is anybody else here
specifically around early
childhood education
okay great well ask you to come
up after mr automatic and then
we'll go to the folks in the
front row around
me
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is right how to be hill and i'm
an early chat educator in the
owner and director of a
nationally credited fights our
focus center in last crucials
recently I emailed all of you my
concerns about the early
children and education
department to push to administer
the minister executive function
scale additional assessment on
an ipads to three and four year
olds and I hope you had a chance
to review that those concerns
but let me share with this looks
like in real life today a three
year old ran up to me probably
claiming mister rate mister ray
I have two foots two foots I
said me too he said on monday on
the on monday that seemed child
told me all about his new tooth
brushed in how he brushes his
tooth now course the correct
words are feet and teeth but by
test standards he's wrong but is
he really he's demonstrated and
incredible developmental leap
learning and adding and asked
makes the world a word plaral
that's a language the balance
but I patest he would be labeled
as.
Under performing here's another
example of high school exam once
asked how do you measure a
height of a building using a
barometer once student followed
the teachers for me like that
correct answer the second one
went up to the top dropped it
using physics the answer was
marked wrong still got the
correct answer but a third set
i'd walk into the building
manager and ask out holidays and
in exchange i'd give them the
barometer still the wrong answer
now I ask you who would you hire
the one that followed the
formula that one who showed
creativity and problem solving
from the mess training I
attended this last week i'll
quote directly from their slides
quote scores do not tell us why
a child may be performing below
average yeah we all know the
same scores are going to be
handed to you to open a
misleading picture it also they
also said something about
the also train us on what to do
for a priest is being funny
bearing this test let me tell
you fine and kind of is actually
the foundation of our day are we
doing something just to check a
box
eccd leadership has said that
test was created and responsible
legislative finance communities
twenty twenty five calling for
more consistent and objective
data across programs but let's
be honest more data isn't
automatically mean better
outcomes and when the data is
collected through the
development interpret tool in
responding children more than
helping them this is a moment
that costs for courage and
clarity we must reject the false
promises that more data equals
better outcomes especially when
it comes to the expensive and
the choice of children stick the
beginning learning thank you
thank you very much.
Good afternoon with the chairman
and members at the legislative
committee my name is is they
never managed to serve as a
picky coordinator for the
children's guard and development
thing and he didn't become
behalf of the dedicated early
chat that educators are formed
that foundation of new mexico's
child cares system challenges
not just supported as the point
service is credit it is a
critical infrastructure for many
earth it has responded to
community meat and allowed
families to work contribute to
the economy and raised
threatening children this system
access today because of the
commitment and passion of the
people who care for an educator
younger citizens every day while
we put up with the launching
call of elevating and
professionalizing our work for
its essential that we pursue
this goal with both equity and
economic pack practicality
requiring our teachers to other
cards to be without flexible
alternatives with ignoring the
realities of the work for as we
currently depend on many of our
educators are all the adults
with decades of hands on expand
others are single bothers
balancing family
responsibilities or a spanish
language speakers who have been
valuable cultural and
linguistics strength into the
classroom from any of them are
sent into green and it could be
an impossible hurdle one that
would push them out of the field
and attempt to ask your
providers across the state or
are already facing chronic
staffing shortages instead of
one face fits our approach I
urge this committee to invest in
flexible cost effective
solutions that the purpose work
for development and retention
they think the little competency
based training which measures
that ridiculous no and can do
regardless of how they gain the
knowledge stackable credentials
which allow educators to build
qualifications over time without
a pausing their careers and a
registered advantage to which
after paid on the job training
while addressing the wage gaps
that often force talented
individuals to leave the
profession these strategies
honor lived experience promote
long term professional brother
and enter their children and
families continue to receive
this.
Stable high quality care the
desert above all we must invest
in the work respect patience and
practice value the teacher of
health care new mexico and our
economy depends on when those
who carried this system for
generations but answer pulling
them as they take next next
steps in their professional
adjourney thank you for your
time your leadership when you
can tech the moment to new
mexico's families and early
educators thank you very much
okay now can we ask
from and you can come on at a
time please come up
and thank you for getting here a
little bit earlier today.
Good afternoon mr chair and
committee my name is easy modern
director of the empire of
congress and we are eat
initiative that was straightened
back in two thousand and eleven
to serve the call on your
communities here in delay and a
county and as you all may or may
not know those areas are
certainly distant franchise and
underserved
residential areas of the
southern part of the state so if
you don't know about them and
you actually
took a tour yesterday
but maybe didn't go through
something that is the community
itself
but what we're really heard
about to speak about is that
that community
and those communities are
particularly like the center
under served into same franchise
for many years and we just
caution this committee in terms
of all kind of thing for a
project that is assisted fills
half baked we are waiting for
more information
it feels like a background your
background deals and it's really
going to exploit our lines it's
getting exploit or people it's
going to exploit our water and
we think that in mexicans just
are better so it appreciate your
attention to the matter
thank you very much and think
you also for.
Good afternoon mr chairman the
members of the committee my name
is case you have then i'm a
resident of last christmas as
well as an attorney with the new
mexico new mexico environmental
last century
we heard today that there was a
real need to mount the ground
water in the mexico then we
don't know how much water we
have left in new mexico
and it's a serious question that
comes forward when we say how
much would we have and how much
is the left for a residency
drink we have a community up
north and edgewood new mexico
that has not had water in their
homes to show to drink to run
their water since june because
the ground water across her is
run dry we're looking at the
same situation across new mexico
as we move forward and so I
think there is a real issue that
comes forward when we look at
allocating fines and investing
in projects right in the water
supply for more it's coming half
baked as my colleagues say
there's real questions yes
design institution may provide
more water but there's also a
question in play of how much
emissions is that going to cause
how much of that thirty percent
of toxic we swatter is going
back in the ground it doesn't
just have operate what is the
cost back on community members
that live here and someone park
in senator racer and don't
account me how much is that
going to cost them for
electricity for their water
bills there's a real thing that
stayed here and there's not
going to be a silver bullet a
quick fx to the water crisis
here new mexico so we just
invite you guys to slow down get
all the facts before making any
sort of investment and
commitment only mexico's water
and mexico's limited funds thank
you
thank you very much
great.
The.
Yeah yeah we're we're going to
continue we have and we have
educated so
now who's here to speak about
education or who were here
educators to speak great okay
can we ask three or four folks
maybe that start with three if
that's alright
to speak to do the two minutes
and then will go onto other
topics.
Absolutely there
let's do the education peace
because you they got here sort
of in mass and then and if you
would just stay talking and will
go to you
thank you.
Good afternoon chairman smaller
members of the committee my name
is july white co and I am the
last crucial president I have
one of the k twelve teachers
here to speak we also have a
mess to you any lcps is one of
the few districts in new mexico
that already has eighty twenty
health insurance coverage I want
to thank you for prioritizing
affordable health care for
educators expanding eighty
twenty coverage statewide will
be life changing for many
educators and their families
ensuring that no teacher has to
choose between paying for their
health care and staying in the
classroom at the same time I
need to show the perspective of
districts like mine where the
district not the state absorbs
the cost of that eighty percent
coverage this is a huge
financial burden on the local
district budget the money we
spend to maintain eighty twenty
coverage is many that could
otherwise go toward lowering
class sizes hiring more teachers
expanding programs for our
students and addressing critical
needs in our schools are
district strongly believes and
supporting educators but we
cannot continue to shoulder this
level of cost alone thank you
for your time and for your
commitment to supporting new
mexico's educators and students
thank you very much.
Okay two more folks
not yet please go.
Good afternoon small legislative
committee my name is brandy
snyder I this is my thirty ninth
year teaching and mine is a
testimonial I am back at the
school that I had
got cancer at thirteen years ago
the entire staff female staff
got cancer we were already to
lose our house I had to google
my mother asked that I believe
the school district I came up to
an assume to teach for hopefully
rest and we were still about to
look at the house I googled
where I can earn money so I
didn't lose my house I had to go
to up with abbey for two years
and teach it was amazing but I
had to leave my whole family
here I couldn't return until the
summer to see my family we are
having medical issues again
because we're taking terrible to
relatives I realize everything
that you are going through and I
appreciate it this is my home
this is my state I have top
pretty much all over the country
and the medical is pretty bad
here i'm very thankful that our
district got eighty twenty but
i'm also not petty enough to
know that the rest of the state
meets it as well this was
horrible I don't have enough
therapist to go over with
everything i've done eighty
twentieth and amazing but I have
worked in states where I got a
lot we were told it that many
people first responded then we
were all first responders during
covered and then once covered in
that we were not a longer first
responders I have had full
medical in many states that i've
targeted I would be I had full
medical in the foreign country
and I understand the pressure is
the water but the teachers in
the classroom were the ones that
might help you solve the water
problems so i've all of these
things but when we have to give
our classroom for two years so
we can pay off medical bills and
still paying actually I just
gotten paid down I I don't have
a lot more because I start
thinking about it and I get
upset thank you so much for your
time and they realize that
you're staying late for all of
this.
And I want everybody else to be
able to speak so thank you thank
you very much
okay please come on up and then
more good to.
Good afternoon my name is garcia
and i'm a professor at the
community college this is my
twenty fourth year is an
educator and i'm also founding a
member of the miss you any a
which is the faculty union
i'd like to call on mse members
in the audience today to please
raise your hands
we are a new union we formed
last summer we've been working
hard at marketing our first
contract and one of the issues
that was brought forth by our
faculty was the need to invest
in an eighty twenty premium
caution model for higher
educators it was approved for
all other educators in the state
not higher at the that's
problematic for a number of
reasons I want to read you a
quote from one of our faculty it
is long seemed that health
insurance bumps involved shortly
on the heels of any salary
increases thereby melifying the
increases drug coverage seems to
be such that at least once a
year I have to ask my pcp to
suggest a different medication
because the cost of something
i'd been using had suddenly gone
up as much as ten times another
item were bargaining at the
moment and are concerned about
is compensation
and investing in meaningful
salary increases for faculty and
staff of new mexico colleges new
cities
according according to our facts
we are as a state rank third in
the us for spending on higher
education but we rang thirty
eight in the us for fact the
salaries as a community card
back at the lower thing back I
am a need of last cruise in a
message and a life long learner
and educator who comes from a
long line of educators this is
my home I value it I value this
institution.
And I hope that you'll take into
consideration how important it
is to retain strong capable
faculty to lead people forward
into our new mexico economy
thank you great thank you very
much and thank you everybody
animals
okay if you would write your
hand if you came here to comment
on things that haven't
okay then we'll ask you to go
ahead come on up and just two
minutes members we're gonna wrap
at five thirty just a quick note
before we start the two minutes
we won't be coming back here
tomorrow morning will be at a
different location very close by
so go ahead and take everything
that you want to grab staff will
take care of the networks but
anything that you want to take
please
we want to have the binders
tomorrow so if there's anything
from the bingo
please go ahead and take it
and the bus for dinner will be
back
okay thank you so much good
evening to her small members of
the community thank you for
being here for staying late for
the opportunity to speak my
name's in a call from myer I
live here in this cruises i've
lived here for seventeen years
and I hope you got to see our
beautiful organ mountains
they're spectacular and they
they might be a little obscured
by clouds but in the spring area
obscured by dust they are often
obscured and increasing number
of days by smoke from wildfires
my sense is a breathing
specialist he's and he's a
started his senior first and a
mess you classes today but he's
seen everything specialists from
a young age and the cost of
health care m
and art in action on climate is
casting us in terms of health
care in terms of are energy
bills are our friends and rudo
so are paying the cost with with
property property damage and and
much worse i'm our friends and
silver city aren't unable to
ensure they're homes
with with non rental.
Not road at all rates in the
state skyrocketing so i'm asking
you i'm calling I knew today to
pass comprehensive climate
legislation like the clear
horizons act the clear horizons
act would catify the governors
commitments you reduce climate
pollution and
it would give us a path forward
for a healthy and prosperous new
mexico for my sign and and all
of our children and for a
generations of new mexicans to
come thank you so much for your
time thank you very much
to mark and please come out
yesterday
i'm here to talk about climate.
I hope you can see this
hello my name is hamilton i'm a
thirty year resident of less
crucials i'm retired from in a
machine
returned and a mission professor
in the college of egg and i'm an
active volunteer for the last
five years with the city of last
crucial sustainability office
where we are working to retro
fit low income houses to all
electric homes
i'm also part of the core group
that a couple years ago had this
conference venture center a
community wide advantage called
plug didn't for good which was
all about electrical appliances
these are my grandsons I walk in
the parks with them I go in the
forecist gap and control over
the environment with them and to
teach them about the environment
and about nature i'm trying to
teach them and appreciation for
their
for their nature and what I
fulfills them and in there homes
and work places in schools and
i'm trying to introduce them to
the idea that
there is a threat
going on with climate and that
as new mexicans they are being
influenced by those threats the
eight year old keeps asking me
what we waiting for to reverse
climate change I think that's
pretty intelligent for an eight
year old so today i'm here to
ask his question of you what are
we doing in new mexico to
address climate change in a
comprehensive manner climate
change has already created
thousands of part chips for new
mexicans and we have the
capacity
if we only have the will.
To lead the way in this country
because we have some of the best
national labs best military
based researchers best
please conclude excuse me two
minutes right but please
conclude your thought
that we have the space port we
have all kinds of resources in
this town and then I mean in
this state to address climate
change we can do it together we
have willing people we have
willing businesses we have a
tremendous legislature with the
leadership of the governor thank
you very much okay please come
on up and we'll conclude.
Terry small committee members my
name is christine darbin I was
born in reason anything in
mexico and I will be graduating
this year from mse with my
masters and public house i'm
here to talk to you about how
tremendous the cost of climate
changes extreme heat and wire
scarcity are killing our most
vulnerable every single summer
our elders our farm workers
threatening our livelihoods
stiffly our local agriculture
the alternate wet season has
repeatedly believed chile onion
sarah purpose it's leading to
lost reaches flooding and water
contimination when I grew up in
anthony I didn't have clean
water
for fastest was not safe to
drink and the the river was
always dry so I genuinely
thought as a child that water
came from the store I didn't
know it came from the earth that
we had oceans I don't know where
modern came from clean water you
had to buy and I hate that
future for the children opening
mexico I don't want that for
them extractive industries in
our region are pleading our air
and checking wells and her
region have let your dramatic
increase almost two hundred
small scale earthquakes under
historically completely inactive
following we are medically
underserved community with
childhood as much works and by
just storms and he stroke him on
far workers who are denied the
basics of water breast and shade
and these are the hands that per
food on all of your tables
please invest in our health and
the sustainable local economy
this is our home in the cost of
an action is what you're great
thank you so much thank you very
much
okay members thank you for
taking an extra time
we're gonna turn for today I
want to think everybody who came
in the audience and who's tuned
and thank you very much in the
staff works very hard to make
these meetings accessible our
ability and you participating in
public comment in staying
connected is very important and
we very much appreciate that.
And of course all of this will
be archived the meeting
materials as well as the meeting
itself will be online and we
look forward to staying
connected okay numbers yeah
we'll wrap up there's a bus for
