K i'm gonna call the meeting to
order
so welcome everyone to another
addition of the legislative
health and human services
committee we have a scant crew
now we have piece from more
folks there as usual there will
be in and out so we'll start
with introduction so we'll start
to my right.
The.
It's like all the way to your
right or just your rate not your
rate rate good morning everyone
my name is representative
marianna and I represent how
sustrict eighteen which is an
all the kirky it is there you
and am not hell area glad to be
here
good morning everyone i'm a
representative joanne ferrari
from house just thirty seven
which is kind of the northeast
part of last crucis and a proud
aggie and are my sons both when
representative heard in.
Thank you madame chair and good
morning everybody i'm
representative pamilla herned in
from the dynamic energetic house
district twenty eight well we're
all working together to make new
mexico the best place to leave.
You win the award for mary
sunshine this morning.
Good morning everyone i'm
represented of terra luhan I
represent house district forty
eight which is in the capital
city
and i'm happy to be here again
this is been a a frequent visit
for me and have family and
friends here my son was an
eighty so happy to be here thank
you
center do you want to introduce
the the team
sure thank you madame share so
i'm zanderdarson from the
legislative council service I
also joining us from the
legislative council service we
have andrea lazaro and grace
while the ramos and then we have
from the legislative finance
committee if we have ruby and
asking bill and then alma casin
oh and sorry we also have leo is
the webcasting
so om are you knew welcome
welcome this this is the most
fun committee for sure yeah yeah
okay sounds good so i'm
representative list thompson my
district is twenty four which is
the northeast tights of
albuquerque i'm not quite as
cheerleader he has
representative heard in but I
have uptown and win rock so i'm
the shopping capital of the
state a data so with that
first I want to think a new max
almost said you would have
that new mexico state for
hosting as this is always a
lovely facility and and the food
is fabulous and there's lots of
it so if you're in the audience
and haven't gotten some please
feel free and go ahead.
Thank you manager
good morning distinguished
members of the committee my name
is marlet i'm privileged to
serve as the dean of the college
of health education and social
transformation here at new
mexico state university i'm
joined this morning by my
colleague doctor alexa doyker
serves as director of the school
of nursing uh we have a
presentation that that were
excited to present to you all
this morning i'll be kicking us
off with an overview of our
college shearing some
information about our academic
programs as well as our clinics
experience to learning and
research and outreach units in
the college and and certainly
highlighting some foundational
prayerities that drive our work
and teaching research and and
community engagement most
notably promoting a mental
health and wildness and then
i'll hand things over to doctor
doyk who will dive in with the
comprehensive update from the
school of nursing with their
work in an addressing mental
health and work for shortages
across the state so with that
go ahead and begin the college
of his serves the state and the
region by driving innovation
excellence and work forced
development in the fields of
health care sciences allied
health education and social
services we provide hands on
learning experiences and
experiencial apprenticeships
were students apply theory and
practice and learning by doing
in the field we are still a a
young college as colleges go we
were formed in july twenty
twenty one when we merged the
two colleges at the college of
health and human services with
the college of education
and and at the top of our list
is is really too embody the
landground mission for the state
of new mexico which is to
provide innovation research
teaching service and community
engagement that serves the
people at the state end of the
region
we're proud of the foundation of
through lines that really serve
as a foundation for a work in
the college again most notably
those being mental health and
wellness up social emotional
learning trauma and foreign
practices and transdisciplinary
interactions at.
Through our academic programs
and our research centers as well
uhm.
What one thing that I wanted to
point out is as we are new
college were also the second
largest college on campus just
behind arts and sciences now
and you know we have some really
strong numbers to report for
fall twenty twenty five um
enrollment as up nearly across
the board and our license
relating a credit programs where
we're preparing work force I
development and and preparing
practitioners and leaders to go
out into the state and impact
other fields available health
health care science as education
source of services etc
I wanted to share to this point
that we have hired a seven
faculty on the endowments that
that were very grateful for from
the state and we have two more
searches in the works that that
will be putting together which
will give us a total of nine
faculty there was a one point oh
faculty higher since fy twenty
three um and and we're certainly
grateful for that that support
that helps serve our mission
that helps impact students that
helps keep students in the
mexico and and that's what
obviously we're here for
in addition to the the one point
our fte higher as we've also
been able to hire a plethora of
adjuncts uh who we've needed to
assign to additional sections as
our numbers have grown so so
certainly a grateful for the
support from the state
particularly on the endowment
side and those key areas of
social work in nursing and
education
are academic units are
illustrate that sense of inner
disciplinarity ranging from the
fields of health care and human
services to social sciences
humanities and education we
obviously want a priorities
student success and social
mobility for students targeting
new mexicans academic success
career tradery work force
preparation and economic
development we want to insure
that all students have an over a
bundle itself support to help
them succeed to mse and as I
mentioned you know heston roman
is up nearly across the board
some key areas our social work
can ecology which more and more
as serving students across
campus who are in the premet
pathway with their with their
academic.
Are goals and also nursing and
and teacher education are are up
in key areas as well
so those are some very exciting
uh kinds of pits of information
to share the gaps between some
of these disappoints may seem
daunting at first but one of the
things we pride ourselves on in
the colleges to really cohe here
around those poundational
through lines at the top of the
less being mental health and
wildness and you can see that
illustrated and the research
that are faculty engaging which
is very collaborative engaging
with professionals on campus and
beyond as well as our academic
programs where we're
increasingly trustlisting
research sequence courses and
really trying to be more
interdisplanary in the way that
which we offer academic programs
complementing our academic
programming at the undergraduate
masters and doctoral levels has
does also support numerous
clinics experiencial learning
and research and outreach units
ranging from some of our
signature connects like the
adgress at speech and hearing
center and the autism diagnostic
center
were were really devoted to to
making sure that students have
authentic learning experiences
both in the classroom and out in
practical spaces as well in
addition to the clinics you know
we we want to highlight also our
preschool programming serving
I believe were up to thirteen
different sites throughout
southern new mexico and donate
county so on here on campus and
then on down highway twenty
eight into someone park where
we're really serving in a
hundred hundred of kids and
families throughout the region
were very excited about that
work we do boast a wider anger
of experiencial hands on
opportunities for students again
through our credited license or
leading clinical apprenticeships
as well as just trying to get
students out into their fields
as as quickly as possible you
know when when they become
aggies we want to make sure that
that they understand what's
what's waiting for them out in
the professional field and the
sooner we can get those hands on
experiences the better.
Um hastes is really again all
together kind of working towards
economic development work force
impact social mobility and we
really pride ourselves on the
ritz partnerships that we have
with industry uh agencies and
community entities throughout
the region.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to offer a brief
overview of our college i'm
going to go ahead and turn
things over it's a doctor doing
director of the school of
nursing
or thank you demorlet and
welcome we're so happy to have
you here at nine madame chair
and other members of the
committee out it's always a
exciting for us to be able to
present on our programs that are
really impacting both our local
community and the whole state so
I was let me get the right
button here I was at to talk a
little bit about our mental
health programs as part of a
school of nursing update and so
i'd like to start by talking a
little bit about our psychiatric
mental health nurse practitioner
program here at nmsu and this is
really are the primary program
that is educating and training
metal health practitioners who
have independent scope of
practice within new mexico
and so are a nurse practitioner
programs are are a doctor of
nursing practice degree I I keep
saying this is a new degree but
it is now over twenty years old
this is a a clinical doctorate
and all of owners practitioner
programs are at this level it's
a three or program full time
three semesters a year so nine
semesters and.
Our psychiatric mental
healthness practitioner program
but also a family note practice
your program are offered through
distance education and we made a
conscious decision to deliver
these programs in this way in
this delivery method so that we
could allow nurses throughout
the state especially rural
regions of the state to become
practitioner well remaining at
home in place it really
criticals very difficult add to
have
to relocate for three years if
you have a family and jobs in
your local community and we want
people to be educated and
trained in that community and so
are distance education programs
allow that are classes are
delivered through either east
and christmas or synchronous
courses the date active courses
with our faculty and then the
students do their clinical
training in their region or
their state and we help them
find preceptors so that they can
do their thousand hours of of
clinical training that's
required for this program
we also offer in addition to the
three year dnp degree we offer a
post graduate certificate
program and this is a program
that allows other nurse
practitioners for example a
family nurse practitioner to
complete an eating credit one
your program
that they can sit for the
psychiatric mental health nurse
practitioner certification and
i'll talk a little bit more
about our initiatives are around
dual nurse practitioner
certification a little later
this program has really taken
off especially during and post
covered and so it's something
that we're really trying to
amplify and really enhance
within our our school
are other ways of in addition to
graduating nurse practitioners
who have a very independent
score for practice as i'm sure
you all know are in in the state
of new mexico we thank you for
that are owner's practice act is
I think one of the strongest in
the countries and allows nurse
practitioners to.
To practice
to the full extent of their
education and training
are we require that our dmp
students also do a quality
improvement or sometimes a
health policy project you'll
actually I I think one of our
idea peace students is going to
speak this afternoon about one
of her rural health initiatives
as a as just a public speaker
but we have our students do a
quality improvement project you
and the psychiatric mental
health practitioner students
have to do something related to
uh health care delivery around
mental in behavioral health and
so those projects have a really
important impact
on either a health care
organization a clinic
governmental agency and really
helps create some sustained
sustainable changes within that
and and so we work we're really
are proud of these projects
and then we do encourage our
students of course the ones who
are in rural areas will do
almost all of their rotations in
their home towns or their home
communities but we also
encourage our other students we
have students and albert
curriculum sound a fee to try to
get some experiences with in
rural health care and especially
with underserved populations.
Own romant dnp psychiatric
mental health practitioner
program is kind of it's it's
it's probably our smaller
program and the reason why I
think is because when.
Nurses graduate most of them are
thinking about you the ice u
emergency rooms kind of those
exciting you know
areas of nursing where they can
practice and in some cases it
takes several or many years of
practice to really recognize the
need for mental health
practition or practitioners or
mental health care providers but
also having them a truty to and
the confidence be to be able to
go in this field it is a very
difficult and challenging field
and so
I graduate rates dropped a
little bit or enrollment
graduate rates dropped a little
bit post covered but it's really
starting to build as you can see
on the left hand bar graph and
are are in roment is just
continuing to write to a grow
again I think postcode people
really saw especially nurses are
a real need for mental health
care providers and need they
recognize that they can fill
that gap and so are current
enrollment in across our danpean
are are certificate program is
over fifty right now and we it
it kind of varies from year to
year but but you generally about
fifty percent of our psychiatric
mental health there's
practitioner students are from
new mexico and all of our
recruitment efforts are truly
within the state
you know that that is really our
goal is to continue to
educate trainers practitioners
in the state and for the state.
We have a
initiative and it's it's new ish
but it really is growing it's
about all around integrated
health care and really
integrated primary care and then
mental in behavioral health and
really recognizing that the
majority of mental health care
in the country occurs within
primary care settings and so we
want to make sure that orners
practitioners both are familiar
with practitioners in our sike
and peas are really trained to
bland both physical health
issues and the care of of mental
behavioral health issues and so
all of our students do get some
training kind of cross training
in a way our family nurse
practitioners do a fair amount
of.
Training and a education in
mental health that's part of
primary care but also vice versa
we are post graduated
certificate program that I
talked about is really part of
this effort it allows we've had
family nurse practitioners but
also certifieders midwise even
nursinessitis come to a
psychiatric mental health
practitioner certificate program
that's the one your program
obtain that second certification
and now they become there
they're certified to be able to
provide that
medical physical care and also
the mental health care as well
too all of our students take
this integrated primary
indicated careful diverse
population then it's of course
it really blends an helps
amplified the
the connection between physical
health and mental health and
then how to deliver this more
into great of care approach this
is an initiative that were
really focusing on this year
really try to build visibility
for the need but also for our
programs and our guard goal is
to increase the number of
dispractitioners in new mexico
who are dual certified with that
psych and p certification are we
just hired an a new faculty
member on the second endowment
that we received from the state
and again I am these endowments
have.
Really
bin I think it's such an
innovative way to provide
sustained and sustainable
funding for faculty positions in
these needed areas and sorry
latest higher is a dual
certified nurse practitioner are
her name is blischer king she
has been a she actually graduate
graduate about our fmp and are
say can be program she has
worked in rural areas for a
number of years she is from last
cruises so she has come back
home and she is going to come on
board and really help us lead
those initiatives there is an
article that I wrote and
published in the last cruises
sun news and if you just google
that title it'll pop up and it's
a really great story about her
experiences as a dual certified
nurse practitioner and what she
feels is really the strength of
this kind of certification
especially in new mexico and
especially in rural areas and so
our initiatives are really too
trade is streamlined are dual
certification program we don't
sell so that someone can come in
and they can work on becoming a
dual certified nurse
practitioner and really to
increase the number of training
sites one of the barriers that
to integrate providing
integrated health care is a
number a lot of agencies and
healthcare organizations they
want their nurse practitioners
to practice in one area so
primary care or mental health
felicia had the experience that
her one clinic that she was
heard to
practice in wanted her to
practice only in primary care
and she had to sign a contract
saying that she would not
provide mental health care.
So that's something that we
would love to work with you on
is to really try to help
organizations understand that
there is value and incredible
benefit to be able to provide
and bill for mental health care
services with in primary care
settings
I think the billing piece of it
was probably they couldn't
figure out how that was going to
work for them but I think that
that would be an amazing policy
initiative for us to think about
um as we move into an area well
we are in a provider shortage um
and we have been for a long time
and with for the foreseeable
future and so this is definitely
one way that we can try to
address some of the new mexico's
mental health care shortages we
will continue to apply for some
federal funding for mental
health care and we did have a
grant that we applied through
itself through her set for to
support this dual certification
initiative and we can really
close to obtaining it but didn't
make the cut so as soon as if
that comes up again we will go
ahead and apply and revise and
hopefully obtain funding for
this program although we're
moving ahead whether or not we
have we have federal funding and
then like I said the last point
there is to promote dual
certification role to all of
these organizations and to our
peers we have a pretty close
relationship with blue cross
blue shield of new mexico and so
working with some of those uh
insurance companies as well will
be critical.
All of our students are trained
in tell a health care whether
it's tell a health or telemental
health and obviously very
critical for rural access to
psychiatric services and the one
good thing about coverage is it
really open the door for a
flexibility and ability to
provide
teller health services so all of
our students do have some kind
of practice intelligent mental
health it could be within a
clinic that offers telehealth
services and then we're also
looking at.
Umm some contracts with with
telehealth companies who are
really interested in educating
and training our students with
with qualified providers and
providing them with that
experience we train them in our
directive courses on the
principles of practice of
telehealth delivery and
and again yeah so we're we're
really we've been doing this for
a long time and training our
students in this area for a long
time but we want to really try
to really promote the clinical
training piece of this as we
move into the next couple years.
We have had some success with
federal funding in the past
about five years and just a
highlight some of our programs
cause they really have had a
sustained impact on our nurse
practitioner education and
training the first large grant
that we obtained was a a
hersegrant was the opinion work
for us in
education programmer or web is
what they call it and are goal
was to try to integrate and
expand education and training
around substance use disorder
and operate use disorder in our
program and this was a three
year grant that provided a a lot
of great support I think our
students received.
Twenty to twenty six thousand
dollars per year of statement
support while they were in this
the psychiatric mental health
practitioner program and we were
also able to support a social
work students as well too so
this wasn't interdisciplinary
grant and that was really
critical are it allowed students
are to either reduce their work
while they were training and or
even stop work for a period of
time where they well they were
doing their clinical training we
established sixty four new
clinical training sites in new
mexico that focused on either
behavioral health and in most
cases substance use disorder and
so that was a we had one person
to voted to that effort over
those three years at twelve of
those sites I were allowing dual
I kind of had a family nurse
practice here's an ease and
really were trying to provide
that that integrated health
care.
And
the benefit to all students at
the time of the grant but also
to this day is that the faculty
looked at all of the courses in
our dnp program and they
integrated concepts and
competencies in substance use
disorder throughout every course
whether it was quality
improvement health policy or the
psych clinical courses and that
that's just that is really our
effort and
so every student whether or not
they got the statement was able
to benefit from that.
Our second grant which
overlapped with the hersegrant
was one from samsa and it was a
two year grand to integrate very
similar competencies in sud into
our family nurse practitioner
curriculum and so
again we we recognize that
people with ad that require
mental health care behavioral
health care substance use
disorder treatment evaluation
treatment they often show up in
primary care clinics and we
wanted our family in there's
practitioners to be well trained
to evaluate and treat in many
cases are in these individuals
and so this was this was a grant
that really worked in um in
concert with the the people who
are working on our prior single.
We have some other health
initiatives we have faculty who
are really passionate about
mental health care in all of our
programs.
The school of nursing lead a
three year sampson grant that is
just wrapping up this month and
it was a part of the campus
suicide prevention program this
is a a program within samsa that
usually has funded about twenty
to twenty five of these grants
each year to colleges around the
country you top had one before
us a wee consulted with them we
were awarded the grant in twenty
twenty two and we have worked
very closely with our office of
health promotion aggie health
and wellness center the dean of
students and many other units on
campus the campus police the
fire department and many
community members who are
invested in promoting campus
mental health and then community
mental health we obtain that
first year and additional fifty
thousand from the eighty d to
support this initiative.
And we also obtain some money
from johnson and johnson so we
always try to leverage.
Federal funding to obtain other
funding to be opened enhance and
amplify these efforts and so
just in a nature what we did
over the past three years was to
enhance tried to decrease the
stigma around mental health and
seeking mental health care
services to do a lot of outreach
on campers about mental health
about suicide prevention there
is an online training it's
called question persuade refer
qpr training they sometimes also
call it gatekeeper training and
it it educates just.
People they delayed public about
how to recognize someone who may
be at risk for suicide we have
had I think it's about well over
thousand students faculty and
staff undergo this qpr training
by the end of the grand period
we will have five trainers on
campus who will be offering in
person sessions we have
additional we have about another
five hundred licenses from this
grant that will continue to
train individuals we really
emphasize.
Some of the areas where you know
we can train student leaders
like resident advisors at a
student at student athletes and
you know get these individuals
out there in the campus
community so that could even are
aggy health and wellness center
they require that students
actually make it to their doors
and so we are just trying to
educate
a large
low a critical massive people
who will recognize individuals
who are really struggling and
know what to do the most
important thing.
We have been working on our
academic practice partnerships
and these are formal more use
that we have with different
institutions and are strongest
and and most
I think one of our
most exciting partnerships is
with the va in albert kirky and
of course there are you know va
clinics down here but our main
collaboration was with the v a
albert kirky and we had provided
support for both of the they
have a nurse familiar
new spreadsheeter and also psych
psychiatric nurse practitioner
residency program
and we have supported their the
development of those two
residency programs as well as
the accreditation of those
residencies we have students who
do rotations through there we do
projects there and then and then
we help them recruit students
into the residency.
And that's I think about all I
have for and i'm had we are
happy to take questions and
again we really thank you for
being here.
Thank you so much exciting
stuff.
But that's growing
so I I will like the vice chair
introduce yourself and then
we'll go to questions starting
with representative heard it.
Thank you very much madame chair
and good morning everyone linda
lopez state senator district
eleven which is the southwest
quarter to burning the account
good morning everybody
represented her.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you for your presentation today
this is so exciting and your
business for how to you you'd
lies both the mental health and
willness aspects of both of your
programs so their three specific
areas I want to focus on and to
give you something to think
about in terms of growing uh
policy initiatives and how you
can continue your program so
right now we've had students
from hour with the state of new
mexico who are in high school
level asking for mental health
rooms but what we don't have is
the people who would be in those
rooms to help it help those
students when they come so i'd
like you to think about how will
you utilize your students to be
the interns and those schools so
that you can help the students
right now we have given up
enough money for at least
seventeen to us schools around
the state to have those mental
health rooms and we're going to
continue to look for a are and
receive requests from other
students that students and other
states so I also want you to
know that there are there that
students and name tales high
school that's what we're working
with.
And then that a rebuild and then
down here in alama gordo the
goal is to get them to work
together on a documentary on
what mental healthiers to them
and you can fit into that just
absolutely perfectly so that's
one area the second area is with
respect to uh the the suicide
prevention so there is a great
program called the yellow ribbon
program in this for students to
try to help make sure that they
don't participate in in an
activity that will cause them to
take their lives and suicide so
it's important for us to gather
them with you particularly
through your mental telemedicine
work and the work that you're
doing in that regard so we will
talk about that and then the
final big area that i'd like you
to look at and think about is
with respect to our native
american communities so I don't
I think you may have heard in
many of you do listen to the
corporation for public
broadcasting particularly in a
story that was done about a drug
court and new met in gallop new
mexico sending individuals out
to places to get help and there
were thirty three places that
were friday in paces but you
doing this work now helping
people with yard addictions
another type of addictions how
can we expand your program to
make sure that you're helping
people get really good
assistance and doctor marlet I
have a special request for you
so we are looking at the yazi
martinez case right now and with
respect to that case what has to
happen is we need to grow the
number of teachers who are have
they are in our native american
community so that they can
continue to grow the students
that are coming into the schools
so you talked about your program
and your up and your teacher
education program and how you
going to i'm asking you to think
about how we can work together.
With that yassi martinez case
and what the court is stated to
grow that even more so with that
i'm going to leave you to
respond to all of those and tell
me yes you're going to do every
less one of them.
Well I I can start and and madam
chair and representative her and
then thank you for that
question.
So I had not heard about the
mental health rooms in schools
and I think that is an amazing
wonderful initiative one of the
initiatives that I was going to
put my slider just slipped my
mind up blue cross blue shield
of new mexico provide a funded.
Or provided a gift of five
hundred thousand dollars.
To the college of hest and three
hundred thousand dollars of that
gift was too higher a professor
of practice and the goal was to
have someone who could really
devote their time to
recruitment.
A.
Throughout new mexico within the
high schools and even middle
schools elementary schools in
the rural areas locally but also
in the rural regions and so we
hired a doctor nicky me in
january and she has been working
with she's been starting locally
and then she's been building her
network she grew up in silver
city that's where she did her
nursing degree and training and
she actually was just she will
receive a distinguished
alumni award next month in
october I well and outside as
soon as it's a bit of the
official announcement has come
out but she and she also set up
all of the rural trauma networks
in new mexico so she's a real
passion for rural health care
and she is well connected
through the state and so what
she is really doing is working
with the different houses within
the schools and so she's making
no school connections so I will
get a list of those schools that
have these mental health rooms
and I think that having our
students they there's a lot of
opportunity they certainly could
possibly do clinical rotations
where their supervised by one of
our faculty in these areas.
But additionally we could have
them do a.
One of their projects that they
have to do to help whether it's
expand replicate
build on the work that's been
done to or even evaluate these
programs and see how you know
what what are the outcomes and
the positive outcomes the
barriers challenges and so I
think there's a lot of
opportunity for collaboration
there and I would love to speak
to you more about that.
In terms of suicide prevention
yet we were aware of the yellow
ribbon initiative and we have
worked with there is a daniel on
a county suicide prevention task
force we've tried to stay very
connected and working with the
organizations that that already
exist we participate in the out
of the darkness walk which
raises awareness around suicide
prevention it was just last
saturday the one here in last
crucis and what really has
struck me every time i've been
at these walks is.
How many high school students
come.
They're probably thirty to forty
high school students and they
are brought the cheer teams at
leading teams they calm they
hand out beads there.
It's it's amazing how aware they
are of.
The need for mental health
services to their very
comfortable talking about it and
so it's really touched me every
time we we have that event we do
it twice a year we do one in
young park in the fall and then
we do one on campus in the
spring.
Um.
And then I think the rest I will
pass on to.
Thank you doctor doing madam
chair and representative thank
you so much for the for the
feedback and the really
exciting and an important charge
that that you're really
outlining for us I i'd like to
speak for a minute on um some of
the work that we're doing and
and work that remains to be done
regarding
collaborating a more effectively
and more robustly with a native
american communities throughout
the state.
Um hast is the beneficiary of of
a very important research and
public service project called
try a tribal education
initiatives and that's three
hundred thousand dollars in
recurring funding that
has I I think essentially to
really important components one
being obviously working to
increase the number of native
american students who go into
teaching
so so you know diversifying our
our pipeline of teacher
candidates and mse was really
important but then secondly and
I think more broadly.
Better preparing all of our
teacher candidates to interact
with support and
engage with native communities
what what what we're trying to
do with those funds as as to
kind of approach both both
objectives simultaneously and so
that involves certainly doing a
better job of recruiting um
students
to to to come to ms and and a
lot you know.
Respectfully a lot needs to go
into that effort when we're
talking about
um you know asking students to
leave there to leave their
communities and and to come to
come down to last cursors
we need to have a campus
experience for them that is
culturally linguistically
representative um and and one
that they feel they feel safe
and they feel represented they
feel supported here
III do you know believe that in
our coursework and in our
practical experiences we're
doing a better job of
indigenousing a lot of our
curriculum.
Um.
One highlight the work of that's
coming out of our border lines
and ethnic studies research
center they've written for some
funds that have gotten some
kellogg funding and some other
resources to work with teachers
here in southern new mexico
particularly the last crucial
public schools and the gats that
independent school district.
Teachers on creating units um in
the curriculum particularly in
the english language arts and
social studies subject areas.
Um that are really speaking to
this notion of
being culturally representative
being being socially mindful of
the students that that were
trying to serve and and really
you know to your point
representative.
We we all have an obligation to
address the deficiencies
outlined and martin and jazzie
and and I you know i'm i'm happy
to report that we're working
towards that and there's a lot
of work remaining to be done
the college of haste currently
in terms of of those who who
self identified we do have for
native american faculty
in our in our full time faculty
ranks and so that's that's an
exciting start um I want to ask
the highlight over the summer I
was privileged to join president
firming on the extension impact
or where as you as you know you
know visit at all thirty three
county extension offices and um
some of the most
poignant moments for me where
meeting with what the tribal
leaders and and community
members and in our native
american communities uhm
understanding ways in which you
know and m s u can do better and
be better uh with rhethris back
to recruiting and retaining
native students here but then
also ways in which we need to be
more present um
you know regarding recruiting
but also you know ways in which
we can be more innovative and
offering academic programming
through our global campus that
could potentially reach native
communities more effectively and
and you know obviously uhm
trying to try to grow those
pathways so lots let's happening
lots to still be done um and i'd
love you know the opportunity to
to check back in um with you on
that and and maybe comment on
how some of our efforts are
coming together but we're very
excited about everything that
you bought lined and and
certainly obligated to to
address those those needs thank
you and thank you madame chair
thank you representative look on
and I want you all to notice
there's no timers because we're
a headed time so in joy but
don't get a customer and don't
get spoil that's right
so go ahead represent it loo
home thank you mandare
as well as III like and thank
you.
For
on the new with the samsure.
Funding that you're getting that
your leveraging other funding
without I think that that's
wonderful to hear it like
hearing those sorts of things
when we're doing you know that's
that's that's the right thing
that's the right approach I
would just if you're doing that
in other areas we I like to hear
more about that I think that
that's which is super important
especially as we're entering you
know the lorian of a federal
potential lowering of a federal
funding I think we're gonna look
at those grant programs and how
you really utilizing those
things and and working towards
your goals here I think it's
amazing.
Mountain chair I have had to
navigate the behavioral health
system here are animals you and
I just want to say thank you
you're improving it I you know
you have your clinic here you're
you know the outreach here and
what i'm hearing here's mostly
prevention.
With a with this funding with
this program it's essential you
know.
These are these are really
important times a really
important works that are
happening as we are rebuilding
our behavioral health system for
the state.
And so without you mentioned
that you have extension offices
and thirty three county so
you're doing outreach within all
of our our thirty three counties
in the state.
And we've tasked now the the
traditional branch that to.
To put together a a mapping with
our counties and how they're
going to establish
originalization for the
behavioral health system that
they're recreating.
I don't think you're maybe not
the way you're taking notes
right now that you're not
thinking about how that's
coordinated and so I would ask
you how you are coordinating
with the aoc and their their
mapping in their planning.
Specifically to the point of
your education plan and in all
the numbers in all the the the
practitioners and.
That are getting out that you
were you are moving forward with
all this funding I want to see
thank you there's that's the
essential piece here that we
need in order to build a system
a behavioral system your task
with that.
But how are you integrating that
with the lc and this new
with sp three right with what we
are what we are moving forward
with with state.
Um that's gonna be a critical
piece of how we're we're really
going to forty five a behavioral
health system in new mexico and
you're doing the work so I
commend you with that focus
specially within our primary
care.
Education for practitioners now
have a question about that
manager with your nearest
practitioners are you are they
focused on being primary care
practitioners or the.
Are they focused on another
field to medicine
so madam chair and sen- a
representative
our family nurse practitioners
are are truly trained for a
practicing and primary care
settings
maybe a little bit of urgent
career but certainly not
hospital based care or a
psychiatric mental health care
practitioners.
They are primarily focused on
primary cars or clinic settings
however they're required to do a
certain amount of impatient
training as well too and that's
helpful because we we do have a
north practitioners in most of
the medical health care
facilities missing a valley
hospital down here the
so at the state hospital are up
in last week so.
We we make sure that they have
some a care experience as well
too it also gives them an
opportunity to see.
Kind of I guess the more serious
mental health
issues are and and diseases and
so but in our family north
practitioner program it really
is truly focused on primary care
and so they family enough
practitioners are really not
educated or trained to to
practice in our hospital
settings there are.
Programs are trained people
nurses to do that and that's an
earner's practitioner program
but we've tried to really focus
on the programs that serve the
state and so that's family
practice
psychiatric mental health and
then we have a new nurse
anesthesia program as well it's
wonderful thank you that you
that's answering my question and
which will need to be too that
these are the types of
practitioners that will be using
or accepting medicaid mostly so
that's correct right yet you
don't have to answer to this I I
know that
madam chairs are in that they
will be in there.
One of the things that we were
working towards or an
interpassionate care are those
that are formally incarcerated
so the pipeline with having
medical care and transitional as
you know transitional living in
and care and those those
pipelines and have you through
your training integrated any of
that through you know
yeah your behavior health
training with these with
practitioner.
Groups manager madam chair and
representative luhan thank you
for that question we
so we do have affiliation
agreements which are clinical
mo's with our done and a
detention center here and we
haven't had a.
The.
Haven't had a a standard
rotation but we have had
students there we actually have
more undergraduate students
going to the rotation at the
detention center than graduate
students but it's certainly
something that we should explore
a little bit more we don't have
we currently don't have faculty
who have a lot of expertise in
the encourse it rated
populations however we have had
in the past and we did have
students rotate through
the jail up in it that I don't
know if it's jail or detention
center up in alva kirky as well
too but that's actually really
good idea I don't know how much
we integrate.
Content or competencies in
working with his population but
it actually would be a very good
top cannot go back to my faculty
and see what we're doing and if
not encourage them to integrate
something we were moving into a
comprehensive curriculum
revision driven by national
standards and so it's a
wonderful time for us to think
very about the future you know
where where are populations of
need and do we need specific
education and training to be
able to serve those populations
and I think this is definitely a
population where that is the
case and you're round to as part
of the destination you
distigmate.
Education and and the training
though that you're doing I I
would highly recommend looking
into that thank you so much for
the for your comments on that.
Will follow up on that and I
just think that you're doing in
our are no I think that's in a
big picture stuff that really as
i'd like you to really integrate
on what the behavior health big
pictures for the state and
however we're changing that and
how you are essential to that
thank you manager madam chair
and representative luham thank
you and
I have testified here almost
every other year and I always
get wonderful ideas to bring
back to the facal team bring
back college making and so I
really appreciate all of this
input we don't we're often an
our own little bubble of of
trying to support and educate
our own students and so it's
really helpful to hear about
what's going on in the state and
and things that sometimes we
just don't hear about so so we
appreciate all of the feedback
thank you representative nay
thank you madame tear and thank
you percenters
I did not know that the college
of it had kind of merged into
this
larger college so i'm I am
actually really going to hear it
as well um.
May background is in ethnic
studies in particular and I
think I tried to spread the word
about the college experience
that I had because.
Um I went to utiostone for my
undergrad and I think one of the
coolest things that they did.
Um
it you know referencing
yazimatines is that as a student
in mexican american studies you
had crosslisted courses with the
college bed.
And i'm wondering if there's
anything like that that's
happening right now
to kind of set the foundations
of ethnic studies that something
you take with you and then you
get the technical skills with
the cross reference courses and
so i'm wondering if that's
happening in the college of ad
and or and the college
pronouncing or anywhere else
the reason
the reason in thinking about
this is the example you gave as
well
with I think you've said it was
the center.
Porterlands center at an ethnic
study center that are doing
these like curriculum programs.
I'm also wondering if we can
flip that on its head where
people come in with a foundation
of ethnic studies and learn
technical skills instead of.
You have the technical skills
and every once in a while you
incorporate an ethnic studies
class.
And I think that's like the
foundational shift and approach
that we're looking for when it
comes to yazi routines because
we can have educators who can
teach one off courses in ethnic
studies but that's not going to
change the outcomes for a
students right
and so i'm wondering if you
could talk a little bit about
crosslisting and maybe a
response to what it would look
like to kind of flip that on its
head.
The.
Madame chair representative and
I thank you so much wonderful
ideas and and
I I can I think hopefully
respond to both of your
excellent questions and ideas um
in terms of of the cross listing
yeah I think we're really
priding ourselves on on a lot of
that are particularly at the
graduate level where we have a
number of programs that may have
similar research sequences so
for instance
in our educational leadership
doctoral program um students are
gonna engage and an act and a
couple of different sequences
one on the quantitative research
side one on the qualitative
research side than in public
health sciences you know we have
similar doctoral sequences and
across the board curriculum and
instruction which has the
multicultural education critical
pedagogies i'm stranded at which
is a very popular option for
many of our doc students um we
were what we're working towards
as a college is being more
interesting area and cross
listing in those so that
students are getting but benefit
of having
perspectives and experiences
outside of their disappointment
not only from the professor of
the teacher of record in the
class and then and the celebrity
that's going to be different
than what they've seen in their
core courses traditionally but
then just hearing from you know
having a soup of principle whose
training would be a
superintendent here from someone
who's going into a completely
different field taking some of
us classes together
understanding what research
methodologies could really be
innovative in answering some of
these really
minute mental questions that
we're trying to tackle
collectively in the state so
crosslisting is really important
at the gradual level in terms of
our undergraduate license or
leading a credited programs
there's a couple of examples I
can point to
all of our students in our
elementary education degree
graduate with enough credits to
apply for bilingual education
endorsement through the an
impad.
And that's a very unique program
in the region so it's so just by
the nature of taking their
course work we we embarred the
bilingual and the teasel
endorsement into that as well so
so that's been really exciting
um.
The the other piece
the the the grounding that the
grounding that you talked about
the ethics studies kind of
grounding we absolutely want our
students to be highly qualified
but that is obviously something
that that we're going for that's
what every teacher had program
every college of of of a like
our escost for but for us the
cultural compensation piece is
equally as important and to tie
it in with the charge that we've
been given with martin is yazi
is as obvious to us and
something we need to work
towards so in the border lands
and ethnic studies um kind of
set of programs and the college
we have the america that native
americans studies minor the
chicana and chicana studies
minor and the borderlines and
ethnic studies minor so we have
these three.
Really popular miners that
students actually from across
campus take and and i've been
looking at
you know the the enrollment over
the last several semesters those
classes fell a lot of them are
from our college which is great
but we're getting students from
across campus which is great
also so.
Your idea of a flipping the
the framework to me is a really
really exciting this notion of
having the ethnic studies as the
as the.
The underlying framework or the
foundation from which we sort of
build out and and and and apply
the theory um that that's very
exciting I think what that could
look like is really increasing I
think we do a good job of having
partnerships with schools.
But I think increasing them and
and elevating them to be more
intentional around around some
of the cultural competencies
which are maybe less less than
the realm of skills and more in
the realm of dispositions.
Um and so i'll you know along
the lines of dispositions we do
have through our credited uh
teacher education program
the multicultural education
dispositions that i'll students
get evaluated on when they enter
the teacher education program
and then they include that and
they're final
and their final portfolio which
has replaced the practice so
demonstrating at the end of
their program that they've
they've grown not only in their
skills of curriculum and
structure and pedegogy but also
in their ability to offer
empathetic stances on social
emotional linguistic and
cultural representation for
students and how they're
teaching etc so lots of work
happening lots of work to be
done
you know you to ask them that
model is is obviously very real
bust very well articulated very
well embedded and integrated.
And I think I think we have a
good foundation we we don't have
quite the capacity but what we
do have is a good vision I think
and and certainly support from
the state too.
To make it a reality and it's
it's a part of our charge and
and that's what we're headed
thank you yes certainly more
support for that here than in
texas
just point that out
also just want to give a
particular example um
when it's only only one mike one
eight time where we're back to
those issues so sorry about
that.
Yeah.
I I just want to make a pitch to
cross list at the undergrad
level
I understand definitely
important at all levels but the
undergrad level in particular
because those the folks were
going into the fields of
teaching
k twelve in particular not
necessarily a master's phd
lesson not always but less so
also.
As an example of the ways in
which this kind of manifest most
folks think of ethnic study is
in english or social studies as
you mentioned earlier but I
think one of the really
universally shifting things
about ethnic studies in
particular is that you can take
a mouth class and every example
that you use in that math class
it's like let's talk about over
representation in the justice
system and you're teaching
percentages you're teaching
multiplication whatever it is
that you're doing and I think
that's that's the shift that we
need.
For something like yazzi
martinez to work and so I am i'm
going to pitch this everywhere
but here in particular and i'll
keep moving on one last
question.
In the integrated health care on
the integrate greater health
care slide
you would mention that there
were some folks who were signing
contracts that prohibit primary
care.
For from providing mental health
care and I really want to go
back to that because that seems
like a really big deal I know in
years past we've had issues with
folks signing contracts where
there are non compete classes
like his contracts are clearly a
problem and so i'm wondering in
order to address something like
that what would be a
recommendation and are you
seeing this on a wide spread
basis.
Thank you madame chair and
representative and yeah
it's yeah it's very unfortunate
and it's only been a couple
individuals who have coming told
me this this individual being
one of them and she's worked in
a number of different clinics
throughout the state.
Yeah it it was I was I was.
Disturbed or a part it was yeah
it was a little bit shocking and
I think it was just from a lack
of understanding and a lack of
wanting to dive into the billing
issues I think it was around
billing for the most part and so
I think.
There's a few things that I I
thought about and I really am
looking at doctor king to help
us kind of lead us at least.
Provide some leadership for this
issue
we do have a relationship with
the new mexico hospital
association I think that's a
great place to start because it
really they have all the major
ceo's of the hospitals within
the state they have their rural
health care network as well too
and i've worked with them on
recruitment they're very
interested in having their
nurses become psychiatric mental
healthness practitioners but
helping them understand that
that this is a you know having
their practitioners that can
practice.
And care for the whole patient
rather than having to refer to a
counselor or a psychiatrist or
as they can p and and have them
maybe get an appointment several
months or six months later or
just having a full
me no a full panel of patience
and not being able to get health
care at all or having to go
forward you know some kind of
out of network provider so
helping help being you know so I
think it some of it is just an
education piece of it and I you
know would like fully shut to
you know think about based on
her experiences where where we
could may be start and you know
do some research there's been a
fair amount a lot but some you
know work on and research on
integrated health care and how
that can work models for that
and so but also then the other
piece would be policy and as
well to to if there are policy
barriers around.
Organizations allowing their
family.
Doctors even to really provide
psychiatric services and to be
able to bill in turns companies
for it you know really try to
analyze the issue and see see
what the problem is maybe it's
just a perceived barrier and it
might you know if we actually
approach the insurance companies
which is why was interested in
talking with blue cross but
shield about this and see what
their tape was it on it was
and again you know of course
medicare medicaid not as
familiar with some of their
policies around this but it's
something that we're going to
continue to explore
representative connect jump in
this is really disturbing I mean
to decide behavior help over
here health over here
in I think we all know that the
number one provider of
behavioral healthiest primary
care and so to I can't imagine
what billing mean you use an icd
nine code for whatever you're
billing for
so that this is
alarming I will say alarming and
i'm not sure what the answer is
but
wow oh representative and I have
an answer
I ever may be answer but it's
something i'm learning about and
and getting super nerdy about
that chair thompson and
representative chaves have been
carrying for a while now but
global budgeting.
Has I feel like this is going to
be leak something I will not let
go is global budgeting because
of the fact.
That we are also in a position
right now financially where
rural hospitals rural clenex
don't know what their funding
source is going to be.
Traditionally folks from real
areas have kind of pooped this
idea.
Um but I think it's a time in
which when I am understanding
across the nation is that real
hospitals are now on board
because they don't have a
predictable funding source but
if we were able to do global
budgeting and look at patience
and a holistic manner.
Wouldn't really matter who
you're building and so I just
want to put that out there and
just so but it's not just
hospitals in practice probably
not cleaning many money
hospitals that every minimum
they're not doing a lot of
primary care per se so we have
to come up with a solution
that's all madame chairman.
Thank you
i'm just trying to understand
that the the idea here of global
umbilities it through billing or
is it through treatment is that
the issuers at the issues
basically they get a set amount
based on a number of factor so
if they have a really lean year
and obviously want they're not
going to have to close it
because they're getting a
certain amount it's kind of a
base budget.
So it it rather than like the
uhm the billing codes that go
along with this the specifics of
it yeah it would there would
still be that order for
insurance to pay for it but it's
it's kind of they like like a a
safety net
up a basement so that they don't
go below
guarantee that there's like a
guarantee I know that there's a
word thank you
representative ferrari
thank you madame chair and thank
you for us was great information
about what's going on here at
any issue it's so exciting
I
doctored doing I wanted to ask
you if you could explain a
little bit more about how the.
A federal funding for some of
the programs that are supporting
the I think it's the residencies
and how if that goes away what
we might need to do as a state.
To support that
madam chair and represent her
ferrari so
overall the school of nursing is
not.
Not dependent at all and federal
funding the grants that we've
had in the past through person
sampson have really enhanced our
programs so
we are primarily supported by
the state both through of course
ing funding revenue or income
appropriations to the university
but then also the rpsps are
funds that we have for our
undergraduate nursing program
are say catrick mental health
practitioner program and then
aren't your same studiology
program and so we are definitely
a state program for the state
and funded by the state and
I never thought that we would be
grateful to not have federal
dependency funding dependency
but but certainly we are are
very stable in that I think that
a number of these programs I
hope once things settle down we
we are always going to need
nurses we are always going to
need mental heads care providers
we have substance used to sort
of crisis in country and so part
of that are
national organizations are
fighting very hard to try to
maintain these funding streams
and so you know we we keep our
eyes out we submit applications
and try to be ready to submit
grant applications when
something comes up we try to
have something in the pipeline
ready to go because a her son's
notorious for releasing the
request for proposals in
november and it's do at the end
of january so you can take a buy
to your
holiday vacation and
so so in a way where were we're
grateful to really have pretty
much all of our funding coming
through the state it's great to
be able to leverage that and I
would say you know we have
leverage federal funding for
other initiatives but more so I
think we have been able to show
that we have incredible state
support which has made I think
strengthen our federal
applications in the answer I
think it goes both ways
but but yeah no i.
If we can get federal funding to
really grow certain programs or
do something really nothing with
our curriculum like integrating
these substances to sort of
competencies throughout our
family nurse practitioner
programming are a sacrifice
program
it's it's it's it's wonderful
but in the end you know we have
solid funding from the state and
we can continue to innovate and
graduate our our students.
Thank you that's good to hear
when you were talking about the
substance use in your use
treatment and prevention
um I think you were saying you
were incorporating that not only
into
the nursing program and.
The program center under your
clinical training sites and
things like that but
do you also have at a policy
level for the university you
know where
there are checks on or the uh
dorm captains or leaders
looking for like party user
things that you know they could
help discourage
at the campus or
the.
This.
But are the collegiate groups
fraternities thank you it's here
already
and and then also with campus
police how how are they about
your trying to redo substance
use and you know for those who
are under twenty one or is it
just so permeated in the um
campus you know activities.
Thank you madame chair and
represent ferrari
I so i've been here about eight
years and I have been so
impressed with.
Kind of the culture on campus
i'm sure there are parties and
there are
you know we know there's alcohol
using you know likely drug use
on campus is on campuses
everywhere but I think we have
very strong pro student policies
are resident assistance as far
as I understand I know because
my friends daughter is a
resident assistant to semester
they got a whole week of
training
and we did this suicide
prevention training with all of
the resident assistance this
past year.
The.
There is a there's a lot of
support for mental health care
services and for a drug and
alcohol.
Use prevention services through
or we have an office of health
promotion that are very
proactive especially in this
area they do presentations they
do tabling they do a lot of
stress reduction events.
I've also been very impressed
with our police department when
we were pulling all the
information together to submit
our campus suicide prevention
gramp we spoke with both the
fire department and the and the
campus police
we have very few overdoses on
campus we haven't had any das I
think when they were looking at
the five years prior to the
start of this grant there had
been one suicide but it wasn't
on campus it was a campus
student it was off campus
they're very proactive I know
that are police department
users best practices for campus
policing they've been an
outstanding department they are
really there to support the
students and provide guidance
i've had the mediate between
students that accuse each other
of stocking their their very
trained their well trained we
actually have one of our current
dnp students doing a.
I think it's
either a crisis response or tram
informed care project with the
police department to try to help
them understand their student
population better and to provide
though that assessment and those
interventions more effectively
and so we we really appreciate
our police department and the
relationship that we've had you
know with the school nursing.
Thank you and madame chair in
doctor doye.
Because alcohol abuse and in
this age group that's on campus
you know is prevalent for a lot
of you know different um just
like falling or drowning or you
know dy
but I think its really important
that and i'm glad that the
campus police are you know not
only I mean alcohol and drugs.
Lead to a lot of time suicide
and so part of that prevention I
think should incorporate you
know how do we make sure there
aren't even off campus within
the campus jurisdiction and
working with the city police
to make sure that there are
parties and I was also wondering
madam chair and doctor doing is
there
i'm glad to hear there haven't
been any deaths but is there no
block zone you know a available
throughout campus you know
especially the race thank you
for reminding me that term.
And also maybe in the
classrooms.
Thank you madame chair and
represent ferrari
having the locks on on campus
formerly was really one of our
goals with the campus suicide
prevention grant.
We ran into some barriers that
the administrative level and so
we had to back off that effort
we do now have new university
administration and we actually
we had a full day workshop in
june on
substantial use disorder on
college campuses and so we
brought in speakers from
different universities and some
of our local speakers to talk on
I think was four different
topics and we invited a group
from
you receive texas I can't
remember exactly where they were
which one they were located at
but they had a very robust
campus recovery program and they
are where they had a recovery
housing for students and they
did having the lock sone
available we've been contacted
by individuals or groups that
would like to have for example
in the locks on vending machines
on campus
it is one of our goals as we
wrap up this grant and try to
sustain the efforts is to come
back to our new university
administration with some of
these ideas in order to gain
support for them.
Okay that sounds great.
Thank you need any support for
some of those things.
Yes
madam chair represent a frari
thank you so much and if if I
may
I can offer a few components and
in our college that that we're
trying to do in this separate so
one of the one of the biggest
kind of messages that that we
try to give especially when we
meet students and families for
the first time we had I think
eleven age welcome orientations
where over the summer where
students and their families
would come to campus tour see
the building see the dorms etc
meet meet us meet the college
meet meet the leadership meet
the unit leads and some back on
in staff from the programs and
one of the biggest messages that
we can give as
simply to.
Put yourself out there you know
the the campus experiences
really in many ways what
students put into into it and
really highlighting I think we
have thirty three student
organizations official formal
student organizations um
university wide so lots of
opportunities for students to
get involved to get engaged to
serve to meet to meet friends
quite frankly and and to stay
connected as they see their
friends and see their classmates
you know on the on the pathways
and in between classes etc um so
that's really important.
And you know
a really cool thing I think
about when when we're back for
the full semester is not only
seeing all the bustling streets
during the day but at night
there's always something going
on there's always an event on
whether it's on the
international arts and the
corporate center or in panamore
or you know senator on the dorm
straight out here there's always
an event an organization putting
something on for students to be
involved in.
Specifically in the college of
hast we're really trying to
round up our student
organizations within the college
so we have a group called the
hest and basically who do
everything from promoting events
and end uh organizations across
campus coming with us to to
conferences like add raising in
different different ways just to
be involved in and to be
presented to be leaders and that
kind of thing um we we also have
the hassle and council and we're
also trying to increase the
number of graduate programs that
have a student organization and
hast right now I believe that
other score of social work has a
pretty robust group that we're
trying to model after as well
and then on the academic side
you know we we we do try to
contribute so so just yesterday
actually um faculty and staff
from paper up and dramas artism
diagnostic center gave a
training to approximately ninety
five resonanted by and who work
in housing
and the training was on.
Working with with students who
may may not have been formally
diagnosed as artism right as i'm
spectrum
but ways in which they can work
training on how to work with
students um and and maybe
potentially refer them for
services i've needed but just
having that again that cultural
company kind of uhm
positionality and working with
students and magist adds to
their training i'm so that's
that's one highlight and then
you know a doctor going was
mentioning some university
initiatives we we were really
excited with president firm is
eighteen eighty eight leadership
initiative the uh summer that
was kind of the first cohor of
identifying new incoming
freshman who are going to kind
of come together and be leaders
throughout their time here and
this year so the college of hest
you know also has the mental
health and wellness clinic there
are counseling in educational
psychology
program and that is right next
door it's all being renovated
now but it's right next door to
the eighty c the autism
diagnosic center and the edge
arguer at speech and hearing
clinic and right across the hall
from the glass family research
for early childhood studies
that instead research institute
all of those are going to be
public feasing kind of wrap
around services for for the
campus community but also
families who are visiting campus
as well so i'm just wanted to
highlight um and thank you for
it for the opportunity.
Manager just one less I think
it's important that
the university I know it seems
impossible but to have under
each drinking prevention because
that does look to a lot of
behavioral problems um and to
make sure that you know with all
of these events demorlet that
you were talking about that
alcohol
isn't always incorporated to
lead you know a better example
for all students but especially
those who are under twenty one
we still have that law and we
still need to and force it not
just say what they're going to
drink anyway if we have the
policy and the enforcement then
it's less likely that you know
it's going to happen.
So thank you
thank you for your office.
And we can get another mike
oh well
we're okay right now work
well.
We don't have to ok all right
all that works thank you madame
chair and I appreciate my
colleagues all of your questions
and suggestions that there's
always the the breath of
information and um that that I
learned too from my colleagues
so thank you.
Ah a couple just I think a
couple of questions
with regards to the listing here
that you had on your program in
roment.
And across the goal is to
increase the number of mental
health nurse practitioners
a question I have is
you show of course the the
graduates.
And.
There's an increase from twenty
twenty five which shows twenty
two
and thirteen for the previous
year and seventeen for the the
the previous to that
how many year providing services
in the community of the words
you you go through school you
graduate how many are actually
um are you able to keep track of
those who are really providing
services in the community.
Madam chair and senator lopez we
do a a lumic survey every year
of the prior group of alumni now
are response rate is usually
around fifty percent but in
terms of our nurse practitioner
graduates for them as far as we
know most almost all of them are
practicing there are many jobs
available especially for a
psychiatric mental health
practitioners there's such a
severe shortage our students are
often getting job offers before
they graduate and so usually are
are employment rate data is
usually you know between ninety
eight hundred percent and
you want once individuals get to
this level they usually don't
leave the field you're we see
registered nurses leaving the
field especially do the stresses
in the hospital based settings
and it always it pains me that
they they think that that's the
only area nursing they can
practice there are so many
opportunities only about sixty
percent of nurses practice
registered nurses practice in a
cute car setting so forty
percent practice in the
community we have amazing
federally qualified healthcare
centers here and archer health
centers like income
and our detention center there's
a lot of great opportunities
that and so we try to make sure
that our students are seeing
those opportunities and the the
range of careers that they could
have with the nursing but once
they get and graduate as a nurse
practitioner
the only thing that we sometimes
see as they may be they decide
that
they they want to expand in a
different specialty and so once
you become an advanced practice
registered nurse and I have
enough practitioner
certification it's it's fairly
easy to lay or on different
certifications if you want a
specialise a little more
no i'm thinking out of chair and
I guess when other questions
tanged on to that are many of
those persons practicing here in
new mexico.
The.
Madame chair and I senator lopez
with our nurse practitioner
students they tend to
because they they tend to be a
little bit older there you got
coming back they're usually they
will do a bachelor of science
and nursing and then they
usually work for a number of
years it could be one year it
could be twenty years and then
they come back to becoming
respectitioner so they are
usually they have a home they
often have a family kids in
school they often are employed
in an area so they tend to stay
in that area so we do for the
most part they they stay where
they are there are our news
practitioners are rarely
recruited out of state so um so
on in most cases right now we
keep trying to grow our percent
of
nurse practitioner students who
are from the mexico but we have
a good reputation so we get
students from alpaso uh we get
students from arizona why all
meaning and usually the mountain
west and we have a few students
from the east coast as well too
but we really try to prioritise
admission of the students from
new mexico into this program so
pretty much the ones in a once
who did our program are residing
in new mexico which is usually
about half of our class they
tend to always stay in new
mexico
and I appreciate that madam
chair cause as we know
sometimes.
How you say we we have this
wonderful cadry of persons who.
Are willing to provide but then
they're gone and we lose them
and I just i'm happy to hear
that
many of them are considering to
stay or do stay as so necessary
and madam cheer so that was what
it might questions
another question and I think it
goes back to.
When we talk about your ethnic
studies you know.
Persistent public education
system of what we do and over
the years there's
a few of us who've been trying
to pass legislation where we
really formally formally
recognize ethnic studies within
our public education system.
Um a few years back we did
change the curriculum rate so it
was embedded
first your a little bit in each
of the grades but madame chair I
still don't believe that's doing
justice to what we need to do
around ethnic studies so.
And and frimmy madame chair it's
there are high schools different
school districts around the
state that do have.
Um a dedicated uhm pathway from
ethnic studies but it's a hit
miss for all of our students and
from email and cherry still
think and believe it we need to
have it specifically formally
recognized and included in a
password.
That is part of the graduation
requirements.
Not just unagree the cafeteria
style that you can choose which
is what we have with the changes
now but something definitive
because I think it adds value
for all of our students to learn
a little bit just you know even
they can retain a little bit
about who we are here in the
state of new mexico it goes
along ways for many other
reasons so I wanted to make that
that come out.
Um and then a question a
might have um.
How directors that are coming
from washington dc and I know
we've heard i've heard from and
I think some of us have her to
work
unm the other institution up the
street but what about the mexico
highlight i'm also in mexico
highlands but new mexico state
university is there a commitment
from leadership to make sure
that the issue aren't diversity
equity and inclusion I know that
different institutions have art
have changed the the title the
name.
Of some of the programs
and I just wanted to to hear
when you talk about um
inclusion within our education
system I appreciate and for both
of you because you're still in
the education system that on a
and a different facility.
It is their support from the
higher ups within the
institution.
That we're not going to be.
Um.
Short changing.
Um giving lip service and not
really doing due diligence to
make sure that we are truly
being.
Inclusive and in teaching and um
really recognizing the value of
diversity in our state.
Madam chair center delivers
thank you so much for that for
the question
you know i'm certainly not able
to speak for any leaders that
are absent here today but
but what I can tell you is that
the messages that communication
that we proceed from the vice
president of eid on campus is
that our student organizations
were talking about black
programs our gbtq
student organization
american indian program
and uh asian pacific islander
student organization those those
are all open for business you
know there's there's either
acting or regular directors of
those organizations they're open
i'm students are.
Campus as bustling and then
students are being served um in
those capacities
where we're certainly you know
doing everything we can to make
sure that
it is something doctor doing
said a step sicking out for me
and that is you know
we're always
embodying the landgraph mission
here and we're always serving
the people of the state of new
mexico.
And the borderlines region and I
I think we're true to that
regardless of whether or not
were
required to scrub.
Uhm particular verbatch from you
know grant applications or a
particular
requests or or instructions on
how students apply to a
particular program or or those
types of things I mean I think
the way that we articulate who
we are and who were serving
you know I I think we have the
ability to be flexible in that
regard but we're always we're
always going to be an m s u were
always going to offer programs
that are culturally
linguistically responsive to our
students and to the families and
communities that from which they
common and who they're going to
go back and hopefully contribute
to
as as we prepare in our
graduates to to be leaders and
to be practitioners in these
fields.
I know in the college of hast
you know we're were
we are allowed in proud of of a
academic programs that the the
few that I the specific ones
that I mentioned earlier
underneath the border and some
ethics studies umbrella um were
were excited to serve all
students and that's our mission
and and we're always going to do
that
I can't I I can't speak to a
sort of larger directions but
but I can tell you that we're
were supported one hundred
percent and and our effort says
a college to to make sure that
all students are welcome this is
a welcoming and close of place
where students are encouraged to
explore their identities to
become experts in their field
and to to go out and and
make the world a better place I
think that's what our college is
all about and so.
Apologies that doesn't directly
answer but but where we are
committed to the mission uh at
animals you.
Madam chair and center to look
at it's just a couple points
our college still has we have a
diversity council the school of
nursing and i'm sure a number
the other academic unions we
have an inclusive excellence
committee and these internal
organizations are faculty driven
we have many faculty and staff
who are committed to diversity
equity and inclusion and a
number I would say i'm thinking
most of the professional
programs are mandated to address
diversity health disparities
socioeconomic desperate barriers
by their credit attention
organizations and so we haven't
changed anything we continue to
as demo that was saying to
support our students but also in
bed these concepts and
confidence sees into our
curriculum as well.
The.
No and and I appreciate that and
I appreciate from both of your
your response.
And and where this is leading to
of course two is for bilingual
students
because you can be his bad
latina ladina
but do you speak spanish rate
and when you go to practice in
a community where you may look
like them but do not speak rate
the language of the community
you're what are we doing to
encourage.
And it it's not just spanish but
it could be they were you know
one of the other languages to
within our native american
communities of when you do
outreach and especially when
you're looking to do and provide
mental health services and for
teachers too I mean it's it
covers the whole game of our
professionals in the.
Um.
So and I will just use this as
an example of madame chairs for
the unmh um the training.
Um to make sure that the
professionals who are coming
through the school of medicine
and others this could also go to
the school of medicine down here
too.
Is making sure that
those who are.
A willing to practice in a
particular community and we'll
talk about if it's a spanish
speaking community that they
actually speak spanish.
So we actually had to put in
money I was able to put some in
a few of our colleagues on the
house I did too to make sure
that there was a training
program for medical spanish.
Um so i'm hoping that that may
be something that you are
currently doing we talk about
for the nurse nursing.
I'll i'm i'm not good at
acronyms but you know when i'm
talking about yeah just to make
ensure that there's an
acknowledgment but a true
valuing of those where bilingual
because they know how lesson is
I know that my son english when
it was come up as a practical
you know how do you do that
there's a difference in you
can't just talk street.
Spoundish and trying and you're
talked medical terms in medical
terminology and it would be I
think the same as we talk
information health issues to so
I just wanted to kind of ring
that.
The.
Um.
To the table for and I hope
that's what you can be part of
your consideration if you're not
already doing that matter.
Madame chair and a center lopez
we in the school of nursing we
don't have a medical spanish
program
partially funding
but but I think it's a wonderful
idea it's it's not a new idea so
but I thank you for bringing it
up again I think it's very
critical.
I don't know how many a lot of
our students use or bilingual
and we really try to help them
understand what a value it is
and what an asset they're going
to be I review all of their
resumes as they're graduating
and I always tell them if you
are by link will put that up at
the top it is so valuable and an
obviously spanish is important
and I think that they do learn a
lot of medical spanish along the
way if they are spanish speaking
which is.
You know and again they become
such assets even as students in
the hospital and clinic settings
if they are bailing wool.
But um but I think that trying
to formalise that maybe creating
something either with the
teacher preparation programs or
even cancelling as well too and
see if we could come together
around an elective or something
that's really around health care
health care spanish I think it's
is it wonderful idea and madam
cher I think that's this kind of
what they're doing over at you
and image at this point working
with a health science to center
with the the students are
receiving a certification
so is the certification so it's
not just all you know whatever
whatever but there's an actual
certification and this is the
second year that they're doing
it it took a while um to do that
but we put in some of our
junior moneys to kind of do this
to kind of get them started and
I know there's the budget
process through higher red you
know that that you have to go
through but I think this was
kind of there was a good way for
it to start to give it a kick
start so it's an ongoing process
and I would hope that for your
consideration cause I know tee
cell in all of the other that we
do for bilingual um education
professionals teachers I know
there's that process but it
should be I believe in all of
our health professions
and wonderful initiatives
I think and when other thing and
I know the the chair woman also
pointed it out when we talk
about the importance of um
the providing of mental health
services in our communities
especially for everybody but I I
look at you been for those who
are like maybe their twenties
are younger.
That I think are going through
some serious issues at this
point in time in their lives.
And I you know there the numbers
that just came out and I so I
she may wish to expand more on
it new mexico's suicide rate has
gone up by nine percent.
Year in a year
and
it it broke it down here for
whites are still at the top you
know in our.
And our numbers although I
didn't see the numbers here yet
but hispanics twenty seven
percent increase.
In the numbers so for me that's
alarming and especially with the
issues that are happening now
with immigration and all of the
other make status families and
other issues that come up I am
really concerned and worried
about what the after effects are
and what are we not being able
to do to outreach
to make sure that our young
people are heard and seen.
And what we can do to help them
I know that's part of the drive
of way we need more
professionals but I wanted to
kind of just flag that that's
all manager thank you thank you
and just for the committee we we
we are over time and
so I said no it's fine
wrong
so I do have questions but
hopefully they'll be brief
answers so i'm i'm really
concerned not concerned um
interested in the autism
diagnostic center so how many
are you see what age groups are
you seeing how many are you
doing what's the waiting list
and what's your staff look like.
Manager thank you so much for
the question so are up our
payment upper damage artism
diagnosic center is affiliated
with our communication disorders
department and as I mentioned
what the renovations going on at
a donald hall it will it will be
centered right next to the edge
speech and hearing center which
is also affiliated with
communication disorders
department that staff is is as a
staff of nine uh faculty
many rslps trained
we actually just hire two new
ten year track
professors this for this fall
who are who are new and so
lots of exciting things
happening there a lot of the
funding if I I think majority of
the funding is through r PS b uh
monies and the current way list
I I think misaggio are mentioned
the other day the current
weightless is eighteen months.
Um and so we're still one of one
of two essentially centers in
the state who can perform these
services.
And and we we would love to tear
attack weight list if it all
possible about where we're
working
with our capacity to serve the
number of families and and
students that we that we can so
what what are you limiting to a
certain age group or is it why
don't thing so
many chair yes the there are two
two different populations and so
on is one as youth and I believe
it's twenty and under and then
the rest are adults i'm in the
the weight list for the youth as
as the eighteen months and and
do you know the weightless for
the adults manager i'm so sorry
I don't have that on me and I
don't want to just throw it
that's.
So you don't necessarily have a
infinite table specific um.
Group or or focus.
Manager there's not a specific
focus in in fact a lot of the
outreach and in community
engagement is with the school
districts lots of trainings
happening with lost christmas
public schools and gats then and
then this summer we actually had
the median training which had
providers uh from all over the
state so slps
you know special education
providers
from every corner were here over
the summer and they think that
sixty five or seventy people
that they trained thank you and
the reason I asked we all know
that early intervention is what
works you know diagnosing a kid
at seventh grade
that's better than not at all
but we've missed the window so
and I and they know it's always
funding I worked with senator
paper and i'm i'm artism as what
brought me to the legislature
and i'm a mom and now so.
I wish we could get the money
that we need so i'm in the on
the nurse practitioner that i'm
assuming the graduation rates
are pretty high
madam chair our graduation rates
are usually she was about eighty
to ninety percent we we
each year we have students who
think this is what they want to
do and within a month or so
they're like.
It it wasn't what they were
expected and it's usually the
work load and you know to be
able to have diagnostic
privileges prescriptive practice
these are rigorous time
consuming programs and so when
we
if we don't include those
individuals you know for most
most people do do complete the
program and and are there are
you able to fill out your
classes you know waiting lists
or do you have slots that go on
filled madam chair no we we have
capacity still and we do we
don't accept everyone who
applies again it's a pretty
comprehensive a holistic
application and the students do
an interview with our faculty
and
but but we do have capacity to
grow and and so with one hundred
percent of our marketing
recruitment dollars and efforts
are within the state and were
really starting to get up more
more outreach to world counties
to rural nurses through the new
mexico association and also
through our blue cross blue
shield partnership as well.
Thank you for the I would and I
know that your your probably at
capacity personally at both of
you but I mean let's think about
the primary care association and
the behavioural health provider
you know I mean because there
are nurses in many places that
those those things don't
necessarily reach so that's just
an
i'm a physical therapist so I
was interested to hear that can
he theology is is a pre med it's
like eighty eight um
new mexico over six hundred pt
short UNM is only program in the
state and they graduate I can't
remember if it's thirty or
thirty two now but twenty years
if no one retires if everyone
stays we would catch up but the
need is going so is there has
there been discussion about a pt
program at new mexico state
and if it's secret you're
looking at each other like I
don't know so tell me what you
can tell me
madam chair it's a great
question we do there's
no we don't lose because we can
really know how to pete school
but many of our canes majors ago
go on to UNM or over to love it
at texas um
to my knowledge there have not
been serious formal
conversations um
yet
and then I I know i'm all over
the place but teacher prep
what percentage of teachers are
are made are going into a
special ad.
The.
Manfair it's a great question um
and and every year when we
review the
educator vacancy report that
that are college and the sore
outreach center actually puts
out um.
We we might be.
Excited about achieving uh a
decrease and vacancies across
the board but special education
is always prevalent.
Um
we consistently have about four
to five majors per semester out
of all of our teacher candidates
who are specifically pursuing
the sped licenser.
At the undergradual level
so so that seems pretty paltry
and and needs to improve where
we are having more successes in
our alternative license program
where students become the
teacher of record with a letter
of verification from the school
district and then they have two
years to complete our program
we've shortened that to to where
students can complete within one
year
by utilizing many semester
formats with our courses and
putting in all online and that
has helped so our numbers in the
special education alternative
license program have had
increased.
Thank you for that even notes
really disappointing and and
then your communications
disorder to it are is that a
doctor level for for slp's and
audiologists
madam share we have the an
undergraduate communication
disorders and then a masters we
do not currently have the doctor
okay thank you
and and um I wrote a note to
myself and it don't know what I
meant by it so maybe i'll come
back um
yep and I i'm i'm I will
reiterate how concerned I am
that some facilities are saying
you can you can't do behavior
it's I mean that's just like a
head exploder for me um.
Let's see it and just just a
suggestion in as I said it is a
miss is kind of my world and
with one in thirty six kids
eight year olds now I would
suggest that you think about
providing a or mandating some
behavioral health classes that
with I mean a better word for
that in your education programs
because every teacher is going
to come across a child with
thought is it's a given
and what works for nor typical
kids is frequently the opposite
of what works for kids on the
spectrum so
I mean my son is now thirty four
and we had a lot of mishaps
because people didn't understand
and I hope things are better but
I think that that would be great
if it was pretty much beaked
into the program that you have
to have some of that knowledge
or and let's face it lots of
teachers leave the profession in
large part because they come
across situations that they have
no idea how to deal with you get
you get a classroom with three
kids with autism in
your pulling your hair out on a
daily basis and who wants to
stay in that so it just a
suggestion
and then the note the fact that
the administration here was
hesitant about putting the luck
son on campus is really a red
flag to me I mean we can we can
put our fingers in our ears and
harm when clause arise but it's
not going away and to pretend
like what we don't need to deal
with it is is shameful in my
mind and so i'm glad that that
maybe things will change I will
offer that and if you need
support from this committee I
think I can speak for the rest
of the members that we would be
glad to write a letter I
strongly word at letter that
were so famous for
and then I to have one more
thing.
But i.
I can't remember what it is so
am so thank you ball for your
time and for answering the
questions usually you don't get
peppered this much because we're
usually much more pressed for
time but but much appreciated I
think we learned a lot hopefully
we've given you some some ideas
and please know that
myself and i'm sure others on
the committee are more than
happy to talk about ideas with
you to be sounding bored to to
help you if we can.
Madame chair and committee
members thank you this is the
wonderful conversation I agree
okay thank you so next we will
go to
food security with rubian
escapel and omar casin okay.
How you go on my year baptism by
fire.
And for those of you her cold we
are to we ask for the air
conditioner to be
teamed a little bit so so
hopefully
the shippers will go away.
Yeah we're working by sucks and
would work
this is the athletic department
there probably are athletic
socks somewhere around here
we could bargain for all of us
women in sandals
so go ahead whenever you're
ready like thank you good
morning madame chair and members
of the committee it's nice to
see you all beautiful last
cruces
so i'm rubian sql with the
legislative finance committee
and we have a new staff member
that i'm so pleased to introduce
to you all today this is miss
alma casin and she literally has
been with the legislative
finance committee for three
weeks
says she's better great sport
and she's jumped in and
we yeah was working on we're
working on a program a valuation
on the income stacked income
supports like guaranteed and
getting all of that and almost
working on that but part of that
is food and food security and so
she just jumped in and helped
and she's like i'd be happy to
come down in present so normally
we don't do this so she's such a
great spot and she's been doing
such a pleasure to work with the
we are very pleased unfortunate
to have her join our staff as a
program evaluator at the left
sim in front of you manner chair
members of the committee and
we're just going to go through
these slides it's this power
point and
word i'll doing an overview of
food security in this state and
it's the very approposed we had
into you know the special
session on october first and of
course these issues will
continue to unfold as the
federal scenario continues to
unfold and are state scenarios
as well so if you flip to slide
to
the items that were gonna be
covering today are a background
and just what our stats are
statistics look like.
I think all of you are very well
familiar unfortunately that are
children in particular do face a
very high level of food security
and security in new mexico we're
gonna talk just a little bit
about our area food programs
because there are many and our
network is vast and buried in
complex but just touch on that
and accords look at the funding
for
food and food networks in our
state and then talk about snap
you can't talk about food
security without talking about
snap as snap is the largest
program by far in terms of
addressing food security and the
stayed in in the country and
then also looking at the outlook
and moving forward as we look at
the federal changes that are are
looping so it then i'm in a
terminate over two miscasin for
just to begin on flight three
thank you.
And.
Yeah.
Okay so starting on slight three
this gives us some basic context
on food insecurity in new mexico
so we're seeing that since this
data showed that fourteen
percent of residents
sometimes are often did not have
enough to eat compared to the
twelve percent nationally and
that translates to about one and
seven new mexicans and nearly
one and for children living in
households without consistent or
are adequate food and we're
seeing that even family is
receiving food assistance there
are gaps that remain so about
twenty seven point five percent
of snap households and then
we're seeing forty five percent
of those receiving summer ebt
are still reporting food
shortages
so trying to slight for this
graph tracks new mexico food and
security compared to the us over
time new mexico currently is the
fourth highest state with the
highest rates among um
nationally and historically
we're seeing about two to three
percent higher than the national
average rates have declined
severally up until the twenty
twenty one but since then
they've increased again this
shift is reflecting a
combination of effects
inflation hire food costs the
expiration of pandemic relief
and then also the end of maximum
snap a lot mentioned twenty
twenty three we also want to
note
that most recent data is from
twenty twenty three so this is
not reflecting the significant
state investments made since
then those impacts will show in
future data
and then of again we're also
seeing that food and security is
not evenly spread out across the
state county is like cute ron
luna mckinley and silver others
are reporting the highest rates
in our state.
And then moving on to slide five
were specifically looking at
child food and security so
according to the l of c school
meals program evaluation which
you will hear more about later
this afternoon and twenty twenty
three about twenty three percent
of new mexican children
experienced food and security
the national average was
nineteen percent which puts new
mexico among the highest states
for childhood hunger this
matters because children are
particularly vonable to defects
the food and security and these
effects are not just healthcare
based were also seeing
development and academic
performances and now i'll head
it over to miss escort.
The.
I'm so madam chair and members
of the committee so some of our.
Food program than that I know
that's always trying to see if I
could be like i'm trying to look
at you here
some of our this is just it's
not a foolless but it's kind of
that the bigger programs are for
our rare food programs here in
this state so of course snap so
for folks listening who may not
know what that stands for it's
that federal supplemental
nutrition assistance program it
was formally called food stamps
currently
that program is a hundred per
sont a funded by the federal
government it has a big impact
across the state for
grocery store just not only food
security people for food bed the
impact on employment grocery
stores are moral communities
everywhere so it's got a big
multiplier effect throughout the
state and the the funding
amounts are large you know it's
over billion dollars when during
that pandemic when we had as
miscassing just mentioned when
we had the full alignments and
we had the covered relief money
so we had the extra funding that
was put through during covered
you know our amounts were over
you know to billion dollar
mounts for large in the state
that across the country not just
here in the mexico's cross the
country that the federal
government did put out to help
everyone in this day there's so
many people weren't working
during covered to to be able to
have food so it's a significant
program so
we have here on this line in
mexico
I just put this in course people
ask about the federal poverty
level a lot of states are at
like one sixty five percent of
fpl of the federal poverty level
where we are new mexico at two
hundred percent f p l for
ability to qualify
and we also have here.
I I just added this we are have
supplements to senior snap their
senior snap and we have a state
as a hundred percent state
program a hundred percent state
supplement that we put
additional general fund dollars
in to supplement senior snap so
that's something we've been
doing for quite a while and that
has grown over the years so just
wanted to note that
additionally there some of the
other federal programs include
the commodity supplemental food
program at the emergency food
assistance program tea fab you
hear people say that acronym a
lot tif out um surplus surplus
agriculture the commodity credit
corps cc program and the thrifty
food plan so all of these are in
a ray a whole different array
different eligibility different
requirements of a food
supplements funding that come
from the federal government from
primarily from usda that US
department of agriculture some
of these have already been
reduced so when some of the
earlier federal reductions came
through not associated with the
reconciliation bill but just
looking at overall just that the
funding build that when they
first did just the funding some
of these programs just like some
of the higher education grants
and all we're were reduced some
of these food the commodity
programs were also already
reduced so I think you've heard
some of the food banks talk
about that that they've already
been seeing an impact with those
commodity reductions
also we have the national school
lunch and breakfast programs and
the sun sunbux or summer ebt so
these are programs for kids in
the summer when they're not
going to school to get funding
through
through snap that for associated
with kids and then.
We have a course universal or
one of the few states in the
country that have universal
mills and you're going to be
hearing all about that from our
staff coming up after lunch when
they present the program
evaluation on that
one note since we do have
universal schools it's not
income beast so it does tend to
help support kids that are not
necessarily more kids not
necessary low income but but it
that is a universal program for
all kids with stigma removed.
We also have in the state and a
course across the country
special supplement the special
supplemental nutrition program
for women infants and children
are wick that's administered by
the department health so another
federal program helping marms in
and kids which is very important
and crucial with all the reasons
healthy food in nutrition but a
courts formula and also that's a
very important program and then
again for seniors we have the
mills on wheels program and the
commodity supplemental food
program for seniors and then
where I think very important to
this area where we have so much
farming and agriculture there's
in a read these programs I below
the last bullet here so the new
mexico grown programs which
includes the regional farm to
food bank program the farmers
market nutrition food hunger and
nutrition program the double app
food bracks food bucks program
and of course all of their food
banks that work in collaboration
with our farmers and then the
funding that helped support the
farmers to then provide funding
to the food to the food banks
and that program was looking at
also potential reductions with
the federal reconciliation bill
so again impacts multiply
impacts not only directly to
food food banks but also to our
our labor market and also those
are something to keep in mind as
we we look at this whole hole
array the whole network if you
turn to side seven man and chair
members
this is just a little I very
high level look at new mexico
spending on food so
this is our different food
initiatives and this.
Are we do want to give credit to
the administration and the
department of finance
administration everyone can get
this data and you can cut it
different ways because there's
now a dashboard on the
department of finance
administration then in mexico
dfa website so aren't this was
something that we didn't have
for a long time and it's looking
at all the different departments
and how much they spend on
different programs for food and
associated with food economic
development ped puppet the
public education department it
looks a cross the
administrative the executive
agencies at food spending so
that's where this data comes
from and I just wanted to say
that anybody can look at this
and and cut it in different ways
this data so what the data shows
is that new mexico his invested
over and this is just our state
funds over a hundred and eleven
million and general fund revenue
this is just generous for a food
security just for a flight but
state physical year twenty six
so
that's a substantial amount and
you'll see the growth here and
we've had three sort of main
bump ups in twenty four twenty
two for twenty four and f way
twenty six and those were pretty
much tied to
that that school school lunch
program that but the school
mills program.
And and other food initiatives
so you see that that work that
spending has really grown
substantially
so that's to be noted because in
during covered we put in
addition to those federal funds
in allowing everybody in the
country to have their highest
mass maximum alignment under
snap we also contributed during
covered and i'll just say this
because I know representative
ferrari worked really hard on
this we contributed substantial
amounts during covered just a
hundred percent steep fine two
food bank funding so multiple
times you all were we care we
had multiple special sessions
throughout covered in the tail
and then we kept putting in your
five million three million five
million so a lot of money was
put in to help support food and
and I think that should be noted
that's not on the the scraft
because it doesn't show those
years but
well I guess I don't know that
it's was rolled into these
numbers but it would substantial
funding and I know
representative worked really
hard on that so just wanted to
shut that out
and side number eight managed
here
and other people not yeah I
don't want to exclude anybody
else like the people worked hard
so thank you
iran and slide a manner share
members
this is again just kinda
highlighting just different
state agencies and spending and
by far the highest amount here
is of course the public
education so schools go so mills
for kids and then the health
care authority which of course
is all the other array of food
programs that we talked about
and then there's other smaller
agencies and you have right here
new mexico state university
which is is so graciously
hosting us today and that for
the next days so.
They also have their ram
programs in all that that show
up and then have funding here so
just wanted to lay that lay that
out for you but you can see that
overwhelming majority is through
a basically for kids and the
other
funding for food security for
for adults and for families out
of the health care forty
man i'm cheer if you turn to
slide nine one thing that was
not included when we looked at
that dashboard at the on the df
website for food that I was
talking about one thing that
wasn't included in that was the
the growth funding which stands
for government results in
opportunity program grow funding
that was included in the latest
general appropriation act from
this year's twenty twenty five
legislative session so a
substantial investment was
included in the the ga the
general appropriation act this
year thirty million dollars.
For
four food banks so that was a
really substantial big deal and
the hope west and this was
before
some of the the ground shifted
underneath this but the hope was
and what we were talking about
at the time is this is going to
close that gap in food security
and it makes an basically dealt
with our foods in security and
make us arm power with a
national average in and
basically kind of be out a game
changer and really close that
gap unfortunately the the sand
shifted underneath the summon
are outlook it's a little
different now so we will i'll
have to keep looking at the data
and
and I just accordingly but I we
this was not included in that
hundred and eleven figures so
the number is higher so just on
the growth funding
so thirty million dollars was
appropriate for FY twenty six
through fy twenty eight
and the funding was when you
looked at the language in house
bill too and there may be a
question at the same thing
representative luhin um the
funding for each fiscal year.
Um so was twenty six twenty
seven twenty eight ten million
ten million ten million.
It said first the language did
say in the general appropriation
act up to fifty percent
for the first two million could
be used for infrastructure up to
fifty percent and then the other
fifty percent for food and then
it ratcheted down to twenty five
percent and then for a twenty
effort twenty seven and then f
way twenty eight that you know
for food all of it for food so
there was a contract i'm just
introduced to you with the food
banks in collaboration with the
department and a finance and in
ministration and with the health
care authority and it actually
did fifty percent for
infrastructure and so I think
maybe some of you are hearing
from the food banks in your
areas that they're a little
concerned because they were
hoping it might be a think a
little bit less for
infrastructure in a long war for
food and so they were a little
concerned but they of course
said they're they're good team
players and they'll work with
that and the infrastructure if
you have a question on that
as far like truck three fridge
reader tried to refrigerated
units and all to get the food
out particularly in other rural
areas to get the food out
maintain the food and also i'm
that's.
Okay so that's a bit glee.
What that is and I on the second
bill in here I just noted
specifically that some of the
funding for infrastructures to
establish a centralized hub
warehouse in rearing the county
and again purchasing those
mobile
refrigerated food trailers.
All right and then I did put
here because since it is grow
funding yeah the whole point of
growth funding is it's a a demo
dep- demonstration projects
really to go and then you have
to prove how is this really
being effective in moving the
needle so some of the
performance indicators that the
number of households served and
the amount spent time food bed
yeah so performance indicated
for all grow funding are
extremely important
manager if you turn to slight
tone.
Um so this is now we're gonna
move into and pivot some just
directly more to snap that
supplemental nutrition and
assistance program so in new
mexico this is the graph here
shows are snap participants from
nineteen ninety to twenty twenty
four and
you see the really large growth
here and a lot of that is tied
to covered in a course during
covered when we had the federal
dead designated public health
emergency that's when you all
will remember that we couldn't
remove anybody off of medicaid
if people came on regardless of
their eligibility they stayed on
and that was also tied to snap
though our medicaid numbers of
course really went up across the
country all the medicaid numbers
went up ours were really high we
talked out at just just over a
million and medicated a course
snap went up as well so that's
what you're seeing here in these
these numbers
um self specifically there were
about and this is the latest
date I do shout out to our
colleague and mr
just pulled these numbers for us
on
friday right
and said so there were about
a four hundred and fifty nine
thousand five hundred monthly
slot snap recipients during
august so that is the most up to
date number and that represents
twenty one point five percent of
the state's population and
that's based on federal data
so in afway twenty four and
state fiscal year twenty twenty
four nationally new mexico
ranked second out of the states
and then territories based on
its share of population
receiving snap benefit so I
think some of the.
Other data before we say we were
first and that's been reported
anything in the newspapers were
with the current data and an
adjustments and all weird second
but almost at the top first
second yeah to meet him tomato I
guess so yeah so as there's that
data for you
and then okay slide eleven
this I think gets maybe a little
confusing so don't focus
necessarily too much on the
other details but where this is
this was presented this slide
was presented by the lfc
director mister soli to the
federal
oversight committee
though this is starting to look
so we just manage to share
there's some of these slides
where pulled directly from what
um directors a lee presented to
that committee just so you all
could have the same information
of course it's online but so you
could have some of the same
information and data so this is
just pulling some of the big
pieces that are in there the
federal reconciliation belts
though the one big beautiful
bill we we just reference it as
a reconciliation bill but the
one big beautiful bill you'll
hear the health care authority
call it oba so whichever terms
hr wind whichever you want to
use it's all the same thing so
these are just pulling some of
them major snap component pieces
and just looking at the state
for the figure the federal
fiscal year of the calendar year
the month then just trying to
look at when they could have the
starting impact because that is
actually pretty confusing
because depending on the piece
they all started to potentially
start a different times and then
depending on our actions of
course around
our error rates which are
changed and can change the the
rates the timing is different
also so that pieces laid out
here are just our state match
requirements.
Which begins in this is under
again the record federal
reconcile affiliation bill that
the the rules have not been
rolled out so that's what
everybody's waiting on what are
the federal rules going to say
so that's just the big caveat we
don't know what's going to
happen because we have no
federal rule yet but based on
just the bill this is the
information so I just want to be
sure in caveat that we're
waiting on that for snap for
medicate for everything but for
them state match requirements
changing those could potentially
begin in.
October will see the state match
requirement delay for depending
on
our implementation
implementation rates could
depend on our error rates so
that shows you that could begin
an afway twenty nine prepping
for that first starting in f
thirty.
And then if our requirements
have a delayed implementation
i'm gonna go into these and more
detail so what maybe I want use
to slide any further but this is
just a little pocket guide book
if you need to live really
quickly and see when could these
potential start all right let's
go a little easier way to talk
about some of these side twelve.
So what are some of those
changes in the reconciliation
bill and I first listed these
based on what the health care
authority reported to you in
gallet some kind of reiterating
their their slide and then a
minute talk a little bit more
about it
in terms of fiscal components so
hca reported to you again in
gallet that the new requirements
for states to share a portion of
the cost of snap benefits which
are currently financed a hundred
percent by the federal
government that's what you know
I told you earlier again based
on our apparent payment error
rates so them states with high
pair a error rates can get a
delay before having to pay the
cost that the are stepdown car
share so that could go in in
effect in f thirty so that was
the alaska the mercowski.
Peace that the that was put in
and and a course applies to all
states so.
That's our little conunder rate
is a dear do you wait do you
play and then
and then you have to have to
pivot relief which is probably
difficult to deal or if you know
it's or a failed save a safety
net if you can't make it so
that's the thing that you hold
her cabinet secretary are me how
talk about in gallop i'm also
that them with in place just
generally in the in the
reconciliation but is
that reduced to federal funding
to administer stop based on your
payment error rate changing from
fifty fifty state federal
funding to then seventy five
twenty five in that starts
interesting you're twenty seven
and then there's also in the
bell resetting the formula for
benefit amounts and that reduces
the maximum a household can
qualify for and that could
potentially start potentially
in october coming up potentially
we're waiting to see also
additional work requirements
which everybody's heard about
them for snap households and as
stricter enforcement of existing
work requirements starting
potentially in november so I
think that's two pieces that may
be people don't hear about as
much you're like work
requirements but stricter
enforcement of work requirements
and of course how do we do that
so that's the thing something
that the whole across the
country states are wrapping
their heads around and trying to
to figure out so there's that
piece also eligibility reduction
through how benefits are
calculated starting potentially
again in october so
you are may be familiar with
medicaid snap you know when you
go in apply that certain things
can be.
Looked at differently like your
household your you know
different ways of looking at
what makes you eligible so that
change as well so that has a big
impact and that actually is what
ties to
payment error rate in new maxico
and all we are error rate is
that we tend to give people
benefit it's and it's usually
associated with the data that
that's people who are applying
give to the to the health care
authority to the income support
workers so if the if the forms
you're forms you're rant your
your
utility bills you know if those
aren't correct then that's how
we get the the ding on the
payment error rates so I think a
lot of time just busters getting
really wanking but um I got into
the weeds I had recently I
really started looking at data
on what causes our payment error
rate and so just without boring
you too much with that but
that's actually what it is we
tend to over estimate their
benefits get a little higher but
it's based on
the information provided by the
client by the person that's
applying and and i'm sure
they're you know trying to use
the best but it you know it's
what what documents do you have
at any given time and it's
usually tight here household
sites work constitutes your
household size so that can be a
complex question believe it or
not so that's that's the that's
the one geeky part of me so
anyway fyi on that piece
additionally
I we're looking at
the eligibility reductions
through how benefits are are
being looked at for generally
calculated but also eligibility
reductions for non citizens and
that could be starting soon as
well.
So I will turn to the next side
managers side thirteen and this
is a little bit more on snap
error history and
this is something that we dug
into a little deeper as you can
probably tell at the legislative
finance committee and this is
looking over time and you will
see over time
that even though our numbers to
some this app are numbers on
snap the number of people
weren't that much lower they're
at they were about two hundred
thousand and then we're looking
at about two hundred and fifty
thousand and our error rate was
much lower for a lot of years so
it was slightly over the federal
the the national US error rate
but we were in you'll see fy
element on thirty you know clear
through out to
afway nineteen we were in the
ford as for the six percent and
it started creeping up some in
nineteen and then and the lot
most recent years went out
higher to the reads now that
you've heard about.
Uh there's think you will be in
four years with not available
do you what happened.
Mannems here i'm not quite sure
what happened there where we
didn't have the right thank you
so
yeah but I think it was the
trend though was it was in line
with the trend.
So are but the point in their
side here and with those data is
basically in twenty thirteen
here we managed about two
hundred thousand snap cases and
we even have the cost for keys
here two hundred and eighty six
dollars with the payment error
rate was four point five percent
and then it started creeping up
with in twenty twenty five we
had turner fifty thousand
households and then the error
rate was fourteen point six
percent and so
basically there's that error
rate really creeped out but we
know that we can we can do it
weekend we can keep that down to
that lower rate because in the
reconciliation bill it's less
than five percent and in the
next slide tax we start talking
about some of the so i'll flip
to the sides.
Fourteen
and here we have a break out of
the funding and I won't go so
much through the funding here
and you basically see here and
this piece we're talking about
the different brackets that are
in the reconciliation bill so if
you have a payment error rate
for snap that's below six
percent that's one piece one
bracketed area then it's six to
eight
percent error rate than eight to
ten and then over ten and a
course right now we're at
fourteen a little over fourteen
percent so we're in that higher
that last bracket and basically
what you see is you know if
you're below six percent the
feds will pick up the cast and
as your error rate creeps up you
see this is our new mexico
numbers here that we're
projecting out from lfc you see
basically the federal amount
going down and the state amount
increasing so that's what this
is showing you in there the
graph the though table over here
now here i'll i'll read the side
by a little bit to you so these
proposed snap la- uh changes are
in current line the again the
feds pay a hundred percent for
benefits and fifty percent for
administration
so
and also the sale that under the
new reconciliation bill we've
institute a new state matching
requirement based on again the
state payment error rates and it
requires the state it if the
saints match rate is
are six percent or higher it
rams up and there but there is
that delayed implementation
through up by twenty thirty so f
if you turn a page fifteen
this is looking at other
components so basically the
changes would be a decrease in
the federal matching rate for
administrative cars which we
talked about fifty to twenty
five percent and it would
eliminate funding for snap
nutrition education that's
something maybe people aren't
talking about as much.
And but what snap nutrition
education so that some
of the one how do you apply for
benefits in two healthy mails
healthy eating all of that area
of things so that slated to just
go away so the amount new mexico
is just over three million push
uh four million for stap
education so that's that is
eliminated in the reconsiliation
bill also the changes as I
mentioned earlier and were
current work requirements and
that's by increasing the age
specifically of able bodied
adults without dependence you
hear people say ebay be a wd
which stands for able body
adults without dependence so
that's changing that age from
age fifty four to sixty four
years so requiring
work so that's
about ours that
in a month or or school or
equivalent are you know
volunteer community work all of
that so and then.
The bill would change the
reconciliation bill change the
definition of it a dependent
child from under eighteen years
of age two over the age of ten
so I know you all have heard
about that and also recars
counties to have a ten percent
unemployment rate or higher for
the county to receive a waiver
on the work requirements and we
only have I think
i'd looked at this before one or
two counties I think sierra
maybe remember here we don't
have as many counties you should
you think that might fall under
that and I had elected this like
two months ago and i'm turning
remember yeah I think it was
sierra maybe one other so that's
not too many very counting that
would qualify
man insurers say it's sixteen
have two more slights almost
done
side sixteen
and this is am trying to look at
summarizing for you and this
again was information that was
just presented.
Two weeks ago I think are we
going to have two weeks to the
federal
reconciliation or federal rather
oversight committee.
So
that beginning and fiscal year
twenty seven um assuming the
state picks up that seventy five
percent of snap administrative
expenses and it's and that would
cost our state eighteen point
nine million in general often
annually so that's one amount
since significant amount of
funding
and that's what of course be
recurring then nfw twenty nine
the state cars to fund the
current federal share of snap
benefits as astimated at
approximately two hundred
million and then that projected
costs to implement a hundred
percent state funded snap for
newly an eligible client so
that's that part that peace
where one if you follow up
because the work require if you
follow up because of if you're
your years it is in ship or
anything like that that amount
is a hundred and nine million
for twenty seven hundred and
fourteen million in a forty
twenty eight hundred and twenty
million in future twenty nine so
when you start adding these
numbers up this because this is
just snap to this isn't
medicated or anything these
numbers start becoming
substantial.
So this was again this is new
numbers new data that was just
presented to that committee like
a week and a half ago.
Um and I think this is important
as you move into that special
session and then again the the
impact some people said they
these numbers were reported by
the health care authority so
health care the health care
authority reports and estimated
sixteen thousand two hundred and
twenty new mexicans could lose
snap benefits due to their
immigration status so that's
that last bullet there on the
newly and eligible clients which
picks up even more than just
immigration but it's tied to
that bullet on those costs one
oh nine one fourteen million and
one twenty million
also the health care authority
reported that fifty five
thousand seven hundred and
fifteen in mexicans recently
snap will be newly subject to
work requirements with twenty
thousand seventeen in mexicans
likely to lose snap benefits due
to work requirements and that
could just be lot everybody's
pretty much working right but
it's just reporting and all so I
want to clarify that because
they think allowed it times
people they oh you're not
working well people are working
it's just you have to report it
right and how you report in and
how this system reports it so
just want to clarify that point
manager.
And then last lee on side
sixteen health care authority
reported approximately two
thousand seventy seven new
mexicans could see a reduction
in snap benefits due to changes
and deduction allowances and
again that's that piece I said
when you go and you bring your
documents what actually
qualifies or doesn't qualify
like on your utilities you rent
your household size you know all
of that stuff so that's going to
depend on the roll out of the
rules so that's going to be
that's going to really matter a
lot so to summarise madam chair
is always we throw a lot of data
and a lot of numbers at this
committee so thank you for
always bearing with us i'm just
a summer eyes
we know that new mexico
struggles with food security and
and it's struggled even more so
for for children and all
for a while so it's not really
just as the best way twenty
three
we we perform poorly and this
date has made significant and
and the legislature is to be
commended that legislature the
state has made significant
recent investments that grow
funding and more throughout all
of these different departments a
hundred and eleven million plus
the thirty million growth
funding just for you know
looking at just recent fiscal
years
that we've made substantial
investments to a direct to
address food security in new
mexico however since the chunk
of that funding is just newly
infused into the system we won't
know it's total effectiveness
and then of course now the sand
is shifting also these looming
changes in the federal funding
and the roll out of these new
federal rules and could of
course have a major impact and
then lastly
the federal reconciliation bill
brings the new rise we talked
about um associated with snap
with our performance error rates
but I think the positive.
No potentially to leave you with
is that you know this date the
health care authority the income
support workers have performed
quite well in and past years for
an extended period of time so I
think there is every hope
hopefully that that they can do
so again so with that mandate
here we thank you and we're
happy to answer questions
okay thank you for that let me
look at the agenda um.
So.
Let's see a three minutes per
question so we'll start with
representative of an eye
no questions manager this is a
greater review I just switched
some of our counterparts were
also here too to hear the
devastation thank you.
Okay okay
don't forget to use your mike
thank you for this presentation
so my biggest question is under
this
error rate I I didn't quite
understand would cause it are we
paying people who should not be
paid or but we not pay in people
who should be paying but does
that mean
madam chair representative
hernin
I don't think a thing sometimes
so I don't I don't want to act
maybe I don't want my words to
sound like you fraud is being
committed something it's not
that I think just with anything
right when you're doing income
support work you have to clients
come forward you have to be
deemed eligible they're required
eligibility requirements in
order to do so it you have to
show like your your how deter-
documents to show your household
size you know your income of
course your utility all these
documents you bring and you have
you submit to show your
eligibility for these income
support programs including snap
and medicaid and what what
happens is the new mexico and
and and other state that across
the country this is really
across the country
some states maybe tend to give
eligible clients less than their
their technically eligible for I
think we in most states we in
new mexico and most other states
tend to maybe all repair then
you have to adjust so
that you know that these are
audited and then you do the
adjustments and so that's what
happens in that's most often
tied the specific component
piece is usually tied to
household size so that's usually
where there's confusion when
clients are coming forward.
And it can lead to some
overpayment so that's what I was
trying to indicate manager and
that's mostly what our payment
error rates are tied to and
that's pretty prevacive across
the country
well thank you for their that it
was.
Just interesting how it has a
ground over the years and so I
was.
And in that's probably fine and
I think that if we were actually
looking at what people are
actually earning it i'll be
wouldn't be an error rated all
because they probably need
though the money in the food
that we were providing but I do
want to go to the supplemental
to the supplemental full program
that we had for their schools
now it was supposed to be free
lunch and breakfast for every
signal student what I don't
understand is what percentage of
that was federal money if any
and what percentage of it was
state money was unclear from the
presentation
madam chair
I think that I don't want to
still the fender that then are
lfc staff is going to come and
provide for you it won fifteen
one thirty a whole program
evaluation on the universal that
world the school mill program so
I know that they're going to be
addressing that in detail so
so they will have the answers
more but basically
there's a fourth foot.
Cause there is an array of meals
program right first for kids
there's that's what we were
trying to get that at that for
earlier sites we have all these
programs and these aren't even
all the programs this is just a
few programs so some programs
like summary bt so summer mills
for kids that's funded through
the federal government and stop
we but will sometimes argment
these these programs are sorry
for the long answer with unstate
funding but some have state some
have federal answer you have to
look at all the specific
programs but the program of
valuation will have more than
thank you madame chair
representative look on thinking
around here peach sixteen
the
second less a point here the et
states about fifty five point
seven new mexicans receiving
staple nearly subject to work
requirements and then the
additional twenty thousand so is
that do we combine those two
numbers to get seventy five
point five that will be
affected due to work
requirements is that fair to say
manager manager I think that's
fair thank you.
Yeah this is
and so could it could impact
clarified so clarify so the
second last point where it says
ht it's about fifty five
i'm thinking that the fifty five
is the total number that will be
and then twenty out of the fifty
five okay
okay just making sure that that
was my clarifying question on
their peace as thank you I don't
share appreciate that
and then so this highlights his
pay highlights the population is
are most voluntary at risk as
well mountain.
Manager I think this was the
health care authority
authorities attempt to try and
quanify you know to make a
projection and estimate of the
snap implications so I think
other people might say other
populations are like the food
bang through they might say
they're populations are more on
the edge so I I don't know that
I can address that point but
this is the snap thank you match
it maybe we can get some more
specifics there in are we
talking about their
indiscussions and how the state.
Is looking to mitigate the
changes
of this with these impacts.
I have these these well impact
to see how we will meet a gate
you know how
how repointed you know help from
the statement
madam chair I think during the
special session you know coming
up that that's definitely we're
going to see a lot of discussion
around that so I think there's
talk about you know or we can it
just put in state funding to
offset some of this and then I
think i'll sell
I think people are discussing it
and all all these networks all
these areas so the food banks
that just are kind of people so
I think that's the keys um and
then of course the health care
authority you heard from them on
there trying to look at what
they can do to.
Update their it systems update
their forms
work with their training their
workers than all and should add
one other point I didn't may be
fully answer representative
hernin's question so as you
you had x amount of income
support workers we did the
legislature and the governor
signed we did put additional
funding over
from like.
Yeah fiscal years.
Now eighty nine nineteen twenty
twenty one we did put in some
additional funding
for growing the work force in
the income support division the
people who work on eligibility
for you know medicate and stop
for for clients
I don't I think they might argue
that we didn't put in as much as
they would want but there was
funding added but during those
times in during covered right
you saw the levels of people
going up so that's the case
loads increase so I just want to
be fair and say you know there
they didn't have to look at the
eligibility every six months
like it's going to happen under
reconciliation bill and people's
remained eligible but they still
had increasing substantial
increasing caseloads and so that
can impact your workers and that
him could impact our are are
error rates as well so I just
wanted to be fair and nothing
taken I was actually going to
talk about that the increased
time of that amount you're just
quickly to help how the
reduction in snap dollars effect
the grocery stores in
particularly in our rural areas
are we looking at that I mean
who you talk about that the
maybe it's an
it another presentation enter
managed here we are looking at
that and
we we have met
repeaterly now with the food
banks with road red around fee
we just met with eastern and
they talk about that a lot and
they're and feeling america has
some datas well that's not in
the sense of date of course that
we presented free so there is a
multiplier effect in it
particularly just in a nutshell
we have food desert thinking we
don't have enough grocery stores
we know per we're at about half
the rate where we should be i'm
just remembering these numbers
off the top of my head that's
particularly impactful in the
rural areas where the rural
areas where we do even have
someone places that take snap or
that our grocery stores in which
could be a regular grocery store
convenience stores dollar
generals.
Some people don't count
communitors and dollar generals
as grocery stores but then a
chunk of those won't even take
snap bt electronic benefits
transfers that's what he bt
stands for so it is particularly
a particular problem in this day
it will have a multiple effect
and it is particularly of
significance for role areas
thank you very much here are
just really quickly I just know
looking at that thirty million
dollars that we help get into
the budget for and talking about
the fifty percent divide without
in this regard with the follow
without question is without
infrastructure piece is going to
be so critical and crucial to
make sure that we have called
storage and we have those you
know the facility type of um
infrastructure for food in four
food banks arm i'm just really
interested for the you know this
next presentation and really
taking a little bit deeper dive
around what what this means for
our schools even our
universities and the food and
securities that we're talking
about here we have asked you
about that this is this is so
huge right now and having worked
you know a little more
diligently than in the years
past on the subject matter I I
have a lot of questions we don't
have the time to ask them but I
really appreciate your work on
all this and
it's really critical that we
have a full plan to get to to
work with everything and what we
have in place now thank you
I thank you madame chair and
thank you for your presentation
on both of you the
we did here
a santa ana casino where there
is some more of this information
madam chair that was a
presentative I said there at the
meeting night I happened to
serve as an advisory member on
the federal funding
stabilization sub committee as
the finance amount falls like
over for only go
but there is just so much
information that's been given to
the subcommittee and I know that
we're meeting back here in
october here in los cruces and
is for three days
and I anticipate that we're
going to have some pretty hard
discussions.
Um
I think and part of it matter
cheer to this is information for
us to look out but there's still
for a waiting to see what else
happens up in dc
for implementation because if
you look as to when the rules
are adopted there are similarly
as c as to whose dropped off
great so that's many who and are
immigrant community but it's not
that they're called your
determinology illegal just that
they have papers and others but
they will be summarily dismissed
so that's another chunk of
people that immediately drop
after all so they're starting to
a whole letter level madame
chair of of food and security
and what do we do for that that
that population to
so I think it's still you know
and I know that there's the bill
madame share
that you're they have to pass by
the end of this month
I don't think it's going to
happen in dc by the end in the
next couple of weeks to be
honest so I think we'll be back
again on another budget
reconciliation continuance as I
call it and who knows why what
happened and out just your so
we're still operating I think
for us as a a big question mark
and question market was our best
foot forward.
Um where I would ask madame
chairs this committee is so
important and I know we we are
advocating for this committee to
sit permit
because of the whole issues that
surround medicaid health we have
a big task ahead of us um
just looking at the federal
budget at this point but there's
has to be some more permanency
for our committee so that we
really have I think a foot not
just in the door but if you know
both feet friendly planted in
the conversation with our budget
committee the lfc and others to
make sure that um
that we just that were included
in that whole process so I i'm
anxious to hear more about the
schools information this
afternoon because madam share
even these numbers in my
community I can speak about mind
there are many families who are
on the snap and it's not that
big chunk of change but it's a
little bit of money that helps
to sustain and it makes a big
difference unless but not least
as the senior citizens I know
their example from work but if
there is a reduction in numbers
and in
you know how much money they
receive and it per it is our
perview as a state to make that
end those in spore so there is
still I think a lot of movie
parts madam chair that is
there's no definitive just yet
as i'll thank you
thank you and um
I was just thinking with the
suicide rate at nine percent you
have families who are more food
and secure what second to do to
people's state of mind it's a
little scary so I do have a few
questions you may or may not
have the answer
so
we have a high error rate that
people are getting what they
don't deserve and am put net
quotation marks so do we have a
sense of the number of folks who
actually would qualify for snap
benefits that we haven't reached
or have been applied.
Manager I don't have that number
but that's a good question
that's always an issue with
medicaid and staff all of these
that we know that there are a
number of people that do qualify
and are not on their programs so
I don't have that but I can
train request that it's
it just popped in my head I
didn't ask the question I got a
bill passed this year for money
to do snap outreach and the
governor retold it so
i'm not sure whether that was
good better otherwise at this
point with all that's happening
federally but
have you seen from healthcare
from the state a plan to end
maybe it's not advantageous to
get the error rate down maybe it
is who knows what you know
what's going to happen tomorrow
is there any kind of a concrete
plan to to reduce the error rate
manament here I think
eight the health care authority
secretary meal talk some about
that with you all in gallop in
case when she you know they've
looked at the projected number
that they would need for income
support they feel and are those
things so I think that they
would say that they are are
constructing a plan I I think
yeah
this weren't seems I mean
i'm just wondering how can you
document what your household
sizes I mean you know my my son
has shared custody with his his
his son's mother and it's hard
you know social security numbers
don't prove anything that you
know someone social so is is
there like a formula or a a list
of accepted docket I mean I
can't even imagine what that
would look like.
Madame chair could you repeat
that please i'm sorry I could
have some data for you know your
other question now
so how do you prove what your
household size is
that there's anything can prove
or disprove anything as far as
that goes
madame chair I i'm not
remembering their I just looked
at a really quiet
data document on their last week
and it is it was surprisingly
complex that component pieces of
your household or not so I know
that sounds like me be for a
little it it was not easy so I
think that's one of the the
issues across the country as
they said so I can't remember
all the details but
yeah so that's surprisingly hurt
and then to answer your other
question i'm doctor denses with
our staff just wrote back when
you said how many people are the
issue is how many people in new
mexico are eligible for snap but
not enrolled and so she writes
that the twenty twenty two day
there from the federal food and
nutrition services f n s
estimates new mexico has one of
the highest uptake read said
ninety nine percent so sounds
like most people who are
eligible are on it and she said
the confidence interval is
between ninety percent and a
hundred percent uptake so
and then
eric my other colleague is
saying there is used with self
attestation they think on the
households are indifferent that
so I think people may be conself
a test but there may be some
issues with that so our
colleagues are chipping in some
additional
folks I I just it's hard for me
to believe that we have ninety
nine percent I mean there's not
ninety nine percent of take of
anything that was twenty twenty
two manager so it's.
Could be night the same so the
data is a little different I do
i'm just surprised that it's
that high and because we know we
have folks who.
Just don't know about programs
or don't have the the
transportation or whatever to
apply
you are correct manager and the
avoid we were still under that
public health emergency area so
then everyone had was on so
that's what you'd be but that's
why I just had to think for a
minute so now yes definitely we
wouldn't be at that high number
his people
yeah that makes perfect sense
okay I think that's it for the
morning
so we will break and be back at
what let me see is there anyone
in the room who would like to do
public comment now we have yeah
okay then chair yeah should I
just have one point really quick
yes I I wanted to see the
citizen response to sort of what
senator lopez said in this is
that at a preview just when you
were talking vice year about
looking at these different
groups and and the the funding
committee the the federal funds
oversight committee and and and
what the outlook is I just
wanted to remind you while that
lfc's already started we got the
budget submitted on september
second in this case and we so
we're already needed pin budgets
and this committee goes before
the legislative finance
committee gives you a funding
priorities and your overall
priorities so that's going to be
coming up relatively soon so
just wanted to give as you'd
said that it remained in me so
just give you a heads up that
that's coming in that you'll
need to formulate that thank you
okay i'm throwing it up to the
lfc folks let us know asap so we
can
make sure we're available and
and have our ducks in a row
thank you both and welcome I
this was the easy start
okay if you want to come
forward.
And you'll have three minutes.
And just push the person to turn
the mike on and you'll have
three minutes thank you thank
you so much chair and committee
members my name is john hummer
i'm the ceol of community action
agency have southern new mexico
and also a representative of the
new mexico association of
community partners and thank you
for asking if I wanted to speak
instead of waiting to one
fifteen I appreciate you
I did want to speak to today
about the critical role
community action agencies or
case in new mexico play in the
context of medicaid and snap and
thank you even for you know
asking just some of your your
great questions about how I know
representative lewin had
mentioned you know how do we
mitigate this case but can help
with that so as you may know or
maybe you don't there are six
designated case and new mexico
that provide essential services
across thirty three counties
several public served between
seventy five thousand n ninety
thousand people each year we are
asking to be included we are
asking for a four point five
million for the ca a used to be
included in the health care
authority budget to sustain an
expand our family support
services and outreach efforts so
just a little history our
agencies have built trusted
relationships with new mexicans
for over sixty years we're able
to organize workshops
information sessions in local
communities educate residents on
issues many kid and supper fee
seen including eligibility
criteria navigate them
application price says we're
able to contact targeted
outreach campaigns to ensure
that eligible individuals and
families are informed about any
upcoming changes and also just
helping them to understand uh
the entire process which we know
is very difficult this is
something that we did due during
th.
The pen to make but also during
the roll out of aca so when that
was happening the community
action agencies were the ones
that were out there helping with
information and and employments
and getting families connected
to the resources that they need
but it actually in addition to
like the outreach we do provide
one on one assistance
we serve as navigators guiding
individuals through complexities
of enrollment and addressing any
questions are concerns and we
also help with mediation as
needed because a lot of times
you know as they're going
through the process working with
the state or whoever they're
working with there's just a lot
of problems and so we're the
ones that help them with that
we're collecting data were
providing feedback to
the state just to help with
any improvements i'm trying to
help identify barriers that
families
the the other thing though that
that we do is
um
we really do want to make sure
that families are receiving
comprehensive support so the
work that community action
agencies due is around family
well well being so we have
programs that are you know we
have straight out food banks
that that we have we have some
in it
up north oh well i'm sorry i'll
go fast but we do a lot of
programs programming in that
area
but we just want you to know
that the families that we work
with are the ones that are going
to be most affected by these
federal changes and we
definitely can play a video role
in a sustain the aca
with this unfortunate you know
thing that's happened into us so
I just wanted to take the
opportunity to come in talk
about that in just let you know
that we're here to help and to
let everyone know that there is
a state wide network of six
community action agencies that
work with almost a hundred
thousand people a year.
And we're doing so much work
around those families and we do
hope that we are going to be
included to help with some of
the challenges you all are
facing thank you so much for
presenting it for the work that
you do
thank you
committee we uhm again don't get
used to it we're done early uhm
oh up on the minute early so are
not too bad so enjoy your lunch
and enjoy the minute
we'll be back at one fifteen
oh and for those of you who are
listening on zoom we will uhm
start with public comment at one
fifteen
n so
where on lunch break.
