if you could rejoin.
It's got a whiff of almond
extract. I don't want to be
cranky, but
children, you will listen. Um,
um, so we have our presenters,
we have our committee slowly
filing back in.
If you could take your
conversations away from the
doorway, please, so that we can
hear in here uh pre preferably
come join us again, but um, so
we have Madam Secretary and, um,
go ahead. Thank you.
Um,
good morning, uh, or good
afternoon, Madam Chair. Members
of the committee, uh, my name is
Clayton Lobaugh, and I am a
program evaluator with the
Legislative Finance Committee
staff. Uh, today, I'll be going
over a program evaluation report
on um higher education,
workforce endowments, uh, you
should have it in front of you.
It looks like this, and then,
uh, after that, uh, we'll turn
things over to, uh, Secretary
Rodriguez
for a short, um
department response. Um, so, uh,
first, I would like to thank the
Higher Education department, uh,
the Council of university
presidents, the New Mexico
Independent Community College
Association, uh, and the New
Mexico Association of Community
Colleges for their coop
cooperation on this report. I
would also like to thank the
multiple academic and financial
officials that we spoke with at
Higher Education institutions
for this
uh, program evaluation.
Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, if you would please
turn to page one, for a summary
of the report.
So LFC has consistently heard in
the past that one of the
barriers to the state's
workforce in high demand fields
is not having enough faculty to
grow college programs.
Today's program evaluation
focuses on $170 million that
you, the legislature, dedicated
to creating endowments to help
colleges hire additional faculty
and grow college enrollment
capacity in the fields of
nursing, teacher education, and
social work programs.
This approach was intended to
turn non-recurring windfall
money into long-term investments
that could grow college
programs.
You appropriated this endowment
funding to the Higher Education
department or HED who
distributed the money to
colleges based on applications
and enrollment.
This evaluation finds that while
there are some bright spots and
progress has been made. The
envisioned program growth from
these appropriations has not
fully materialized yet.
While some programs have been
able to use the endowment
earnings to hire faculty such as
UNM's teacher education program,
INMU's social work program and
CNM's nursing program, other
programs have not deployed at
the Endowment earnings for
faculty salaries. The endowment
appropriations were sufficient
to support around 87 additional
faculty, but so far our
supporting around 52.
Now, there are some bright spots
and initial impacts from the
endowment appropriations, but
there were also some delays in
implementation issues.
These delays in implementation
issues found in this report
suggests that the higher
education system has a capacity
constraints on absorbing large
waves of appropriation which may
need additional monitoring,
and on implementation in the
future.
And now, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, if you would
please turn to page 3, I'll go
over the background of the
report.
So page 3 describes how New
Mexico currently has roughly
22,000 nurses, 23,000 teachers
and about 4300 social workers
If you turn to page 5, the
report shows that degree
production falls short of future
workforce needs. The state would
need to graduate and retain over
12,000 nurses, 11,000 teachers,
and 3000 social workers to
address the anticipated job
openings over the next 7 years,
as shown on chart 6, projected
degree completion in these
fields falls short of the
anticipated demand.
The higher education system
plays a pivotal role in
addressing these workforce
needs.
So as a strategy to increase
faculty and expand enrollment
capacity in nursing, education,
and social work, you
appropriated $170 million for
endowments to add faculty and
expand programs.
Figure 1 shows how the
endowments can generate
investment earnings to fund
additional faculty and graduate
more students.
If you'll turn to page 6, the
report shows uh HED allocated
most of the funds through a
formal application process, but
some of the social work funding
was distributed based on
enrollment.
The legislature appropriated
this funding over 3 fiscal
years, but most of the endowment
funding was appropriated in FY
23.
As shown on chart 7, 15
different higher education
institutions received these
endowment funds.
If you'll turn to page 7, you'll
see the programs receiving
endowment funds have
collectively had a flat
enrollment or decreasing
completions since FY 23. Now
these trends are not really a
reflection on the endowment
appropriations because
endowments take time to set up
and implement going forward and
hopefully these endowments will
help with increasing enrollment
capacity and degree completion
going forward.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee on page 8, you will
see that because of
underspending, colleges are not
fully using state endowment
funding to grow program
capacity.
Assuming investment returns of
at least 5% and spending at that
same level.
The funding, uh, should have
been able to support about 87
additional faculty positions.
However, there are currently
around 52 faculty supported by
these endowments. On page 9, the
report shows colleges and
universities earned $10.7
million on investment gains from
the FY23 endowment
Appropriations, but only spent
about 2.5 million on faculty
salaries. Chart 11 shows that
the FY 23
appropriations alone could have
supported an additional 73, uh,
faculty positions, um, but there
are 52 faculty in FY 25.
These 52 faculty did have an
impact in FY 25, teaching 326
courses and reaching almost 5000
students. These are promising
signs that some colleges were
able to use the earnings to hire
additional faculty.
If you'll now turn to page 10,
you will see on table 2 the top
5 programs who used endowment
earnings to support faculty. I
know, uh, UNM's education
program, social work programs at
ENMU, NMSU, and Highlands and
C&M's nursing program used
endowment earnings to support 22
faculty and, uh, reach over 3100
students in FY 25. This
represents a bright spot showing
how college programs can
leverage endowment earnings. At
the bottom of page 10, the
report shows how colleges are
increasing their budgets for
nursing, education, and social
work, signaling a promising
intent to grow these programs.
However, as shown on chart 12,
programs have underspent their
budgets in the past.
If you'll turn to page 11, the
gray text box describes how this
pattern isn't limited to
specific instructional programs.
NFY 24, State Colleges and
Universities collectively spent
$364 million less on instruction
and general purposes. Then they
collected in revenue, leading to
$1.8 billion in fund balances,
uh,
and this underspending suggests
a structural capacity issue to
fully dep
lo y available resources.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, if you'll please turn
to page 12, you will see that
colleges and HED's management of
endowment funds had delays in
implementation issues,
postponing serving more
students.
If you look on chart 13, you
will see that while HED
distributed most of the
endowment funds quickly. HED
distributed a third of the
endowments in an untimely
manner, delaying the impacts of
some endowments.
Staff turnover at the department
may have contributed to some of
these delays.
Uh, if you'll turn to page 13
and look at chart 14, you will
see that despite some delayed
funding, colleges were able to
earn investment gains on the
endowments in FY 23, 24, and 25.
HED has distributed the vast
majority of the $170 million.
However, as of mid-2025, HED had
not yet distributed $5 million
in FY 24 social work funding.
HED reports that it plans to
distribute the funds to
behavioral healthcare
organizations for clinical
supervision, uh, services, and
this is an allowable, uh,
expense if the clinical
supervision services are for
licensed social workers.
At the bottom of the page, the
report shows how at some
colleges investment earnings
have not been expended on
faculty salaries and instead
accumulated in accounts. For
example, if you'll turn to page
14 and look at figure 2
you will see that you and M
received 11.5 million for
nursing programs
Uh, the nursing endowments
earned 1.4 million in FY 25, an
investment earnings, but didn't
uh not spend any of the earnings
on faculty salaries.
UNM reports the lack of spending
was due to high turnover and
retention issues within its
nursing program.
Um
On the second half of the page,
the report discusses how UNM
applied for and received a $10.5
million social work endowment in
FY in 2023. UNM is in the
process of establishing a
master's of Social Work program
and this program will be a
positive development for the
state when the program is
established. However, UNM does
not anticipating, uh, does not
anticipate completing all
approval processes for its new
social work program
until at least FY 27.
If you'll turn your attention to
the gray text box on page 14,
um, the report describes how
ENMU was able to receive all
internal and external approvals
for a new social work, uh,
program within 2 years. NMU has
hired 3.5 faculty with a $9
million endowment and plans on
graduating 15 Masters of Social
Work students in FY 26.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh, if you'll turn to
page 15, the report shows how
northern New Mexico College
received $5.5 million in
endowments, but did not
distribute any earnings over
almost a 3 year period.
On page 16, you will see on
chart 15 that western New Mexico
University received over $22
million in endowment
appropriations since FY 23. Yet
the university has made no
distributions from the endowment
earnings on these endowments to
pay for faculty salaries.
Starting on page 17. The report
shows how some colleges used
endowment funds differently than
legislative budget language, uh,
instructed or intended.
For example, New Mexico
Highlands University received
money to create an endowment for
financial aid, for social work
students. However, despite
appropriation language and
guidance from the higher
education department shown on
Fire 7.
Highlands gave out $1 million
directly to students as
scholarship, scholarships rather
than creating an endowment to
fund financial aid in
perpetuity.
On page 18, uh, the report
discusses how San Juan College
reported that it would use a
nursing endowment to hire two
additional faculty.
Uh, but the money was instead
held in a contingency fund in
case a local partnership with a
hospital fell through. Now this
partnership with the hospital
will be a positive development
for the state and will increase
the college's capacity in
enrollment by 50%. However, this
partnership was not in the
college's original application
for funding and was the reason
for the delayed spending from
the endowment. San Juan College
now reports that it is ready to
hire a faculty
with earnings from these
endowment funds, and the
partnership with the hospital is
uh moving forward.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, if you would now turn
to page 19, 9 shows that over
the past 3 years, NMSU spent
more of its endowment earnings
on foundation operations than on
faculty salaries. NMSU and its
Dona Anna branch received $34
million in endowments since FY
23, which earned $6.4 million in
investment gains. 1.2 million of
these gains were spent on the
operations of the NMSU
Foundation, while only 795,000
has been spent on faculty
salaries. Since the enimusU
Foundation did not have to
fundraise for these
appropriations, the need for
general administrative fees on
these appropriations that are
separate and distinct from
investment management fees, is
questionable.
If you'll turn to page 2
Figure 10 shows how UNM and its
Gallup branch received $42
million in endowments since FY
23, earning about $14 million in
investment gains. $1.9 million
of the gains were spent on
operations of the UNM
Foundation, while only 942,000
were spent on faculty salaries.
Now, if you would now turn to
page 2 at the beginning of the
report, you will see some of the
key recommendations listed.
This report recommends that
colleges use their endowment
investment earnings on faculty
salaries and other allowable
expenses.
and renegotiate the fees on
funds received through state
appropriations. And now, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, uh, with your
permission, I'll turn things
over to Secretary Rodriguez for
a brief response for um, a brief
response to the report and then
stand for committee questions.
Thank you so much, Clayton, and
members, Madam Vice Chair, Madam
Vice Chair and members of the
committee, thank you so much for
allowing me to be here to
provide a response today.
Um, the department has provided
an official response which you
have a copy of. It looks like
this, and I appreciate the time
and effort that went into the
legislative Finance Committee's
independent analysis, and I
appreciate the opportunity to
respond today. The department's
presentation looks like this, as
I already said, and we will be
referencing a lot of the data in
this document. As we can attest,
the state of New Mexico via the
executive and legislative
branches of government are
working to strengthen
high demand and high need
workforce areas. As a matter of
fact, in 2022, this committee
and many others have identified
three priority areas, which
included nursing, social work,
and teaching. And as the LFC
noted in their response to
address this, the legislature
appropriated 175 million in
endowments for faculty positions
in student financial aid in the
three noted critical workforce
areas.
The appropriations from fiscal
year 2023 to 2025, to each
higher education institution are
within our response on pages
one, I'm sorry, 23, and 4. The
LFC's program evaluation notes
on the very first page that the
department had unnecessary
delays in distributed a third of
the funds in an untimely manner,
over halfway through the fiscal
year. However, looking at our
official memos, award letters,
and announcements, we issued the
funds
in the following time frames and
well before that 6 month mark
mentioned, and that is also
noted in the response. So in
fiscal year 2023 endowments,
which are laid out on page 2,
the request for applications
were due to the department on
August 1st, 2022. Awards were
announced in September for
$130.5 million of the $150
million appropriation. The
reasoning for the $19.5 million
shortfall is quite simple.
Only 3 institutions requested
funds totaling $30.5 million in
social work. And because of
this, I personally worked with
higher education institutions on
capacity concerns and reissued
the RFA in which 2 more
universities sent proposals and
were awarded the remaining $19.5
million before the end of the
fiscal year in 2023.
Looking at these funds now,
however, I would have
recommended a $50 million
appropriation to nursing, and
only $30 million to social work,
the reason being is our nursing
programs know how to do
endowments. It's very common for
them. They receive donations.
They receive more money from all
assets of the aspects of the
government and know how to do
this.
Now, let's move forward to
fiscal year 2024 on page three.
The department received $10
million for nursing endowments.
We had experience this time.
This was a new concept for our
department. Um, we were able to
issue the $10 million
the announcement was in August,
prior to Governor Lujan Grisham
and many legislators who are
even in this room, broke ground
at the College of Nursing that
is now at the University of New
Mexico. In fiscal
year 2024, you will see that we
also received $20 million in
funding for endowments or
student financial aid and social
work for scholarships and paid
practicums and master level
programs. A memo for the 15
million toward endowments to
support financial aid was issued
in July. Something that I have
to note that's very technical in
nature, and I apologize is for
financial aid, we don't put
money out the door at the
beginning of the fiscal year,
the beginning of the semester.
It's
actually a drawdown from the
university at the end of the
semester on the actual
scholarships that were awarded
versus us giving them a lump sum
and then not awarding that, and
then they get to keep the money.
We do it on the actual number of
students who receive
scholarships to protect the
state of New Mexico and your
investments.
Now, the 5 million remaining was
a very unique appropriation and
opportunity for our department.
The funding was intended for
scholarships and paid practicums
for students who are likely
already graduated and we're
entering the workforce.
Therefore, the funding channels
through the universities were
not applicable. We began this
work with momentum, I can assure
you, for that $5 million
appropriation, we convened
professionals and constituent
groups from the Social Work and
mental and
behavioral health fields to help
frame the scope of work and we
originally aimed to manage the
funds without a third party
administrator, however, due to
the specialized nature of the
funding, we recognize the need
for sector-specific expertise
that our department did not
have. We are now partnering with
Falling colors and organization
already trusted by the New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Collaborative to ensure funds
are delivered effectively and
with fidelity to the original
tint of the language. And
last on page 5, we venture into
fiscal year 2025 with $10
million for endowed faculty and
financial aid for students
pursuing bachelor's and master's
degrees. These funds were issued
in October 3 months after the
start of the new fiscal year. I
want to note, Madam Chair and
committee members that this year
the department has learned and
grow the past year with all
these endowments. We had a lot
of staff turnover and
adjustments at our agencies with
institutional finance
financial aid, and the
administrative Services
division. However, we are now
fully staffed and all funding
and guidance for higher
education institution for this
past fiscal year or this fiscal
year or fiscal year 26, has
already been issued and out the
door madam chair, so we are
learning and we're doing better.
I can assure you of that.
Additionally, to avoid any
miscommunication with our
legislative partners. We also
include the legislative Finance
Committee on all of our memos,
guidance, and distributions to
the
institutions. Now, before we
dive into the data, I want to
discuss these funds from the
higher education sector
perspective. Although the
rollout of these funds may have
appeared slow. Many colleges and
universities had to to develop
new internal structures to
manage and deploy the funding,
especially our smaller rural and
frontier institutions. Since
these funds were a new concept
to their internal business
offices. Some, particularly
those without
prior infrastructure, did not
have experience managing
endowments of this scale or
access to the financial
institutions within their own
communities that could handle
these endowments, um, which
required additional time to
fully implement their awards.
Additionally, the term endowment
carries a very different
meaning, um, in higher education
than what is assumed in this
evaluation. We have explained
the difference of endowment in a
traditional sense versus end
ow ment appropriations on page
one of our response. Now, let's
dive into my favorite part,
which is always the data, you
know, I always come with data to
these meetings. Typically
program evaluations have a
significant amount of data as a
baseline to the analysis, that
official validated data from our
department is missing. It's not
from our dear E-Dear system. So
I do want to bring that forward
today. Within our response, you
have enrollment data on page 5
and completion data on pages 8
and 9 for nursing, teacher
education, and social work
programs starting from academic
year 2021 to 20222, the year
before the implementation of the
endowments. Three positive
takeaways that I can give you
today from this data set.
Undergraduate student headcount
across all three subject areas
increased by 12.6% from the
2021-922 academic year to the
2024-25 academic year.
Graduation among
students in teacher education
and alternative licensure
programs has increased by
approximately 19% over the past
four years. And in an additional
internal analysis completed by
the department, nearly every
awarded college and university
has seen an enrollment increase
in either undergraduate or
graduate programs or both in
every subject area called out
for the endowments.
Now I'm gonna dive into an
enrollment analysis on page 6.
As far as nursing is concerned,
6 of our 7 4-year new universe
call, I'm sorry, for your
universities and all 17 of our
16 of our 17 community colleges,
including branches have nursing
programs. The two largest
programs are in Albuquerque at
the University of New Mexico and
Central New Mexico Community
College. Overall, undergraduate
enrollment in nursing programs
has
increased by 22.3% over the past
four years. However, the
graduate level has seen a small
decline. If we break this data
down by institution though, both
eastern New Mexico University in
New Mexico State University have
increased enrollment in their
graduate nursing programs and
New Mexico Highlands University
developed a doctoral degree in
nursing, which was approved by
the state Board of Finance this
year.
or last year, Doctoral degrees
in nursing are critical to
filling cartical care gaps in
rural and frontier communities
statewide, and our universities
are working really hard to
address that occurring, a
growing need. For teacher
education, 92% of students are
actually enrolled at the
undergraduate teaching level
programs. An undergraduate
enrollment has increased by only
1% since the 2021-22 academic
year. However, graduate
enrollment grew by 2.5
% and 6% in total student credit
hours. There are two things to
consider here. One, salary
increases for our educators. New
Mexico has one of the highest
teacher salary out averages in
the region at $68,440 in the
2023-24 school year.
Additionally, pursuing a
graduate certificate degree in
microcredential allow for
teachers to be eligible for
higher pay in the state of New
Mexico. And 2, because of the
legislature and the
governor, the teacher
affordability scholarship Act
was actually amended in 2023 to
include teachers pursuing
graduate degrees. Now, let's
switch over to social work.
Although there is a growing need
for individuals graduating with
a master's degree in social
work. There are a number of
programs at the undergraduate
level. Um,
I'm sorry, I lost my
place here
At the undergrowing in social
work, there are a number of
programs that the undergraduate
level that are critical in
preparing students for
enrollment at higher level
programs in the future. It is
promising to see that the
2021-922 academic year
undergraduate enrollment in
social work programs has
increased by 33.4%. This tells
us there's a growing level of
interest in the field, and it
could potentially lead to an
increase in graduate programs
within the coming academic
years. And then we're gonna jump
to completion.
Although there have been strides
and enrollment across all higher
education programs in the state,
the ultimate goal that we all
have is increased completion,
meaning graduation. And those
data sets are on pages 8 and 9.
There have been increases in
students graduating from teacher
education programs, but
completions have remained
relatively flat in nursing and
social work, which you'll see in
that data. We truly recommend a
crosswalk approach to reviewing
enrollment completion and
licensure requirements
by our boards in these fields.
The state's boards set the
professional requirements, but
working in collaboration with
the higher education
institutions, it is critical for
alignment, like we did for
nursing in 2018.
I want to reiterate that
increased enrollment and
undergraduate programs is a sign
that interest in these fields is
growing and can lead to
increased graduates in the
future academic years. However,
it takes time for students to
progress through a program and
with these types of funds, so
increases in completion from
increased enrollment may not
show up in the agency's data
sets until fiscal year 2027, 28,
29, etc. The data due for the
2024-25 academic year will be
available
in September and it may not show
the increases that you're
wanting to see. So what are we
doing now? What is our response
to this performance evaluation.
You're probably wondering, uh,
due to a recommendation within
the LFC's program evaluation and
with the close of fiscal year
2025. This past June in which
the last of the endowment funds
were distributed. The department
issued a memo to all awarded
higher education institutions,
requesting the total number of
faculty, the application
s they received the new hires
and the separations so that we
can present that to you at a
later date. And the number of
students served by the program
in 6 semesters since the
endowments were implemented.
Additionally, due to concerns
with the university's
foundations, which we also have
concerns with. We have
approached the office of the
state auditor to assist us in
reviewing these specific
endowments. More information
will be forthcoming. And last, I
want to draw your attention to
an op ed authored by our
department
' s deputy secretary, Doctor
Patricia Trujillo, who also
happens to be a tenured
professor from a regional
comprehensive university in New
Mexico. She truly understands
the nuances of endowments and
their purpose and explains that
it in this editorial. Endowments
take time, as my partner here
also mentioned and our colleges
and universities are working to
truly build that capacity and
hire that faculty and the
benefits will reap in the near
future. So
in closing, Madam Chair and
members, the Higher Education
department will continue to
collect and review data
pertinent to nursing teacher
education and social work.
Additionally, we welcome
conversations and collaboration
as the higher education sector
in legislative proposals and
budget requests for the upcoming
30 day session that you all are
getting ready for. And just so
you all know, joining me today
is Chief of Staff Gerald Honey
and my other colleague Dr. Britt
Shaughnessy of the Academic
Affairs and Policy Division, who
' s doing a lot of the work
mentioned in that memo that I
talked about. Thank you again
for your time today. I know I
blew through that, maybe not
fast enough, but I tried my
best, and we are now open to
questions if you are Madam
Chair.
Thank you for that. So before I
open it up for questions, I want
to go back to you, Clayton. Um,
has the LFC been been, has this
been presented to the committee.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, yes, this report
was presented on July 24, 2025.
And could you please summarize
any concerns, any actions, any,
anything that came out of LFC
around this report.
Um, Madam Chair, members of
committee, I'll, uh, do my best
on recollecting the hearing, but
um
let's see,
uh, questions were asked, uh,
regarding the um
uh on the use of the audit or on
the use of the endowment
earnings for, um, foundation
operations and then follow up
questions to the department
regarding their collaboration
with the Office of the State
Auditor were um a definite point
of questions.
Thank you. Uh, I did see some
things that made me go holy
smokes, this is wrong. And
uh
so I will go to the committee,
um, I just wanted to be sure
that LFC had had weighed in, um,
just so that we could get their
take. And I think I'll start
with Senate Senator Pinto, no.
Representative Johnson.
OK,
Senator Pope.
I'm good mature
OK, Representative Anaya.
I will have questions, Madam
Chair. I am
absorbing all of this right now.
So if you could please come back
to me, I would appreciate it.
And uh I think I will give 4
minutes, Representative Chavez.
Yeah, it, thank you, Madam
Chair. It's a lot to try to
absorb in just a few minutes.
Um, but one of the questions
that I have is with regard to
the folks who are coming out of
each of the um uh professions
that you talk about. Do you,
does anyone track
where those students are.
uh, either going to work or
whether or not they're staying
in New Mexico to work. Is there
any tracking of that?
Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, the state has
provided funding for a statewide
longitudinal data system housed
within the higher education
department. Um, I'm, uh, I'll
turn it over to the secretary to
give updates on that.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
the state does track that. There
are two components of that.
That's the Department of
Workforce Solutions, who we work
in coordination and
collaboration with for the New
Mexico statewide longitudinal
data system, also known as New
Mexico rice, which the
legislature has been incredibly
generous in funding, um, the
past 3 years. We did do
performance evaluation with
Clayton actually last year that
looked at those post-secondary
degree credentials, but at the
certificate level
for non-credit, we are planning
on doing an expansion of that
internally at the higher
education department using the
statewide longitudinal data
system to see where people are
employed and how much they're
making, but you can currently
see that on our system as we
speak bisector, by age, by race,
ethic and ethnicity, um, by
going to NM right or
rise.nm.gov.
Um, and then I'll probably have
to ask you for that again
because I didn't write it down.
Um, but there was another
section in the report
um, that talked about the UNM
School of Social Work.
And
I'm looking for the page, but
there was also sort of a little
um
discussion about eastern New
Mexico. They were able to set up
their social work program in 2
years. Do we know why it's
taking you and Em so long to set
theirs up.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, let me, uh, find the
exact page. Well, he's finding
that. What I will say is the
University of New Mexico is
currently going through the
Higher Learning Commission for
the accreditation process, so
they're almost across the finish
line. We did award these funds
approximately 1 year and a half
ago, so they're not at that
two-year point yet, um, but they
are looking to be done within
the next, hopefully 6 months
starting in fall 2026,
having their first cohort on
campus. And a follow up to that,
what is their cohort look like?
How many numbers are they
looking at in terms of that
first cohort? Um, Madam Chair,
they have not enrolled any of
those students yet, and I don't
have those numbers offhand, but
you might know Clayton. I don't
have specifics on the cohort
size. Another element is that I
think the some of the initial
plans on um the program being
developed was initially a
partnership between UNM and NM
S U for uh joint social work,
uh, program, um, those for
partly for accreditation reasons
and, and just um decisions made
by the institutions that
partnership, um, they went in a
different direction. So, and
then internal processes for
approval, external processes for
approval and accreditation
approval as the secretary
mentioned. So those were all
reasons provided. And Madam
Chair, do we have a sense of how
many faculty UNM plans to to
hire for the social
work program.
If you don't know, that's fine.
I'm just wondering, Madam Chair,
members of the committee at this
point, I don't have that um data
point. OK. And then the other
question that I have has to do
with um
the money's getting out late to
the universities.
Can I? OK, thank you.
Um, so you said, Madam
Secretary, that that problem had
been
taken care of in terms of there
was transitions and I think uh.
uh turnover and staff. So my
concern would be if the money is
getting out late, then that's
gonna impact the kind of
planning that the universities
can do in terms of, for example,
the upcoming school year. Um, so
is that going to happen again? I
mean, I would hope that it's
not, because again, I think that
that really creates a problem
for, for schools who are trying
to
get going for the upcoming
school year. Madam Chair, it's a
fair question, right? I did
provide the timeline that we had
at the higher education
department. Nearly all of the
funds were awarded, distributed,
or the methodologies were in
place by September, the start of
the fiscal year is July 1st.
Once again, it was new for us.
We, we've never had the size of
endowments. I will tell you as
of this fiscal year, fiscal year
2026, all of that was done by
the first week of July. All of
our guidance methodologies,
distributions, so we have no
delays whatsoever now.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair
Representative Ferrari, thank
you, Madam Chair, and, um
I'm not sure, uh, it was on page
14 discussion of ENMU being able
to stand up their program in 2
years and then discussion of
UNM, um,
uh was going to work with NMSU,
um
to, um, you know, get support
and help, but then that didn't
happen, and UNM is taking a lot
longer, and I was wondering if
what some of the barriers were.
Um
so Madam Chair, uh, members of
the committee, um, I, I think,
uh, so part of it was the
partnership, uh, the
institutions going in a
different direction from that
partnership, uh, and then, um,
curriculum development, um,
internal processes for approval
and then working on uh
accreditation.
Um
yes
And Madam Chair Representative,
the other thing that's important
to know about eastern New Mexico
University and how they were so
fast and efficient as they
fronted their own money to start
and develop the work to plan the
program out while the endowment
increased in those funds so that
they could pay their faculty and
staff when they hired them,
which was, I think, 3.5 faculty
members that they did hire, but
they did front their own money
to start that program, whereas
the University of New Mexico
waited to
receive the $10.5 million
appropriation to start that
work.
Is this about
the answer or something else?
Oh, OK.
That's all right.
Madam Chair, I don't know if you
want me to answer Representative
Chavez's question or if you want
to finish representative
Ferrari's questioning first.
Uh
it's fine with me. I'm finished.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Harari. Madam
Chair, I did get a result. The
first cohort or uh a response,
the first cohort at the
University of New Mexico in fall
2026 will be approximately 15 to
25 students with 3 full-time
faculty members. So thank you to
the University of New Mexico for
getting that information. Very
briefly, but don't make it a
habit. It, uh, but just quickly,
is the, is the UNM, is it a
one year or a two-year program
for social work? Madam Chair, it
will be a two-year program for
social work. Thank you.
OK, um
Senator Charlie
you
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
what are the accountability
measures in place when
I just thought that was really
loud, sorry. Um, accountability
measures in place when the
money's not spent, can HED
reclaim some of that, especially
given the report on, um,
non-privileged or foundation
funding.
Madam Chair, a pullback of that
funding would have to actually
be a legislative ask that would
have to be laid out in House
Bill 2 for us to pull back that
money at this point in time, it
does sit in those accounts.
Very well, thank you. And then
did no tribal colleges apply for
the funding out of those 15 that
were awarded.
Mister Chair, um, it was very
clear in statute, the higher
education institute, so it was
to public higher education
institutions, and as my friend
Senator Pinto knows, we always
get into drama with this because
the actual state definition of
public higher education
institutions, unfortunately, it
only goes to the 24 Formula
funded institutions. So we've
actually been working very
closely with um our legislators
that when there is language in
the future
put forward for any sort of
endowments or funding to higher
education institutions. We put
public higher education
institutions and tribal colleges
because then they will meet that
criteria of that definition. I
appreciate that, Madam Chair and
secretary, um, I know that NTU
is struggling right now with
funding and recruiting. So, um,
I would have liked to see them
in this, but good, good call. I
will keep that in mind.
Um
who's reviewing the P&L
statements? Does HED have that
information to know exactly
like, yeah, there's a portion
going to salaries. There's a
portion, I want to know where is
the actual money going? And who
knows that information?
Uh, I, I'm sorry, could you
repeat the question? Profit and
loss statement from the
universities. Is that
information made
um available to HED or to LFC?
Um, there are, um, uh, annual
like audits and financial
reports produced by the, uh,
foundations and colleges
regarding their financial
statements, but we don't have a
line. I, Madam Chair, I
apologize. Madam Chair, we don't
have a line item accountability
of how that money is actually
being spent.
Madam Chair, if I can't,
Clayton, so fiscal year 25 was
the end of all of the 170 $175
million of endowments that we
did receive. With the end of the
fiscal year, we issued an a memo
to request exactly what you're
asking for, and I actually have
Doctor
uh, I'm gonna say Doctor Brett
because I always have trouble
with their last name. She just,
um, issued the memo for that. Do
you want to briefly say what
you're requesting in that memo
for the chair and the senator.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, in this survey that
we just issued the memo for on
the bottom, we are asking our
institutions to please provide
the headcount of faculty whose
salaries are being paid out of
the general fund entirely. The
endowment appropriations
entirely or that are getting a
salary supplement from the
endowment, um, appropriations,
and then they have to list them.
So
hopefully the survey will yield
results that allows us to
understand how this money was
implemented into faculty
salaries.
And Madam Chair, Senator, I also
think you're trying to drive out
the foundation question as well,
which provides a lot of
concerns. So how is that money
being spent? That is something
we can add to this memo and
survey and request how that
money is being spent as well.
I appreciate that, Madam Chair.
And, um, just in closing two
things.
when
legislation is moving through
the process and we know that
there, I can only work on what I
know, and if we, if HED knows
that that language is very
specific and money will not get
to tribal colleges if we don't
flag it. We need to know that so
that we can do our jobs to make
sure that that money gets to
those communities. The second
piece is my niece goes to UNM
and she's in the College of
Nursing, and none of this money
is getting to her. Her mom is
footing the bill. She has not
been approached or addressed by
the university
to help her to support her
through this. She's working a
job outside of the university
setting on top of this grueling
curriculum to get herself
through college. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, if I can, Senator,
I'd love to get your niece's
contact information so we can
see if she's eligible for
scholarships and then
understanding if she's undergrad
or grad, my team will walk her
through that one on one. I
appreciate that and I want that
for more than just my niece.
Absolutely. We have a helpline
number that anyone can call.
We're in busy season and we will
walk crosswalk any financial aid
with any individual, whether
it's in state or out of state,
Madam Chair.
Representative Blan
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna go to the LFC
report page 17 regarding the use
of funds and so the report
appears to make clear that HED
awarded funds for research for
non-teaching positions.
even though the legislature's
budget language requires that
that the endowment funds are
used for active teaching
facility directly engaged with
students and I'm just wondering
why did HED ignore that
directive and isn't in, isn't
that in violation of the spirit,
if not the letter of the law,
since I did not see that
specific point addressed in
their response.
So I'm just wondering if uh you
can clarify that for me. Um.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, quick thing. So
this is, uh, page 17 regarding,
um, so, uh, you're talking about
page 17? Yeah, the use of the
funds that were not necessarily
in the budgetary language. So
that, uh, finding on the bottom
of that page, uh, actually
relates to how, um, New Mexico
Highlands University allocated
the funds, so HED um
HED allocated the funds to New
Mexico Highlands based on their,
uh, application, then, um, New
Mexico Highlands, uh, the
funding was intended to create
an endowment for financial aid,
um, but the funds were allocated
as scholarships rather than as
an endowment for financial aid.
At that point, it was allocated
to, um, the, uh, Highlands
University.
rather than the department.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So then
regarding that, was that money
clawed back because it was not
used properly at
that institution. Um, Madam
Chair, um, members of the
committee no funding has been
clawed back or anything. Those
were just allocated as a
scholarships. Madam Chair, with
the end of the fiscal year, we
sent out a survey so we can
understand how those dollars
were used and then make a
determination based on what
Highlands reports back to us.
They may have an opportunity to
use their current existing funds
to fill that hole and then put
the rest of the money back into
the endowment. They're working
through that right now, and
they'll be reporting it to us,
um, through that survey.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And so I
guess I'm just, I guess I'm
piggybacking off some other
questions about the
accountability metrics in here.
So if there is an institution
that does not necessarily follow
the guidelines. Well, I mean,
the guide, the thing is the
guidelines with this
from HED they appear to
be in in compliance with
whatever NMHU did because it
says you can use it for to
support financial aid through
endowments, but not specifically
scholarships. So I just want to
make sure, let's just say an
institution does not follow that
and they expend the funds
incorrectly. What more than just
a slap on the wrist or, oh,
maybe do better next time. Will
we be freezing their funding
until they're in compliance and
then where, where does that go
regarding the, the state auditor
and then their audits
independently. How do we ensure
that they are following the
lock s We're, I, I'm kind of
sick of people just using funds
for something else and then
saying, oh, just kidding, we
actually made a mistake. There
needs to be accountability. So
what, what specifically is that?
So maybe one of your team
members can give us an answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much, Representative
Block, for the question.
Um, so the higher education
department, you know, as the
secretary mentioned in her
presentation.
you know, um, you know, we have,
we have worked on, uh,
continuing to build up on the
processes that we have in place
for oversight of all state
funding that goes through, uh,
the agency.
Um, in this particular issue,
when it comes to the endowments
and the use of those endowments,
the way that the department
prepared these applications was
ensuring that it met the
language of the legislation,
ensuring that institutions that
applied provided us with the doc
with information to support the
use of the funding to ensure
that it matched what their
intent was.
and then from there, that
funding was then awarded.
Now
with this report that was done
by the LFC and then with the
work that we're doing at the
agency.
We've also communicated with the
Office of the State Auditor.
because the Office of the State
Auditor also has been having
conversations with our
department about the use of
funding by institutions, um, um
I just draw a blank
Hm
By their, uh, foundations, my
apologies, Madam Chair, um,
the use of funding by their
foundations.
And so we are working closely
with the state auditor, uh, on
auditing of foundations that is
gonna specifically target the
use of endowment funds as well
as other funds that foundations
are responsible for maintaining
and managing for institutions.
And so that is a process, a
representative block that that
we are embarking on in order to
ensure that this funding is
being utilized appropriately.
Next steps
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
uh, is, you know, once that is
established, then we will make a
determination on what those
appropriate next steps are, uh,
whether it be the uh clawing
back of funding as, as has been
mentioned, uh, or, uh, an
understanding of how to
appropriately approach ensuring
that the students that are the
recipients of this funding are
still supported.
Thank you, Madam Chair. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
probably, I don't know if I have
any time, but no, you don't. But
as, as I was saying anyway,
Madam Chair,
that like the money
it goes to the institutions
based upon their applications,
or is it just automatically
given to the institution. So
with the application, did they
say it's going to be for
scholarships? I'm just trying to
figure out clarity on that, or
did it say we're going to go to
the endowment, and instead they
used it for scholarships to
animate you, Mister Chair. So
this money was a memo that went
out with distribution
methodologies, so it is an
automatic distribution that
specifically told them it had to
be used for endowments for
financial aid in which they did
not
follow the guidance and once
again we're collecting
information for them to either
pay back that money, put the
money back into an endowment,
vice, all of that stuff we're
going to work with the
institution on that. OK, thank
you so much, Madam Chair.
Appreciate your help on that.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair
I'd like to go to
uh, page
5
this handout
So I, I need help understanding
or making sure I understand what
these numbers mean
in nursing enrollment from 2021
to 2025. You go to total
graduate student credit hours.
I'm sorry, which, which, um,
pay?
OK, all right, sorry
Um, it's negative 11.6%.
Uh, can you, can you explain
that to me? I'm really having a
hard time with these negative
numbers. Madam Chair, yes, so
it's a decrease in the total
amount of classes that those
nursing students are taking at
the institution, that academic
year. OK, thank you. And now,
could we go to page
8
and that same handout.
and we're looking at program
completion data. Students
graduating with credentials and
nursing, teaching, and social
work.
very end, 2019 to 2024 change,
you have
1 to 2-year certificates, a
negative 41.7%, associate's
degrees and negative 8.3%.
Bachelor's degrees, a negative
0.3%.
And at the, at the bottom got a
total of 2.3%. So that's
that's really discouraging. And
then on the next page,
um
social work completion, 2019 to
2024 change and 0.4 negative.
change. And I, I guess, you
know, I'm, I'm not as familiar
maybe as some of these folks
with a endowments and what our
expectations are
But
compared to the need that we're
we have for nurses and compared
to what I think we, the spirit
of giving this money for an
endowment
purposes and increasing our
graduates and, and actually
coming up with, with the real,
um
determination of whether our
education is successful, which
is employment status compared to
that. This is just so
discouraging. I, I don't even
know.
I don't even know how to process
this.
Um, at what point do we
what were our expectations here
and at what point do we evaluate
whether we're successful with
this allocating this money for
endowment.
Um
so, um, Madam Chair, uh, members
of the committee are regarding
the, um, regarding the
expectations and uh checking in
on the uh, the endowments, um,
that's part of, you know, this
report is checking in on the
status and impacts of the, uh,
$170 million in in
appropriations. As far as, uh,
like, um,
language in the appropriation
specifying out, um, a definitive
timeline. That wasn't there, but
the, um, you know, from the
appropriations to uh increase
faculty in order to increase
enrollment capacity, um, based
on, uh, the analysis in this
report, um, about 80, the
endowments were sufficient to
provide, uh, uh, funding for
a, um, 87 additional faculty and
at the time of this report there
were 52 supported.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
did you break that down as to
how many of those, um, you said
87 and how many were actually
employed 50 something?
He just said that. I'm sorry.
Uh, no, no worries, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
that would be 52, um, and
there's, uh, yes, that would be
52. Just curious, Madam Chair
and presenters, how, how many of
those were nursing faculty.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, if you would, that is
delineated on uh
page 58 of the report Appendix
I.
OK, I guess my time is up, but.
I appreciate we may have a
second go around, um, depending
on how things go. So we'll go to
back to Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll try
to get through my first two
comments a little bit more
quickly. Um, some of these
things, I was like, I'm really
mad about this. And I started
reading through and I was like,
I don't know if I'm as mad as I
thought I was, but for other
things, I'm just as Matt. So
here we go. Um
I'm looking at the actual
rollout, um, and I'm, I'm very
much focusing on UNM. It is in
my district, so I am doing that.
I feel like every single
institution looks a little bit
different. And so part of my
analysis is, I think the LFC
report is kind of like
it's always a good overview in
terms of numbers, but it doesn't
always tell each of the stories,
which I think is, is really
important, um.
so I'm looking at this here, um,
the College of Nursing rollout.
And at first I was like, what
the heck? Why is it 2025 and
people, you know, are barely
getting money. And then I looked
at the breakdown, right? So you
get awarded in 2022. You invest
in 2023. Earnings are available
in 2024. And so to me, I'm like,
it makes sense if you're putting
money somewhere else to spend
it.
later. It makes sense, um, the
second piece that I want to talk
about is maybe Highlands, um,
because we had a presentation
from them recently and I was
like, oh, that's great. Like
they give their students
straight up money. Absolutely.
Like students are totally
suffering over here. I
understand it wasn't legislative
intent, um, but I will, I'm
commenting on this because I was
happy that the money is not just
sitting there and it's not going
somewhere like nefarious. That's
great to me that it went there.
No, not legislative intent.
but I'm also looking at the
language from the memo on page
17, um, from the higher ed
department. It says, quote, For
endowments to support financial
aid, including scholarships and
practicums for New Mexico
residents, da, da, da da keeps
going.
And so I'm, I mean,
I, I don't
I don't know what the
legislative appropriation
language was, but I feel like
that could just be loosely
interpreted if you're looking at
the higher education guidance
because it, you know
it doesn't say you need to
invest this money. An endowment
could just be a gift. Um, not
necessarily invested. And so
that I thought that was
interesting. Um
now the pieces that I'm more
concerned about right now. Um,
are the foundation pieces. I, I
don't, can, can somebody help me
understand why money would be
going to a foundation in the
first place. I, I think I'm just
kind of clueless about that.
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, so the
appropriations were initially
directed to the higher education
department. And then based on
either, um, applications or, um,
formula distributions based on
enrollment, um, funding was
provided to the higher education
institutions to set up an
endowment. And then, um, the
institutions could either um
have the endowment managed by,
uh, and, and having
an agreement with their
foundation, if, um, or with, uh,
the state Investment council,
um, and in those cases you're
referring, um, that would have
been money, uh, managed by the,
um,
a foundation
OK, and I'm imagining if you're
going to give a foundation money
to invest. He would give all of
the money to the foundation. Why
was there a portion
Um.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, so with, uh, the
endowments that could be, that
would be pooled money. So, uh,
the, the, uh, endowment
appropriation is pooled into a
larger investment fund, and then
there are specific accounts
within that investment fund, uh,
reserved for that specific
endowment, and there could be,
um
uh, fees on that.
OK, so essentially the
foundation is charging fees to
invest.
there are, um, investment
management costs and then
separate from that, there are um
general, uh, administrative
costs to support foundation
operations. I'm sorry, I I I
might interrupt you to keep this
going, but
if the money, if the moneys
themselves weren't invested?
then why are there fees for
investment?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the funds were
invested.
Uh, it's earnings on what do you
do with the earnings from those
investments? How do you use
those? Do you, uh, provide
those, um, for faculty salaries,
for other expenses, for etc. OK,
so you're telling me the
entirety of the money was moved
to the foundation to invest. The
foundation has now taken a
portion
of that for
administrative fees, essentially
in investing that money.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, not the corpus of
the, not the main body of the uh
of the monies that were
invested, but the spinoff, the,
the investment earnings from
that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. I,
if you're coming for round two,
I will, I will come back.
Madam Vice Chair
thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
and Representative Anaya, you
know, state Investment council
and others, mm.
that's how they stay alive.
and
the way that many investment
firms it's, it's what they do.
So I look forward to more of
your questions.
um
on, on just a couple of, of
questions, uh, Madam Chair, on
page 7, I was noticing, um, on,
uh.
talking about the flat
enrollment and decreasing degree
completions. Just a question to
ask is, um, was there a survey
done or is there any information
as to, I'm sorry, thank you, as
to why students are leaving or
have not completed their degree.
Um
Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
not, uh, um, not a qualitative
survey identifying those, uh,
specific, um, items you
mentioned.
OK.
I was just curious, Madam
Secretary, do you have any
information
that you have heard, even if
it's anecdotal about why
students are not completing or
leaving. Madam Chair, um, we
haven't done an official survey
or an analysis on this, but what
I will tell you is a lot of our
students move out of
particularly these three fields
because of the licensure
requirements and the exams. So
every single one of these
fields, there's the teaching
boards, there's a licensure exam
for social work, and then
there's, of course, NClux for
nursing. Um, sometimes our
students will move
to another degree field to avoid
some of those requirements that
are put in place by New Mexico's
boards and commissions for
those.
But it's not the whole reason.
It's just part of the reason.
But Mister, can I, so
shouldn't there be counseling
when people are
advisement when people go into
those to say this is what you're
gonna have to do so that we
don't waste the money on folks
who are going to
at some point, say, oops, uh,
this is not really what I wanted
to do.
Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
uh, previous LFC, um, uh,
reports of, uh, highlighted uh
student support services and the
impact uh positive impact those
can make.
And I appreciate, I appreciate
that additional question, Madam
Chair, because it's, it's, that
was kind of where I was leading
to with this one. If we need to
offer supports for the students
just so they understand, of
course, what's coming down the
road, um, because even so for
the cost and even if receiving a
uh.
a uh uh uh a distribution from
the state that we need to make
sure that we're helping, making,
you know, kind of guidance,
students need guidance, doesn't
matter what age either.
Um, Madam Chair, the other
comments, and I think my
colleagues have already asked
too, um, about, you know, NMA
NMSU, some of the um.
again foundation operations.
and you know, San Juan College
also had again their foundation,
um, UNM
and Madam Chair, I know over the
years, of course, too, that it,
it's how many of these
investment organizations do
operate. They have to survive,
but you know, even for UNM 1.9
million in administrative fees.
I know that UNM has and what I
call the black box. So any grant
that you apply for, you always
have to figure in a fee that UNM
takes as a cut.
Um, so there, there's always
some, some issues and that's I
understand that's how they
survive, but
um over the years, the longer I
stay here, the more I'm kind of
questionable questioning exactly
how, where and who do some of
these um necessary cuts, and
what, what's the necessity for
them? So that's a whole another
discussion with um, with higher
ed, not you, but the
institution's Madam Secretary.
And last but not least, on your
recommendation on page 20. And
Madam Chair, what I've seen over
the years in
it's no fault of anybody who
receives funding
but if the legislature doesn't
put guidance in House Bill 2.
If we don't put language in
there with specificity
on how monies are to be spent or
used is open. It's an open game.
So if we have not put language
in there and I really appreciate
that a recommendation and I'm
hoping it's actually, maybe we
need to highlight that, Madam
Chair, for this coming
legislative session to make sure
that there's some budget
language for any and future
endowment appropriations that
prohibits some of the concerns I
think that the committee is uh
affording and bringing forward
at this point in time. I know I
will flag it because I think
this is not right.
Um, but again, Madam Chair, as
for those who are new,
if we don't flag it in the
budget, if it's not there in
black and white.
it's open game. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. I do have a few
questions. So, um, on page 19,
um, of the, of the LFC handout
and figure 9, it looks like New
Mexico State.
took about 20% of the, um, of
the gains in in on the
foundation. Um,
I mean, I, I, I'm, I'm not
talking about my millions, but
if my investment people were
taking 20% of what I made, I
would change investors. Um,
so it
I guess, would it make sense for
us to say
if you're going to charge these
fees, then put the money in the
SIC where we know what's
happening and there will be, you
know, the, the fees are already
baked in. Um, I just, I hate to
see money that we desperately
need for these professions to go
into who know who's pocket. I
mean, Wall Street is all I can
say. Um, so do you, did, did LFC
have any concerns about that,
uh, and I agree with my vice
chair that, um, the black box is
pretty scary and I think
we, as a, as a legislature, need
to start saying this money goes
here and only here and you get,
you know, 3% for over what you
know, whatever is reasonable as
opposed to here's the money and,
uh, do with it as you please
because that, that feels like
what has happened here. We, we
thought we knew what it was for,
and some of the universities um
had other ideas and I, I'm gonna
get on my little soapbox again
and say, we need to have
oversight over
over the dollars that the
legislature, um, appropriates.
And, and I mean real oversight.
I mean subpoena power. I mean,
if you don't do what we tell you
to do, then there will be
consequences, not, oh, well,
happened again, you know, I've
been around long enough to see
this happen over and over where,
um, you know, the money just
fritters away and we have
nothing to show for it. I'm also
very disappointed in the
numbers. And, um, let me see,
let me get back to my notes. Um
OK, uh, let's see. Uh, on your
presentation, Madam Secretary,
um, on page 3
I'm confused over why,
um
on the 2nd, the 2nd, um, box
there. Why we awarded $5 million
to falling colors for student
financial aid, uh, uh.
I mean, falling colors is the
entity that's, um, overseeing
our behavioral health. Why are
we giving them money for
scholarships?
Madam Chair, um, we are actually
giving them money to provide
paid work for the clinicals
aspect of that in which graduate
students graduate with their
master's degree and then have to
do some sort of clinical hours,
practicum hours, and falling
colors is working on those
stipends and salaries for those
individuals. And, and so how
what is their cut? I mean, uh,
is all of this money going out
the door? Are they keeping 20%,
uh, how it's, it just seems
weird that
we have
we have a for-profit entity
deciding on our, our clinical
work,
Clay Madam Chair, members of the
committee, if you would turn to
page 13, um, and then the middle
paragraph, the report describes
that falling colors will assess
a 6.6% or 330,000 FIFA
administering and overseeing the
appropriation.
That,
that's less than it could be, I
guess, but, uh, um, again, why,
why are the, we're giving the
universities money for this.
Why, why are they not do? I
mean, admittedly, I graduated
and did my clinicals decades
ago, but, um, the university is
who helped me arrange my
clinicals. I, I, I, I just, that
just really sticks with, in my
craw that we are, um, paying
someone to do something that, as
far as I'm concerned, should be
the
responsibility of the programs,
but I will leave that one alone.
Um,
let's see
Um, and, and as, as my vice
chair said, I think we do need
to be more prescriptive when
providing funds across the board
because how many times have we
thought we gave money to this
and it turns out it went to
something else, um, and then
back on page 8, I should have
written, um
which
I think, I think on the
secretary's
Mhm
um
let me get there
So looking at
the first table, the doctor of
nurse practitioner, in, it says
it's 100% increase from 2019 to
2024. Well, it's a 100% increase
from 2019 to 2024, from 5 to 10,
but in 2021, 22, we had 19. So I
think this table is, um,
misleading.
um, and, and very concerning.
Um, we put this money in and
we're, we're getting fewer
completions. Um, that's the
total opposite of what this
money was intended for. I'm not
happy that it took so long to
get out. I can kind of
understand that, but the fact
that it's being used in ways
that
I know this committee, um,
thought we're gonna be different
than that. And I'm guessing LFC,
so I'm just, uh, this
I'm frustrated. I'm very
frustrated. We try to do things
as legislators and what we, we
do something and then, you know,
years later, we find out it
didn't do what we intended it to
do. So with that, I will go back
to folks for a second. Um,
so who has, who has further, OK,
2 over there.
345. So we have 15 minutes, so
I'll give you 3 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
think I'll need 3 minutes, but,
in, in the interest of
oversight, uh, you did present
to LFC, was it last month? Is
that correct?
Is there a plan to come back to
them in a certain period of
time?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, the LFC, uh,
program evaluation unit does do
progress reports on its
evaluations. Um, there's not a
progress report on this at this
time.
I
I just feel like leaving leaving
this presentation without having
a follow-up plan. Like, we want
to hear from you in a certain
time. um, actually, um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I also forgot to mention as part
of the um protocol after these
program evaluations, um, we, we
send out an implementation plan
to, um, the agencies that are
evaluated. So the Higher
Education department and the
College Associations, uh, were
sent
information from a spreadsheet
essentially from myself asking
how are you going to address the
recommendations, uh, from this
evaluation. So that is a baked
in part of our process. So we'll
be collecting that information
even if there's not a, um,
specific, you know,
report on that, we'll be
collecting that information and
monitoring that.
So I'm
I'm assuming it would be up to
us, or you, Madam Chair, to
request another presentation at
a, at a time when you have more
information, correct?
We'll talk about that, I guess.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
agree, and I would like to, um,
we as a committee, I would like
to suggest that we have a commit
as a committee, write a letter
to LFC and say that we want
performance measures on this. We
want a report card, um, because
this is, this is our purview,
and we want to know what's
happening to, to the money that,
that has been spent. So, so
Xander, another strongly worded
letter.
So Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
would love to have advisory
members on that too. I would
certainly, uh, sign that. Also,
it's, it's not every day that we
agree on a lot of things in one
presentation and I completely
agree when it comes to the open
openness policies when it comes
to investing these dollars
because I think that's
incredibly critical. So I would
totally work with you to get
that done because the SIC, we
know what they're doing, even
the NMFA, I mean, they know what
they're doing, and we know that
it's also performing as well. So
when it comes to these specific
instances in these
uh.
institutions, is there metrics
that have been promulgated from
uh the higher education
department.
specifically pertaining to how
these funds may be invested
because if it goes to a private
entity, I know like counties,
for example, it's class A, B, C,
they can only really invest in
certain things, right? So I know
institutions, they can invest in
the home market. So what
guardrails for our funds are put
in place for those. I don't know
if they have any promulgated
rules.
Mr. Chair. These were new funds
for the New Mexico Higher
Education uh department. We have
never had endowments of this
nature or scope at this dollar
amount. So it's a learning curve
for us as well, and that's why
we appreciate this performance
evaluation. So when we rolled
out these this money, we put the
exact appropriation language and
said you have to follow the law,
um, but we did not provide
guidance on where they invest
these endowment dollars from. So
whether that's SIC, that's our
foundation, we have not done
that, no.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I just want to make sure that we
have reports annually of the
balances. Do we have that
because let's just say you
invested in, I don't know, a
Tesla or something and it, it
dropped 10% or something. Would
we know that? Would we know what
their balances are after that
fiscal year on whatever the fund
may be. That's the last
question, Madam Chair, we did
issue that memo, and that's part
of what we're collecting now at
this time, now that all the
endowment funds are completely
out the door. OK, thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Appreciate
it.
Senator Charlie, thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, it just a
comment that I would love for,
um, UNM NMS the, these folks to
come and answer these questions,
right? It's
I know it's not you, right?
You're overseeing, but we're
frustrated with this and
taxpayers should be frustrated
with this, and I just would love
the opportunity to ask, um, you
know, while we're in UNM for
more than a sandwich for lunch
if they're making $14 million
off these endowments. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
October
that, yeah, OK, um,
representative, so we have
Representative Renaya, um, and
then Chavis and then
Ferrari
No, OK, so just Anaya and
Chavez. Go ahead,
Representative. Oh,
let me ask. 00,
she's not part of us.
OK, so we will go. Linnet, is it
something for right now or is it
something for after we finish?
OK, very quickly
So good afternoon, chair, uh,
members of the committee, Linnia
Montoya and the associate
director of government relations
at UNM, so no longer on your
guys' side over there on the
council service, but, um, I did
receive some information from
our UNM finance folks, um, and
so they do want to one point you
guys to, I think it's page 35 in
the actual document of LFC's
program evaluation. They did
respond, um, overall
to the cup, uh, through the cup.
um, report, um, and then
additionally, um, I have our
finance folks listening online,
so they're sending me documents
and stuff. Well, we're going
through, um, but according to
our finance folks at UNM, um, I
am not one of them, so don't,
don't hold me to all this. Um,
it supports the operating
budget, so any of the
investment, um, percentages that
we take out at the UNM
Foundation, um, it supports the
operating budgets
of the foundation and our
foundation is audited annually,
um, as part of our university
independent external audit. Um,
those are publicly available,
and I do have links to those and
if needs be, I can send them
over to Xander as well, um, for
you guys to take a look in that
kind of um documents things. I
also have um the policy for our
investment, um, procedures for,
um, our foundation, which um was
provided
and kind of, they were delegated
this power from our UNM Board of
Regents to invest in any of
these funds. Um, these are not
our only endowment funds that,
uh, the UNM Foundation covers,
so, um, if you guys need any of
that information, I'm happy to
provide it to Xander. That would
be great. And I'm wondering, is
your endowment, um, can we look
at
how much is in there, what it's
invested in? Is it open or is
it, um,
private?
I will double check with our
foundation folks. Thank you. OK,
we'll go back to Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Linnea. Um
OK, first question is a little
bit more straightforward, um,
anywhere in these reports, um,
can someone point me to the
legislative language, like the
original legislative language. I
may have skimmed over it.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, if you'll turn to do.
uh appendix C of the uh page 52
of the report.
Thank you. I will note that and
look at it here in a minute. I
just wanted to know what the
original language was. And I'm
looking at this program
enrollment data. And I'm also
thinking back to my work with
the PTs when they were trying to
get accredited so they could
expand the number of seats that
they could offer
so they could expand the number
of students. And so I'm thinking
about that accreditation process
and I'm wondering if it's
parallel to this. So I'm looking
at the
page 5 of, um, the secretary's
program enrollment data
Um
cause I'm trying to separate
how do I explain this? I'm
trying to separate what the
money is supposed to be used for
and what it grows.
versus what, like the numbers
that we see in front of us. So,
maybe an example would be best.
So
we have the number of credit
hours that students are taking
that it looks like some of that
is going down. But if you look
at the like undergraduate
headcount, those seem to be
going up itself.
If we're talking about expanding
the number of faculty somewhere.
I am going to assume that we are
also trying to expand the number
of students that we can serve.
And so I'm wondering why one of
the measurements is not nec
that's not listed is the faculty
expansion
instead of the student piece.
Um, and I'm wondering if
did I miss that
I see heads shaking, so I may,
Madam Chair, that's a very valid
point. It's not in my response.
However, my colleague does have
that in his report.
And I'm wondering that because
it from my interpretation of
this, this was supposed to go to
expand faculty. And so we have
student numbers in front of us.
I'm hoping that the faculty
expanded and or got raises, so
we can keep them, um, I'm also
wondering if that money was
going to the undergraduate
programs, the graduate programs,
or both, in each of these
institutions, because I see
growth in undergrad and
less, a lesser amount of
students in graduate school. And
so I'm, I'm trying to like suss
through all of this just to go
back to the original intent of
the language, which was, wasn't
necessarily growing the number
of students or credit hours, but
it was to expand.
faculty and
the number of those who are able
to serve students.
I hope that was not as confusing
as it feels in my head.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I, I, uh, that, that
makes sense. Um, so, um, if
you'll look at page 9 Appendix
J, you'll see the faculty FTE
for the programs that received,
um, the endowment
appropriations. However, I do
want to give a caveat because
your question regarding what,
what was the marginal increase
in faculty before and after
these appropriations. Uh, uh,
you know, in looking for that,
um, data, um, the FTE data, uh,
in, uh, financial reports of
actuals and in operating
budgets, um,
uh, the quality wasn't as, uh,
one would hope in order to get
to that question. So a
recommendation within this
report that we haven't yet
talked about is uh strengthening
the FTE reporting within
operating budgets and financial
report of actuals, um.
yes. And Madam Chair, if I can
in my remarks, I did note that
the higher education department
did take that to heart. We
issued that memo and we'll be
collecting that and then to
answer one of your other
questions very briefly. These
faculty members teach both
undergrad and graduate. It's not
exclusive to one or the other.
Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
there's also, uh, separate, um
appendix that relates to
Appendix D on page 53. That's
the enrollment data collection,
uh, survey that we did to look
at, uh, from FY 23 to FY 25 and
budgeted for FY 26. Uh, what,
what is the enrollment, um, in
programs, uh, recei that
received an endowment
appropriation. Thank you, Madam
Chair. And one last question
that I hope is short, um, for an
answer.
Um, have we expanded the number
of students we can serve
according to accreditation with
this money.
No, OK
Thank you, Madam Cherke. I'm
gonna go back to Senator Charlie
for a brief comment. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. In looking
over Appendix C, page 52. I do
want to note that every single
one of these line items does
have and tribal higher education
institutions, so I would be
curious to know what outreach
and application happened, Madam
Chair, Clayton did correct me
right after that, and I was
going to go talk to you
afterwards. Yes, um, when my
team was behind me too. We did
not receive any applications
from our tribal colleges
for these funds. We did reach
out to them. Oftentimes it's
capacity issues. I will tell you
that Navajo Technical University
does receive an annual
appropriation of $215,000 every
single year, further nursing
program that can go towards
faculty, staff, and support of
their students, but for these
funds, none of them did apply.
Just on that point. So the, the
outreach that you made to the
UNM CNMs, etc. Was that
equivalent to the outreach that
you did to the tribal
institutions. Madam Chair,
absolutely. I actually meet with
our tribal college, uh,
presidents, uh, quarterly, and
we did talk about these funds
with them as well. I have the
agendas for that. Thank you. I
will go to Representative
Chaves.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have a brief comment, and it's
in relation to um exams for
licensure and student support,
and I just wanted to point out
that the Center for Social Work
Excellence at New Mexico
Highlands does offer free um
testing prep for social workers
who want to take their master's
level license and also they also
offer free CEs, um, to maintain
your license. So I just wanted
to let folks know about that.
Representative Ferraud
nothing? OK
Pa, please know that we will,
uh, continue to, um
follow this and investigate it
and, and I for one will be
disappointed if we don't have a
report card for this, as we do
for the other, for many other
LFC, you know, the red, green,
yellow, um,
because I think we are, if we're
not in red, we're pretty darn
close.
So with that, we will move on to
our last presentation of the
day. Um, it is the Kevinness
settlement update, George Davis,
um, with child, who's a child
and adolescent psychiatrist,
Jessie Clifton, staff attorney,
disability rights, New Mexico.
Betty Fish, uh, Fleshman,
executive director Pegasus Legal
Services for Children in Teresa
Yannen, Executive Director,
Native American Disability Law
Center. So if you can all come
up
um, and we will get started. I'd
like to be last. OK, thank you,
thank you.
Yes, and, while we have this
little break, um, Representative
Lundstrom has arranged dinner
for us at 5:30 at a place called
the Rocket. She said it has fun
food like meatball sandwiches
and pizza and so we will meet
there at 5:30 and, uh, members,
please, uh,
please join us and staff.
So are we missing someone
and that person will not be
here. OK, all right, so we're
not waiting for someone. I
should have asked, OK, whenever
you're ready, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you members of the
committee. Uh, my name is Teri
Yiannen. I am an attorney, and,
uh, the director of the Native
American Disability Law Center,
um, our office is in Farmington,
um, and we serve, uh, the
Northwest section of New Mexico,
um, our organization is also,
uh, plaintiff in the Kevin S
lawsuit. um, for, uh, over 12
years I've been representing
children
um, who are in state custody,
um, and one of our clients was
one of the named plaintiffs in
the Kevinness lawsuit. Um, we
greatly appreciate, um, this
committee's ongoing interest in,
um, these issues and in the
Kevinness lawsuit, Betty
Fleischman was, um, scheduled to
attend with us, um, and
unfortunately, she had an urgent
family matter, uh, that, um,
made it unable, made it
impossible for her to be here.
Um, we have a couple of, um,
documents for you that will
hopefully, um, provide some, um,
structure for our conversation.
Uh, we have some brief comments,
um, to make, but we'd much
rather, um, address your
immediate concerns and
questions. And so we're going to
keep our comments rather brief.
Um, we have, um, a timeline of
the key dates
within the Kevin S lawsuit
because this has been going on
since March of 2020.
Um, and, um, kind of taking you
through the um, the steps along
the way to where we are today.
Yesterday, um,
Mr. uh, Pifer, the arbiter in
the case, issued his second
order, um, and so we also have a
summary of the order. It, um,
provides some very firm dates
and, uh, requirements and
benchmarks that the state needs
to meet.
Um, and we are, we already have
some conferences scheduled with
him to review, um, the state's
actions and their progress
toward meeting those benchmarks.
Um
we also have, uh, just a brief
summary of the, of the Kevin S
lawsuit. The way we really think
about it is there are
essentially 3 groups of people
involved in this process from
our perspective. There are the
defendants, children, youth, and
Families, um, and what is now
the Healthcare Authority.
Previously it was called the
Human Services Department, as
you know.
One of the unique things about
this lawsuit was the fact that
we did include the Medicaid
program because the Medicaid
program operated by the
healthcare authority plays a
really important role in
providing services to children
in state custody because so many
of them are receiving Medicaid
services. And so it was
essentially from our thinking,
impossible to address the
systemic issues facing the child
welfare system in New Mexico
without including, um, the
Medicaid
program.
And
when we, when we brought the
the lawsuit, we really had some
very clear goals.
We felt the system should be
trauma responsive. We felt that
children should be in the least
restrictive environment. What is
the least restrictive
environment. It's called a
family.
It's called our community.
That's where kids need to be.
Um, and Doctor Davis can speak
to that much more eloquently
than I can. I just know that I
don't want to be in an
institution. I want to be with
my family. And that's what we're
really trying to focus on is
increasing families, not
placements, not beds, families
for children, so that children
receive the care that we all
want them to receive.
Part of this part in order for
them to maintain, um, their
homes in their communities is
the fact that we have to have
community-based services. This
also gets back to the Medicaid
program. Do we have appropriate
behavioral health services? Do
we have appropriate supports for
families and for these children
so that they can be successful.
The other unique thing about
this lawsuit, and this primarily
comes from the Law Center is we
only represent children who are
Native American in state
custody. We don't represent
other children. And so what we
really saw was a lack of
appropriate services for those
children. And so we wanted to
make sure that there were
considerations for, uh, the
unique legal and cultural status
of Native American
children in state custody
After we filed the lawsuit, we
spent about a year discussing
settlement. Um, and the
settlement was, was signed on
March 20, in March of 2020.
Part of the settlement and one
of the things that the parties
agreed to, um, was how it would
be implemented. The state was
very adamant that they would not
agree to a consent decree. They
would not agree to ongoing
jurisdiction by the federal
court where the case was filed.
Um, it was just we were not
going to reach a settlement.
I've been practicing law for
over 30 years.
I have sued
governments in several different
states, several different
tribes, and the federal
government. Litigation is the
least effective way to resolve
an issue or resolve a problem in
my opinion, sometimes you got to
do it and we had to do it in
this case, but it is not an
efficient or effective way when
you can reach a settlement. We
still stand by this settlement
agreement. There is nothing
wrong with the settlement
agreement.
The problem is the
implementation.
However, because we couldn't get
a consent decree. The parties
agreed to the code neutrals, and
those are a third bunch of
people or 3rd group of people
that are, it's almost like the
third stool of, of, you know, a
third leg of a stool to get this
done. The parties agreed to the
code neutrals.
We didn't pick them, they didn't
pick them. We had to come to an
agreement on that.
Kevin Ryan and Judy Meltzer are
nationally known experts. They
have implemented child welfare
reform in several states across
the country.
They still are providing
valuable input both to the
arbiter and to the state on what
needs to happen. They are
talking to state CYFD workers on
the ground. They know what's
happening on the ground.
We don't always agree with them
to be frank
They don't always
you know, agree with us.
So they are a separate neutral,
independent.
input on what is happening in
the state.
And then we have the dispute
resolution system.
So under the settlement, we had
to go through mediation and
develop a corrective action
plan. So there's a two step
process to resolving any
disputes. We couldn't go because
we didn't have a consent decree,
we couldn't go back in front of
a judge and get any sort of
judicial order.
And the way the settlement is is
written is there are timelines
for the state to achieve certain
outcomes
and
we had to give them time to
implement those. We went to
mediation. We agreed to a
corrective action plan. We had
to give them time to determine
whether or not they were going
to comply with the corrective
action plan or meet the goals in
the corrective action plan.
And so it wasn't until last
spring.
that we were able to go into
arbitration under the terms of
the settlement agreement.
The arbitration was held in
November
and Mr. Pifer
issued a decision in January. We
had a status conference in July.
In July, it became very apparent
and Secretary Casados
acknowledged that nothing had
changed. So in that six-month
period from January through July
through June.
there had been no progress and
no improvement.
Nobody is more frustrated with
this.
than we are
Nobody who represents kids or
who helps kids, who works with
kids, is satisfied with the
status of the system.
We are now with this remedial
order number 2 in a position
where we have some
accountability.
We're also hoping that this
committee and other committees
can hold the state account to
account as well, because there
needs to be some accountability.
as
Ms. Beck
said yesterday, this system is
not working for our kids. And
there are kits
We all feel that way, I think,
and we need to start making sure
that they know that we feel that
way.
Sorry
That's working right
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
us here today.
Um, I am going to, um, I'm gonna
read my uh
comments
which I know is
less exciting
but more accurate
So we'll call it that.
Um.
and also I'm gonna in my
comments, I'm gonna concentrate
on
some of the foundational and
fundamental, um, pieces of the
functioning child, uh, child
welfare agency, um, because
only by looking at those kinds
of foundational, um,
supports,
do you, is it possible to
understand how we could have,
frankly gotten into the place
where we are.
to be perfectly honest. Um
um
fundamentals of a functional
child protective service agency
are always the same in all
states and at all times. There
are 3 foundational components
that are required for a
department of function at all.
The first is staffing
A competent, well-trained,
integrated.
staff in sufficient numbers to
accomplish the job of
investigating abuse, placing and
supporting children.
The second essential ingredient
is placements, and by
placements, I mean the same
thing, uh, that, uh, Therese is
just talking about. I mean,
safe, supportive home
environments that are required
if children are to develop
normally and begin to recuperate
from the sorts of situations
that brought them into care.
And the third in his short list
of services is uh
is, uh, I'm sorry, the, the
third component of this list of
3 is services, and that includes
educational, of course, life
supports, but mainly in this
case since uh uh HSD now HCA was
included in the lawsuit.
Um
mainly we're talking about
Medicaid services.
Those that are overseen by the
HCA and the health, the
healthcare authority and
delivered by Presbyterian,
including physical health,
pediatric care,
psychiatric, psychological and
behavioral health of all sorts,
services that are accessible.
available
adequate to treat complicated
trauma disorders. We'll get into
matters of
network adequacy, um,
afterwards.
These three components, the
staffing, the placements, and
the services are not unrelated.
In talking to a number of case
workers who have left the
department who are currently
working at the department.
the impossibility of serving
children when there are no
placements.
and there are limited services,
not only frustrating, but it's
demoralizing.
The absence of placements and
the absence of services are
oftentimes cited as the reasoned
caseworkers cannot do their job
and subsequently eventually
quit.
The lack of caseworkers and the
resulting high caseloads for
those who remain also in itself
begins to
create further departures, and
we've seen in various offices
across the state. We've seen
them operating with just a bare
skeleton crew of uh caseworkers.
Sometimes there are some offices
that have had zero at times.
Here's the point, the lack of
these three fundamental
components can snowball going
forward because the deficiencies
in these three fundamental
categories impede and make
impossible sometimes, the
fulfillment of other critical
requirements. So the Kevinness
agreement isn't, uh, it does
focus on those and the and the
co-neutrals have
time and again tried to redirect
CYFD back to those fundamentals
of staffing, services, and
placements.
But it makes impossible to
fulfillment of of other
requirements and they don't have
these three basic components in
place.
The settlement is laid out so
that events required to care for
a child coming into custody are
sequential. One event, one task,
one assessment, uh, follows
another, and it depends upon the
previous task. If there's a
bottleneck or if there's a
missing piece in the sequence.
Everything afterwards is delayed
or completely derailed.
which oftentimes, as we all
know, is what's happening.
For example, as part of the
initial settlement agreement,
I'm just going to give a couple
of examples here, and I don't
mean to get off on these, um,
but as an example, there were
the uh state was required to
develop and then employ, uh, an
emergency initial screen for
children immediately after being
taken into custody and then a
larger screen, a version of the
same short screen, um, later
after they'd been in custody for
45 days, if they stayed.
The state was able to create
those screens. They had
lots of technical support, I
believe it was from the Pred
Foundation and they're called
the cans, the, the emergency
ones is called the CAT, which
is, uh, is an emergency
evaluation when a child first
comes into care.
um,
but
they created those as far back
as 2022, but in their own annual
report, which just came out in
August, and I really recommend
you read that because a lot of
the data we are taking from this
is from their annual report,
even though
uh it has not been validated.
Um, we, it's some of it probably
will turn out to be inaccurate,
not deliberately, not by
intention, but as you review the
documents, uh, and the
information sometimes you revise
those figures, but we're using
that, uh, as the basis.
and their own annual report that
came out in August, the state
itself acknowledges that in the
case of the emergency portion of
that screening instrument, the
one that's supposed to be
performed and presented to the
court at the time of the initial
10 day custody hearing, the
state itself reports that it has
occurred on time only in 1% of
the cases in 2024
We just let that sink in.
I know
In the case of the more
extensive screening instrument
that is scheduled to be
performed for each other remains
in custody for 45 days. The
state reports that 9% of the
children in custody who are
eligible for that screening
instrument actually received it.
The point of these instruments
is that they provide the
assessment for a new child. When
a child, you know, if, if a
child, uh, came to your door and
said that they needed help, you
would have to know something
about that child. You don't know
anything. You virtually don't
know if,
if they have broken bones or
seizure disorders or uh whether
they're being abused or not, and
that's the whole point of these
screens is just to like orient
the caseworkers around these
cases.
These are just examples intended
to demonstrate that without the
full film under the foundational
supports in the end, of course,
uh, the foundational supports
that are missing there are
primarily staff, are primarily,
uh, the absence of caseworkers.
Um, and they're also the, the
absence of the other two of
placements as well.
placements
The desperately needed expansion
of foster families suffered from
a similar fate. The initial
agreement
that the state agreed to
that the conneutral monitors of
the agreement would set a target
for new non-relative foster
families to be recruited each
year.
These were non, uh, these are
non-relative foster families,
kinship placements, uh, all the
way back, uh, at the beginning,
the state has done much better
on and of course the kinship
placements are not subject to
the same sort of recruiting.
They have to be found, you know,
whether they're in New Mexico or
not, so it's a different, uh,
it's a different bailiwick, and
I'm, I'm talking mainly about
non, um, non-relative foster
families. The target recruitment
number for 2024
was 265. I wanted to comment
that 265 families
not beds, we'll talk about that
in a bit. But 265 families is
not what we need. It's, it's,
it's a very small portion of
what we need. Um, but there was
a number agreed upon between the
state and the monitors, the code
neutrals, because they thought
it was an achievable number.
The state actually licensed 134
out of that 265, which is about
51%.
I mean, that's, it's wonderful
that they got 134, but there's
more to that story. Even at half
the necessary new foster combs.
Um, this, this is a good thing
to happen, but this number fails
to actually reveal how many
foster families surrendered
their licenses during the same
period
In the past, the number of
non-relative foster families
leaving has essentially equaled
the number of newly licensed for
a net gain of 0, so we're not
gaining ground on this, and they
leave, you know, there are many
other people could tell you why
they leave, but they leave
partly because of the lack of
support, partly because, um,
they, they're not either
supported or it's not a friendly
environment, frankly, but a lot
of people leave. There's always,
by the way, in every single
state, there's always a high
turnover of foster families.
It's just it's higher here
and the reason why, of course,
is, you know,
people decide they're going to
take a foster child and they
might keep that foster child for
years. And so it's, it's not
always a one-shot deal. There
are some people that take, you
know, 1012 sequentially. There's
probably people in this
committee that are doing that.
I did it, actually, a long time
ago, not in New Mexico.
Um
lack of support is an immensely
important issue for foster
families, and it's really a
frequent complaint. It's the
reason why a lot of them leave.
There's also a place, this is
also a place where HCA, uh, or
they're assigned MCO,
Presbyterian, could step in with
crisis services and meaningful
in-home supports to reduce the
kind of stress and the and the
difficulties of maintaining a
foster child in the home.
Finally, when recruitment
efforts to bring new families
in, while that's dominated our
attention
We're, we're also aware, if you
look at the total picture, the
total numbers, um, that for all
the numbers of families who
express interest in the and the
department has spent a
considerable amount of time
Um, I don't think it's been
effective, but they have made
efforts with ads and with tables
at various places like the state
fair. They've organized a number
of events, but people show up
for those and then sometimes
they can't get through due to
the delayed licensing the
delayed training that they
receive. So some of the, some of
them get discouraged before
they're even um at the, at the
starting gate. Um, again,
it's staffing
um, and it's, it's the fact that
there are just not enough
well-trained uh uh staff,
whether or not they are social
workers is a very good point. I
mean, obviously most of us would
prefer that, but they don't even
have bodies.
Um
just a point of clarification.
Sometimes when CYFD presents,
they will report foster care
numbers as beds instead of
families. That is not a useful
or even a meaningful number.
Um, beds are not what we need.
Families are what we need. There
are some foster families that
have 345, there's some we know
of that have 8 kids. That's not
foster care anymore. That's
congregate care and under
another name and actually it's
worse than congregate care
because you've got two parents
and at the same time you've got
6468, how many children are
there? That's not common, but it
does happen.
Just to address one final issue
that that keeps coming up over
and over again. It's an, it's an
issue that will not die, despite
all the information the exposes
and the expert opinion to the
contrary. Residential care,
congregate care. We're using
them as the same thing. RTC
we're using that as as a similar
term.
Um, congregate care is not a
substitute in any sense whatever
for foster care in a home and
family. Nevertheless, both CYFD
and, and the healthcare
authority as well as
Presbyterian, that is charged
with serving all the children in
custody continued to propose
residential congregate care as
an alternative to foster care.
They propose it as
as a way of taking excess or
emergency cases, and I'm sure
that's probably true. Um,
however, it's not a substitute
for foster care. It doesn't do
the same thing. It's not good
for children. We know that from
from the US Senate investigation
of this. We know that from
continuous streams of articles
in medical journals that
congregate care is not the kind
of place you want to raise
children.
There have been times in the
past where a very large number,
maybe even the majority of
children in state custody were
housed in New Mexico RTCs. I
mean, I've also didn't say this,
but I've worked for CYFD and for
the university, and I worked for
him for 40 years, but, uh, it, I
was there when that was
happening and I think there was
a certain ignorance around that.
Um, I mean, I don't know. I
mean, I guess when you're born
into something, which is kind of
what getting out of medical
school in the state is you feel
like you're born without
clothes. And, uh, and
you, you don't realize that
that's not a suitable way to do
that. There have been times
before that when um uh children
were raised essentially raised
and out of state RTCs. Most of
them in Texas.
Some of these children stayed in
RTCs for years, essentially
growing up in congregate care.
Congregate care is easier, but
it's easier for the adults. It's
easier for CYFD for HCA and for
Presbyterian, but it's worse for
children.
The primary developmental
requirement for any human child.
is the continuous devoted
presence of a primary caretaker.
I can't say that enough or
strongly enough.
Congregate care is useful for
the short-term treatment of
older children who cannot be
managed or treated outside a
confined environment, and that
is nearly the only legitimate
use of congregate care.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name's Jessie Clifton. I am an
attorney at Disability Rights
New Mexico, um, disability
rights to Mexico is the state of
New Mexico's designated um
protection advocacy agency, our
sister agency, the Native
American Disability Law Center,
uh, comes from the same enabling
legislation, uh, the federal,
uh, legislation, uh, protection
advocacy agencies, um, were, uh
created by the Federal Congress
as a reaction to the
overinstitutionalization of
individuals with disabilities
and since that time in the 1970s
to the present, uh, the mission
of the protection advocacy
agencies, uh, it's a national
network has expanded into
services that keep kids in
school, services that keep
people in the community, um, and
so it was no surprise that uh
disability rights in New Mexico
took an interest in this
lawsuit, and we are also
one of the named plaintiffs on
behalf of our constituents
because many kids in in state
custody are children with
disabilities, either
developmental, um, perhaps
mental health diagnoses or
others and uh uh the
constituency for our
organizations is quite broad.
Um, and the urgency
for which these uh children,
these constituents of ours have,
uh, for access to Medicaid
services to medically necessary
services, um
I would say necessitated our
involvement and continued
involvement in the lawsuit and
the subsequent settlement
agreement.
Uh, in particular, um, Mr. uh,
Doctor Davis, um, talked about
the and cans assessments. I
wanna, um, talk about a little
bit about Appendix D and the
settlement agreement, which has
more to do with, uh, access to
medically necessary services,
uh, and, um,
uh
so appropriate supports would
help you not have to be
institutionalized but can remain
in their communities, homes and
communities.
Uh, a key component of that, and
I, I have to say that um
I've been working on the, the
Kevin S implementation effort
for a bit, a little bit over 4
years, uh, the, uh
settlement itself, it always is,
I won't, I don't wanna get too
romantic about it, it's
beautiful to me, it, uh, there
are 4 appendices and sometimes
that may um
feel burdensome, but they, the
way that it interconnects is
part of the beauty. It was part
of the intention and part of the
intention setting by both
defendants and plaintiffs that
um
so as part of that, when I, when
I talk about medically necessary
services and Appendix D, this
cross sects with least
restrictive environment, uh,
and, uh, and permanency for for
kids. So, um,
Doctor Davis referenced the cat
and cans assessment. Part of
uh, being able to appropriately
serve youth, keep them in their
communities, is to be able to uh
identify what is the need, what
is, what are the medically
necessary services. What are the
services the youth would benefit
from and as Dr. Davis spoke, one
of those assessments, the CAT
assessment, was, is intended and
designed for early use within 10
days. Uh, the idea being giant
red flags that folks should be
aware of before we place this
youth in a, in a placement, they
have no hope of succeeding in,
right? And so
timely completion of the CAT
assessment is important, very
important, because it identifies
those giant, those big early red
flags. Within 45 days of coming
into custody, the Cairns
assessment, which is a little
bit more granular and because of
the algorithm that the state
uses is supposed to support
recommendations of services that
the youth might be might be
medically necessary. These
assessments are non-diagnostic,
so they can't tell you that a
service is medically necessary,
but it puts everybody on notice.
We should be looking at
functional family therapy,
multisystemic therapy, uh, eye
movement desensitization, uh,
MBR, what's the R?
Response. You leave it to the
clinician,
uh, so
the, the numbers that some of
the data that I'd like to share
with you comes from the state's
Progress report, which, um, they
produced on August 1st of this
year. It looks back at the data
from 2024. It's the most current
data that we have, but I'd like
Dr. Davis have to preface it
with a word of caution that
we're not con
we're not convinced this is the
most accurate data, and that's
not necessarily a malicious um
statement. I don't like Doctor
Davis. I don't think that's
intentional, but the con
neutrals will also put out their
own report in the middle of
November. And that will be
validated data, which um we tend
to find more reliable and that's
also one of the reasons that
code neutrals were brought in to
the settlement. In the first
place was to be that reliable uh
um
finder of information. Um
so the, the cat assessment
whether done timely or not in
2024, about 27% of youth
received that, according to the
state's report.
27% received a cat 2 37%
received the cans.
Part of HCA's working with the
MCOs and in this instance,
Presbyterian, is that the cat
and cans assessment would be
incorporated into the Medicaid
members, uh, comprehensive care
plan, and that was a byproduct
of lengthy conversations, um, to
be frank, between the parties
that we that we, we ultimately a
couple of years ago shared that
value that the MCO should be
aware of this information so
they can incorporate it into the
care plan for the individual.
And uh I have to, one of the
things that we're seeing is one
cat and cans aren't
being um being conducted timely
and then, you know, more than
half of the, far more than half
of the cases done at all, uh,
and that only 1% of the cans
were shared with the MCO. 0% of
the cat was shared with the MCO.
So there's still um
uh discrepancy, uh,
communication difficulty between
the MCO and uh CYFD by
incorporating this information
into the comprehensive care
plan. Uh, so I, I, I wanted to
to mention that I think that
that is one avenue of early
identification of services to at
least start conversations about
what the youth might need.
Another avenue to early
identification for services or
subsequent specialized
evaluation is the well child
check. The well child check is
already a federal
requirement, uh, for children
and youth under the age of 21.
It's part of the Federal
Medicaid Act. Well child checks
in our context, one of the
reasons they're important for
children in state custody is
because they can identify, uh,
it includes a mental health
screening and developmental
disability screening. Those two
things alone are invaluable
because it puts everyone on
notice of the possible needs of
the youth. And what possible
follow-up services they may need
or follow up, um, assessments.
Uh, according to the state's
data,
um
well child checks, uh, this past
year in 2024, were somewhere
between 46 and 56% depending how
you calculate it, which I have
to say also gives me concern
because it's, it's not a
you either got a well child
checkup or you didn't get a well
child checkup. And while the
state's methods of verifying
whether that appointment took
place may vary. It is concerning
one, the figures concerning in
the first place, because half of
our kids aren't getting it,
right? So that's important.
But it's uh also concerning
because um
it uh
there's, this should be static
enough for it to be useful.
There should be a way to
identify that this youth
received a well-child check, and
it referred to XYZ Services and
whether or not the youth
receives those services. The
state's own report says that
they're that they're not in a
position to be able to identify
whether referrals to services
actually leads to connection to
services.
Also, really fundamental.
Um
I would like to, to mention that
the, the
Cat and cans and Welsh I checkup
hopefully this uh identifies
early services and follow-up
interventions, but there are
larger problems like the
continued use of congregate
care, which Doctor Davis
mentioned, and I'm happy to get
into it in a moment. And also,
um, access to community-based
mental health services which are
included in the settlement
agreement.
First of all, I'd I'd like to
point out last year, according
to the state's data, roughly 50%
of the children in state
custody, 18%, uh, experienced,
um, one or more inappropriate
placements and what that some of
those figures at least some of
those numbers are, uh, youth who
were in congregate care
inappropriately or who are in
residential care
inappropriately.
So, for instance, uh, over 40%
of children who are in out of
state clinical congregate care
were placed there without all or
part of the medical necessity
standard prior to their
placement.
This, this is uh requirement if
if we're gonna escalate youth
into higher levels of care, not
based off of medical necessity
standard. That is a giant red
flag. Your institutionalizing
youth, not because it's
medically necessary, but because
that's an available placement,
and that's a concern
Uh, only 20, 26% of all
congregate care placements met
the medical necessity standard
of the 74% who didn't meet the
medical necessity standard, 0%,
none, none were because of a
best interest determination
standard. And I have to mention
this because while we continue
to see this conversation come
up, the need, the alleged need
for congregate care for
residential treatment care.
the data as illustrated from the
state.
shows that we are sending kids
who do not meet a medical
necessity standard and who don't
meet a best interest
determination standard.
I'm not aware of another
standard that that would
illustrate necessity placement
in a congregate care. Those we
are escalating kids into higher
levels of care because that,
because it's available, and I
have to say that before, when,
when the lawsuit was filed, one
of the considerations for DRNM
was this what appeared to be a
pattern of practice of
escalating youth into higher
levels of care because there
were not adequate
community-based placements.
So now, undoubtedly there are
less RTCs in New Mexico than
there were 5 years ago.
Uh, but what we still see is
that while they're here, they
still get misused.
that we still see kids escalated
into care, not based off of
medical necessity, not based off
of best interest determination.
And so, uh, I think it does
stand to reason to expand that
network of providers, especially
if we're not also making the
same efforts and investments in
community-based mental health
services.
that we're gonna see a return to
that practice and a continuation
of what we're, we're seeing
today. This, this unneedless
institutionalization of youth,
which again I is one of the
cornerstones for why disability
rights in Mexico got involved in
this lawsuit.
Uh, when, when a youth is put in
a clinical congregate care
setting. They're required after
30 days to have a planning
meeting. It's called an IPP, uh,
according to the state's
records, only 13% of those
required 30-day meetings were
documented.
Uh, even of those 13%, 40% of
those didn't include discussion
of things like clinical review
of medical necessity of the
placement.
Support services for the child,
steps necessary to promote their
discharge or the identification
of community-based mental health
services that would allow them
to discharge.
So all of this, I have, I just
want to impress the importance
to you all.
illustrates the, uh, the youth
who get put into these
placements can get put in
without the appropriate
considerations and not keeping
the child's needs and uh at the
center. And then even when
they're there, that, that's not
like they fell through the crack
and were wrongly admitted
admitted and then we discharge.
Most of the time we don't
document whether we're having
conversations about how to
discharge them. And then when we
do document it, half of those,
40%, don't include necessary
components that we would expect
the welfare systems, the child
welfare system, and um the child
support team to discuss for
their discharge. And uh
so I think there's an uh an
element of the of the system
being overburdened. um, but at
the expense of children, and uh
I feel like it was necessary to
share that with you all, as far
as
why Concrete Care and
residential care, uh, has not
been promising intervention in
the past and why its expansion,
I do not think would be in the
best interests of children.
Uh, another component to
consider here is um
oh, I did have to, I forgot to
mention this to, according to
the state's data, 36% of
placements in clinical
congregate care remained in that
setting even after an
affirmative determination that
they no longer met medical
necessity criteria. A third of
kids we put into congregate
care, stay in congregate care,
even though we know they
shouldn't be there.
Behavioral health services, uh,
and access to their availability
as you are likely aware in the
settlement agreement, there was
a portion
uh, in Appendix D, and I believe
Appendix B. This spells out, um,
a handful of evidence-based
practices, uh, specifically, um,
high fidelity wraparound,
multi-systemic therapy,
functional family therapy,
mobile crisis response. Trump
informed cognitive behavioral
therapy and eye movement
desensitization.
response
Uh,
this according to the state's
own data in 2024, only 2.6% of
children accessed at least one
of these evidence-based
practices. One of the
deliverables was an anticipated
service utilization for these
evidence-based practices and um
my recollection is that not a
single one of those services
anticipated less than 20% of
kids in custody would use it.
Um,
but in any event, I am certain
that the anticipated service
utilization was uh far beyond
2.6%. So there's a problem with
connecting kids to services, and
it's either a problem with
connecting them in the first
place or a problem with the
availability of the service in
the community, um,
or, or some combination
The state did not collect
significant data on whether or
not children access trauma
informed CBT, cognitive
behavioral therapy, or EMDR and
um there were multiple points in
the state's report where a
survey tool was designed and
implemented into the FAC system
in 2022 and to date, well,
through 2024 was not used
consistently enough to produce
any kind of reportable data, uh,
and which again is, is
concerning. um
because if we know that
behavior, that, that was the
whole point of this being in the
settlement agreement.
and a robust system of
behavioral health in the
community, helps keeps kids out
of institutional care, out of
congregate care, out of res
residential care. That, uh,
availability of services, uh,
helps kids, uh, stabilize and
hopefully heal beyond.
what's the unfortunate trauma
that brought them into the
system in the first place.
And not having access to those
services.
I, I don't think it is unfair to
say, uh, puts the youth at
higher risk for, um,
destabilization for uh
disrupting a placement and
contributing to, uh, what we
know is at least on average 6
movements, uh, for a child in
custody for every 1000 days,
which is twice what the
agreement was. Uh, I would like
to also highlight a couple of
concerns, um,
with, uh, cuts to Medicaid and
uh and the idea that that those
will be coming after the midterm
elections. Uh, what we want to
encourage the state to do now,
uh, is to plan and prepare for
that, um, because what this
implementation effort cannot
afford is another excuse or
another reason to delay or to
pause or to have to draft a new
plan because we got the rug
pulled out from under us. Um,
this was, these were commitments
the state made 5 years ago, even
before it enhanced
the um the provider
reimbursement rates and, and so
we would like to encourage the
state to, to be thinking about
how, um, it still will make good
on its obligations under the
settlement agreement, even if
federal funding is reduced.
Uh, we have concerns, uh,
long-standing issues regarding
access to services, um, as
you're all likely aware, a
couple of years ago, legislative
Finance Committee, uh, put out
a, um, uh, actually two reports
that talked about access to
Medicaid services and utilizing
secret shopper methods that um
the LFC employed and found that
the wait times were astronomical
for behavioral health. As you
might imagine, for these kids
and of all people, that we can't
wait 2 months for the behavioral
health service. We can't wait 90
days. We can't make a referral
for treatment, foster care, and
then wait 60 days while
everybody says no, just for the
system to say, well, the only
thing we can do is ask again.
The youth, uh, who cannot, that
was the whole point, the
children and youth need to be
able to
access behavioral health
services in the time that
they're needed. Uh, otherwise,
the snowball continues as Dr.
Davis discussed.
Lack lack of access to
community-based mental health
services equals uh a greater
reliance on out of state
placements and congregate care
placements. And in fact, we've
seen that. We've seen um
especially this uh the last
year.
on the one hand, it's good that
youth who can't access
treatment, foster care in New
Mexico can access it in Arizona,
maybe Colorado, and maybe Texas.
But it's a question, it's an
open question. Why is it that
they can access it in Arizona
and Colorado and Texas, and they
can't access it here.
And so the concern, uh I think
treatment foster care is a
particular concern for the
implementation team. One,
because the arbitrator, you
know, it was of interest and,
and concern to him, and it's
also uh specified in the
settlement agreement.
But treatment foster care is for
kids who require a higher level
of care than traditional foster
care, but maybe you don't need
to be in residential care. It's
the intermediary. So if we're
talking about the needless
escalation of care in kids into
custody into congregate care
into a clinical settings into
residential care.
not having access to treatment,
foster care makes that problem
worse because there's no off
ramp. It is
uh uh
a treatment, uh, a regular
foster care home if, if it's
available, oftentimes that's not
the case
And, and, and then or an office
placement or a congregate care
placement like AMI or YDI and
none of these have the clinical
expertise to meet the uh
behavioral needs of youth who
hopefully could be averted from
a pipeline into
institutionalization.
And and so we want to encourage
this committee to uh be take of,
uh, take treatment, foster care,
uh, into account and um
that it'd be a particular
consideration in your efforts to
hold the departments
accountable.
And I think that's
what I have. I'm pass it to you
all.
Yes, please, the doctor. All
right, I probably don't need,
who, who doesn't have questions.
OK, so there's 12345678 of us in
we have about 40 minutes, so
I'll give you 5 minutes if you
promise to be on 5 minutes.
So, um, we will start with
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
mines are more of comments,
especially about our our state
in our communities that are not
protecting children. And what
that says about us and not
holding it you pull your mic a
little closer?
and not holding it as a
priority. Um, and using funding
as an excuse to not do the
things that need to be
implemented.
That is very distressing and um
there are mechanisms within the
state that they could have
accessed funding to and I, I,
I'm.
if we look at where we are today
in ours.
in our state and all this cry
about crime.
Um, the children grow up
and if this is taking years to
address, well, guess what we're
in for as we go into the future.
Um, if we don't do anything.
then we just want to say, well,
they're adults now and we're
going to put them in jail. Um,
but these resources need to be
there. The funding needs to be
put in. It is, I don't think it
is, we're still not at the
majority in our legislature to
prioritize it, um, but there are
a few and um continue to
advocate and um
always in support. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Pope
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you for the comments,
Senator Pinto. I want to echo a
lot of what you said and
really just the values and the
priorities of what we should be
doing in our state. Uh, one of
the questions I have, uh, you
mentioned, uh, treatment, foster
care, would that be the same as,
uh, I've heard therapeutic
foster care or something? Is
that term kind of synonymous?
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh, I, I, uh, that's
my understanding, although in
New Mexico regulation, it is
referred to as treatment foster
care.
Thank you and thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, and I think you
mentioned, um, I think.
in some cases, not having the
availability, um, maybe
availability in other states.
Um, could you explain maybe what
is limiting um
this type of care, uh, for the
kids in our state is at a
workforce issue, funding issue,
infrastructure, um, what do you
think's going on and how do we
alleviate?
Um,
Madam Chair, Senator Pope.
that's a great question. Um,
it's a hard question to answer.
Um, uh, and it has to do not
with, uh, the people who are
running therapeutic or treatment
foster care. You're right, those
are the same thing. Uh, it has
to do not with either the people
who are running it, it, uh, it
has to do with the entire
context of, of New Mexico
medical care, meaning it's, uh,
it is overburdened by managed
care.
It is, um, suffers from, I heard
the, one of the previous, uh,
people speculating about
malpractice, um, the, the entire
context makes this a difficult
place to practice. Um, but also
there's a history to that too,
is that, uh, therapeutic foster
care, which was, I think, you
know, created and
94, 95 or something like that.
It had a very robust kind of
presence early on. Um, and it
gradually, um, lost that, that
dominance. So there were more of
them in there. There were many
more beds. They probably lost
half their beds, um, I know I'm,
I'm creating, I'm not answering
your question because I'm saying
it's contextual. A lot of it is.
The one of the things that
happened, uh, if you talk to the
Foster Tru and foster care
agencies, they will say that,
um
during the pandemic, uh, a lot
of their families, um, pulled
out and they have never ever
recuperated from the uh from the
time of the of the pandemic. But
then the other, the last thing
I'll say, I know that you're
gonna cut me off for my 5
minutes possibly. I know how you
are.
Um, the, uh, one of the things
that makes it difficult is the
nature of the patients is
because um
there aren't lower levels of
care, and therefore, these
patients, the very ones that
Senator Pinto's talking about.
they grow up, uh, and they grow
up
in a foster system where they
don't have a good attachments.
Um, they don't, they don't learn
how to self-regulate. They don't
learn problem solving. They
don't learn social interpersonal
skills. And so by the time they
get there, they are difficult
kids to treat. Uh, that's a lot
of the reason why the, the state
in in its various entities wants
to, um, open more residential
treatment because they're,
because residential treatment is
by its nature
is more coercive and confining.
Uh, it's not better, but when a
child grows up through the
system, um, without those kind
of attachments, that's kind of
what you get.
Madame Senator Pinto or Senator
Pope, excuse me, um, if I could
just add in, in my experience
with the children that I've
represented, many of whom were
in treatment, foster care at
some point. Um, uh, what, um,
what
we've heard from, um, the state
frequently is, uh, a family will
say no, or there's not a
clinical match, and we cannot,
quote unquote, make them take a
child. But they enter into this
cycle of having, as Mr. Clifton
mentioned, getting these denials
over and over again without, um,
having a conversation about how
do we get to yes? Like what do
you need?
in order to serve, in order not
serve in order to have this
child in your home? What is it
that you need? And when you
change that question, you change
the answer.
Thank you, experts. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I didn't expect
y'all to have the, the solution
and the answer. We don't always
have it, but um I just want to
understand this better and I
think that's where we start to
get the solutions. So thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you
Representative Chap. Oh, I'm
sorry, um, Representative
Ferrari.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for this, um
very, um
realistic update, um, when what
you just said about when you
change it to the foster family
to what do you need to say yes,
um, are those mostly the
services and being able to
take the kids to their own
doctor, to the, um, you know,
getting the staff support, you
know, for behavioral health
problems that might just occur
or better information about the
young person
I'm gonna say something about
that because that what she said
was what I meant to say.
But I, I got derailed onto my
context issue. Um, it, it
absolutely is. It's the very
things you're talking about, but
also, um, it's the idea that,
uh, that, uh, therapeutic foster
care has a service definition
within Medicaid. Um, and it's
not inadequate for the more
difficult and complicated kids.
It's simply not an adequate
service definition. So you have
to add things to it. We're
calling those, uh, those single
case agreements where
you might have to add um
something like a nighttime
supervision. Uh, you might have
to add, like you said,
transportation to school. Um,
you might have to add an
additional person there when uh
if the, if the child is, you
know, disregulated, and so, uh,
there's all sorts of things you
can add. usually they fall under
the category of wraparound
services, but that exact is
exactly where it talking me.
It's the, it's therapeutic
foster care plus
whatever is required and that
whatever is required is what
Theresa was referring to.
OK, thank you. I, I agree. Those
are things um that need to be
provided, but aren't always um
within the capacity of even um
children, youth and families of
being able to um have those
available. And so I'm glad that
this is something that we can
keep pushing, um, the state to
provide and with this settlement
and not to give it up, they
tried to make it so we would
say, oh, we don't need this
anymore. We've already, you
know, this has been a few years,
um
but we just said no, this is
not.
taking care of properly yet.
We'll have a long way to go. Go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Ferrari, thank
you. If I could just add, um,
and it kind of gets back to, um,
what Doctor Davis was talking
about with how these things, how
these pieces fit together,
because it takes time
and it, it's, it's more than
just quote unquote, sending out
the packet. They, uh, it takes
looking at the child as an
individual and say, and, um, in
the case that I have that Doctor
Davis has been so instrumental
on my, my client's older, so I
could talk to him. What is it
you need? What is going to work
for you? Um, how do you want to
go to school? How do you, you
know, he doesn't want to talk
anymore. He doesn't want to talk
therapy. He doesn't want to talk
for the 10th time to the, you
know, 15th therapist about
what's happened. OK, can we talk
about art therapy?
All right, let's do that
So it's, and I'm lucky because
he can tell me what he needs,
but it's, it's breaking it down
and it's the CYFD staff and the
care coordinators and the people
at, you know, involved in the
team having the capacity and the
time to do that. And without the
staffing, without the CYFD
having the staff that they need,
they're not gonna have time to,
to have those individual
conversations.
So it's, it gets back to that.
all of these pieces linking
together.
Thank you.
I guess my threats worked, and
even the doctor, my, my, um,
meanness proceded me, so he's
heard about you, Madam Chair.
He's heard about you. I'm proud
of that. Um, Representative
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys so much for the
excuse me, the presentation, I
think it's a, I'm glad that you
put in here just the facts from
just this year of how many
children have died, which is
just such a horrifying thing
that we have to live with as a
state and a legislature and a
governor and, you know, we've
been kicking this can down the
road for years, and there's not
much road left, which is kind of
the problem. We're really
hitting an inflection point
where we need to fix this
problem. It's not just something
we can talk about
on the campaign trail or
whatever. It's something that
must be fixed. And so when it
comes to this litigation, like
you said earlier, you were like,
I think you said litigation is
the least effective way to
resolve an issue, I'm inclined
to agree with you because I see
these lawsuits all across the
state, like the, the Yazi
Martinez or Martinez Yazi, that
we've literally gone from 0 to 0
ever since that started and
ended. I'm not asking you to to
talk about that, but regarding
the Kevin S settlement
it's just so disheartening as a
legislator to have to continue
to listen to these stories about
these kids who keep dying under
state custody, and we try and
we, we do what we can as a
legislature, but we don't really
get far. And so I thank you all
for your your work on this, but
I specifically I'm just gonna
focus on your, I forget what
it's called, uh, Kevinness
Plaintiff summary of remedial
order #2 from yesterday, I
believe, so that's very
very quick turnaround. Thank you
all for that. I appreciate it.
So I guess I'm just trying to
figure out what specific
frameworks are in place to carry
out this latest order.
So, Madam Chair, I'm gonna go in
the back of the
one pager here and it talks
about licensing
And so I guess I'm just gonna
bundle all my questions in one
big question so you guys can
just go up until the 5 minute
period. So go for it. But
regulatory burdens, are there
any when it comes to licensure
and is there anything that we
can do or the department can do
right now to make it less
burdensome for those foster
families, etc. and then down at
the bottom of the page it says
notify the co neutrals
overseeing compliance within 24
hours of a child's death or
critical incidents.
So we're only probably about 24
hours since this order came. So
if we hear later on that they
did not give us that
notification. Is there any kind
of tool in place for the judge
or for the co-neutrals or
anybody to mandate compliance
with this order and then going
to the actual
ruling or whatever this is
called, I'm on page 7, and I
think something very important
to talk about.
is this portion here about the
co neutrals and, and what they
have contributed.
where it says successful child
welfare reform requires a judge
who demands accountability from
the state, and engaged and
committed governor and focused
and motivated agency leadership.
So I, I hope that we can hold
these individuals accountable
with this new ruling. So can you
just jump into it, all three of
you, if you have anything to add
to that, how do we ensure that
there's no regulatory burden on
those foster families? How are
we getting notification and can
we retroactively
try to ensure compliance with
all these documents here. So I
know it's a big, huge loaded
question, but this is a very big
important lawsuit. So thank you
all and go for it.
It's like mute on Zoom, right?
Um, thank you, Madame Chair, um,
Representative Black, um, um, I
have not heard that the
licensing
requirements is an issue for
either foster families or for
treatment foster families. From
what I understand, from what
we've heard recently, both in
meetings with the state, um,
and, um,
the various sources of
information we have, um
they, uh, New Mexico families
are showing up.
Let me just say that. Um,
families in this state are
showing up for their own
children. They're showing up for
children who need families. They
are, that is not the issue.
People are expressing interest
Once, once you
contact,
then it's a matter of getting
through the process. So it's a
matter of getting through the
training, um, and are there
alternatives for providing the
training, but it's actually
getting the paperwork finished
and, and things like that. And
from what we've been, what we,
what we've understood is that
there's nobody in the system to
help families through that.
um,
and so, um, and so people get
discouraged and they, and
they're like, OK, I, I guess you
don't need my help.
Um, and so from a regulation
standpoint, I think
I don't think that's the issue.
I think it is again this
structural issue of having
somebody help people through the
process.
Um, and making sure, and that,
you know, the paperwork's done
and, and things like that. Um,
because most of these people,
they're working, they're doing,
you know, they've got, you know,
they've got other jobs and other
commitments and, you know, and
that sort of thing. And so it's,
it's literally that process is
the sticking point with the
families. That's my
understanding is that, do you
feel that's accurate? Madam
Chair, I apologize. We're over
time. If you can be as quick as
possible. Thank you so much. I
was going to add
the only thing I was gonna add
to that is just that the delays,
isn't the difficulty in in
achieving the license, that the
delay is on CYFD's side in the
slowness of the process.
Um, and to get to your other
point, um, there's also an issue
with retention.
and, uh, um, and the, um, the
issues around that. I have a
friend who was a foster parent,
um, until about 7 months ago and
she's waiting for reimbursement
for expenses from last November
or December.
and, and she finally told the
state somebody contacted her and
said, well, send me the
paperwork from October and she's
like, you know what, I can
absorb this. She's like, take
care of the grandmas who can't.
Um, the other thing is, um, the
arbiter has ongoing jurisdiction
to enforce the orders, get, you
know, so thank you. I, my
apologies, madam. Yeah, and, and
once again it comes up that we
don't pay in kinship guardians.
Um, so that that would be, that
would
be so helpful and it would be
nice to have that, have that
data about how kinship
guardianships.
play out, you know what, if
they, you know, what happens to
those kids, their outcomes, etc.
etc. So just throwing it out
there to the universe that uh
more data we need, uh,
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all so much for your
work and for your presentation.
I, I just need to echo what a
lot of people said, you know,
what Senator Pinto said about
these kids are growing up, you
know, it's, and the word that um
describes the feeling is I'm
sure we all feel is
disheartening. It's just so hard
to hear
So, um
I just want to take off on what
Representative Block said, which
is, you know, what can we do? As
you were, as you were kind of
answering his questions. I, I'm
thinking crazy thoughts. I'm
like, you can't, you can't force
CYFD to do anything.
I mean, we've tried, have we not
tried, you know, can't force
them. So we need someone to
train.
Who can do that? Is there an out
of state entity somewhere that
we can
bring in? I mean, I know that
sounds crazy, but I'm thinking
crazy. You know, what, what can
we do that we haven't thought of
that would help them. I mean, I,
I would love to, rather than
tear it down, I'd love to help
CYFD do their job and uh so I
don't know. I, I feel like we,
we need to just really think
outside the box and, um, we, we
need to take something away from
this meeting. So, you know, can
you tell us what can we do?
Elaborate on that, please. Thank
you.
Um, 11 thing, Madam Chair and
members of the community, um,
one thing that, and I think this
is responsive to to
Representative Block, uh, at
least in part as well. One thing
that code neutrals, um
uh really leaned in on it and,
and Representative Block
mentioned uh from the handout
is uh
an overtly
uh, overtly committed governor
um, to be part of the effort.
And, and so I, as the decision
notes and so does the the work
the fact sheet, um, our hope is
that the governor would would
attend the October status
conference.
And I, I don't think that's a
complete answer to what you're
talking about, but I think
that's the part that stuck out
to me that I'd like to share is
as the co-neutrals agree that we
want to build up CYFD. We want
CYFD to be um child welfare
agency that functions and
protects children and what they
have said is in the other
jurisdictions where they've seen
that reform successfully take
place. There is strong overt
commitment from the executive.
That's helpful
Thank you
OK,
um, Vice Chair Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I appreciate the update.
of information, um.
it's disappointing
It's angering. It's all the
different verbs that you can use
as to where we are at this point
in time.
Some of us have erred on the
side that there would be some
hopeful movement forward.
on actually coming to fruition
and what the um
on, on what was brought forward
in the the Blaylock versus the
state or the state. It's just
we're, we're nowhere as far as
I'm concerned.
Um
you know, we had a task force
last year.
and there were a few of us who
sat on it that are in this room
besides myself.
um, and I have a colleague
sitting here who was also on it.
and I was hopeful that there was
going to be some movement just
based on the camaraderie and
information and such, but where
we are at this point is
shameful
um
and
yeah, there, there's other
things that
has been, uh, taking place by
the administration.
that I'm not happy with.
It's not helping our children.
It's not happening to our
families.
and, you know, Madam Chair, um,
and I, I've read through this,
you know, sitting through here,
and I do hope the governor shows
up.
It'd be nice
but again
just because a governor shows up
doesn't mean things are gonna
happen.
because I've been through around
a few administrations.
and they'll get rid of one
person, another person comes in,
they get rid of that person,
another person comes in.
And regardless of what system
that the legislature may come
forward with for overseeing the
Children, Youth and Families
Department, it still comes down
to staffing.
It still comes down to higher
retention, appreciating the
people who are there too.
And Madam Chair
in talking to some persons who
work within the department,
there's no appreciation.
They don't feel it
And I sure as heck wouldn't want
to work in a department that
doesn't have any appreciation,
and yes, we have issues because
there are no social workers.
Yes, we don't have bodies who
are there, but for those who are
currently
some of them the ones that I
have spoken to, Madam Chair, are
they're ready to leave, and they
will be leaving soon.
which is sad
because they've been committed
to our families over these
years, and they've been doing
some good work.
So Madam Chair, I think we're,
we're caught in a quandary.
as to what do we do? Do we fire
everybody in the department and
start over?
There was one suggestion that
was made that I've heard.
Do we go through and get rid of
all those who are just a talking
head or somebody who's sitting
there and just keep the social
workers. Well, that ain't going
to be much either because we
don't have hardly any left of
those persons with those
credentials either.
I know of a few new people who
just started about 3 weeks ago,
and they still have interest.
They're still willing to learn,
but they too, I spoke with one
of them last week, and she's
already beginning to get that
weighted on feeling.
So where else is she gonna go?
Will she stay
So Madam Chair, um
you know, we've talked so many
years about treatment, foster
care. I've been around long
enough.
It hasn't worked for so many
years, especially when we send
them out of state because we've
lost persons, entities, whatever
you wish to call them, of people
who um are appreciated, to have
resources, who are supported,
who are trained.
I mean, to be a foster parent,
you don't just say, I'm going to
take somebody in. You have to
have training to understand the
children who come to you
with aces, right, who have
trauma.
It's not just opening your
doors, but you have to have
support when you bring somebody
into your home. I know cause I'm
living, I've lived through it,
and I am living through it.
Um, if you're in treatment,
foster care, that's a whole
specialty of people who are
willing to take those children
in their care.
Those are homes, but they have
to have support, training.
right?
Constant involvement because
children change. You can't have
one child who does this and it's
going to be the same cookie
cutter for everybody else. It's
not because we're all
individuals.
And Madam Chair, I've said this
before. It, it's working and,
and yes, there are persons who
have come forward who want open
their homes and want to provide
care
reliable for these children. But
if we cannot appreciate and
support these families.
and
um, training, reimbursements,
all of the other issues that
we've heard so many years, Madam
Chair, then we're in a quandary
again. I'll keep saying that.
I um
our behavioral healthcare
system, Madam Chair.
is
we passed something, Senate Bill
3 that's supposed to be
revitalizing
putting something back together
again, but that takes time.
Yes
Our children don't have time
because every year of brain
development and such, if it's
not there, they lose it. And
then we have the end result of
where we have children who land
up in the, in the, the juvenile
justice system who go on and
continue that other
life
And Madam Chair, I've said this
before and I'll say it again and
I'll end my comments.
You know, um, my family, we
were, uh, the victims of a
drive-by shooting.
and
Mr. Trujillo Demetrio is 42
years old. He was one of the
shooters.
Sitting in court to listen to
what happened to him in his
life.
Um, I had just first become
uh, a state senator
when he was 1314 years old in
the system.
Look what happened
We didn't help him back in those
days either.
He has a son who is 19 when he
shot up Mahome too
He has a learning disability.
right? It's on the spectrum.
Smart young man. I mean, I'm not
saying he's not because I have a
son who's also on the spectrum.
but because of all the other
issues that we didn't support
that family with with Jose.
Look what it was
He was brought in because he
wanted to fit in.
and Mr. Pena knew that and
understood it and used it.
But what I'm saying, Madam
Chair, is our system didn't help
these families back then either.
And we wonder what we're at
I've been around long enough,
Madam Chair, that CYFD has had
issues for a lot of years. This
ain't the first run around. It's
been around for a long time.
Since I started here, and that
was under Governor Johnson.
and it continues to build, Madam
Chair, and it continues to
build.
We have a lot of work, yes, and
remember we're coming up for a
new administration coming in.
Whatever changes we make and
whatever commitment is made.
Yes, I know the court. I
understand how that is, but we
also have to look at the future
governor that's going to come in
as to what their commitment is
not to penalizing and not to
putting children in the prison
system, but what are we going to
do to invest in families?
Invest in this department that
is supposedly committed
to helping our families, 2000
children, Madam, Madam Chair,
there's many more out there in
our communities.
who, by the grace of God right
now, aren't in the CYFD system.
Otherwise, quite frankly, I
think they'd be messed up more.
Thank you, Madam Chair
So I'm trying to get my emotions
under control.
So,
I wanna thank this committee
because this is one of those
days where we are the hell and
human suffering Committee.
Today has been a
hard day.
I have 2, excuse me, two close
family members. Someone in my
family adopted them as 2 and 3
year olds.
One of them died by suicide in
his twenties.
The other one
is an addict
who is just as involved.
and as the senator said,
we didn't help those kids back
then.
and we're still here. We're
still at the same point.
I'm, I'm disappointed as I can
be that CYFT
and HS Healthcare Authority are
not here. Yeah, it's
uncomfortable for them. It's
uncomfortable for us too, but
being uncomfortable
is the least of our worries.
I, I, I'm really, really
disappointed and I'm sure I will
get texts. We are listening on
Zoom. Great, I'm glad to hear
that.
Oh, there is someone from CYF
CYFD.
OK,
thank, thank, thank you for
that. So in most of you know I
also have a, an adult son with
severe autism.
and
I had a great husband. I have a
great husband. We had good jobs,
and it was all we could do to
raise him.
He could easily have ended up in
the system.
If, if I had to raise him alone,
I could not have done.
And I think about the, the kids
that were being warehoused, the
kids with autism, they're hard
as a mom, I can tell you that is
not an easy child to raise. My
son is on the severe end, and he
also has intermittent explosive
disorder. He's 6'7, strong as an
ox. I was physically abused by
him on many occasions, but we
loved him and we took care of
him.
So, um
so those kits are really hard
to, hard to, um, place. I have
many friends whose kids or
grandkids were sent to Texas for
treatment from the time there
were 3 till the time they were
18.
And you know, the state paid for
them to go, um, fly and see
their sons or their grandsons
twice a year. That's not a
family. We didn't have the
supports then. We still don't,
and I feel like maybe we're
going backwards as opposed to
going forward. It's been broken
for so long. 3.2% of 8 year olds
are on the spectrum.
Those kids are gonna need us
even more. Um
and, and I have a question. So
when we, when we learned that
Presbyterian was going to be the
medical provider for all kids in
foster care. I was very
concerned about relationships
that those kids may have
developed with providers, with
primary care providers, with
behavioral health providers, and
I asked Presbyterian
specifically, will you do
special contracts to make sure
that these kids, if they do have
one supportive relationship,
they can keep it. Do
any of you know if that has
occurred or if they are forcing
the, you know, what for.
And, and in my job as a physical
therapist, I have worked with
kids who are who are in CYFD
custody and sometimes um
things didn't happen because the
foster one kid who had major,
major medical, and she went to a
foster home, and the foster mom
said, Oh, it's too much trouble
to have therapists coming into
the house every day, you know,
and so all services were
stopped. This kid had a cliff
lip and palate. She had kidney
issues, fetal alcohol, she
couldn't, she didn't swallow.
And so the mom just decided it's
too hard, or the foster mom,
it's too hard, so we're going to
stop all services. I have no
idea what happened to that
child. She was an infant when,
when my services were ended, but
I'm wondering, do any of you
know if press has kept that,
that promise that they would
continue the relationships with,
with kids um who had developed
relationships with medical
professionals.
Excuse me,
madam, would you say that again
for
are pushing.
Yeah
My apologies, Madame Char, um,
um, uh,
the, um, there are issues with
Presbyterian Health Plan, but to
my knowledge, that's not one of
them. Um, and, um, I do think
that, um, that as, as from what
I understand, um, HCA does have
a corrective action plan, um, in
place with Presbyterian Health,
um, and I think one of our
recommendations would be
for, to the extent that
this committee can, um, have
that, make sure that they're
being held to account on that,
on that contract.
Um, and, um, and that compliance
plan. Um, as, um, I think Mr.
Clifton mentioned earlier, um,
single case agreements are
possible with with
um Presbyterian Health. Um, but
again, it takes time. It takes
some serious time. Um, and if I
can make one other comment, um,
one of, one of the
recommendations that we would
suggest is that this committee
do what it can to make sure that
um Ms. Kunkle and the
implementation team have the
resources they need to
effectuate the settlement
agreement
but also the authority because
there have been a lot of people
in different roles who track
information and track things,
but they have no authority to
actually require anybody to do
anything. So that would be
another recommendation.
And I apologize for emotion and
it's been a rough day.
So, um, I frequently express
emotions about these issues, but
I just do it in a mildly
different way. Oh, I have that
one too.
I have that one too
So, uh, um, and at the request
of Senator, uh, Representative
Chavez, she had wanted to go
last. I want to thank you for
your work and um know that this
committee is committed, although
our, um, we have, we have no
oversight. We, we can write
strongly worded letters.
and that's about where I, I'm
looking at, at how we can have
more oversight, um, Martin, um,
Fleischer, I think, is that his
name? Um,
is, is looking into it. The last
time the legislature used a
subpoena was 2011. Um, so I
think we need to start looking
at ways that we as a legislature
can can instead of um
you know, hearing all this stuff
and getting broken hearts that
we have a way to start kicking
people in the ass. So thank you
so much. Representative Chavez.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, so I, I have, I don't
have any questions. I have a lot
of comments.
Um,
and I took some time to write
them down because I wanted to
make sure that I got most of
them. This isn't all of them.
This isn't everything that I
have to say about what's going
on at CYFD. It's not everything
that I have to say about the
settlement agreement.
but I want to take folks a
little bit back into history.
In the 80s and 90s, there was a
consent decree.
And at that point in time, it
was the Department of Human
Services that um
social services that was uh
responsible for child welfare in
the state.
We were under consent decree.
and there were several things
that we had to do.
right?
Um
we had to hire licensed social
workers. The department had to
hire licensed social workers,
and they were very successful in
doing so. They created an
implementation plan that
included hiring from out of
state.
The focus was on family
preservation.
keeping families together,
keeping kids at home, in homes,
and were successful in doing
that.
The department had to focus on
permanency for kids, and that
meant if kids needed to um
be adopted, then there was a
serious effort in terms of
adopting those kids and placing
them in in adoptive homes. So
that they weren't languishing in
in foster care. And if I
remember correctly, that's one
of the reasons why um the ACLU
sued the department.
But we also had the department
also had
at that moment in time, a
skilled, educated, and
experienced leadership that was
skilled in child welfare. They
knew what they were doing, and
they knew what kids and families
in the state needed. And they
also knew what workers needed.
And I remember a time when the
great majority of the workers
there were licensed social
workers. Once that consent
decree was over.
the department started to slide
back. They decided that they
didn't need to do the things
anymore because nobody was
overseeing them. Nobody was
making them do it.
So they stopped hiring licensed
social workers. They stopped
focusing on family preservation.
They stopped focusing on all of
the things that had made them a
model in the in the rest of the
country.
There was also another report
that was recently um
sent to the department and many
people have it. And, and that's
the Child and Family Service
review that the federal
government does. That's dated
2025.
Some of the things, and I
didn't, I didn't, wasn't able,
it's a 42 page report and I
wasn't able to read back through
it again. But there's some very
interesting things that I wanted
to share with everybody.
One of them is that
maltreatment for kids in foster
care and Bernna Leo County has
increased.
and we have seen evidence of
that.
One child was killed in foster
care. Another child was abused,
and I don't know if that foster
parent was ever arrested or not.
I know that there was a warrant
out for her arrest.
I don't think that people know
that children are, were most
recently removed from a foster
home for sexual abuse. I don't
know who abused, who sexually
abused those kids, but somebody
did, and they were removed.
That home had 6 kids. The home
where the child was physically,
actually the the home where the
child was in foster care who was
killed and the home where the
child was placed, who was also
abused, were all overplaced.
There were too many kids in that
home, and that's something that
CYFD does on a consistent basis,
and that's not safe for those
kids.
Placement moves for kids in
foster care in New Mexico are
double that of the nation.
That's not good
Anytime we take a kid out of
their family home that creates
trauma.
And I want to mention that also
includes the governor's order,
where she has basically um
signed an executive order
requiring that kids who are born
addicted.
or there's an attempt to um
remove them.
That also causes trauma. And I
think that at the top, at the,
at the highest levels
that's not understood or
recognized. One of the other
pieces that I found that was
very interesting as well is that
there's higher, higher rates of
placement of kids in Valencia
County. I don't know why that
is, but that's what the report
said.
Case treatment plans were not
appropriate to the circumstances
in the case.
That was one of the notations in
that report, and there's another
notation in there that talks
about treatment plans.
And what that says to me is that
workers are not experienced in
creating treatment plans.
for kids because they're not
experienced social workers.
They're caseworkers
There's a big difference between
the two.
The state has been on a
performance improvement plan
under the Fed since 2017.
So yeah, not much has changed
Things are not getting better.
They're getting bad.
They're getting worse
The settlement agreement, as you
all stated, has been in place
since 2020.
and the state has failed to to
meet.
practically every single
requirement, every single year,
which is why you all went to
arbitration. And if I remember
correctly, one of the things
that the arbitrator said was
that things haven't gotten
better, they've gotten worse.
And they're continuing to get
worse.
CYFD is a huge issue, and we've
had a lot of conversation in
this committee and there's other
committees that have also had
conversations and presentations
about CYFD LFC, courts and
corrections is are the, is the
other one as well.
I think that we need to
recognize and seeYFD can't be
fixed in its current state. Why?
They don't know what they're
doing. They're not experienced.
They don't have any experience
in child welfare. They don't
understand it. They're doing
what they think they they should
be doing. They're doing maybe
what somebody tells them to do.
It's not working.
One of the things that I really
have take issue with in the
settlement agreement is that it
doesn't require the hiring of
licensed social workers. The
only mention that's made is of
caseworkers. And we've got to
recognize that social workers
are trained to assess families,
to assess children, and to
provide services to those
families and kids. And without
that, if we don't have that
basic base of skilled workers,
of a skilled workforce, all of
the changes that are being
recommended are not gonna
happen.
They're just not. You can't
expect somebody who
has been doing plumbing for part
of their life, who the
department hires to understand
child welfare.
You can't expect the clerk from
Macy's to understand child
welfare. You can't expect the
teacher, and I'm not saying that
any of those folks, you know,
that those jobs aren't honorable
because they are. What I'm
saying is that we need to
understand that we need to hire
licensed social workers, and we
can't get away from that.
We have, I'll recognize that we
have a workforce problem, but
the schools of social work are
putting out, are educating
licensed social workers,
licensed master level social
workers. They're not coming to
work at CYFD because of the
reputation that COYFD has. It's
a toxic, chaotic environment.
Caseloads are way too high. We
all know that. You all talk
about caseloads and graduated
caseloads in the settlement
agreement. But again, that
doesn't matter if you don't have
the skilled workforce.
As of about 2, about a week and
a half ago, I learned that there
were 10 permanency planning
workers in the Bernalillo County
office.
I knew that earlier this year
there were 800 cases.
So how are those workers going
to make visits?
to families? How are they going
to make visits to foster care
families? How are they going to
get kids to medical
appointments? How are they going
to do anything?
but sort of just sit there and,
and I don't know, cry.
It's not possible. It's, it's an
impossible situation.
You also talked about treatment
foster care.
Earlier this year
No, it was last year, I think
Um, I arranged a meeting between
the CYFT secretary and some of
the treatment foster care
agencies, because nobody had
talked to them, nobody had asked
them.
what they needed. Nobody asked
them what issues they were
running into.
And one of their major
complaints was again the
workers.
Workers didn't follow through.
Workers gave them bad
information.
What do you do?
I don't know if they're
continuing to meet Secretary
committed to continuing to meet
with those uh treatment foster
care agencies. I don't know if
they, they continued.
I guess I'll have to go back and
ask.
In terms of foster parents,
we do have a problem in terms of
addressing what the concerns
those foster parents have, I
don't think that we've sat down
to do that.
in a respectful, honorable way.
Those foster parents have some
of the same issues. Foster
parents that have been licensed
through the state have some of
the same concerns and issues
that the treatment of foster
parents have.
Inexperienced workers, no follow
through, late payments.
can't contact their their
worker.
And it goes back to
the horrible working conditions
and the big cases.
We haven't talked about how many
kids we have whose parental
rights have been terminated?
We don't know how many kids are
waiting for adoption?
My question is, are we creating
legalized orphans?
How many of those kids are going
to age out without ever finding
a permanent family home.
I don't know those numbers and I
would really like to.
I'd really like to know that.
I don't think
that
the governor is the answer
because every time, and I lived
through that too.
Every time you get a new
governor, they have a new idea
of what CYFD should look like.
They reorganize. They have a
bunch of secretaries come
through. There's not any kind of
consistency.
We need some consistency in that
department, and I don't think
the governor is the answer.
I have another idea about that,
but
that's for the next legislative
session.
I think we need to come
to the reality that is, this is
going to take lots of years to
fix. It's not going to take 5
years. It's not going to take 10
years.
It's gonna take way longer than
that, because it took way longer
than that to tear it down, and
it got torn down.
Really, I think, you know, we
need to recognize that CYFD is
like the Titanic, and it's
almost ready to go under.
It can't be saved no matter what
we do. You can't make the
arbitrator can't make CYFD do
what CYFD can't do. And I think
we need to recognize that.
because they don't have the
skill to do it.
They just don't
One of the pieces lastly, I
think that one of the things
that we need to do and, and, and
some of the other senators and,
and representatives mentioned
this is, you know, how do we get
to our kids before
they're in the system
before
they're facing being removed
from their families. And I think
as a state, one of the things
that we need to do is really
focus on meeting the needs of
our families, putting more
resources into that, identifying
at-risk kids.
and getting to those kids before
they're in the situation.
that some of our foster kids are
in
that some of the kids have been
removed
As a state, you know, I just
want to say that
knowing that we've had the
number of deaths that we've had
this year.
and knowing that two of those
were kids who committed suicide?
is a tragedy
and we don't have any more time
to waste.
We've got to do something now.
and we can't put our hopes on
the governor.
She's been in office 8 years.
Hasn't been good for 8 years.
So we've got to do something
different
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you for your
presentations. Um, thank you
again, thank you, committee.
This is a not an easy um
committee to be on and I truly
appreciate all of you and your
thoughtfulness and your passion.
Um, so with that, we will be in
recess until 9 o'clock tomorrow,
