And you feel tripped today it's
an incredible area to be a
critical time and incredible
opportunity as i'm sure you'll
see through your time in these
taxi day spent here one
to acknowledge also that we do
have our our mayor protect daisy
leader
behind me here on my left and
then also are depending city
manager mister marco craheada
and yes mean with our
communications coordinator
behind you there
i'll just touch in a few things
not sure if this like got up but
I just wanted to share of a few
things about what someone park
is doing
the city of someone park is has
embarked on a course of
redefining the culture of this
border community.
We have put in place as we speak
a new minister devomin code that
is in the tail end of public
review
that'll combine some regulations
specifically zoning and
subdivision regulations and the
ideas to be able to become
customer friendly while
maintaining the
really the natural scape in the
bearing of this of this border
region
we also want to make sure that
the proper infrastructure is
being designed as part of these
master plan communities against
only park
collectively with that we are
focusing several areas
one of them is a medical
sector
we recently completed over the
last twelve months
land use the plan that was
adopted through zoning planning
and zoning
and also proved by council and
we've now secured three acres to
develop a micro hospital we just
approved the
consultant to conduct the
medical market analysis and
we've talked to some medical
providers and there's a lot of
interest in developing that here
for those of you there are
familiar
it's our taxpayer money on an
annual basis annual base of six
thousand mexicans go across the
texas state line and we
subsidize medical jobs such as
cna nurses doctors and so we
want to be able to retain those
folks here and of course we want
to increase access to to medical
rather focusing on the sports
tourism fifty three billion
dollars nationwide industry we
have a tremendous relationship
with your parcel local motives
we just signed a new three year
contract to bring over their
youth academy
training programs to suddenly
park in our multi generational
center thank you legislators for
funding the quality of life
we are able to build that
facility about a year ago we
opened it up with the grant that
we received a couple of years
ago so the work that you do does
touch as far south as a border
so we appreciate you in that
also we want to point out and I
know senator steinborne is is
sitting there behind you.
Uh he's he's AAA passionate
individual for the outdoor real
grand trail into we appreciate
your support as well as you
continue to find the
recreational program on that in
we are building several segments
of trail in fact if you go to
our sports complex you'll see a
temporary white multipurpose
trail that's back seventy five
percent percent complete in
construction so strong focus on
the outdoor recreational economy
as well and then lastly
I will say you we've got
tremendous partners we were
closely with the border
authority we were closely with
the dodgy we're working on
regional projects
that touch every aspect from
workforce development to
creating jobs to being
competitive to this region as
well as our our colleague here
our colleagues in this table but
including missed mister patchek
or so with that again welcome to
someone parking we hope you
enjoy the next few days that
down in southern new mexico
thank you mister manager and
great thank you.
Mr mister chair members of the
committee my name is jerry
pacheko i'm represent the
universal international business
accelerator which is part of the
smallest development centers
network we help companies export
an important to new mexico no
charge
we represent the border
industrial association which is
the largest industrial
association in the state
representing the modest
industrial base we got about a
hundred and thirty members in
that so we work with government
at all levels and obviously with
the legislature to try to get
cap loudly for our projects and
finally we've been contractors
for the new mexican partnership
for about twenty three years
recruiting companies this is
this year's in the thirty fourth
year that i've worked on this
industrial visa came down here
to work in nineteen ninety one
and so it's a pleasure for you
guys to come down and see what
we've been able to achieve in
that that time period so i've
got this short presentation I
want to go over
if you have that there we can
turn to the second page you'll
see a aerial of son had only
more from the mexican side so
son had only
will
is primarily a an industrial
park at this point in time with
future residential commercial
planned but she can see the
foxcom plant there they had one
point five million square feet
previously they're making about
seventy thousand delt computers
a day they added about one point
two million square feet and
brought some production from
asia so it's a huge plat we also
have gmc paper tech for people
who plant on the other side
sunrise confections which is of
gummy bear factory and or or
donally next slide you can see
the industrial parks and how
it's lead out in in relation to
the port of entry there so we
have four industrial parks in
senatory so you can see the jet
and the union pacific project
which is what I call an acquired
tenant so we've got about eighty
companies about seven millionth
graffit we support about seven
thousand employees the next
slide is an aerial of the union
pacific project which we
established and did the ribbon
cutting on april first and a
twenty thirteen.
They're doing about two hundred
thousand container listen here
and this is the biggest
container yard that under
pacific has in its system by
territory it it ranks about
tenth to twelfth depending on
the year in terms of container
lives next slide is our cattle
crossing a lot of people don't
realize that the largest cattle
crossing on the US mexico border
is in santa teresa they were
slated to cross about six
hundred thousand head of cattle
this year you probably read in
the newspaper about the screw
worm plague and so those guys
have been hurting there they
were a shut down last november
open december shut down twice
again and we don't know when
they're going to open but that's
a major economic driver and
those guys are hurting over
there
next slide you see some of the
logos of some of the companies
that we haven't sent it to
resell were big and electronics
we have a but eight hundred and
forty eight thousand square feet
on our side of the border that
supplying fox gone on their son
the mexican side of the border
so we have come school also big
electronics company but a lot of
people don't realize new mexico
has an automotive production
beast and it's based in santa
teresa so we have companies like
formats doing all the soft stuff
in your car we've got votesco
german company do not sensors
we've got the death ink japanese
company doing plastic injections
so forth and so on but we've got
value added agriculture we've
got cold storage we get them
better fabrication and obviously
logistics next slide shows the
the hottest ports of entry on
the US mexican border if you see
that forty four percent on top
of that graphic there that
sanitary city new mexico are
port grew in in the burb value
of traffic value cargo going
through our port of entry by
forty four percent more than any
other port of entry on the US
mexico border next line is an
economic impact study the
enemies you did for us in twenty
twenty one and the updated in
twenty twenty four I see crammer
back there from arrowhead those
guys are great they work with us
on these.
Economic impact studies
enemies you concluded that we do
about two billion dollars a year
in terms of
revenue to the state's economy
we support about seven thousand
jobs so to put that in
perspective I think film does
about eight hundred million a
year space for you know
contribution economy but my
foreign large this is the major
economic driver
I just say we're not as sexy as
richard brance in or or netflix
so you know or mean potatoes
down here
next uh slide senatorisa the
sanities industrial base is now
counting for more than sixty
percent of new mexico's total
exports to the world the the
green line shows what we're
doing will do a little over
twelve billion dollars a year in
out of new mexico and exports
the red line shows new mexico's
exports to mexico the blue line
shows dornia and a county's
exports to mexico which is
almost completely covering the
red line so
we are trade with mexico one up
a hundred and one percent last
year are trade with the world
went up a hundred and forty one
percent because of what's
happening and in the industrial
base
next slide shows
I I did a listing of the
recently completed projects of
the companies that we recruited
to this area so you can see
there we've got quite a bit of
stuff going on there with
everything from value added
agriculture to out of parts
tyson crump at a germany we
recruited them metal fabrication
break parts incorporated working
with them now on getting them
set up and dodiana county the
big big distributor
you saw border plucks digital
assets and green power motors
to a deals were announced last
year
other developments you can see
on the next slide we've got a
couple of new industrial parks
slated to be built a big
residential community up in the
industrial base of twelve
hundred acres a couple of solar
forms and we've been working
with animal shoe for about six
years.
On a decilination plate so if
you tally up with recently been
constructed in sanatoriza
completed under constructed
resladed for construction it's
about two point five million
square feet add that to what's
going on and son had only we
have a about four million square
feet it's been built or is under
construction as we speak
one last thing I want to talk
about is one of one of the ideas
we put together that became your
old came to issue was we kind of
tend to be an island on to
ourselves in santa teresa so we
started thinking how do we
benefit the russian state with
what's going on down here so we
started what's called the supply
the supplier program we actively
interview the companies in our
industrial beast and ask them
every day you open the doors
what are you using while pallets
shrink wrap in her gases
lubricants and he landscape in
services whatever so we put an
excel spreadsheet together and
set it to every economic
development organization in the
state
and we're trying to bring new
mexican companies into the
industrial base to supply the
companies that are here it's
almost kind of a reverse export
and I know senator gages we
worked with the watson hopper
downing your your region down
there within so I think he was a
very first success in this
program and it's been around
about seven years and we have a
tally of about sixty three
billion dollars of contracts
that we spread across the mexico
that are tied to this industrial
please mister chair members
committee thank you very much
thank you very much
mister
they could you you say you're
not in sexy as rich richard
brenson better every time I
think about the members I
certainly think about
your
that aside my my name is
jonathan misses and i'm the
assisting county manager over at
the county of donanna I
supported however received the
likes of the departments of the
fleet department and the jeport
which many of you were just that
as well as having previously
overseen the utilities apartment
we are unique and that we
operate the four wastewater trip
in plants within the county.
And then I also support with
government relations so happy to
be in community with all once
again and i'll be there
alongside your if we get into
the special the major thing that
I wanted to share is that we're
here to help you with the heavy
life says I look at your agenda
and I look at the needs for your
preliminary outlooks on your on
your budget as well as what
you're looking to invest in
terms of the border
infrastructure in economic
development we hear to be by
your side and to try to make a
little bit easier or also
concerned and are advancing our
discussions as gerry mentioned
though the bia is a final one c
six we are the county and we do
own much of the property can
make the land deals to be able
to make the necessary
infrastructure investments
within the county the likes of
the disall plant that jury
mentioned we do have a current
refine out on the street right
now it will be closing within a
week or so and from there will
be able to take that information
to help and share all across the
state for those of you that may
have went through your
colleagues that are so on the
decel plants that went to the k
bailey hutchinson in the nearby
community this region has been
doing this for the last two
decades and so we're happy to be
able to see how we can replicate
that when I was up at the
roundhouse during your
legislation your session I heard
the needs not only in our county
but also in burner wheel county
and insanity county and so we're
hopeful that we can try to
replicate that so that we can
put the the state back on the
map for water security we also
are well aware of the concerns
with the capital at least and
for the reports in the reform we
actually was listening to
meeting this morning and I heard
about some of the fiscal
storeship so to that in that's
one of the reason that the
county and I speaker headed this
reduced are icip list down from
eighty three and now it's down
to nineteen the way that we did
that every when we look to see
what were some of the projects
that were kind of withering on
the buying we said a threshold
for five hundred thousand and
below because that truly wasn't
in the spirit of what the f a
was asking to be critical are in
terms of a critical need in the
community over a five year term
we also went and saw at the
obviously public request of the
governor how could you lies our
own reserves.
As well as our bonding capacity
to be able to complete those
projects and to make sure that
we start to presenting true
shovel ready projects so that's
one of the things that were
focusing on we also made sure
that we did that informed by our
strategic plan that is covering
over a five year term we've
parted with the ripple
foundation which is in
conjunction with the robert with
johnson foundation to look at
our treaty to plan from the lens
of seven vital conditions and
one of the things that I would
invite this committee like we
did with our commissioners to
perhaps adopt one of our vital
conditions when you're whenever
you're in community or whatever
you're thinking about your
allocations they are reliable
transfer changing transportation
thriving natural world basic
needs for health in for health
and safety humane housing
meaningful work and wealth
lifelong learning and then at
the center is belonging and
civic muscle these are the
things that we've committed to
and our committee to try to make
sure that we do a team community
lift and will do it alongside
this committee as well just a
quick too quick notes on all of
the materials are online the lsc
under the lfc tab
for for anybody who's interested
in following along with the
materials then also I know the
microphones can sort of go in
and now so yeah i'll make sure I
get that's right of close to
the last two major points are we
are working in community to
repair the relationship that we
have across the state I think
when you look at the four of us
I can't see that we've always
agreed on the same thing but we
know that for the better rate of
the community we do need to be
able to get in the same vehicle
shuttle bus coach plan whatever
you want to call it and move
ahead we're also working with
our mexican counterparts that's
one of the reason that you saw
representation from the several
economical as well as the
council because we recognize
that we're we're doing here is
in community but it also touches
international boundaries and
that's one of my favorite things
about the border I grew up in
this community you probably
passed my old home alongside
magnuts I group at mcnutton
spruce this is not the same
summon park that I grew up in
and i'd be proud to come back
and be able to represent it
anywhere I can.
And my credit position I do get
to do that alongside mario and
and his other team in the last
but not least is that we
recognize that we have major
infrastructure needs this was
something that was critical and
presented at the new mexico
energy symposium earlier this
year one representative lukon
your own representative dixing
representative of sanchez and
representative hernandez spoke
to us about the next generation
of energy needs that we need and
we also know that we need water
which is one of the reasons if
we pledge our support across
that rfy so we are here to help
and we will continue to hope
that we can leave the state
thank you
thank you very much if you
manage
thank you chairman of members of
the committee i'm joe delaware
with the new mexico border
authority i'm also an advisor to
the economic development
department in the state
department of transportation are
before I start i'd like to
recognize i'm fred heinerek was
also a border authority board
member and there's also one of
our hosts here at the facilities
so thank you
haven't had any lunch but I
heard it was good
so i'm doing this presentation
so I I don't know if this has
been handed out um and all start
with slide one so one of the
things we've been working on
the past couple of years is what
we call the santa to that serve
strategic infrastructure
assessment
you saw a lot of growth I think
in the video I think jerry did a
a good recap and put together
the numbers of all the
industrial construction and all
of the things that are happening
in the border but we also were
trying to I think learn from our
history and and jury's been at
this a long time and so what
happened in the first thirty
years that has maybe been
different than the last five
years and how can we move
forward so something today says
experiencing a lot of growth a
of that is based on the
infrastructure investments that
have been made in in recent
years by this legislature and
the governor but now you can see
on this slide of the ingredients
of something really special so
you have the intermodal inter-
union pacific railroad facility
you have the jet poor which now
can a tom accommodate cargo as
we saw.
On their runway ribbon cutting
just a an hour ago or so you've
got to foreign trade zone you
got a port of entry and you've
got the ability to process and
cross oversize and overweight
cargo which is the designated PO
we for this entire region so
that is a unique opportunity
along this border and the
question is how do we continue
to use those resources and
make this port of entry in this
area this region are more
competitive on the US mexico
border and beyond so on the next
slide we with our partners at
the
center for border economic
developments and narrow head
centered animals you as well as
with data from the message of
alley economic development
alliance we put together kind of
this graphic which in a natural
talks about the growth and
opportunity so missed
opportunities and why further
their infrastructure investments
and deploying resources to this
region can benefit the entire
state of new mexico at the end
of the day there have been a lot
of missed opportunities so there
are some numbers there which we
looked at eight specific
projects that could have come to
new mexico but ultimately when
elsewhere followed up with them
and found that we lost at least
one thousand nine hundred and
ninety jobs from those eight
projects in over two point seven
billion dollars and capital
investment when we surveyed why
they didn't come to new mexico
ultimately infrastructure
constraints a lack of inventory
national regulations which made
economic certainty and
investment maybe a little too
unpredictable and the lack of
existing industry that
accompanied what they were
already working on as well some
work force constraints but at
the end of the day the the the
message we kept hearing is they
saw the potential and something
to let serve but we just weren't
quite there yet so if you look
at the next slide i'm one of the
key projects that we're talking
about is the border highway
connector so it took us a little
over twenty minutes I think to
get from the airport to the sun
and part race track and casino.
So right now it's at about
ninety percent design and is
ready to to go to construction
as soon as i'm early in twenty
twenty six but you have a bore
highway connector they'll reduce
that time from over twenty to
approximately eight minutes to
go from that area to this
community that's huge right
particularly is worked force and
companies are looking at the
region and talking about where
the work force will come from
and how there's connectivity to
employment centers and and i'll
pass so and so on so that's a
key project i'm in a large part
of the motivation for that the
necessity for that is also
displayed in this graphic which
shows the number of trucks and
passenger vehicles that are
currently crossing and what is
projected to happen once the
bridge of the americas and
downtunnel passo closes at the
commercial traffic on an in
about the next year or so and so
there's potential opportunities
there and with the right
infrastructure investments in
around some to tell us we have
the potential to attract on that
so then this next slide shows
water and wastewater capacity so
one of the things that we had to
look at is what is the existing
capacity with the ability to
grow and dedicate capacity to
new investments and you show
that you know there's a crue a
demand forecast which is is
increasing to twenty forty two
but just within the last year or
so since we put together this
start of this report the
dashline shows an updated demand
forecast we're looking at a lot
of demand for water and waste
water and need to start looking
at how those investments need to
happen and then the next slide
this is probably the least you
know to be at jerry's term the
least sexy thing to talk about
but it's strange you know it's
you can't come out and build all
of these things if there's going
to be a flooding issue so we had
a a very technical and detailed
team look at a large area of
basically flat and and desert
landscape.
And look at what um improvements
will need to be and so this is
also a tool that'll be useful
are to future folks that are
looking to build something and
invest i'm in the area and so
we've commissioned on these
details drainage studies so that
the next slide is economic
return on investment so one of
the things who want to be able
to do and and kind of tell the
story of of this region is when
you the legislature and others
put money into infrastructure
and invest in this area what do
you actually do get in return
and so on the first column shows
are what would happen if we end
up in a halted development
scenario we're not investing an
infrastructure we're not trying
to kind of grow you still see
some growth things will continue
to come here just are based on a
number of factors that are kind
of a respective of uh any
further investments and I think
that's what we're kindest in
today and then you can see a
continued growth scenario
through twenty thirty of what's
some of the investments on the
next i'm slide would kind of
return and so
and then the last column shows
the difference between those two
numbers in both loss of jobs and
also economic i'm indicators and
then the last slide here table
two I basically shows what the
estimated needs are to really
grow in a way that
you know what would give those
numbers those jobs and those
are kind of gdp numbers and
start building that
manufacturing industrial and
commercial sector that we always
talk about in terms of the state
are moving away from reliance on
unsaw things like oil and gas
and and the existing industries
that we have today but how can
we supplement them and grow
beyond that and and these kind
of show what the uh recommended
amounts in annual investments
would be to kind of get to where
we need to be and then
I think that's kind of the last
slide I will say there's a much
larger version of this
presentation that the team at
aero ahead and wilson in company
architects and engineers put
together.
A lot more detailed graphic
information on the economics and
numbers and needs specific needs
for water wastewater even things
like electricity and natural gas
and on the front page I think
you can see the website and
where those reports can be found
which is
w dot santa trees a strategic
plan dot com and with that i'll
conclude the presentation thank
you great thank you very much
mister
okay will go now to questions
from the committee and we'll see
if there is any questions from
the committee
up yes I have sent her video
please
okay thank you chair thank you
everyone that to the presenters
and gerry I just chair just want
to acknowledge juries what a
wonderful job is done for so
many years in decades and I know
you have about four decades left
in your jerry so we're looking
forward to even bigger things
but I just real quick mister
chairman I wanted to ask mr the
letter so the question on I
don't see page numbers on your
existing table
table one and table too so if
the investments were to be made
mister chairman
on the the stuff that you're
going to need here on the
infrastructure of the
transportation drainage etc do
we know do we have the economic
station that tells us if the
deroy the return investment is
gonna be clean or is it going to
still need and put her dollars
from a state investment or a
capital entity.
So so mister chair I know just
enough to kind of be dangerous
center pity if I try to give
that answer so i'm going to now
stock to criminal winning him
actually wrote that report and
is all of those details on to
answer that question okay so mr
chairman are not quite sure mr
winnington if you are doctor
willington if you heard my
question
yeah I think I got it
represented members of
committee.
So the scenario we looked at is
based on continued growth and so
we've stand studied the economic
impact and senatory systems
twenty twenty one and going back
to twenty nineteen jobs of grown
their eighteen and half percent
per year and so what we looked
out was if you run out of water
infrastructure and you can't
grow any further that's the
halted scenario when you look
out to twenty thirty if you can
continue going at eighteen and
half percent per year which
requires the infrastructure
investments that's a good to the
continued growth scenario and
and chair and mister wittington
is that eighteen percent on the
top end or is that your at what
added you determine the eighteen
percent
it's based on the employment
growth that's been observed in
the senators industrial park so
based on surveys even through
covered it was a company over
both rate of eighteen and a half
percent per year since twenty
nineteen okay thank you chair
and so then the last couple of
times i've been here one of the
things that i've heard almost
each time is that housing is not
there the there needs to be so
can you satisfy an eighteen
percent growth and employment
and basically you have to grow
one house for every five houses
that already exist here to meet
that demand so are you able to
do that.
Miss chair
center party
so the citizen park is really a
bedroom community and provides a
housing where the industrial
part provides the employment the
jobs that we're talking about
currently today we have seven
pids public improvement
districts that have been
approved we've got another
application for an accession in
petition sitting on my desk for
about four hundred additional
acres there are a uh there is a
significantly large development
that has not yet gotten to a
point where it would be publicly
announced that would essentially
double the population until in
park in the tune of a body
eleven thousand dwelling units
that does not include any
commercial retail so then the
question becomes do you have the
water in the sewer to sustain it
as mister misses has pointed out
here and
all of these gentlemen here
before me is is it the the key
and doctor kramer disgusted as
well the keys going to be that
we need to be able to invest in
our water insurer infrastructure
as well as our transportation
network to be able to see it I
can tell you that had a meeting
on friday with the district
engineer and the discussion was
we need to petition a uhm
I call it a river capacity we
don't want to be in the same
situation that will run show up
a kirky was with all that
western west and traffic until
west a boulevard was constructed
and the constraints with the
river crossing does take ten to
twenty years to develop and so
we are in the works with my
conversation with the district
engineer and also now
we're going to be facilitating a
meeting with the n PO and text
up but these are things that we
can absolutely do but it takes
infrastructure and it takes
investment and cheral I will be
done after this does the
community want to double insist
the message in the discussion
and I i'd be happy to have our
mayor protein visit back
i've never known anybody that
doesn't want to be in a winning
team if you do it right
and share we do have the mare
protemas here maybe she wants to
comment on the the perception
from the community.
The.
Yeah either way and we'll
appreciate the opportunity to to
visit as we go through well keep
going we do members will wrap
this part up at two thirty for
the next part but again very
much want to encourage for their
conversations all good and then
chair the last thing I just want
acknowledge you know their folks
here and that are having you
their signs on data centers this
and that I just want to make the
comment that data centers are
extremely more efficient than
they were even just twelve
months ago so I just think that
that probably needs to be
communicated better to community
on what data centers are capable
of from an and efficiency on
water usage
how are you etc thank you chair
thank you very much senator
video next we have center woods
and representative chatfield
thank you mister chair
the question I have is on the
page where it talks about growth
and opportunity here and and the
study assume and was done in
twenty twenty three
I see one day on victor is that
correct.
Mr chair center woods that's
correct so this used data in
twenty twenty three i'm again
there's a larger presentation
that has some other information
but that particular graphic is
from twenty twenty and in a
question I have is
we talked about mister
opportunities here where did
those projects locate did they
locate on another border area
and another state where did they
locate this in general
set so there was no mister
chairman of center woods so each
one of them went somewhere
different there wasn't like a
theme that we were able to kind
of and cover essentially they
were looking at different side
evaluations visited saturday to
that got at least passed the
initial site visit stage and had
followed discussions and then
ultimately located elsewhere so
I know offer sure one of them
went to virginia and one of them
went to I think I don't know if
his michigan minnesota those are
two places but um in these
specificate examples
okay so
essentially they work
concentrating on settling on the
mexican border mexican american
border mr chairman center would
that that's correct i'm not in
those two cases the others that
there were some that were um
there was one that in particular
was looking at across border
model but that's what I don't
know if they were they ended up
going if I had to guess I would
say probably a location in taxes
okay any other question I have
that I haven't heard in talk
about is the turf's possible
tariffs would you anybody like
to comment on how that's gonna
ficture report mr chair senator
yard i'd like to compete on that
i'll give you an example a last
year we
announced the eve bus company
that the state signed a contract
with to do school buses they
were going to call locate with
the polish battery company we I
had three visits from from the
the two companies we had picked
out a building at a hundred and
thirty five thousand squirrel
feet they were going to call
location.
Fifty percent terrorists on
lumin and fifty percent
terrorists on steal it out of
seventy five thousand dollars to
each bus so they ended up
shutting the west virginia plant
down there still operating out
of la that hundred and thirty
five thousand and I have the
company here as we speak is gone
down to twenty five hundred
square feet in a public
warehouse because of what's
going on and are steel companies
are or hanging on our automotive
companies that you still are
hanging on it's been really
disruptive and
we're seeing companies that
hiring people because we're
waiting and seeing what's going
to happen with the effects and I
think that most people in
industry would say I wish I wish
we know what a tariff is what
the tariff is what it it you
know it's not if we know what
the tariff is we can deal with
that but when we don't know it's
hard to plan so one of the only
sectors I see that is better
fitting is a public warehouse in
sector because everybody's
trying to be preemptive and
import product from mexico but
that entails the charge so it
were were kind of in liberal
here and it's it's a little
disappointing because twenty
twenty four was the best year
we've ever had in this
industrial base and twenty
twenty five was promising to be
the same but and we're still
recruiting companies as you saw
but there's companies that are
not coming because of the
terrorists
well so in essentially right now
everybody is filling up
warehouses here and and bringing
goods and services are goods
across right now
due to expectations of direct
mr chair senator we have
three four public warehouses and
they already have the regular
clients you know we have one
warehouse importing mexican
sugar
uhm almost all of them are doing
auto parts what have you so as
to the extent that they can
accommodate that preempt move on
terrorists they're trying to do
that but they have the regular
clients and it's not like we
have an empty warehouse.
They can go into hopefully with
some of the new spec buildings
that were seen built we can we
can accommodate some of that
preempt over the priorities
importation of of goods that
would be tariffed
thank you mister chairman thank
you very much center what's the
next we have representative
chaffield and representatives
and
thank you mister chair
mr chair wanted to talk a little
bit about the d cell proposal
I didn't go to day but I in
previous years i've gone and
looked at the cape bailey
hutchison december plant very
impressive twenty seven point
five million gallons of water a
day costs
at the time that I turned it
cost was two dollars for
thousand gallons that's doable
it's a it's a great
great idea
my question is have you how much
waters down there in century
says they're plenty and if you
put in the sale plan what what
type of capacity are you talking
about putting in there and are
they used
for the water would it so some
of it be for drinking some for
data center so for
and how what is your capacity to
meet that need
chair and representative I feel
i'll take that question john
atms so i'd like to share a
little bit more about what the
refire requests for information
is that is currently out on the
street as I look at the latest
status it will actually close in
one day and what we're looking
to do is to invite companies and
we've already got notice of
global companies that are
willing to come in and they are
going to help us with the
valuating exploring and also
implementing a decel capable
plan for the likes of clean
drink and water not only in some
of the in the industrial park
but also at the sun that that
has support of entry due to some
of the concerns that have been
stated out there and also the
shaprell area which is on the
other side of the community and
we know what the bolsters in
ocrafors look out there.
I can't speak to the operation
of the correct board but we do
have the vice president for
crook here in the door capacity
with mr and fontana perhaps it
can speak to that I think
without speaking out of school
they have access to sweet water
but it is the sweet water that
is currently still pump pumped
out with the arsenic are goal
with the desalt plant would be
to be able to pump up some of
the brackish water and to be
able to replicate what is going
on in the nearby community we
are currently looking at the
awkward formats but we would be
looking to do this alongside
industry to be able to align it
with the needs of the industrial
park and in the as a second part
to that as we look at the
boundaries of the current
operation of current and the
recent recent shifts in in
management there will be parts
of the system that will remain
in operation by the county and
there will be parts of the
system over remaining operation
by current and then the city of
someone's park has a signal that
they are looking to create their
own public works department to
take that on as well from that
lens our focus will be the
industrial park and then any
other a residential areas that
crop up alongside to the extent
that centered up by the mention
in terms of creating housing to
make sure that we have the
number of of homes needed for
temporary or long term workers
so terror I guess what it comes
down to what is your vision in
gallons per day and what is your
cost estimate just a wag just a
guess
term respond representative
chapter those members are yet
not known because outside of the
wilson evaluation I would say
that we are continuing to look
at who is interested in the
industrial park one of the
things that we've noticed is as
part of our k p m g in our
analysis is that we in the state
are about five to ten years
behind when it comes to sight
selection which is why I suspect
those bills that came out one
sixty nine one seventy sort to
help us with some of the sites
elections and to make sure that
we get ahead of the curve and
back into parity.
So we're really looking at to
take the current read of the
global needs and be able to
match it with those operations I
be i'd be speaking out of school
if I gave you a number without
knowing who we have pending
chair or
city manager in fantasy you want
to add anything to the.
What I can tell you is I was
looking at the the the total you
asked what the quantity of
available breckage water
unfortunately I couldn't open
the the file but the osy
recently did publish a
a presentation that really
identifies what the call
couldn't could to see a practice
water
that's available in this area as
as mister misses pointed out I
can tell you currently in in the
case of crew and what their
utilizing there's about
thirty six hundred acre feet per
year that the city selling park
itself owns and we're not even
reaching that as the whole crew
of service area so so there's
still water rights available
to to be able to operate but in
terms of longdashterm
development
the eleven thousand d u unit we
are talking about that's that's
roughly a demand of about.
Fifteen hundred to eighteen
hundred acre feet of water per
year that we're talking about
i'd have to do the quick
conversion on on gallons but
it's it's it's a fairly
significant amount it's in the
millions of gallins
that we're talking about per day
one where when we're talking
about what it takes to to have
that kind of growth
interenda representative chapter
the only thing I would add to
that is that when we look
alongside to building out our
industrial park we are going to
seek to work with corporate
entities and partners that have
corporate responsibility top top
at their mind and terms of some
of the closely systems that
they're presenting to us in
terms of what senator by the
amendment and how far some of
these technologies have come
with the data centers and the
likes of other entities those
are the kinds of things that we
want to be doing here because we
know how much of a precious
commodity water is not only here
but across the state and the
delicate balance that it needs
related to at the agricultural
community as well
thank you mister chair thank you
very much representative
chatfield next we have
representatives
thank you mister chair
I was wondering the slide for
the required infrastructure
investments for continued growth
and I really appreciate that the
break out of the different
components I was wondering if
you could talk about the
different funding sources that
you would be utilizing or
seeking in order to.
Raise or you know have access to
all the funds needed.
Thank you mr chairman are
representative dixon so that is
kind of the last um I think part
of the study so in the next year
we have one year left in this
effort is a kind of look at what
those different funding i'm
scenarios can be so combination
I think of public private are
funding I think mr messes talked
about you know the r f I
you know that the county is
doing uh at the same time we are
also task the western and
company engineer and architects
to look at different decel plans
and kind of have an idea of what
you know maybe the need is to
kind of satisfy some of those
from brackers water i'm so there
there recently it had been
tasked with that and and that's
why the draft of the the the the
current report hasn't been
finalized to move under that
next part which is going to be
finding recommends
recommendations looking at
things like public funding but
also p three's having private
operators our potentially come
in and how will the k bailey
hutchinson for example was
funded
great thank you thank you mister
thank you very much and next we
have replacement gareth and
reserve dow and then represent
silver and then rooms of it
thank you mister chair thank you
for the presentation we're
making in normist efforts to
attract business throughs
buildings on spare utilities
development lead and things like
that as you make contracts would
is the expectation for companies
moving in here what what are we
expecting from them in terms of
investment
that we don't do that we don't
pre do that mister chair
representative that we don't do
we have a very aggressive
specter builder that we included
out of dallas blue road
investments and they're now on
the fifth spec building they can
start the six quarter one next
year so on the specs side of
their happy with what's going on
you know economic conditions you
know appropriate.
That's one side of our business
the other side of a business is
to recruit an actual company
that does what's called the
building a b t s that's a custom
building they we get the general
contractor the build to their
specifications what have you
one of the issues
we are on the border here so
texas is right across the of the
river over here or just right
across the the the road here we
run into some problems sometimes
with
contractors from texas that want
to work here or that are working
here i'll give you an example we
did a couple of leader deals
recently local economic
development act and it's it's it
is a good expectation to have
that leader money that goes to
company spent to new mexico but
there is very few general
contractors in even the last
cruces area that can build a two
hundred thousand square foot
building so those texas
contractors come over here all
of a sudden they don't qualify
as you know for leader the
company can't hire them because
it needs to spend that money in
new mexico and we've seen that
total as high as seventy five
percent so we're kind of working
around that by establishing
corporate offices and operations
for those texas contractors here
but that's that's an issue
and i'm not sure sure just
another quick question we have
ongoing discussions about public
private partnerships and there's
a lot of work around the
spectrum we need that
legislation
private partnerships
mister chair
representative yes I mean we
can't get stuff done without a
public you know with the public
sector not working with the
private sector when we've to you
we've had a historically very
good relationship in in doing
that we have developers or
companies to put up the money
but the county needs to have
infrastructure in the state is a
partner in that sense because
capital outlet is the life blood
of our water weastwater system
down here.
And also or roads you saw the
roads we have the industrial
base of beautiful because what
the legislature's work with us
and the governor is official yes
critical
and june representative of
gerthy I know we're running
short on time and i'm happy to
have these discussions as a
cyber after this uh welcome but
the things that were also doing
with our interested parties as
it we are also trying to put our
fingers on the pulse of what are
the pain points and some of the
things is gerry mentioned is
that the can be looking at deals
right across the state line or
they don't have the same level
of impediments that are maybe a
bit of a holdover when it comes
her inspection process I can
give you a key example when it
comes to our low voltage
inspections those drive some of
our big investments crazy
because they have to get a
special inspector for that and
that's one of the things that we
want to make so that we work in
conjunction with the legislator
to make sure that we updated for
the twenty first century
approach the other thing that we
do as we try to make sure that
we invite them to be in
communities that they understand
the uniqueness of our region and
so that they have that buy in
and then more so try to get some
winds that will be not only for
our community but also for the
region at the county we have a
unique uh a unique approach in
that we have to support in
service three thousand and eight
hundred square miles of urban
and role area so that's why when
we hop in the car and we go from
something park all the way up to
hatch it ticks about an hour in
twenty minutes and we are trying
to make sure that when we think
about inviting folks in that we
think about wins across the
county not just one area.
Great thank you very much for
we have represent downrips and
silver and then represent it and
we're close we'll try to wrap up
as close to two thirty as
possible thank you thank you
mister thank you gentlemen for
the presentation i'm looking at
the numbers of jobs is that the
total number jobs are that the
jobs are the people who reside
in new mexico pay property tax
new mexico could you break that
down
that's a total mister share
representative that's a total
amount of jobs at the industrial
b support the latter we we did
because we survey the industrial
base periodically because the
question is how many new
mexicans are working in the
industrial base because of right
next to a parcel texas the last
survey we did and you've got
appreciate previously is about
sixty percent text and forty
percent in mexican the last
survey before the pandemic and
went down to fifty three percent
tax in forty seven percent new
mexican and some people might
say won't come on you know
you're not even fifty percent in
the mexican that's a win a
passal county has eight hundred
thousand people done and
accounting two hundred and
twenty thousand and were almost
fifty fifty so we've we've made
more conservative effort when we
recruit a company in to do job
fears to put them in touch with
the department of work for
solutions and we're not seeing
the labor problems we saw a
couple of years ago so it it's a
lot smoother and hopefully we
can get that to sixty percent
new mexican and forty percent
texan thank you mr chair and
then i'm just wondering has
texas or mexico invested any in
the infrastructure
mr chair representative
we are part of the elsewhere
municipal planning organizations
who we all work together on
further funding because this
highway that goes right by the
casino goes right until parcel
so we all have to work together
here as for mexico we are gonna
and we have worked with mexico
traditionally even to get this
port eventually opened which had
opened in april of nineteen
ninety three we had to work very
close with the mexican
officials.
And we're going to be doing that
going down the road because this
needs to be expanded in
modernized I mean with a six
largest port of entry on the US
mexican border in terms of trade
and you look at it it's like
that's the six largest sport I
mean three north found
commercial leads for passenger
leads we need to really increase
that footprint for us to take
advantage of of trade with
mexico thank you thank you mr
chair thank you very much
represents over then
representative
thank you chair think you offer
the presentation I just had a
couple of questions around um
just continuing with the jobs
thread can you talk about the
work for that's needed because I
saw that that was one of the
impediments because we have
three pretty large high schools
in the vicinity chaperized
gadston something that I saw
and wondering how we can tap
into young people that are going
to be looking for jobs and the
relationship with the new mexico
economic development department
and how
how you're just leveraging any
resources or work that and I
mean dd is doing
mister chair representative i'll
give you an example of beautiful
example how we're we're trying
to develop job skills the job
skills are everything from
a floor worker operating you
know basic machinery building
maintenance apply chain managers
see and see operators were using
computers to make your your
products but union pacific one
of our border industrial
association members generously
stepped up to the plate and his
funding a program called the
industrial careers academy write
down the street here suddenly
park as a doney and account can
be called just some important
branch so every time we're
getting a company at we're
referring them to the people
over there and they're
developing special programs to
train these employees and were
also through our charitable
foundation working with the gets
the independent school district
reaching up the high school
students because there's some
students that don't want to get
a four year degree they want to
stay in the area they want to
have a career.
And let me tell you something
you'll be an example is to who
you'll tell us us that runs a
fedex ground facility started
out as a as a college kid but
lifting boxes are to trucks he's
now the warehouse supervisor in
the guys all of maybe forty
years old earning six figures a
year so it is possible to have a
career in in the industrial base
but it's very important the
workforce
chair and representative silver
I I think one of the things
having spent eleven years in
higher education is that a lot
of times these systems are
fragmented they're overly
fragmented and as a result
they're a duplicated efforts and
investments that it eventually
are competing for each other you
have corporate training programs
you have state training programs
you have local regional programs
like the ones that jerry
mentioned but they're not all
interconnected through a web of
transition for true what's not
as upskilling and reskilling so
when we have in jerry's
fortunately have just autoschool
who also sits and works at the
work for sport but we need to
activate and send back some of
the information that is going on
here because some of those folks
that are wondering how they're
going to put food on the table
tonight might not have the
minimum wage jobs to be able to
make that happen and so when we
talk about some of these next
gen facilities we want to make
sure that we make that almost a
requirement when it comes to
stimulating local job growth and
and also putting it together
with the next generation of jobs
were seen almost a mass exiting
being difficult for computer
engineers to be able to be
placed now that a eyes coming
into the picture so we need to
think about what those future
dislocated workers will look
like I myself while I love being
part of the knowledge economy I
have my days where I wish maybe
I could go work in a more
ballian field like plumbing or
electrician because that is
where some of the jobs are going
and with that being said I think
what we are doing as we're
taking the likes of what we're
doing with the ped and mark
dusky for the intern program and
making sure that we inspire some
of those high schoolers into
what the jobs are so that they
don't get disincentivised when
they come in they see our
administrative jobs in our and
our knowledge economies and
giving them the options for
vocation.
Where they can earn as base six
figures and be able to stay in
their community and get back so
we're looking at engineering
jobs were looking at a skilled
trade labors of will require the
needs and the likes of a local
unions as well as future
placement as we are lying and
that's one of the things that
are partners of the video are
working on when it comes to the
industrial manufacturing and
some of the upskilling
reskilling with their
microcredentially they will
actually help give some of those
next genda opportunities for our
region and hopefully putting our
new mexicans first
thank you thank you chair thank
you very much upset about it
thank you mister chair thank you
panel for a great presentation
i'm looking at this from kind of
a high level and what you're
saying is for an investment over
four year period of one and a
half billion about you'll see an
economic output of six and a
half billion is that what you're
basically saying
okay
you know i'm a little familiar
with water projects do you think
you can do all this work i'm i'm
looking at your water
infrastructure investment alone
do you really think you can
accomplish that in a four year
period when I mean I I i'm just
looking at the area that you're
serving clear out to shape
around i'll have some i'm just
wondering will you be able to do
that in four year period
and represent it what I would
say is that there are current
needs in the system that could
be a dress that the play habit
with our ability to currently
and I don't say hours but more
so more the likes of the current
water provider to be able to get
some of those the water word
needs to be because there are
days where there's not
sufficient water for the
construction there are days
where sometimes our concerns in
the community for the the
hammering and that just means
the error in the water that's
knocking and so those things
have been identified for a while
perhaps the county in the city
worked in a silo as well but
we're identifying some of that
disfunction so that we can put
those front and center.
Most recently we've been having
public discussions about being
able to provide through a grand
to be able to address some of
the hydrant needs directly to
correct via or through the
various boards including
something park so that we can
address those so we have a
couple of early winds that we
can work into the system and to
start addressing the immediate
needs and then targeting some of
the long term needs that have
been identified in the wilson
study
and emat madam mister chair reps
have had adaptors to add on that
so this is kind of like a
baseline report which just
identifies kind of a roadmap for
how we can invest in an
infrastructure and what it would
there recommended kind of a
mount in like today's dollars
would be to start investing in
infrastructure and building it
up but the the short answers
know I mean we couldn't next
year build a hundred and sixty
seven immediately the next year
hundred and sixty seven because
you know we needed a plan like
this to at least start to
identify what the needs are with
the specific projects are
there's a land use component
that's you know involved in all
of this and so it basically
creates like a baseline that
then we could start crossing
things off the list if we don't
meet the one sixty seven over
the four year or the one point
five billion over four years ago
creates kind of a balance she
you know that we're at least
able to start kind of chipping
away as the intent of this
exercise thank you that's
helpful thank you mister check
thank you very much for that
thank you members for great
questions thank you panel for
going to start at oriented and
diving into the number of the
issues and it's very clear to us
when the reasons that we wanted
to come down here is because we
need to be ready to be that best
partner which of course includes
significant investment
partnership in collaboration and
with that we're going to
transition to our next panel
will get folks a second to get
up there.
Yeah.
The.
And.
Okay.
Thank you all very much and I
know that you know we have a
sort of AAA type fit with
appreciate yeah so
madame c o thank you for the
center piece
okay we're really pleased and of
course we're we're we have our
border to are starting about
four
but we're really pleased to be
diving into a discussion on
international border and
economic development and
infrastructure
the side of the federal are they
come through better as quiet
thank you so much for being here
on with your
cheap
and
really great to have our public
regulation commission cheaper
staff destroy curry
man of co kelly timeline from
our past electric great tab mr
naper here from border plex
digital
and uh
is it
who is it feel let the free.
I've got great okay perfect
thank you okay
so can we we have until about
four pm perhaps we could start
with sort of a a brief overview
of or if that would be okay and
then we'll go through and from
that so from the mexico side of
the of the border and then we'll
go to
this whatever order folks want
to go in from there.
We went started this at the
house at all say a grass calling
beat that shown as that only
under committee finances they
looked at all making
a salute and small
representative share
your smooth
senator by his chair
can I look
executive director of new mexico
but the authority
met company since that then you
might do not in is direct rise
around economically with this
what is your look at the door
over tomorrow director related
to the most epilemistic
assurance plan as your
television only particular
questions could afternoon
everyone I appreciate the
invitation to this meeting of
the finance community of the new
mexico legislator I agreed
nation small representative
chair senator george when yours
vice chair had out of the
federal executive director of
the new mexico border authority
and the mayor of some park
highly better
today with me is daniel donato
director of economic development
of the municipal government up
to the waters and architect over
the motor director of the
municipal institute of research
and planning for two otherwise.
The midst your case former
secretary and not economic
development you went on to them
to store in this forest and
important technicians thus
handle but I need for some
central asuas can take it unless
front data delicious thousand or
making call take us it you are
convinced he was a colonial
asseller for kick home to spend
more resolver in mister probably
must economist with an iron as
when I must competitiva get well
make what I look at you that
they be the mister so we turn
this in below zero from there
we are very pleased with the
important now for being made to
join forces among the series
then make up the water between
the states of texas new mexico
and you woe convinced that unity
strength and that together we
can solve our problems thereby
creating a more competitive
sound that can improve the
quality of life for a residence
on both sides of the border.
Union conversal authorization
is some truck on any planet so
they he called the cruises from
the resource internationally it
but also the hostile will
appreciate it on younger
consequences is that come for my
opportunity to realize they'll
parcel county don't county
county yellow we have no days to
help with us collect that
collect about how common
solicitor might told us crucial
international desert here only
more than that there is a far
well to pay you in partnership
with a parcel through the mpo we
are working on the strip jerry
strategic plan for the
international board requesting
on august sixth the first
meeting of the steering
committee was held composed of
authorities from parcel county
donate county and the
municipality of quarters with
the idea of working as a single
system for all international
crossings from can only most of
that the restaurant do well but
need you
but a what is his easily broken
shop reparatory who say here
only more sentence
and the laposilia yelling mean
and this year the the second
wall america's parallel but a
traffic way communism is just a
previous but i'm going to ship
the below me he got most almost
all kind of who knows projectors
case on building that is part of
authorities because in our
enough for the same is the clue
say it that you're
for where does it is a fault
most importance to prepare this
fed on the most sent that that
is crossing in light of the
possibility in imminent closure
of going to the last I mean it
goes grossing to carticle trucks
traffic in may two thousand
twenty seven and the mexican
side we are working on several
party already projects that will
end out of the strengthen this
international crossing
will say almost the apple
sitting and
list as part of.
Like to show some slight
limit aspects
I mean let me ask for one second
yes as the vice chair and i've
had these before we understand
the issue with the waters and
the data center weren't in a
hearing and we know you guys are
going to come to los cruces
tomorrow and out of respect or
guest from mexico can we just
have our presentation you guys
can hold your signs or hold them
down and it's just out of
respect for the committee
the committee is not here
dealing with the data center in
the water issues that's a long
wash you so you guys just
dropped out signings down i'd
appreciate very much and it's a
signer of pack for art
presenters here i'd appreciate
the very much better you don't
want to do that then it'll be up
to the chair
glasses
we don't continue aim in the
most so what you're gonna copy
on the
star the positive act on this
really portant yeah
thank you only more something
that is a lot easier to disclose
the making cook on a thousand
years
so we provided you with this
image and we are trying to show
you the importance of the
crossings between the united
states and making and especially
the crossing between sound that
there is a head on you as he and
the naposelia eliminate this
year they'll say the career in
and when they corridor war
considered almost keep concerns
point where I
commercially know and take what
romanian is allowed to since
three is a group she says here
we we wanted to show you that
this crossing between what is an
advanced which is cargo and they
might impossibility of the go to
the one of some medical crossing
we wit.
Can see from this image that
there is a
revenue of ninety four thousand
million dollars and if it is
closed
see it doesn't here which is
heavy then they give for the
lesser sell could say thank you
only most of the there is a good
thing that would mean that they
they try me me on this
you could be within the occasion
your parcel to won't be
interested in me on the letters
to get it she can start getting
ten dollars commercial as those
one what this means is the
commerce trade is growing in
this area for example last year
I believe the the trade
in the stand that there is an
only more crossing was a twenty
eight thousand million dollars
in this year went up to thirty
eight point eight thousand
million dollars see less yet the
apple security and the copy of
it in in the states I was would
almost pretty scared if someone
who scandal
impulse article telling this we
make a normal city alone with
any sustainabilities that as
universal and I mean he cannot
comment you're not going to
result your part we are all
falling up to seeing time if you
call up to a car they asked him
on part of the but I wear me
sort of doesn't sell as unis
they stay closing them as you're
not
we are looking into launching
projects and the we are working
with the mexican government but
into the modernisation of the
massive because mexican customs
facilities and it's worth to
mention that the presidents of
mikey go has authorized the
budget to carry out these
projects
italian constitution deliver me
and to an approach is there can
be no real astignance
international care only most on
that there is a.
Calling the insurance the
healies are in traffic we could
add in authorities like it does
united
also construction of the unable
by pass from come you know to
hear only most of that there is
scientire national crossing
intended to streamline vehicle
traffic and avoid passing
through the amount for a
residential area
being admit what i'm into and I
really didn't drunk a lot of
data so what discuss has gone on
this case then that I
took them as touch who that i'll
say in demand you are
complimentary concrete though
premise clock yeah you know in
press and we important think it
getting better and it's the
current data e went up with
someone's hand the product is
available
more over the improvements at
the road junction from a quarter
on this highway to the
international crossing with
concrete payments through
private investment by a very
important business group that
wants to participate
even if they are no places to is
this he said that
it will go music in the circle
but I mean the federal reading
assessor only most of the
terrorists
and the medium term it it's
going to take some time will
understand but we need to start
the project we want to start the
project for the royal way back
towards get only more center
that is
it is important to mention.
E immense you're not going to
special interest or appreciate
they make you call but I close
the mom part of them what a
crusader thank it only more
center terrorists a presentation
than on broadband is around so
now some kid on him said that
the united states they hear
number policies are used to that
they hear they've been making it
was came from side christine to
economical in the same that are
unison piece maybe antilocation
on the police they settle your
listing better soon kit then
come been officially scarlet you
facilities on minister
it is important to mention that
the president of my heat doctor
shame bottom as a special
interest in the sun that there
is that federal new most of that
that is across the having
designated the second animal
area as a development house this
is part of my head was strategy
to promote economic growth in
different regions of the country
through the creation of
investment hopes with tax
benefits and administrative
facilitation is still sporasses
than these senators per
attracting between honest
information that elected economy
can set what is clarity come
will automatically say
responsibility electronical
semiconductories for myself to
call echemical local was
california and that they make
you call honest as that they
hear is the central saddling
best young came no solution
considering a human schedule
meant they answer said there's a
settle called up dollars a lot
of styles
you said that they said what
trust you that is is when
important this bill can is as he
transating pool sellers but a
caring plays in current I mean
those produce
these areas are decided to
attract investment and faster
economic activity in the keys
sectors such as automotive
aerospace electronics send my
conductors pharmaceuticals and.
Chemicals what the president
seeks with these
strategy is to decentralize
investment so it is not
concentrated only in regions
that have traditionally been
development center so I just
state capitals but to
incentivise cities
that is why is that.
What are your important
department so through my
resident for talice accurate she
does see some kid only more so
that there is a door santander
most cannot seem also be
tireless but all in the
commercial get that kind of sold
lows and a front data so they
most use this caring for the
palestinians were still in the
social system what is making
getting most of us have for the
list called being colored to a
start on the most dospondors in
call mazic to single me and is
the person it case was a
computer that a
comparison to stand on grandma
called for the potential
economic
that is why it is very important
all of us to modernize drink
them and make the sample only
most of that there is a crossing
it at john and successful we all
understand that timing is vital
for the industry working on both
sides of the border we know you
want to strengthen your state
and we from what is mechanical
want to strengthen the link of
this entire region were more
than two one a half million
people
turning it into a large market
with strong economic potential
so we agree entirely and we are
so grateful that you're here
I know there may be some
questions we'll go to our next
presenters but we agree entirely
and I really want to express for
the committee our gratitude for
you come in today and the
partnership of being able to
work on infrastructure on both
sides of the border is very
important particularly at this
moment and time yes the most
complete amount that
the level of the standard
support since yeah easily called
up colorado what are sealed you
get us it is the sale
asking someone's complete
amendment that work on the state
they are going to
see no simpler so that mean it's
just probably a discuss that
looks quite start.
Get to have letter most of the
most complete thanks very much
german and all protocols have
been
articulated as we seen the
caribbean thank you for having
me here i'll be really brief in
my with my fancy notes i've
written here I I do want to
leave this committee with five
thoughts that I feel very
serious about the first one is
my name is kelly tom and i'm the
president c o v passal lecture
but I have been an energy since
nineteen ninety and I couldn't
be more excited about what's
happening and energy that I have
today i've been in very
different markets I grew up in
west virginia my dad was a coal
minor working in west virginia
maybe i've been an energy my
whole life but I worked in the
columbia bolivia and the uk I
lived in jamaica for five years
have worked throughout the
united states and there's no
bigger opportunity then we have
right now in this space so I
just want to leave us with a
couple things about that that
the time this is exciting time
for both energy and economic
development and we are committed
and needed and necessary for
economic development win five
years ago there was a lot of
trepidation because we were
bought by jp morgan's
infrastructure investment fund
and there were some worry about
what would happen they'll pass
the electric serving both new
mexico in the elpasso region
everyone from hatch to van horn
what would happen I hope this
committee is seeing that we
fulfilled our promises we give a
hundred million dollars to
economic development not because
we're you know just generous
because we know that's the only
way out so we're committed we
changed our whole vision
emission to be an engine for
economic development
transferring that energy
landscape because we know which
is my third point it's the only
way out now I don't know if
anybody else but me has been
poor but growing up with the
data you didn't graduate from
high school whose mother was a
type is back when they had those
things and having to choose
which bill you have to pay for
is not fun and we all talk about
affordable energy and we're
committed to that and that's
reason where an issue in our of
p but our customer mix does not
work.
It does not work to have eighty
percent residentials or ninety
percent or whatever it is and
have no businesses for taxes for
schools for infrastructure
infrastructure expenses have
only going up there only going
to go up look at terrorist
geopolitical impacts and for us
to do that we have to and it's
my third point change our
customer mix I know there's a
lot of different feelings about
what happens right now and what
large loads we bring in but I
would just encourage us all to
be open because we're all
driving the needs for large
loads if you do a google search
as one x if you do a chat search
it's ten x we all are creating
the need it's not some data
center name and all the people
here it's us so we're creating
the need and so we're focused on
the need for that data center in
the need for power in a
situation where it's been flat
throughout the country we have
built nothing we have built no
transmission lines we haven't
built any power plants that work
twenty four hours a day and
that's what loads will do for us
so the fourth of fifth thing I
want is to remind us and I want
to give time from a panelist is
that it there used to be a time
and all this markets I mentioned
when economic development and
site selectors would come
against what they want to know
do you have worked force are you
giving a tax break and all these
other things well today guess
what they ask every one of them
not just one of them is their
sufficient power will you be
able to big power you know we're
lucky you know why we're lucky
because I don't have to go to a
more crazy market and get equity
I go to one shareholder who only
has pensioners which means they
don't expect the fifteen and
sixteen percent return and I say
I need a hundred million dollars
about a substations I need xynz
and they've been able to do that
because they believe in this
region as I do is the reason
five years ago I move my family
to this region because we've
just scratched the surface now I
didn't live here by her horse
stories where every other city
stand and towing yellow arizona
and so on and so forth really
leaned and economic development
and they've had.
Benefits that we haven't had and
so my fourth and fifth point or
this there's lots of competition
we're all competing for the
loads that will change to
jactory for decades to come
there's no way to do it without
power infrastructure and there's
no way to do without
infrastructure we're very
cognisant of our vision a
mission that has five pillars
one of them is a clear
environment one is affordability
we we understand we got a
balance a lot but you know I
talked to people in georgia my
good friend who is ceo for
southern company talks about
what they've been able to do
with additional please open up
libraries to an exysether
schools are better I used to
rebig power plants and texas and
guess what infant and texas when
you had a powerpoint there is
what they had go to where we get
fifty percent of our power in
their zone and pale very the
nuclear plan look at their
schools look at their schools
and what i'll leave you with
everybody wants the large loads
in a country that's been flat
forever our national agenda is
to make sure that we have the
inner do we need because you
know what happens when we say no
guess where they did the person
was in my office and we left me
and guess where he went to the
buy so i'm going to buy on
vacation on in christmas i'm
lovely I want to go but I don't
want them to have our data the
country doesn't want us to have
their data and it is time for
our fifth or whatever you want
to call industrial revolution
and a hope everybody's excited
as I am because the competition
is fears their time is now
there's no way to outlive it and
a group in west virgin that
shares a lot of similarities
with new mexico my sister died
of a fitting all over nose and
she was a doctor a medical
doctor and the time is now to
get office spiral into it you
know it soon what we've always
been capable of and it's extreme
prosperity I refuse to declare a
poverty anymore i've refused to
listen to any politician who
says that every day just praise
over in our poverty and sell
tells us how social socially
economically.
You know back or we are so what
i'd ask any committee that's
fine answer economic development
let's seize this moment because
everybody anywhere you go I just
came back from epry where every
ceo in the country who's right
now right here knows there's
only a few
years for this our country needs
a one chicken this number sixty
five gigawatts this year of
power to serve the loads were
creating some communities of
already benefited arizona has
thirty six day decisions that's
probably too much but we have
zero and our service territory
were excited about senators a
were excited about this region
but will have to have power for
us to fulfill and take advantage
of his right here our finger
trips right now so i'd encourage
the community to you or beyond
signs and always dig into this
very new watch situation that
will acquire all was to be
balanced but nothing happens
with without power and we take
that as a great responsibility
and a sacred one thank you very
much great thank you very much.
Mister chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to visit with you my
name is land of nap you're i'm
the chairman and founder of a
border plex digital but me we
have a few slides for you arm is
the one that looks like this
blue and light to we can put
through these are real fast I to
store look I I think this part
of new mexico is a special place
I actually think it's resource
rich I think the cultures
impressive I think it's got some
magic you know I think that we
heard earlier from our of your
neighbors in mexico with the
trade in the growth and trade I
think that will continue alright
and so I think what this part of
southern new mexico has you on
my perspective is the right
ingredients to really be an
important an important economic
development so.
And when we look today and we
have these discussions about you
know either or I actually think
this is an ant I think we can
develop this infrastructure and
we can develop these resources
sustainably and we can have long
term economic growth in the
region that I believe will lift
families in their outcomes for
generations it's admittedly an
ambitious statement I just made
right I just think it's real I
think I think this region have
that opportunity and so when we
look at
your the trends that converge to
make this possible you I would
point to a few things so if you
go to the third slide the
basically has explaining growth
and for structure on it's got
that short this is what uh kelly
was just speaking about if you
look at that graph on the right
hand side.
What this graph is showing you
is the aggregate power
generation in the united states
of america compared to china so
if we look at that basically the
united states has been flat for
call it thirty years.
Alright china has china's great
is now you know three x hours
growing at a higher rate and I
would tell you this is not only
a new mexico problem like this
is the united states of america
problem right when we when we're
all se- here on our phones who
want to draw down your more
power the reality is because
ordrid has not grown it is
forced us into into a position
of unneeded scarcity in the way
out the path force actually add
the resource so we get into the
project opportunity in the
region you know the thing to
know about us as we want to add
power and we want to add water
in the water resource to develop
as the bracket shock for that
the previous panel is spoken
about in the power to develop as
the work we've been doing with
the passal electric to had power
to the region so we are here to
actually add infrastructure to
it I think when we had free
structure we get economies of
scale it with the county's scale
you are the math gets a whole
lot better particularly for the
individual citizens you know of
the community and so this
problem frames it is problem is
why you know there's there's a
raging debate about trade offs
i'm here to tell you I think
this regions won the few places
in the country where it's an and
by adding growth infrastructure
I think you're going to have
more economic growth and more
clean water and more jobs and
better outcomes for people and
this is when a few spots in the
country that they can do that
so if you go to the next slide
which uh looks like this was got
the new mexico flag on it you
know I I think we're super
interesting as we put a finer
point on new mexico this region
particular you know it's it's
the right place for sore
development and in the video we
showed earlier you could see all
the source coming online you're
the battery manufacturers or in
northern mexico so it's a nice
way to collapse time from a
supply champ one of you to pull
battery technology out in
northern mexico into southern
new mexico and so I think that
when you look at these resources
we find ourselves that a
position whereby going long
growth infrastructure you will
attract different customers so I
do think one customers the data
sir.
So maybe give you some ways to
think about data centers and
water consumption.
These data centers are designed
in
a utilized close loop systems
what that means is so look i'm
relatively old alright so i've
been building data centers for
twenty five years I built them
around the world you know was
blessed to get to do that the
original cooling technologies in
the data center had evaporated
cooling so imagine that calling
tower on a roof where your shed
and water old day long that is
not how modern systems work
modern systems work in a closed
format so it gets charged once
it's circulates forever and
forever is a little bit of a
stretch but it pretty much
circulates forever right so the
water you suggest minimum the
real way to think about a day to
senate water usage is this going
to have seven hundred jobs in it
so it's basically seven hundred
people in what however much
water they need during their
daily life so if you figure you
know to two and a half people in
a household seven hundred jobs
you'll call it three hundred
households it's about that you
don't want to look at an
agricultural proxy is about the
same thing as twenty acres of
our fell for forms or you know
few more acres of account forms
so the day the center itself is
not a big user of water I think
that what data center brings to
the water equation around here
is an economic injection okay so
right now when we look at the
the land that were looking at
the pelipine out the santa
teresa that the tax room and
perland there is something like
a hundred books and actor write
it is not much you with the work
we're going to do we're gonna
put it really valuable that's it
on that that has said it's going
to jury generate millions of
dollars of year and revenue to
the county so there's a nice
step up there and I think those
millions of dollars have removed
to the county can fund this
decel plant we're talking about
mean ultimately in look i'm not
the water expert that new mexico
status i've read their work
imported there what their work
talks about is there's sixty
five million acre feet of water
in this basin in which were side
right now in my you know as a
business person my conclusion on
that is if we have the economic
growth we can invest a harvest
in this those tax dollars that
we harvest out the economic
road.
To sustain that we develop that
sixty five million eight feet of
water and that should be to
convert that brackish water into
fresh water I think would be an
amazing innovation for this
reason now we've got an example
of that in the cabinet plan
texas we've got examples of that
elsewhere in the country and
around the world so I think
that's the water opportunity I
would say it's an end I would
say what's invest and was
unlocked the water capability
and i'd say the same thing on
the power and so we have the
power and water capability I
think when when we look at the
economic growth in the country
we will be able to attract data
centers here which uh which I
think changed economic
trajectory of those seven
hundred families who went up
with jobs in that facility right
and I also think we will track
more advanced manufacturing
logistics so I think it's about
unlocking the resource to build
on an existing strength.
In them the last slide here last
couple slides here I think you
were got a rendering of what an
integrated campus would look
like when we integrate from the
infrastructure through to the
tenants which would be you know
data centers manufacturers and
legislation companies and then
to wrap it up.
Your or our value system in core
values are around your lifting
lives okay so we're in the
growth infrastructure business
in we serve
you know you mean the support is
in communities and support that
lifting people's lives in this
you have starts with the jobs
and work force okay we've met
with don't you in a community
college we've met with new
mexico state I think you know
the best the most important
resourcening of region is the
human rights to human capital or
look i'm a technologist i'll
tell you I think the best
technology ever creates when got
trade humans alright so we'll do
pretty good we'll do pretty good
work for the eye but it's not
going to be a self learning
healing system like a human
right and so I think the number
one thing to do from investment
perspective is to start with the
talent in the region so this is
why we immediately lean into
creating training programs with
the local education systems i'll
tell you like working these
facilities you can do level one
stuff without a phd without a
backswish degree maybe we can
actually get people you're out
of high school into the training
programs to do it or I saw I
would just tell you I think it's
an and we can build the stuff
and I I think the most important
investment is going to be in the
people
thank you great thank you very
much mister neighbor
cheapest to have great thank you
so much for making the trip down
to you thank you mister chair
for many members nice to see you
all i'm try a quarry on the
chief of staff at the public
regulation commission
it's nice to be in front of you
again and have this conversation
with these esteem panelists let
me bring it home in how
us as regulators of new mexico
government are looking at this
unique inflection point in the
energy world
as you've heard from me before
the way that energy is created
and regulated with established
about a hundred years ago maybe
a little bit more and frankly it
hasn't changed much then but
since we've got in here since
this inflection point has come
upon us it's changing and it's
changing now and quickly and the
prc is coming into adapting.
So I have a slide doctor for you
i'll walk you through it on
slide to I just wanted to think
you all for such a successful
session as far as we were
concerned I hope you feel the
same way in twenty twenty five
we created more flexibility for
our commission to meet current
and an anticipated demands and
challenges as they keep coming
we are common to continuing to
meet them so that was a really
there's a bunch of legislation
actually that passed HB ninety
three HB ninety one as one
seventy sp eighty three as b
five thirty five thank you for
all of you helping us get those
through and for giving the
commission the flexibility it
needs to rise to the challenge
there's more flexibility needed
but we can talk about that in a
minute we also were very
successful in one of our bowls
which was to partner more with
their sister agencies the prc
was tired of being kind of sand
alone and so the other piece
lots of pieces of legislation
that were passed was help us
coordinate with our sister
agencies be participanting in
these important conversations
economic development committee
the trade point advisory
committee working with wild
fires working with broadband we
are excited to get out and work
with our sister agencies and
then of course thank you for the
trust and the investment in the
proceed so moving on to slide
three what we're seeing as
you've heard from my fellow
penalises I won't believe it
were seen dramatic massive
growth sps as you know the
permit basin they're looking to
electrify there's a ton of load
there by twenty thirty they're
looking at thirteen thousand
megawhat's
right now they're at fifty one
hundred mb.
And so this is the challenge for
pn they're at forty nine hundred
megawaters by twenty thirty
they're looking at fifty four
hundred mb and this should come
as no surprise to epe but right
now they're around twenty three
hundred mb and by twenty thirty
based on the most recent
planning that we've seen we're
looking at about thirty four
hundred mb based on the filings
at the commission
we're also seeing transmission
and interconnection challenges
and we're becoming part of a
regional energy solution so all
three of our major investor
owned utilities are
participating in regional
markets sps has long been a
member of the s p p which is
renewing and a pretty a more
streamblind planning process for
their transmission planning for
the in interconnection planning
p p and m has is currently part
of the western energy in balance
market and they have announced
plans to join the ediam that's
coming out of caso that
california is so an epe has
announced their intention to
join markets plus with a
so we're we're engaging in
regional transmission in
regional markets that's going to
help us as a state me are demand
and be flexible and make sure
that we're able to rise to some
of these challenges
moving on to the next slide side
for as we've been telling you
now two and a half years the prc
is permitted to reduce in
regulatory lag being a reliable
partner in regulations so you
all know what you're going to
get and our are regulated
entities know what they're going
to get and i'm really excited as
I was preparing for this panel I
was running some numbers and I
had been having a conversation
with you and you mister chair
about what does it mean for this
continued investment in the prc
and I was very excited to run
our time frame of cases to
figure out where we are with
making progress and being more
efficient so in the year of
twenty twenty three cases
opened.
How long it took for us to close
it was approximately two hundred
and twelve days for an average
case
from twenty twenty four to
present our number of days of an
average case is a hundred and
twenty nine so we're talking
about a forty percent
improvement and efficiency for
cases in and out of the
commission.
We're excited about that also
for our ccn's are average
decision time was nine months
we've heard horror stories of
maybe it's going to take fifteen
months and we can't bad on that
word where coming in under nine
months for an average ccn and
for an average ppa we're coming
in at under seven months are
often times we see those to
combine and so that can cause
the ppa to take a little bit
longer but we're really excited
about these numbers and i'm
really proud to sit here and
tell you we've increased
efficiency by forty percent for
cases in and out of the prc we
think there's more efficiency to
be had but again we can talk
about that in a minute we're
also talking about being more
proactive in the breath and the
quality of work that we're doing
we're working with our rule
makings right now we're always
working with real making that's
one of the fun pieces of an
administrative agency but we're
looking at a squeezing out more
efficiencies in those roaming
and being more responsive not
just in our role making but
overall operations that the
agency to our utilities were
definitely interested in healthy
utilities because without a
healthy utility we don't get
power when we turn on the lights
we don't have jobs to
have people have the money to
pay their electricity bill so
it's it's really important that
we have healthy utilities were
interested in making sure that
we have adequate representation
from the consumers from the
public from the large customers
from the small customers we
really want to be more inclusive
and responsive to those
interests and also our job is to
balance those interests so the
more that we hear about them in
the more we hear from them the
better we can consider the the
positions of each of those
parties and balance those
interest.
Antified number five where we're
going to excuse me.
I said I was grateful for the
for the trust I mean that we're
really excited about where the
prc is hadded.
The innovations state government
fund has allowed us to make
plans to do something that we
have been talking about since
i've been involved in the
utilities industry so that would
be sense the con one the first c
n one generally instation
closure in two thousand thirteen
and we plan to bring on utility
modeling into the prc so right
now the way that it has always
been is essentially the
utilities run their load
modeling they run their four
pass modeling and yes the
parties have an opportunity to
test that but there's been no
independent modeling available
to the states.
We're gonna change that so very
excited to be able to do that
we're also bringing in a
grandmother modernization
specialist because what we're
learning as we're looking at
at states and frankly into other
countries is that
a lot of what we need to do can
happen with the right technology
and so the prc doesn't want a
certain way we want to be
proactive about this so this
position will be targeted at
looking in and working with the
utilities suggestions and their
requests and making sure that
there's collaboration there
obviously this position will
test the utilities claims
because that's part of what our
job is to do but also it's going
to be proactive and really look
forward to where we can be
innovative because the utility
industry has not been one that
is known for innovation but I
think it's time to change that
and I think the prc can help do
that
so we're really excited to work
with you again in this upcoming
session we were very pleased
that the prc
I think it's the public
regulation commission acts we
had pushed through some
modernizations and some updates
it made through both house
chamber and the senate chamber
made it to the governor's das
she pocket v towed it but she
has promised that it's going to
be on the car so i'm excited to
work with you all again in this
next session to modernize the
prco I talked about the
flexibility to meet the the
incoming upcoming demands maybe
some of those demands that we
don't even know about yet this
is going to be a key peace
because right now are statute
says I have to
have you know let's say a
consumer relations division and
that consumer relations division
has to be its own division it
can't be wrapped in with any
other division my it department
has to be house in a certain
under a certain other division
and so we can't move it around
it is the future of what our
agency is going to be doing it
needs its own recognition and
it's own.
Flexibility we need to be able
to
change things as demand requires
and right now our statute
doesn't give us any flexibility
whatsoever to change how we meet
demands so that's one thing that
will be doing and the other
thing that i'm excited to work
with you all on is to take the
next steps towards making the
prc itself funded agency
currently we collect oversight
fees from our regulated entities
that would allow us to be
completely self funded the fees
are and saturday are intended to
assist in the oversight of those
utilities but currently they go
to the general funds so I look
forward to the continued
conversation that we started
last year to bring the prc along
with all of these exciting
happenings and really become
more robustly in the
conversation thank you
great thank you very much madame
chief the step will go straight
to questions i'll have a few
again members we're going to
wrap up around for
we're gonna start with
representative dixon.
Thank you mister chair thank you
for the presentation I think
there's a lot of exciting
things happening here at
particularly with
energy and economic development
as you all have said
my question it goes to mr
neighbor I think you talked
about the water usage and how
it's now most air data centers
use closed loop systems.
Was that cracked.
Yes that's correct
what I would say is new ones
being built now if you look at
data centers built twenty years
ago the answers know but the
last few years yes.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you and so
with a close loop system is it
possible to use recycled treated
water.
Yep that's actually mr members
that could be that's a
interesting question yet so
there or there is innovation
around how to take ray water you
it's and i'm not an expert in
great water for cooling
solutions i'd say there's work
being done on it it's unclear to
me if the how that will play out
in the short term or turn the
long term I think people figure
out how to have solutions such
that the tolerance for machines
is fine
mister chair I think you're so
so doesn't have there is a
likelihood that it doesn't need
to be fresh water moving forward
yes up mr members of the
committee yes
thank you mister chair.
Thank you very much for some
dickson will go to center video
then senators.
Uh thank you very much chair and
I you know just more of a
statement or mr
naperiod would want to answer
some of these mister chairman
but yeah I mean I said this
earlier data centers in the last
year in the last five years have
what would you say they've
improved in terms of efficiency
on water usage power usage if
you have a microphone you can
don't even have to go on and use
any of the public power can you
comment on some of that because
I think that's important in a
conversation like this
yes mr chair members of the
committee so we look at the pace
of innovation in infrastructure
generally it's amazing it means
it it's remarkable so in cooling
systems for example if we look
at the data centers I was your
part of twenty five years ago
rative to the data centers today
it's ninety ninety five percent
your water reduction and with
that water reduction is not only
say ninety nine percent ninety
ninety five percent reduction
but it's not just the water
reduction like the the water is
an input the output is compute
great so while the input is
dramatic whatever ninety five
percent lower yet that the out
the computer put is
a thousand x minute like we've
really as innovative you know
group of people kind of figured
this out me we've made real
progress alright so that's
what's that's on the water if we
look at power systems if we look
at the efficiency level of
microprocessor or a gpu chip
certainly today for every your
election going in we're getting
more computer I you know I
couldn't give you an accurate
percentage on that one that I
could tell you is it's a heck of
a lot more effective than it
used to be I would say as a
forecast all of these trends
will continue so I I think we
will get more efficient per
electron particularly like the
value of each electron going out
I think we'll get more efficient
on any cooling and put that
shows up in that's you know this
is where when we look in
technology markets like we live
in an inflationary period
generally.
But all of us have experienced
deflation from technology the
last twenty years is because of
those relationships we just
talked about
insurance maybe one or two more
so just you know if you had a
data center ten or fifteen years
ago that was the size of a
football field how big is it now
is it true that it's essentially
the size of the table i'm
sitting out here or is it or is
that an etheration mister
chairman and members of the
committee so that that's another
superstating question so or our
ai team was we did some work for
the DO d and we put we work the
software that literally put a
data center on the moon the
specifering so I was at cape
canaveral in literally this year
falcon heavy rocket launches up
as a night want it was amazing
that data center was literally
like you know a third of this
table that was it in and work
worse or stored in the put
infrastructure on the moon for a
long term exploration purposes
so a data center department who
wants one wants to find it could
be literally a small as a chip.
When we look at state of the art
your a I training centers that
will be you know a million
square foot on a roof
just a series of chips your
sought so I think it's it's like
a fractal it's based where
there's a form factor but data
soon which looks like a chip in
is made those as you won't
aggregate it and that's as big
as data search we can build
today thank you chair and III
this will be my last question
you know I love the subject you
know mister chairman so
and I don't want to put you on
the spot mr neighbor if you
don't want to answer this next
question but if you were to look
at the average human being and
what what percentage of our
digital life is going to run
through at data center somewhere
in this on this planet because I
think that's also important to
mention as well because you know
we can't pretend like this
doesn't affect every single one
of our lives in some way shape
record
yeah so mister chairman members
the committee yes the the
observation is look i'm fifty
four years old yama digital
immigrant yeah I I grew up in an
analog you are now living at a
digital one my children are
digital natives.
Every time we touch our stream
that's coming out of a data
center like it literally you
know the data or ubiquitous data
of the quality of data
dramatically improves our lives
so hundred percent of everything
we do is come out online coming
out of the data sir when you're
make a reservation for a to
repair a pick up truck that
software running that court
leadership is coming out of it
like it's coming out of a data
sir it it's everywhere alright
thank you very much mister
chairman i'll just wrap up like
section on just you know the all
of these components these
questions I asked her very
important to have in this
conversation and and i'd rather
own this market in this thing
and you've made the decisions
retermined mister neighbor to
come here and I just want to say
you'll thank you for making that
decision I mean we need to have
this kind of a of a industry in
new mexico and it's a clean
industry you've just
demonstrated that it's about a
ninety some percent improvement
in terms of the what it utilises
to make it self work and happen
and I just think it's a no
brainer for us so thank you
thank you very much center video
we're gonna go to senator
steinborn and center
thank you mister thank you
mister chair panel good to be
with you all appreciate your
presentation today.
My question is probably for you
miss cory it's really senator
round how we find infrastructure
how we find energy
infrastructure in new mexico.
Tell me if this assumption is
correct building these data
centers from the one we're
talking about in this part of
the state will involve building
new power generation capacity is
that correct
mr share senator that's largely
correct okay because data
centers consume and incredible
amount of energy they're very
energy intensive and one day the
center alone could literally be
equivalent to not only the whole
city of lost curses but all
southern mexico in reality let
alone several day to set herself
just we understand we're not
adding a little capacity or a
little straw and the system
we're having to generate huge
amounts of energy
and so my question is the just
for people's education that
don't know this you know when
utilities build new at power
generation in new mexico they
are allowed to recover those
costs and make a profit based
upon adding to people's bills.
Tell that how they do costs
recovery and pay for that.
So my question do you matter
miss corey is when we
contemplate creating new huge
new sources of power generation
for a company.
What is the cost recovery
strategy for paying for that new
it for structure and how do you
spread that between consumers
and between the company that's.
Generating revenue from that.
We have that's the milk mr chair
senator that's the million
dollar question or billion
dollar question if uh if I may.
There is.
A cost because they should
principle in utilities and so
when utilities are building out
let's say a line extension to
get to the data center to serve
the data center the data center
is responsible for a pain for
that for that build out in most
cases the generation that serves
that data center that can be
done several ways and and
frankly either one of my
colleagues here probably know
more of the details on exactly
what goes into those types of
negotiations but it can be done
through a special services
contract which still has to come
to the prc ford and information
and approval or
if there is a greater need in
the utility can show need across
across the system they can
dedicate a certain amount of
that generation to let's say the
data center in spread the rest
of that generation now across
the populace and therefore
recover roughly proportional to
that.
And I think all other options
are on the table because that's
that's the big question the
other thing I would say before
I conclude is that
there is a.
Go ahead
leave your transfer but I should
sorry about that well I could
offer just because we're
studying throughout the country
right now the good news and bad
news of being last a little bit
to the data center race is that
we're stunning throughout the
country I think it's important
to note two things the first of
which we have the lowest load
factor of anywhere i've worked
that means that infrastructure
we have here today is used about
forty percent the time which
means we have sixty percent that
we already have space and today
we're building generation
already worries p so there is a
couple of ways to do it one of
which is if it's serving the
region and sometimes it does
because infrastructure hasn't
been built as seventy five
percent of our country's
infrastructures over twenty five
years old and so what you do
then as you dissect the cost
what's serving that load the
other way you do it as you
contract to make sure that
they're paying for it over
period of years it's much like
today if you get an new line
extension you say are you going
to revenue justify if not you
have to pay for it and the good
news I will tell you because we
have now talked to million data
centers money they haven't asked
us for a discount they have not
asked guys in any way to give
them any free ride and fact the
data centers which has been
public in the other state I
serve has written as checks
momentarily after we said we
have to pull a substation it's
fifty million dollars so I think
there's a couple of things to
remember and in addition is that
what we've talked about the
problem and I think sen
mentioned it is that
the thing that's the problem is
the current because that every
piece of our business right now
throughout the country we have
all this waste and energy so in
every piece of our business the
day there's a solution that we
believe or at technology
solution that can help us
generating plants are not
running so there's a way to say
how do you optimise it
transmission lines today are not
optimized and so there's a lot
technology now that you can look
across systems and see where the
supplies you can put a large
loan how do you get the most of
that in our distribution
operation centers and so on and
so forth.
So there will be technology to
help us squeeze that a little
bit so just not building
building building because you
can't just build your way out of
this you got to build an
optimiser we are so what i'll
leave you with this there's a
number of ways you can do it
data centers and our expenses
and our experience only care
about one thing time they have
not pushed back on how much it
costs they don't want to rip
them off and they're willing to
pay that bill so it doesn't I
know there's a lot of concerns
but the good news is we're
looking at every way that
contracted before and whether is
an ohio or texas are virginia or
where else they have what's the
way to make sure our community
benefits without having to pay a
bill that is not directly
related or supports them so
there's lots of contractual ways
to do it too thank you thank you
sorry matt president ceo
president comma president and
okay thank you for that answer
miss coria back to you and i'll
just make a statement you
mentioned before your job is to
to accommodate everybody I think
really the p r c needs I don't
disagree with that I mean
economic development is
important we all my colleagues
comment about all of us use a I
that's a truth I mean you know
it'd be disingenuous for us to
set up here not today we all
don't benefit from it by as it
disproportional heavy industrial
customer i'm worried about
managing a risk for consumers
and and we all know in the
economic development world
sometimes things work out
sometimes they don't but if we
say sure build that we're all
going to pay for it and then it
goes away we're on the hook
consumers you don't have a lot
of extra money down the hook for
higher bills I think you I would
urge every tool be available to
require those companies to pay
the cost of building that new
capacity and that we are hedged
against long term risk those
companies don't work out what is
our cost recovery it's not on
the back of consumers because
we're talking about building
huge data senators and consumer
vast amount of energy.
Um
leaves huge potential exposure
to customers so i'm not i'm not
opposed to building data centers
I think water resources really
interesting we also need to look
at that for sure but in terms of
the power generation of the cost
recovery aspect we need every
good consumer protection tool
and I appreciate you matter
present ceo saying you're open
to that too
but I think as the regulator
it's up to you to really drive
that bargain
as the one he gets to approve it
not use all these tools so I
would just request it.
And that's
thank you thank you very much
next we have senator woods then
reps and
then i'm gonna don't know that
thank you a quick question I
would talk about a load
specially for SB s.
And
well for all three the utilities
and I know they turn in
integrated resource management
studies
just
just off the top you're here
what's a main source of
generation or they plan and for
this increase load have you can
you remember that off the top
you had if not the ceo of a
parcel electric can tell you
what hurses
mister chair senator I don't
have that resource mix out the
top of my head well currently we
have four hundred meg out to
solar but the only thing being
built to day is solar pite we
will we have it issued a rfpe
and all resource p and we're
going to look to see and we know
that we have rules in new mexico
that limit what we can build but
we are going to look to see now
given the changes of these
subsidies what is affordable and
what can I work around the clack
because unfortunately you're
fortunately people want power
and twenty five a day seven days
a week and so we're going to
have to figure out how we do
that under the confines of what
we have a new mexico to build
generation but today the only
thing we're building is
renewables and we have four
hundred and we're building three
hundred more now both posts
solar and storage but we have
issue our of people will know
that by the end of the year what
does resources will look like
so you're you're saying solar
and battery storage is how you
going to meet the future right
now i'm not saying that because
that would be disingenuous what
i'm saying is that in the state
new mexico right now.
Mr neighbor it looks like under
household ninety three can build
and i'm not i'm not going to or
pine because I used to be a
lawyer and i'm not now
it looks like they can build
generation that perhaps we can't
build because we are under some
regulation about what we can
cannot build what I will say
throughout the country today if
we need sixty five gb right now
there has been nobody who has
been able to demonstrate how
that.
Quantity of the load can be met
without gas and that's why you
have gas pipelines increasing
today and why you have turbed
manufacturers increasing the
capacity of their plans so i'm
not saying we have that plan we
vision rfp while I will say
conventional wisdom is if you're
going to have this industrial
revolution like the ones before
you'll have to have our forms of
energy and we're excited to
bring batteries we think that's
the holy grill to but as you
know I won
mb of solar tax depends on the
rule five to ten accounts and so
we're going to all have to
figure out how do we balance
this idea that we need the
capitalised on the economy and
we need to balance the approach
of how we bring energy with the
very real are as he said
safeguards that people who are
benefiting pay for it and I
don't we do a survey of our
customers every year and the
number one thing that they care
about is affordability and so
we're all gonna have to we're
going to all struggle with how
do we make sure that happens the
most often away
when you say the number one
thing they want is affordability
that means you're doing the hell
of the job because reliability I
think they want also you know
it's funny cause I live in the
caribbean and people are used to
power outages but here not so
much if you're out for an hour
though it's a front page story
so yes I think they've become
very accustomed to and of course
when we talk to any load whether
it's been still wanting to
approve or every person want to
come to send a tarrassa the
first thing they want is to do
what you're saying what your
safety meaning how often you
have a power outage how long is
it and they want to know your
reliability likely we're very
very reliable utility and so
that's not the concern it's how
much you're going to pay are you
are you a high tech utility
because high tech people don't
want to deal with the backward
you told you some back or
technology so we've had invest
in that as well and but they
want the best tools to build a
man's or energy use.
So I I don't want to be
disingenuous because I don't
know how you have sixty five
gigawats in this country that's
going to be met only with silver
in storage I don't know how that
works but I am not the
technologist mr neighbor is so
under household ninety three it
looks like independent
owners can build generation that
perhaps the utility cannot and
will be pushing the legislature
in the pc I mean the p r c two
help us understand what those
confines are for us
and I
often wonder if there's enough
natural gas turban's out there
a week and even supplied the
need for it when we finally
decide we need to do that
unfortunately if you don't get a
reservation today the the
prediction is that you will have
anything available to twenty
thirty so we are putting
reservations down just in case
because what we are finding ways
to make that happen because
you're right that nobody
building a gas servants for a
long long time and now see man's
admit to be she and everybody
are adding
a capacity lines but there won't
be radio to twenty third it's
either you do it now or you wait
to twenty third and and right
off the top you heard just to
quick one more quick question
and this is probably out of
your.
Expertise.
If you had a generator how long
would you take to get it
installed in online
a lot of things like your
regulation rates we did have a
development partner filed for an
air permanent in texas and it
took levin days for them to get
it so it depends how fast you
move from relator perspective
and getting permits but today
you have a reservation for a
turban and they have that to be
they can have it by the end of
twenty six but you had to get a
reservation at the beginning of
this year so eighteen months but
that capacity will be gone if
you don't make reservations or
you don't get them now the
estimates are twenty thirty by I
will point to the last guy's
firepower plant that we built I
was in here but I understand
that it started in its planning
mode and rfpeating and all the
things you have to do when they
are permitting and twenty
seventeen that power plant came
online and twenty twenty four so
that's not going to work we're
gonna have to be able to build
populates in two years does that
like takes to build a power plan
a year and have so the ideas
let's get the reservations let's
get what we need to and maintain
our optionality.
Under the confines of what make
new mexico will let us build in
in the regulation and michael
one less statement that goes to
the amount of regulation it
takes to put a pipeline in here
or transmission out of here and
all of that larger regulations
we have in the state in the
mexico
on top of what the prc requires
so it's a lot of time learned is
always getting that much cheer
thank you totally fair thank you
okay we're gonna we have center
eh dunkin reps have it at a
center to bias in represent
little and then i'll have some
questions to close and I think
we do our jobs will be right on
time representative dunkin and
thank you mister chair
senator we are I hope I
pronounce that correctly
when looking at this and i'm
looking at the benefit
to us as new mexico for
california arizona along the
where
can you if you thought about it
can you tell us as as good
partners and hope we are
partners can you tell us what
the benefit is from mexico
in this in the same area.
But on when if you just want ok
since it's hit that can compare
should industry set up your
delivers allows c
I cannot compare and also
doesn't make it does come
general for ca
line two so you'll commence your
passage
with our fourth plan with its
own horizon sealers see lamb
commercial not pass and
rapidless pointless.
Losing bills and I don't partial
move.
The benefit well we need three
and when it interesting and it
has to be fast they have to be
quick on both sides
make you go make you go it's
needs an it's interesting to to
struggle
if we do not do this fast and a
real fast manner the the
the the
jobs are going to call somewhere
else to different price under
world.
Thank you for your thank you for
that senator I agree with you we
need to act very quickly and we
need to
for both of our economies I
think this is a win win for both
of us and still thank you very
much thank you mister thank you
very much for some document
thank you missed your chair and
I too would like to ask senator
clay.
Are you have relationships with
for states texas new mexico
arizona in california
i'll just start who does the
best job of working with with
mexico on on these
multinational you know
arrangements and agreement
seniors there are better model
that we could replicate in new
mexico.
What consider almost your may
constant grow massing is the
sona is miraculon
the dollar is you are quite
ok representative and a
commission doesn't do front they
don't know the consider okay is
the what prevarious and in that
will sign you system in the up
what a little bit they can go on
or may he call it will be on tua
but a for teleseller it must be
veto and good and playowners
will be more signs into a
horizon russia to grab building
us almost seen automatic let me
doesn't this is how yes in this
the momentum we see of affect
that info to he could okay when
must have been sat masco more
here what you competitive
contrar authority and is there
mundo competitors contra
humans into me will make you
call into me most those who need
but also most of the article in
the sponsors income units
everything this get the most
competitive corner through here
then window but I can also again
let him last impress your.
I I consider that
well i've gone some traded more
in this area because it's my
region it's my area i'm
representative from south waters
I represent
the committee for order affairs
with a making call and so for
many years we
we've been trying to strengthen
this region
but we lost employment and so we
we need to work together and we
do not new mexico to our watch
of texas and so
we need to keep on working to
strengthen
the
great area this great region
there is price of two and a half
million people so that are
competitive news does not go
somewhere else.
I think you for that answer
senator and I just
i'm just saying the world is
getting smaller and smaller and
I was just at a landground
committee hearing last thursday
and you can't imagine that it
would be tied to this panel but
just a little factoring abequand
grounds at some top of a
geothermal gold mine and they
are partnering now with the p n
m
s luck would have it the
language extends to AP and m
to electrical utility plant that
they have north of espinola and
the langround property is
adjacent to that facility and
they are working now to build a
john their mom nur clear not
nuclear excuse me plan in uh
abeque p and m is investing in
theirs and it will provide a
money for the community for the
langrand errors and and that
much needed a power in the north
that's a wonderful example thank
you that at a center to bison
represent little and then
thank you mister chair I also
serve on the energy council and
I am astounded when when I meet
with these people and here all
the energy producing states that
are part of the council except
for new mexico talk a lot about
smarts and what I help some of
my colleagues understand is that
science is and were in an error
where sciences had been seen
rather quickly and that those
are best to wrote horror of the
I guess the chernobyl age
should understand the science
that we're dealing with now and
the smr technology is quite
different than what we know and
what we grew up with so while we
wait for fusion technology which
is easily at a decade out for a
power of plant how real listing
are you in implementing smrs
here a new mexico and what's
that timeline.
Mr chair members of the
committee of this another
fascinating question so it turns
out new mexico has leading a
smart company in it your caros
is up the road outside of albert
my take on it is um we certainly
have this technology like the us
navy has it now we run all our
carriers on your little modular
reactors so we've solved this
problem I think in commercial
purposes I were cared drives as
we are going from heavy
engineering sorry heavy
scientific discovery into
engineering so for example you
know i've toured you three to
four essential manufacturing
facilities in the country and we
are getting from that face to
where we're going from custom
design to commercially available
out parts of pump a compressor
about yeah that kind of stuff so
I would tell you now that there
are or
huge capital injections going on
like if if we do a news running
we look at amazon and that's an
excuse and somebody else you're
the automatic capital is going
to accelerate the space okay so
you know
we can't really predict which
way interest rates are going on
so I hesitate to predict like
winner so marshall be ready
available but I I do think we're
hit and engineering face and I
think it's going to happen
within a decade then the
question he comes can we skilled
out and what is the your level
lights cost of energy on that we
look at your other caught the
question earlier about costs for
kill what our majority whichever
one we want to pick news work
pretty don't well for the US
navy so I bet it becomes
affordable you know I think it's
going to be a matter of scale in
pace all right but i'm
personally optimistic about it
because we got a lot of in one
thing about our country it takes
us a while to get a line but
once you get aligned almost with
us you know and I think we're
regional line around these
technologies to or we will
advance rapidly on them
thank you very much thank you
mister thank you center
represent little please thank
you mister chair
I think you for the presentation
this afternoon.
I am
eventually I gradually wrapping
my head around humpers idea of
the
quantum computing and all of the
all of the debt which is needed
to generate that in so I have a
question from mr nephew when the
first one is
you mentioned that you had had
many years of experience
building you've built other part
other locations data centers can
you let you know can you tell us
where else you've built had this
experience thank you mister
chair members the committee yes
almost so in the united states
throughout texas primarily in
san antonio texas and dallas
texas in the midwest chicago
illinois on the east coast
northern virginia southern
maryland international markets
in the u k would be outside
london on continental europe the
outside amsterdam in asia hong
kong in australia outside sydney
in mexico outside mexico city
thank you very much and mister
chair I heard mention me and i'm
understanding this but as well
as the idea of a closed loop in
reference to the water that's
being used my question is mister
chair
can you tell me what it's just
an estimate with what you
envision what's being planned
here how much water is needed to
start
a facility like this and then
how much would you estimate is
needed each year
trip mr chair of members of the
committee on depending on the
final design the initial charge
amount is going to differ so I
don't know the answer that the
specifically because i'm not
actually designing that system
right what I would tell you on
an ongoing basis if we look at
across the data center.
It's literally equivalent like
three hundred households so as
thousands of gallons a day it's
not hundreds of thousands or
anything like that
okay thank you and finally mr
chair I have kind of more of a
comment and i'll make it brief
but for a different
coyour pet is quiet
and in respect to driving down
this this corridor to do sitting
on the bus getting a chance to
take out a look out of this i'll
look out of the windows
as an indigenous person in the
front of the problems it's
remarkable to me that this
corridor has existed for
millennia this commerce this
industry has been in existence
for millennia to watch how it's
being transformed is quite
hard to say
want to say I
wonder how our answers felt
about this help they thought
about this so or not look at
this
this corridor the work that's
going to be done to benefit the
people I look to
this state and this region of
the country I with those and
sisters watching I still I
believe very strongly that this
must be done in a very
responsible way and I think you
all for your
your presentation and the
partnerships that are being
offered to ensure to ensure that
this can be done responsibly
thank you
thank you very much for present
thank you panel very much i'll
have a a few quick questions
starting
thank you again in terms that
sort of the time for the budget
time frame.
Where some of the investments
that you talked about are
continuing and particularly with
relation to send her only more
what are some of those time
frames and I ask because for
this committee we're we'll go
into budget sessions starting in
january where we're going to be
considering large one time up
but very large potential
investments and infrastructure
all across are stay and one of
the focuses of course down here
in southern new mexico and the
more that we're matching these
time frames and complimenting
each other's work you know the
better for for both of us so
wondering about the time frame
from your perspective.
The question is
when our annual success he there
is a
can you say international thing
affect us young then it was
quite recruiting the
nationalists seen embarrassing
it will be no north america no
attempt this is she on the ceral
crucial category would point the
corner when delivery it says is
though those are fake that you
put it on the trust almost on
and this is yourness they need
to stay okay consider almost
careful to but but made sure I
do see a bus
international son kit only most
of the is or located below most
practical condition to
sectorists the they should all
quite as transport these task
making lower us
or
nose and call for total masts
can is increase assumption on
the most and that there is a
policy for the palestinian
continue for
what they said calling best
young they allow me he can still
look at said I still were okay
and we come in the low not to
make another mississiera but I
can decide.
We are
very interested in this project
because our are crossed things
are going to be affected the
government to the united states
has made a decision of closing
the car because the cargo
lanes are especially on on that
got there america's bridge and
so we have noticed and we have
spoken with you and we've seen
that the future for
the several areas of industry
the most convenient
solution is sacred only more
sent that there is a it it's
logical and so we need to
strengthen or are
crossing we need to strengthen
our relations on on both sides
but we have to add very quickly
thank you thank you very much
president c o I want to thank
you very much for being here
today
the i'll have more questions
moving forward but i'm very
interested in what you talked
about sort of the national and
international scope and seeing I
think we have a chance we're
very much not the bleeding edge
here yeah when it comes to
investment in in data center or
other large scale construction
so it's it really feels like
what you were explaining that we
can take lessons learned and and
I uh take very much to hear the
concerns around timeline in
interest in sort of
um condensing timelines and also
appreciate the opportunity now
with the new ownership structure
that once we have big
opportunities collectively that
we can really push forum so I
just I really appreciate you
being here in terms of thank you
for having me here my fellow
painless have schooled me on my
breaking of.
Protocol not directing questions
through you this isn't my
typical environment so I promise
if you have me back I will make
creek of school me and health is
what protocol is so my apologies
for breaking protocol I promise
to get better.
Yes
other members said well that
just wraps up the meeting as the
check catalan
fair point
miss courty thank you very much
I I will be very interested to
see moving forward if there are
additional budget requests I
think we see you're implementing
the trust in the investment in a
pretty aggressive way I am
particularly interested in this
came up a little bit in the
implementation for house bill
ninety three the micrograde
opportunities you know they
present certainly absorb some
challenges but they also present
some of our largest scale
shortest timeline opportunities
to bring on different energy
sources so as we move forward
the microgreat implementation
and
how you're seeing that pursuit I
think is really interesting
and then
mister napier I guess I I the
I guess one
with the some of the development
that you're helping lead here in
something that are so what are
some of the pay ranges for for
jobs that you're looking at that
that would be created
mr chair and members of the
committee um if if we look
different segments talk about a
level one in in here
specifically and talk about in
the day to center itself of the
level one would be you know
eighty two hundred thousand year
as we step up high school will
be a level five are we can
segment these things in between
facility operations versus tech
operations
tech operations are more you
know software centric in those
in those upringes of those
ranges is going to be you know
one eighty north of two hundred
type of annual comp on in that
special cash comp yeah many of
these tenants in
yeah they are probably traded
companies.
And so really that the
compensation the matters most of
these places is this thing
called a stock option right to
the cash companies interesting
the you know bigger opportunity
for most employees and these
companies is actually the equity
of participation got it thank
you and i'll I think while be
keen to learn more as we go
forward but the
the opportunity to access those
sorts of jobs and particularly
at entry level
you know really entry level
beginning through a process that
is really revolutionizing the
world with artificial
intelligence to have that
very much centered in new mexico
is a remarkable opportunity it
with one of the leading benefits
is just the level of investment
first and people here second in
the place and I want to talk a
little bit about that
the data center is not static
right you build a big building
maybe you add on to that as I
understand that you'll be sort
of moving new hardware into that
kind of a facility on a fairly
regular basis is that right yes
mr chair members of the
committee that the answers yes I
I would to me the analogy of a
data center I would compare to a
biological system right is going
to take a new nutrition on a
regular basis that nutrition is
in the form of power right it's
also in the foreman who ships so
that the if if one looks at the
product cycle today have been
video yeah I think maybe the
united states must valuable
company or something pretty
aren't close to that they're on
an annual release cycle so that
every year they're releasing new
chips yet those chips how are
more energy efficient and
computationally capable and so
that something that data service
in an upgrade you're really it's
like a tesler your testle pushes
in his software break how to get
a new core right the same thing
is going on these data centers
with when the new chips get
released so the chip release
triggers hardware investment
that new hardware shows up and
software gets created.
To optimize the outcome from
that hardware that thank you for
that and and what I take that to
mean or one of the things that
it really means to me is that in
donate county or wherever these
are located that regular level
of upgrading and new investment
directly spends off regularly
new revenue for that community
and it's one of the things that
I frankly transformational is
the only way to describe and
this is sort of a much older
model but in low slowness and
much older model different model
the level of investment in the
citizens of last cruises the
infrastructure in las crucials
from water to roads to you know
walking trails and a park that
by the hill where I went in two
thousand as part of the
graduating class that new
investment is at its sort of
foundation investment in the
residents of that community
and you know I think very much
we've heard in comments from the
members and really good
questions
that's a big part of our job is
to work together to make sure
that as being the best partner
were making sure that that
the investment is helping our
residence but this is a remark
and this is a remarkable
opportunity and and I would
frankly echo the thank you and
also appreciate that we've had
this open discussion today we'll
be up in las cruces tomorrow
talking specifically about water
in the afternoon when invite
folks up for that but a core
question i'm gonna ask again and
again is how do we bring
investment that makes everyone's
lives better because we know we
need investment and I it really
seems like what we're hearing
from all the panelists here
today is a strong commitment to
bringing investment to southern
donate county and to southern.
Mexico and that is a very
important thing that we're going
to be the absolute best partners
we can be in an open dialog
where everybody's white voices
are welcome which is what we do
here today so with that
thank you all very much for your
time we'll look forward to
seeing folks if you want to come
up to los crucials tomorrow
that'll wrap the hearing portion
for today and we'll look
membership obviously feel free
to use facilities or anything
and then we'll hot back on the
bus for a quick tour thank you
are very much we're doing for
today.
