All right great good morning
everybody
has has everybody done
the baritos are excellent and
thank you so much for really
making such an important space
work for our committee what
we're going to do first
committee is we're going to ask
for a brief introduction and
welcome from three of the non
profit leaders here in the
region they really help pull
this together and so we'll go to
them and then we'll go through
our agenda
um and that's going to start
with the program evaluation on
public school lunch costs um
so eat up before the public
school lunch conversation will
start with mr alba and then go
down the line
i'd like to introduce my
colleagues first i've got a
terrible winter here the ceo of
the community foundation of so
that new mexico and i've also
got a don harming here from
community action agency as she
is a ceo there and i'm doing so
on the executive director where
you're going to start a
presentation of the terror
good morning to her small
members of the committee thank
you all so much for being here
today hopefully you get some
wonderful local food from some
of our wonderful partners here
in southern new mexico think you
offer being here thank you for
allowing us to share our non for
profit stories with you this
morning i'm as landso said i'm
doctor terry winter of the
community foundation of southern
new mexico our organizations
there's twelve counties in
southern new mexico as part of
our work in these twelve
counties it is really important
that we collaborate with our
partners and really drive change
throughout southern new mexico
in the last couple of months we
have reengaged.
Our southern new mexico non for
profit coalition a lot of our
non for profits are feeling
feeling a little scared right
now in our communities and so
we're bringing everybody
together to make sure that we
can support one another
this coalition is here to
support our sector with building
capacity and increasing impact
on programming throughout the
last year we have taken on a
monthly networking lunch hosted
multiple trainings and developed
resources on how federal funding
cuts will effect our state
especially our partners here in
southern new mexico
it is through this work that we
have found impact as partners
while also recognizing the dire
need to ask each of you to
support as federal dollars are
being cut through out the nation
while also affecting new
mexicans here each and every day
in the state of new mexico not
for private account for eight
percent of the new max costs non
prepa- or numb mexico's private
sector of work force for every
one million dollars of outer
state dollars including those
from federal grants foundations
and donors and other states the
non for private sector brings
into new mexico it generates an
additional seven hundred and
thirty thousand dollars
one point eight billion and
revenues for new mexico
businesses over seventeen
thousand jobs for new mexico
workers and a hundred or eight
hundred and sixty one million
and leaver income for these
workers and twenty twenty five
one billion and active federal
grants are obligated throughout
new mexico to our non for profit
community
new mexico has received one
hundred and twenty eight million
and direct giving from philip
tropic foundations which
generated two hundred and seven
million and economic impact and
created two thousand jobs in new
mexico
as a community foundation our
mission is rooted and supporting
non for profits and
strengthening the systems they
rely on to serve our communities
we are proud to stand along or
not for profit partners today
and every day in this important
work.
Community foundations like ours
play a vital role in bridging
public and private sectors we
provide flexible funding
leadership and infrastructure
that strengthens the non for
private ecosystem and as whole
as our communities.
We act as an incur institution
is during that nonproprofits
have resources connections and
support they need to fulfill
their missions and reach those
most in need
we also serve as a partner of
government or offices helping to
increase their impact through
collaborative efforts in
addition we play a critical rule
on convening cross sector
partners by bringing together
private businesses government
agencies public institutions and
non for profit organizations to
address complex challenges from
rent from launching regional
capacity training throughout
southern new mexico through the
coalition to serving
collaborative partners and
disaster response.
We support unified community
driven solutions that build
resilience and foster long term
recovery
state and investments in new
mexico's not for profit sector
would be transformative.
Creating significant economic
and community benefits
and there is some surveys in two
thousand and eighteen that's a
non for profits where the third
largest employer in the state of
new mexico we are forced to be
reckon with a new mexico and
we're here to help those
partners in new mexico however
federal credits per degree plans
april twenty twenty five report
on impact of federal grant
fundings of new mexico
sector shows a total of more
than twenty two billion over the
course of approximately eighteen
months can be lost.
This is a dramatic amount to
fill once federal funds continue
to be last these funds i'm loses
but end up insufficiently
funding resources to meet the
demand for services people will
lose their jarms and the cut
back of the federal assistant
programs the demanded for non
for profit services will just
rise.
These services are critical not
only to support individuals and
families but also to insure our
communities remains stable
resilient and able to rebuild
for the future.
We respectfully ask for your
support to secure sustainable
funding to address these growing
shortfalls.
Support ongoing discussions
about the anti donation clients
which create significant
barriers for the state to
effectively partner which
heritable non for profits and
serving our communities.
Enabling legislation in that
establishes clear checks and
balances including legislative
oversight of funding decisions
would help strengthen these
partnerships.
Today I sit with two partners
and there's multiple partners
behind me and standing in the
kitchen in southern new maxico
weird collaborative team when
something goes wrong we pick up
the phone and we bring each
other together how can we
support how can we do things how
can we bring together how can we
bring those small amount of
dollars to really impact our
community moving forward
we have a prow collaboration
with community action sea and
cost of the pyragreenos all
members of the southern new
mexico coalition and where we
have hosted several regional
conferences and continue to
break provide ongoing training
and capacity building.
Our work is deeply in or twained
across counties reflecting the
strength of regional
collaboration I can't tell you
how many times we meet with rule
food pentries that just aren't
sure what their next steps are
going to be and I can colorenzo
and see he can you call the food
bank and capper can you call the
food bank and data and that's
the phone calls that we can meet
when we were in times of
disaster and going through
response deploying emergency
phones within twenty four to
forty eight hours to support
immediate means we knew we need
people to have wrap around
services it wasn't just about
handing a family attract and
saying I hope this helps I hope
this gets you groceries I hope
that gets you another rental
property I knew that I could
call community action agency in
dawns team would say yes we will
meet with those individuals we
will make sure they have wrap
around services we make sure
that those individuals have
something more than just
receiving a check through
disaster funding.
That is how southern new mexico
works that's how our teams work
together and we're so proud of
our work so i'm in a time as
diene to share a little bit more
about community action even see
thank you good morning
good morning to her smaller
committee members i'm done
however the c of community
action agency and also the
representative of the new mexico
association of community
partners which is that state
association for the case and
thank you so much for this
opportunity we know this has
been along three days so we
really do appreciate your time
but today I am going to talk
about the video role of
community action agencies or
case we love acronyms and new
mexico and the potential impacts
of the federal cuts to the
mini service block grant or csp
as you are me no there are six
designated case and new mexico
that provide essential and
flexible services to all thirty
three counties several web lows.
And serve tween seventy five and
ninety thousand individuals
across the state each year
so if you haven't received a
service from us I guarantee
someone in your household has
were asking the committee to
include four point five million
for case in the hca budget to
sustain an expander work
were so important because for
over sixty years we just
selevated our sixty year
anniversary actually these
trusted local organizations have
operated under both federal and
state statute so we do have a
state statute that also governs
community action agencies we
deliver a wide range of programs
that include early had start
heads to our head start
employment training youth
leadership development housing
stability so the senior
programming we cover all the
things
it the funding is critical to
support these families but also
for creating new programs and
responding to emergencies when
they arise a good example of
flexibility is are covered
response so when the pandemic
head and you know all we did was
try to move everybody into their
home so that we could still
provide services and a way that
was safe but also cost effective
we distributed millions and
millions of dollars of his
sister that included cash
baby supplies food rent terror
shirt are more recent example
with the response to the reader
so floods but in addition to
that within thirty six hours we
had twenty thousand dollars
worth of dippers and formula and
baby supplies delivered to the
miscolorado
during that time so
but even more recently we had
some flooding and vado and we
were one of the groups in boots
going through the man knocking
on.
Doors asking families what do
you need what you really need we
don't want to tell you what you
need you tell us
and we were also acting as
interpreters for the red price.
Our status of our federal
funding
I think like everyone re don't
know right like every there's so
much uncertainty there but we
really do have this incredible
by participant support at the
federal level but we still the
risk are still we don't know
whether or not we will be
included in the reconciliation
and we know that even if we are
there is the possibility of
importance and reductions and in
all those things.
Umm the economic impact of of
csb funding I think is really
important and would have
negative impact sign on not only
new mexican families but I saw
on the local economy case the
six of us employed six hundred
and fifty individuals and while
paying jobs and so many of these
jobs are in our rural
communities are agencies
directly and indirect
end that so many directly and
directly infused millions of
dollars into our local
businesses for every dollar of
csvg we generate eleven dollars
and additional resources making
us a highly effective investment
for economic support end
development and then obviously
we're going to see negative
impacts on family is which could
which you know unlock and see
could it will leave to higher
rates of homelessness hunger
food and securities that
definitely over you know impact
the overall health and while
being we're gonna see fewer
opportunities for preschool kids
have become school ready that we
know effects their future
education and employment are
successes adults are going to
have reduce access to job
training limiting their
employment prospects seniors and
veterans could face increased
challenges in maintaining
independent living situations
that.
Just use me
I think something that's that's
important that sometimes gets
left out when we're talking
about our work is just our
program oversight in evaluation
I think that's really an
important piece to talk about
for a federal csb dollars
currently they are managed by
the new mexico health care
authority and allocate it to the
case to increase friendly
sufficiency and improve local
economies but we are federally
mandated to implement a robust
system of measurement
accountability just making sure
that were
you don't good stores of these
dollars but we do this to
continue that assessment data
collection and a valuation are
agencies and here to fifty eight
detailed organizations standards
to make sure we do have ethical
and compliant operations and we
do undergo one court ongoing
I have to stress the importance
of the csb funding for the while
being of new mexican families
and the overall health of our
economy
and we all know that when you
have a healthy work for a shoe
have a healthy economy.
Case are essential to new mexico
as they provide programs support
economic development advocate
for new mexico families and
leverage partnerships like my
trust their partnership with my
colleagues behind me including
fyi plus again were requesting
four point five million to be
included in the hca budget we do
have a mechanism around our
state statute that is where our
current funding
lives in is managed just to help
us to grow where work and but I
do also want to offer my time as
well I know you we respect your
time so much if you all want to
have individual conversations
with that's any of us to be able
to help with your committees or
anything you do I I definitely
want to offer at my time as well
so thank you
small committee I went first of
all welcome you once again to
this wonderful capital out there
facility thank you so much I
know we've got some of our local
and reasonable representatives
and senators here that
contributed to this beautiful
facility and I think it's
important that I say that out
loud because it was a lot of
work a lot of hard work on it by
the city allows cruises never
remissed by no thank you not my
friend nearly green for all the
hopes he gave us a as a the city
also put out a
three point seventy five million
for this building to get a bill
to
minister a few the fruits of
what happens when you build
something this way
to show you a little bit of the
growth using the program that we
run out of here.
We've distributed.
Seven million seven point four
million pounds of food out here
since in a second year.
And when you.
That's because we were able to
use it the capacity of this
billion to get food out into the
community and do in a capacity
in different capacities not just
by people coming into our lobby
or through a driver but answered
by using our partner agencies to
get through that into the
community.
That doesn't even include what
we're doing in the rural
communities and we've got a
couple of more capitalist
projects going on the real
community you sell when it stop
around and when someone park and
I want to thank you after a
contribution to that as well.
I just want to share I believe
heard a lot of data today in a
lot of information I just want
to share
a few testimonies and how people
are feeling right now.
The.
We have a client you come then.
She allows us to actually get
around camera and she tells us
and camera that.
Should I disable the grounds
only in this twenties.
She had a full time job to the
working one and she barely makes
it.
She don't sure what's going to
happen with the snap curts and
with a medicaid codes she does
instead to do an insurer she's
gonna have insurance where
is that
she's over that snap without
without a snap benefits and
without medicaid benefits I
don't know that I will we will
be able to make it
one was humble persons I have
ever seen talk about this and
she shared your story with us.
We got another family that comes
in and they have four k
and they're asking us what's
going to happen are you going to
be able to keep your door is
open
when we're gonna do everything
we can't keep our doors open
because that's what we do here
we we work hard to make sure
that we can keep those doors
open for the families the family
is used this is a safety net
most of the families at least
serve are working families.
There are they're doing
everything they can to survive
in our community and this
economy and what's going on
currently.
I think whether you did last
year for the food bank system
was incredible that a true
commitment thirty million
dollars over three years.
That's an amazing thing that we
saw a lot of us were out there
advocating for that making sure
that that happened.
Now we're asking ourselves at
questions is this going to be
enough are we going to be able
to survive cause we're insured
about what donors are going to
do with direction foundations
are going to take.
Those are the things that.
I go home worried about when i'm
here I don't think think about
those as much because we got
work to do when we're here.
I know that you guys have been
refers to friday just as you
guys have a hold this week that
you do represent and state that
you're trying to really really
left up at these situations.
I got great news yesterday when
I we had us reputative.
He expressed to us that he was.
Crossing the lines to go work
with.
Everyone to try to make things
better for any mexico.
We would love to see the same
thing happen at the legislature
we will love you guys work
across the lines and make
beautiful things happen for the
people of our district over
communities of our region and
don't forget about it so we hear
in the south either okay.
I know it's easy to forget us
when she pass the quarrel
but now you see the great food
it's all local food
do you see the welcoming
committee with we love having
you guys here thank you so much
for.
Come into our community coming
toward this beautiful facility
that you guys built
and let us show you around our
community and see what we can do
i'm really thankful for.
Doctor terri went around for don
harmer because this is what we
do in our community we come
together collaborative to make
things happen
I don't know that I would have
been able to make it through any
other of the pandemic without
them.
Or without this community
without a minister penalty
without the county without the
state though the kind of things
they need to happen all the time
not just in a crisis.
Can I really want to just
express to you that i'm grateful
for your leadership and we're
grateful for this facility that
you allowed us to build and we
hope that you see what we can do
if we all come together
collaborately that's what our
mission is all about is about
doing this together with with
others now just buy ourselves.
So with that I just went out
which you are very well and good
less all of you and if you have
any questions for the three of
us we heard answer any questions
excellent thank you very much
doctor winner this hummer and
mistrave
members were on a tight schedule
so what i've actually like to do
appreciate the suggestion from
center souls we're gonna ask
other non profit representatives
and leaders who are in the
audience to just introduce
themselves briefly that way as
members will be able to follow
up as a connection and so then
we can get back to get to the
agenda make sure we'll have the
contact information and staff
can work to share it from the
three who are at the table and.
Yep so lets a we'll start on my
left and please go ahead and if
you would like to introduce
yourself briefly to this other
committee not go ahead.
Good morning everybody yes
I want to welcome last year's as
well in the new our campus and
it has a time for a agreement
much today come on over the
kitchen I will get to the
scratch cutting me off the great
families and the right
volunteers over there.
The.
Loyalty.
Yeah.
Good morning everybody
else.
Um.
Great in the so is reminded me
we'll go over here to the
then they give them they say
this they can see
the support
also the representative of
those.
Yeah
there I go back
to I see in making sure food
testing as well
date thank you very much again
thank you to their resource for
a great suggestion we want to
and I want to think that I think
is very much on behalf of the
committee
that we're so grateful for the
work that you do I think is
we've talked about this
committee and we'll send it
finance house properties lfc
have looked for ways to make
larger investments particularly
around food and in key areas
including social work and early
childhood education many others
sexual assault services and many
many others we acknowledge that
we're facing a tougher time very
much appreciate lorenzo's offer
to host us here today and one of
the big things is that we're
staying connected there will be
challenges certainly but we want
to be as we talk about a whole
lot we want to be the best
partner possible and it's great
to see and be able to connect
more to the work that you're
doing here in the southern part
of the state as well as other
parts as we look for how to do
that coming into the session so
thank you all very much we're
going to go ahead and go to our
accountability report members
very much encourage folks as
they connected either yourselves
your d l a's or others with the
leaders in this room and all the
others around the state whose
serve in similar capacities
because.
The.
Okay we've got mr ray and tom in
a program evaluator and
uh
dr just take from lsc
and
will have
are ped partners will get one
more extra
let's go we'll go ahead and turn
it over to the l c e valuators
and we don't have tab so easy to
follow.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee
thank you for having us here
today my name is doctor ryan's
home and I am here with my
colleague josh chapter
we are program evaluators here
with the lfc and we are here to
present her valuation new
mexico's healthy universal
school meals program the report
looks like this and it should be
tabled with us I don't know if
you finders are folders
and before you begin I would
just like to thank secretary
mary on a pity of pd gregory
frost that and lord henry hand
from p d as well as the staff of
the student's success and while
this bureau of the public
education department as well as
kindle charters policy advisor
in this topic in the office of
the governor and to the less sea
for their close collaboration on
this report as well as all the
district and charter
administrators food service
managers and staff across the
state who welcome the since who
their school kitchens and
contributed their insights to
this valuation
so mister chair members of the
committee if you will please
turn with me now to page one
you'll find the executive
summary which outlines the major
findings of this valuation
so produce the states universal
school meal program and twenty
twenty three schools relied on a
tiered federal reimbursement
model in which schools reimburse
the different rates based on a
student's income and eligibility
status and place much of the
burden on families particularly
those who do not qualify
in twenty twenty three the
legislature unanimously passed
the healthy universal school
meals legislation the law now
mandates free high quality meals
for all public school students
regardless of income in includes
ambitious goals for improved
meal quality namely scratch
cooking.
Food sourcing and reducing food
waste.
This evaluation aims who provide
a status update of the program's
implementation of quality
provisions analysed fiscal trins
in past food services and look
at potential outcomes related to
student participation and
nutrition standards.
Overall our findings touch on a
couple of major themes
first regarding universal access
participation and school meals
has increased and consistent
with proof similar programs
implemented in other states
participation gains were
greatest among us poor students
who would not have previously
qualified for free or reduced
meals
second other the status started
serving free meals and twenty
twenty three improvements in the
quality of unclear since pd has
not been tracking and monitoring
compliance with the quality
provisions but should start in
the coming school year it's
first full year program
implementation.
We find the charter schools and
smaller districts and particular
have face challenges with few
program costs kitchen
infrastructure staffing and
limited access to food vendors
with pd starting to monitor
compliance to performance in the
coming year new mexico is poised
to achieve its quality standards
and strength in its meal
programs
if you will please turn with me
the page for.
I will discuss the background of
our states healthy universal
school meal program i'll explain
how meal programs work and how
the payment mechanisms work
highlight the various
organizations responsible for
implementing these programs in
touch on some of the initial
challenges that have let us to
conduct in this evaluation.
So first wiremeal programs so
important in schools well shown
in charts who there on page four
in twenty twenty three twenty
three percent of children in new
mexico experience food and
security higher than nineteen
percent nationally in one of the
highest in the nation
for many students school meals
are the most consistent
nutritionally complete meals
that they receive
national research also shows
that school meal programs can
improve students academic
performance boost attendance and
promote healthy outcomes
over on page five as you can see
and figure one eight states now
have made their school meal
programs universally free to all
students.
In twenty twenty three new
mexico join these other states
by unanimously passing healthy
universal school meals
legislation if you will turn
with me now to page six
you can see and figure to some
of the key features of the law
highlighted primarily universal
access mule quality standards
like scratch cooking local
ingredients and reduction and
food waste together the features
of new mexicans program are more
comprehensive than other
universal meal programs in other
states.
After passage of the law and in
mexico started providing free
meals to all students starting
in fall twenty twenty three
however mill quality standards
have not been required until
this upcoming school year as
rules not finalized until
september twenty twenty four.
Next over on page seven I will
try to provide a quick crash
course in how schoolmail
programs are funded and operate.
So new mexico school meal
programs is funded through a
blend of federal and state
dollars as figure three
highlights most federal funding
comes through the usda which
ministers the national school
lunch and school breakfast
programs which reimburse schools
based on permeals served
state education agencies in this
case pd distributes funds to
district schools and charters
school food authorities and
entities such as the local
school district
or charter school are
responsible for administrative
oversight and compliance with
federal and state regulations
administering meal service
operations determining student
eligibility and tracking bill
were reimbursements
if you will turn with me over
the page eight.
Table one there are the type
highlights health federal
reimbursements are higher for
meals served depending on
eligibility primarily based on
family poverty level the freer
reduced reimbursement rates that
you're likely familiar with
with the healthy universal
school meals act the state is
essentially paying for students
who do not qualify for these
free or reduced reimbursement
rates.
Traditionally as soon as
eligibility would have been
determined by their parents
regarding completing some kind
of family application form and
their reimbursement rates
determined by their income level
however the state law now
mandates that school food
authorities participate in
direct certification through the
community eligibility provision
or cp
this process this summer is in
figure for there in the bottom
rate we're students are directly
certified through their
participation and programs like
snap toward if or medicaid
if the identified student
population or isp in these
programs at the school meets a
minimum threshold of twenty five
percent
the qualify for cp in a
multipliers of plight so that
with that person is students or
reimbursed at the free federal
rate and the state will then
cover the remaining percentage
of students so as an example is
fifty percent of the students at
a school qualify
after the multiply eighty
percent of those students at
that school their meals serve
will be a reimbursed at the free
federal reimbursement rate and
the remaining twenty percent
students will be reimbursed by
the state essentially
if a school food authority does
not meet the minimum threshold
of twenty five percent they're
considered a standard school and
then they go out and collect
family and come applications for
reimbursement eligibility
over on page nine at the bottom
chart three highlights that this
mandate has leading mexico to
lead the nation and see people
precipitation at around ninety
nine percent of schools and
districts.
If you will turn with me the
page ten.
I would have heard some of the
agencies and organizations who
are responsible for
administering the healthy
universal school meals program
which are highlighted there and
the figure five at the bottom.
Service can come and varied
forms such as your own site
school kitchens
some central kitchens like aps
which delivers to multiple sites
or contracted food service
management companies which
handles all of the operations.
Food can also come from multiple
sources mostly broadline
suppliers like cisco about usda
commodities in a smaller
percentage from local producers
a particular note over on page
eleven is pedi's student
succession wellness bureau which
overseas two hundred and ten
school food authorities whose
responsibilities includes
processing reimbursements
monitors compliance they provide
training and technical
assistance
turning to page twelve
now that have explained how the
program works I want to touch
quickly on some of the
challenges with funding and
program costs
new mexico like other earlier
doctor states overspend its
budget prompting the legislature
to appropriate supplemental
funding as highlighted over on
page thirteen in chart five
as you can see the new medical
legislature appropriate twenty
three million in the first year
but then required in the
additional twenty million
supplemental appropriation
finally if you will turn with me
to page fourteen.
I want a quickly highlight
implications of the recent
twenty twenty five federal
budget reconciliation bill to
the healthy universal school
meals program
the federal budget
reconciliation could primarily
affect student eligibility to
receive federal reimbursement
through direct certificate
certification and programs like
snap and medicaid.
Given our high rates of cps
participation do the high rates
of students part are suppeeding
in these programs lsc staff
analysis indicates that about
three percent of the student
population could be affected by
these changes reducing about
twenty schools from qualifying
for cp participation eligibility
and reducing it and additional
sixty schools from full federal
reimbursement which could shift
a small cost to the states.
Pds work to certify school
starting in the upcoming school
year for a four year period
indicates that these changes are
unlikely to affect the state
until the twenty thirty school
year
now if you will turn please
follow along with me the page
fifteen or discuss our first
finding that increased
investment in healthy universal
school meals has lead some mones
gains in participation.
After the passage of the healthy
universal school meals act the
steam increased its investment
in universal school meals by
twenty percent from a total of
two hundred and six million and
a swite twenty three to two
hundred and forty seven million
in school year twenty four
so what are we getting for the
simbustment as you can see in
chart seven there on the rate
since implementation
participation has increased in
participation rates are now
higher than the national average
over all we saw participation in
launches increased by eight
point five percentage points and
breakfast by eight point three
percentage points from school
your twenty three to school your
twenty four
turning over to page sixteen.
You can see in chart eight that
much of the largest increase in
participation was among students
who do not qualify for free or
reduced meals.
In sway twenty five we estimate
that the state spent seventeen
point four million on students
who did not qualify for for for
your reduced meals
we also see the participation
also increased among students
who qualify for free meals which
is a majority of the students
over on page seventeen chart
ninches that total spinning on
food service programs increased
by twenty point three percent
from school your twenty three to
twenty four or the number of
students participating all
increased by eight point five
percentage points.
Indicating that the increases in
program expenditures are in part
driven by pursuing a
participation but does not fully
account for the overall
increases in total program costs
and expenditures
table five there in the bottom
highlight school districts which
receive the highest allocation
of state funding which is driven
by districts with higher
students percentage of students
who do not qualify for free
eighteen.
I want to hear it some of the
trins that we see in student
participation.
Chart ten there in the top left
list our tin larger school
districts which all experience
increases and student
participation particularly
albuquerque in rear and show.
Chart eleven highlights
districts with the highest
percentage of students who
qualify for free reduce miles
which many already had higher
rates of participation but still
experienced modest increases in
participation indicating that
the universal access for all
students is increasing rates of
mule participation in
communities that are most need.
So the state's investment is
leading to increase
participation but we are also
seeing increased program
expenditures on the bottom of
page eighteen overall program
expenditures has increased from
a hundred and sixty five million
and sy eighteen to two hundred
forty eight million and that's
why twenty four
over on peach nineteen you can
see and chart twelve that this
acquits to approximately four
dollars and sixty one since per
student per day the proportion
spend on food has increased from
one of three in school you're
eighteen to one seventy one in
school you're twenty four and
increase of seventy one percent
which is out peace general
inflation
on the bottom of page nineteen
and chart thirteen you can see
the overall program expenditures
has increased the proportionate
spin on food however is remained
about the state in the keen and
that we have also increased
expenditures for staff and
operations as well
so with raising program
expenditures hour school food
authorities budgeting and
planning for meals services.
Turning over to page twenty.
Chart fourteen highlights that
both federal and state funding
for food service operations has
increased since the passage of
universal school meals
are table six over on page
twenty one shows that force
school food authorities are
budgeting more and federally
reimbursed mill programs in
their receiving and expending
this seems to be a common
practice among school districts
to overproject participation
among federal reimbursement
categories for budget authority.
Another thing we found here is
the use of the cg expenditures
which typically would not be
budgeted for food service
operations which although
technically allowed is primarily
the primary purpose for a
suggest funds as to support
classroom instruction
turning over to page twenty two
as you can see and short
seventeen at the bottom of the
page seg expenditures are a
small percentage of overall food
service operation expenditures
but it's been going on a while
and may be increasing
as you can see and chart sixteen
on the right chartered schools
tend to disproportionally
utilise seg funds purse student
over on page twenty three this
might be because many charter
schools like kitchen and for
structure prior to the passage
of the universal school meals in
contract with food service
management companies
chart nineteen there at the
bottom of the page highlights
the mini school districts
particularly smaller ones have
utilised security often the
supplement staffing or food at
events.
Thank you all and I will now
turn the presentation over to my
colleague mr chapter to discuss
her next finding and key
recommendations
mister chairman members of the
committee as the accident
mentioned the universal free
school meals program in new
mexico goes beyond other states
by implementing strict meal
quality standards the state
started delivering free meals to
all kids immediately and we find
the program is still working to
overcome some early challenges
in achieving and measuring meal
quality with service scratch
cooking by pd's new rules
schools must ensure at least
fifty percent of weekly meal
components excluding milk are
prepared from scratch using
whole unprocessed ingredients if
you look at short twenty on page
twenty nine and informal survey
that ped conducted which is it's
not a perfect example but it's
one of the few day to points we
have suggests that most school
food authorities aren't yet
meeting that threshold today
chart twenty one on that same
page shows that the majority of
schools are increasing their
efforts to cook from scratch
one of the school's biggest
barriers to scratch cooking is
outdated kitchen infrastructure
the legislature has allocated
over twenty four million dollars
for equipment and upgrades since
twenty twenty three but less
than a third of those funds have
been spent yet
most schools prepare meals
themselves and say some
districts including albuquerque
use a central or a shared
kitchen between multiple schools
about eighty seven of the states
two hundred and ten school food
authorities especially charter
schools contract with food
service management companies if
you look at the piechard on page
thirty you see that just a few
companies dominate this market
charter schools are twice as
likely as traditional districts
to use these companies to cook
their meals the concentration of
vendors can bring efficiencies
but it may also drive costs up
especially among charter schools
and it raises questions about
how well these vendors can
comply with the new laws
provisions like scratch cooking
and local sourcing.
Ped says they share these
concerns and the agency is
asking these companies to
reapply as vendors this year and
efforts to tighten controls
there.
On the topic of local sourcing
of school food the statute that
you the legislature passed
direct ped to encourage greater
use of new mexico grown raised
or processed food in school
meals local food may be fresher
than food sourced from further
away and it could help students
understand where their food
comes from and of course it
supports local producers neither
the statute nor ped rules are
required schools to source local
food but schools can receive
grant money to do so buying
directly from farmers and
ranchers who are on a list
approved by the state's new
mexico ground program and and
grown is small funded at about
one point seven million dollars
this year and it won't likely
grow in coming years without
major changes to the grants and
the program structure ped points
out that some unknown amount of
food local food also comes into
the cafeteria from outside the n
m grown program but they don't
have a system for tracking that
right now so looking at what we
can track last school year
school spent about two percent
of their total food budgets on
local products through n grown
that's about half the national
average and districts say they
can't scale up easily given
current barriers
these barriers include small
award sizes the limited number
of local items that are eligible
to purchase and cost barriers as
local food is often more
expensive for schools to buy UNM
is embarking on an evaluation of
anime as we speak ped and the
state department of agriculture
are supposed to report to you
the legislature in november on
their plan to increase the
amount of local beef cheese and
milk in school meals.
Turning to the issue of food
waste ped is requiring schools
to track food ways starting this
year right now and again this is
from ped's informal survey but
only about twenty five percent
of schools reported tracking
food waste at all and most of
that tracking is informal PED
interprets this deficit as a
positive given that these food
waste reduction strategies were
not required until the current
school year.
Once strategy for reducing waste
that's allowed under the rules
is to let students decline
certain components of a meal
that they don't intend to eat
but this has to be monitored in
the cafeteria to make sure that
that meals still need
nutritional requirements school
say it's hard to do that well
with current staffing levels
speaking of staffing all of the
above quality provisions require
qualified staff on page twenty
nine PED survey found that fifty
seven percent of schools are
expanding their training for
scratch cooking in response to
the law but schools tell us that
keeping qualified kitchen staff
as a major challenge especially
in rural districts.
Skills are another bottle neck
for getting the quality as the
school menu transitions more
towards scratch cooking
to oversee all the changes ped
is rightly focused on whether
schools have the menus and the
recipes and the invoices
feedback surveys to verify
compliance with quality
standards some districts conduct
surveys of students and families
but what has been missing is a
statewide system for capturing
student and family feedback on
taste freshness satisfaction
cultural rebel relevance etc as
this feedback could be an early
warning of participation trends
and a tool for improving menus
mister chair members with some
of the strongest quality
provisions in the country new
mexico has a real opportunity to
contribute to the national
evidence based on universal free
school meals by addressing these
gaps through robust state level
data collection and ongoing
evaluation ped can strengthen
its own monitoring and
accountability systems while
informing best practices in
nationwide we think a focus on
outcomes is warranted in
addition to the outputs that the
department is statutory required
to track outcome such as effects
on hunger attendance health the
policy makers here and in other
states are interested in if
you're not turned back to page
two at the beginning of the
report you'll see our key
recommendations listed
first is for bed to provide
schools with guidance and
monitor the use of seg funds
with special attention attention
to smaller districts and charter
schools pede should look at
schools that receive less in
federal funds than they budget
in to determine why this is
happening they should large a
standardized student
satisfaction survey to inform me
quality improvement efforts.
Pd should work with dfa and l of
c to develop a statewide
performance monitoring system
that aligns with the
accountability and government
act to track expenditures food
waste local food sourcing
scratch cooking participation
rates education and health
outcomes the idiots should
expand its technical assistance
and training supports for
kitchen staff particularly in
scratch cooking food safety and
complaints nped should require
contracts between schools and
food service companies to
include expectations for the new
quality standards discussed
above in addition the public
school capital outlet council
should ensure that the
disbursement of kitchen
infrastructure funds is
completed by the end of the
fiscal year to address some of
the equipment bottle next that
schools are facing and now
mister chair members of the
committee with your permission
will turn over to PED colleagues
for a response and then stand
for any questions please thank
you
good morning mister chairman
members of the committee i'm a
great process assistant
secretary of education at the
public education committee it is
a pleasure to speak with you
today about the health universal
schools meals program which I
believe to be one of the most
important accomplishments of the
last several years of the
administration and the
legislature I want to
specifically think senator padia
for his efforts and passing
senate bill for several years
ago and for his continued
partnership as we continue
implementation of the healthy
universal schools meals act the
agency has been working on this
initiative for throughout this
administration it puts new
mexico as a national leader in
the student a nutrition area
this program not only literally
feeds our children but will also
increase educational outcomes
for our students there's ample
evidence that healthy meals
increases attendance and student
achievement I also want to point
out that there are that there is
a school district and several
charters that before this
program did not participate.
In the national school lunch
program and now do.
The agency is pushing hard to
maximise federal funding and
recurring costs to state funds
have levelled off the agency
anticipate requesting level
funding in the recurrent
recurring request for healthy
universal schools meals for a
fiscal year twenty twenty seven
and as doctor tolman mentioned
during his presentation changes
to eligibility in the snap
program
are likely to reduce the amount
of federal reimbursement but the
pedia's pushing schools to
qualify through the community
eligibility program to stabilize
the number of qualified students
over the coming years and that
that should hold in place
the school eligibility for the
next four years and we
appreciate the work that doctor
told me that lfc staff have done
to study implementation of the
health universal school meals
act and we accept many of the
recommendations most of the
recommendations in the report
were already scheduled to be
addressed during this first full
year of implementation that is
coming along now
with that i'd like to introduce
lower henry hand from our
student successful bonus bureau
to directly address some of the
reports recommendations
good morning with your chair and
members of the committee like
doctor
secretary for us that mentioned
my name is lauren henry hand the
w director with a student
success and well in this bureau
I want to thank you for the
opportunity to be here today to
discuss the great work that our
staff is doing to ensure schools
have the support to successfully
implement the healthy universal
school meals program we are
proud that new mexico is one of
the leading states in the nation
addressing food and security and
childhood hunger by being one of
the first states to implement
universal free meals for all our
department is committed to
ensuring every student has
access to nutritious high
quality meals during the school
day so that they can focus be
engaged in the classroom and be
ready to learn.
I want to think that lfc and
doctored home and for its
collaboration with our
department and taking the time
to learn about our very complex
program and forgiving us the
opportunity to respond to their
evaluation report.
The letter in closed includes
our responses to the lefty
recommendations again which many
are being addressed the school
year being that this is the
first year a full
implementation.
I also want to think the
legislature for prioritising
ending childhood hunger since
two thousand and nineteen and
passing into law health
universal school meals as one of
the key strategies to do so
once it was signed into our the
department was intentional and
building in a transitional
period and the timeline for
a scores to meet requirements
and worked very closely with
allia's developed to develop a
rule that would not only address
hunger but would all still
improve neal quality one thing
we can all agree on is that
programming evaluation is
important however this program
evaluation may be too early to
accurate accurately assess the
long term impacts of the program
with the certification period
taking place this spring of
twenty twenty six it will give
the department a true picture of
where some fees are in the
improvements including virtually
prepared meals food waste
rejection strategies the
incorporation of locally source
foods and how they are using
student voice and their future
many developments
most sfa's are eager and well on
their way to meeting the freshly
prepared requirements of the
rule many of them have reached
out toward department and staff
to request feedback for review
of their many to see if they are
meeting the requirements.
A great example of the work that
lead earliers are doing.
In its student direct nutrition
director who true here at
burning public schools who has
used almost two million dollars
in the school kitchen
infrastructure grant to improve
to purchase new equipment for
all of her schools that will
ease an assist and the
preparation of freshly prepared
meals another component of the
health universal school meals
program funding.
It's having funding available
for new mexico ground this year
there was no state appropriation
for the new mexico ground
program however our department
recognizes the importance of
introducing an incorporating
locally ground and portugally
relevant meals into school meals
and therefore have set aside two
million dollars from the healthy
universal school meals program
to continue supporting the
program.
Another major success and the
new mexico grown program this
year is that the department has
awarded more schools than ever
before and has adjusted the
formula to increase support for
schools that do not receive any
state reimbursement
I would like to share a great
new mexico grown story with you
cars and stark was the previous
student at the farming ten
municipal school districts who
was exposed to and learned about
the new mexico grown program in
school and is now a farmer and
selling produce to burning a
public schools
the department continually
encourages scores to use their
state finding to purchase local
and some school districts like
raswell is only local beef in
their many and have spent over
one million dollars of their
food budget on local beef.
This year but I leo public
schools will only be serving
driving and corporating drivings
into their meals and farmington
is committed to using ten
percent of their total food
budget to purchase new mexico
grown products these are just a
few great examples of the weight
schools are going above and
beyond for our students
the department is committed to
providing and continue training
support for all says to ensure
students have equal access to
culturally relevant and
nutritious mills and the map
that you see in front of you
you will see
the department has provided
training so cost estate that
have different components but to
to help schools meet the
requirements of the rules these
trainings were in coordination
with the department of health
and
what
though the department will
continue to provide training
moving forward for the first
time this year our department is
also hosting a chef symposium in
october bringing together
cafeteria staff and new mexico
shifts for hands on training to
create new recipes together and
learn scratch cooking techniques
that can be immediately applied
when they return to their
kitchens.
We also have monthly online
let's talk to see meetings with
food service staff where we come
we cover a variety of school
food topics and provide
technical assistance.
While I am here to with you
today our healthy universal
school mails program manager is
presenting to superintendents on
the per monthly call and is
showing the lunch of our program
took it that includes resources
for schools to share with
students teachers and community
one of those resources includes
posters for school capitalists
promoting the program i'll
posters and handouts if you turn
to the back page of your map um
will include an in an embedded
code with a student and family
serving this student this survey
will be distributed widely
across the state and the
department will be able to
provide school districts with
specific feedback based on the
results for their llu
for schools that have contracts
with food service management
companies the pedirecognizers
that they too will need to
improve the standards of mail
quality and we are working on
updating all of the forms
including contracts renewals so
that we can ensure that they are
also providing the same quality
to students I also want to take
the opportunity to address the
lfc's recommendations on finding
an accountability.
The department will continue to
provide finding support and
monitor sfas to ensure they
aligned with approved food
program operations specifically
to smaller and charter schools
who may rely on the other
sources of funding such as their
segs to successfully run their
program we are also in truck we
are also tracking monthly
expenditures to ensure we are on
track with your budget
projections but I would like to
share an example with you of
water budget would look like
this year if mill participation
stayed the same because there
was an increase in using a
reimbursement on july first we
are looking at a four percent
increase in total in costs
totally close to two million
dollars even if our new account
stay the same.
With that our department will
continue to do everything
possible to maximise federal
dollars first but we ask for
your continued support for a
program to ensure that all
students at can start their
school day with a nutritious
meal and be ready to learn think
thank you mister chair and again
I want to emphasize the
importance of the new mexico
ground program when the PED had
the here the rule hearing of
around the new mexico grown rule
we had some of the greatest
participation at that hearing
that we typically get indicating
that really does affect new
mexicans around the state and we
do hope that we get from the
legislature and appropriation
for the health universal schools
at meals act of that would
either
allow us to fully implement that
fully implement the rule in the
law or a separate appropriation
we have not received a separate
approach propriation for the new
mexico grown
for the for new mexico ground
program thank you.
Great thank you very much thing
it's the evaluators evaluation
team that you deputy sectory
price add thank you miss henry
hand will go straight to
questions stone with center of
video so chat field senator to
buy a send and go from there
center thank you mr chair and
thank you to the to the
evaluators and to the presenters
from the department I couldn't
be happier with everything
that's going on with this
program I think that you know we
came together as a legislature
in in universally made a
decision to provide universal
free meals that are healthy so I
think that's a beautiful thing
that this legislature decided to
do from a bipartisan stamp
waiting was happy to carry the
legislation but but into the
details
I didn't expect you to be able
to flip a switch and everything
was just going to be absolutely
swimmingly perfect with this
program right away and I do
believe that feedback is a gift
and i've certainly received a
lot of feedback in my life on
things that i've done or not
done or whatever and I think
it's important that the
evaluators give this feedback to
the department so I think that's
that's all very natural and very
good and we know what we need to
work on so I I think that's
really good
on the
increased investment etc it just
seems to me like a lot of where
those dollars are going are to
or let me ask you as when did we
move away from scratch kitchens
I don't expect you to know that
right off is a bit more than two
decades three decades i'm
assuming to these sort of like
giant microwaves rather than
going into a kitchen where
they're actually taught some
flower around and do another
gerations of making some funds
or whatever when when do we move
away from scratch kitchens in a
big way
mr chair senator it definitely
has been around a decade or so
that and scores have moved away
from the scratch cooking and a
lot of that came with the um
enactment of the
healthy hunger free act with
obama and um
a lot of schools do you know
there's there's timely their
staffing issues.
Food costs and so it a lot of
that transitioned over time and
companies are now producing a
lot more prepackaged meals which
make it easier for school system
and just warm them up in the
microwave mr chairman is that
right
so so the reason I ask that
question is now you know we we
need to give the department for
school districts and and the
folks a couple of little bit of
time to get the money first to
rebuild myself or are my
district e
scratch kitchen and then second
you've got it in hopefully
during that same period of time
you're creating the
relationships with the local
farmers and ranchers and food
producers and then you're you're
reached training your staff and
making sure that you have enough
people to produce it all so so
there are a couple of steps I
want to remind the committee to
get all of this done in the
accomplished this it's not just
going to be handled overnight so
I I think that's really
important to point out
so it is there are for the local
farmers and ranchers mr chairman
is there a annual or or bite
annual are quarterly conference
with them to show up and be able
to produce their wares and their
foods in there products that
they produce it is there
something that we're doing at
the state level or are you
relying on districts to to
simply create those
relationships.
Mr chair senator we do the
department does me regularly
with different associations that
work with farmers and we also
have convenience with these
organizations with a new mexico
going program association to
support the farmers themselves
they're very involved the
farmers are very involved in the
school planning and have
provided a lot of feedback to
the department on how we can
work better together and we
continually do so we they also
participate on the in mexico
ground chilea ward and they were
we new mexico is also gonna be
hosting the national firm to
school conference this year
cause we are a leader in the
nation on new mexico and new
mexico bone and our local food
procurement.
I appreciate that mr chairman
and thank you for that answer on
I think it sort of starts on
page sixteen of the evaluation
on the meal served by student
eligibility it seems to be like
it would naturally there be a
natural major increase in
students that never were
eligible before because I was
sudden they're eligible or so I
don't know why that's kind of a
surprise maybe the evaluations
want to address that but
chairman seems to be like all of
a certain you'd of have a bunch
of folks participating in the
program that just couldn't do it
before because they were
eligible so i'm not quite sure
where that's a finding or where
that's an issue in the report
mr chair representative or
senator pds sorry
I don't believe it's a surprise
we've seen the same pattern in
other states that have
implemented similar meals what
we wanted to be able to look at
the participation patterns here
locally and see how
implementation of the program
affected us here locally any
months ago but you're right
that's where you would likely
see the largest school birth and
presidential.
And then just back to the
scratch kitchen piece mister
chairman about how at the
average new mexico school about
how long would it take to
actually.
Designed procuret deliver the
material supplies etc and can
get it built out I mean that
doesn't happen over an eight in
a chain restaurant I mean that's
been doing they pump them out
all over the country so how long
does it take for an average
school to be able to agency to
whether actually producing in
that kind of kitchen
mr chair senator I do not have
the answer to that question
because I don't work in
constructions or capital outlet
directly with schools but it
does take time to be able to run
to that passes with the school
districts and
the the new mexico new mexico
did offer to me twenty million
dollars in school kitchen and
restriction to schools this year
forty school forty other schools
that are received funding or
charter schools because we know
that they need that those school
kitchen improvements and
equipment to be able to
successfully operator fractually
be paid meals and their schools
and so they're there have you
know they have to build those
plans and put them in place and
so that finding is available
until june thirtieth of twenty
twenty six and so they have
until the end of this year to
spend down the was twenty
million dollars and into your
point mr chair I also want to
mention that it is it is true
that kitchens in the past have
been constructed without the
necessary facilities to be able
to just install an up and it's
not that you can just replace
what they had with something new
you have this is going to be
built that way exactly and so
there there is significant cost
and time required and then on
budgeting mr chairman so we're
gonna go into i'm in potentially
a special session potentially
not I don't know at the moment I
i'm not aware but exactly when
that might or may not happen are
you how are you giving data and
information to lfc into the
budget committees on what the
deficit might be to keep this
project rolling and moving
because there's there it seems
to be like there's going to be a
potential problem.
So mr chairs federal dollars
right yeah mister chair and and
senator so as was discussed we
we're working really hard to
make sure that we don't see much
of a change at least for the
next four years with trying to
get as many schools
eligible through the community
eligibility program which will
hold their eligibility for four
years and we have been working
very closely with the l e s e
and the left sea presenting
monthly
not at with lfc but at least and
also at the new interest
committee on that is chaired by
center schools that with the
name that is escaping me at the
moment budget state location
think you think you senator
and so we happen we have been
communicating closely and
working together to make big
because it is a concern that we
all have yes while chairman I
guess what i'll just say there
is please be as proactive as
humanly possible because want to
make sure that this does not
slow down and that it we've made
this decision to do it we
unanimously made this decision
as a legislature and I really
want to see this thing all the
way through and then I know
others probably have questions
to determine i'll just end with
this whenever maybe one or two
on the seated lunch time that
was a huge debate when we're
going through this whole extra
site as it was very painful for
for me personally and house is
going to work in a
so the longer that seated table
time I mean it seems to be like
it's not even just about the
lunch it's about the ability to
talk to my colleague over here
is always given me feedback this
is right here but but just to
interact with her and heard
interact with me and have that
sort of like you know social
Me to choose my food a little
bit longer and then it seems to
be like that's also going to in
a reduced the waste that might
be occurring what should that
table time b program nf is a
really locked some of the
schools are gigantic and I I you
know I don't really like large
schools but we have em and we
have to find a way to make it
work for us so what would be the
best what directions should we
take that
mister chair and senator
the research does show that
twenty minutes as as a minimum
is a good amount of time for
students to be able to consume
their lunch and and
I don't know
lord do you have any other
thoughts about that as well yeah
mister chair and senator it is
very important for students to
have time to each not just
walking into the cafeteria and
robbing their lunch but the
seated lunch time as what's
important I received a call
yesterday from one of the school
districts that a nurse was
really upset back the students
at her school or only receiving
thirteen minutes to eat because
they're counting but time that
they walk from their classroom
to the kitchen rather meal and
then sit down to eat and so
they're still not having
adequate time and so we do still
need to work with school
districts and administrators
specifically because they're the
ones that in charge of creating
the schedules and the principles
in their schools to allow so
students to have enough time to
eat we do see students walking
eating on their way to the trash
because it's time for the next
period to come through and it is
such you see because we want to
reduce woodways but we don't
want them to be hungry during
the day and so we do as for you
continued support and pushing
the seat time around the state
okay
and mister chair that isn't also
an area where we've received a
lot of feedback as well we know
the again the research supports
it but it's very difficult for
some schools to be able to
logistically manage bunker
seated time at the table thank
you chair and others may have
some questions thank you.
They said they free leadership
in this area um next we have a
representative chat field center
to biason in the mortgage book
from there we have some done
that I don't know thank you
mister chair.
Uh mister chair the first thing
I want to speak to you as
something that was said by mr
alba
senator harn was willing to
reach across party lines
to a carpet some of these things
and I just want to assure you
that here in the ambulance lfc
committee at the legislature we
reach across party lines daily
it just doesn't make the tv it
only makes the tv when we get
down to the hard stuff that we
disagree on but we we work here
every day trying to make new
mexico a better place and we all
are reach across forty lines and
work together on those things
that we agree on so rest assured
that that happens a lot more
than what you see on tv
the next thing I want to speak
to was the locally grown foods
we've been working hard i've
been in the legislature I think
is my eighth year in one of the
first things that we did I got
there start working on in state
beef inspections are increasing
processing plants in state in
new mexico for b
school meals from locally
growing food uh in in just very
proud of the fact that we that
we have accomplished so many of
those sayings the and state beef
inspections are reality the i've
got contacted by
a big process we're in red home
last week he said he had
increased his floor capacity by
five thousand square feet that's
big that's a lot
we have a number of other
processing plants that are going
in there in the process this
will increase the supply a
locally grown
food it will insure the quality
of that food one of the things
that I think we need to work on
his local distribution
to the schools two facilities.
Often times it may not be the
the actual farmer of the
producer that we need to contact
but some of these processing
plants are
the share you know
I used to live down here a long
time ago and I when I was in
hospital worked in the union
shared whenever I was in june hi
I helped uh job chilly down to
there there was a whole I have
been in this part of the world
so some of the things that we
need to
contract people that we need to
contact is the processing plants
so that they can push that that
the food out into our
institutions our state
institutions that not only gives
our students and our citizens
are good quality source of food
but it insurers against
some of the things that have
already happened which is a
computer glitch that shut down
processing for that's all over
the united states even in the
australia computer group glitch
on one plant one big
multinational plant fire in a
packing house in in kansas the
shut down a you know I think
they that particular france
process two thousand five
hundred beeves for day
shut it down because of a fire
it drove calf rises in new
mexico into the dirt so it's
good for us all to be able to
produce and consume our own food
it's a it's a simple thing I
know whether when I was growing
up we were saying cheaper to
hall the counter that to the
great and then the grain to the
cattle but now we have a little
bit different value system with
only looking for what's cheapest
we're looking for what's best in
what is the best quality of food
for our children for homes and
I think we have a different set
of values now are cheapest is
not always best.
Uh process highly processed
foods are not always most of
nutritious and in truly I don't
think they're always the the
cheapest you know dry beans are
cheaper than a catapeat I know
that it could enough to know
that
so I appreciate what we've done
I think we need to work on the
distribution system and I have
the one i'm going to end with a
question would be for week got
into this
how many of the kids got
breakfast because
we've appropriated twenty some
twenty three million you said
and and where you overrun at my
twenty million but I think one
of the things in that formula
were not thinking about is we
added a meal in there some of
the schools at breakfast and
some of them did not but now we
have mandated did we mandate
three meals.
Yeah.
The.
Mr representative we have not
mandated three meals it's
breakfast and lunch and
previously the participation for
breakfast was around forty
percent and so it has gone up
there you go so I think a lot of
that cost over run was any
addition
of another meal
so it wasn't just a cost of the
it's not that we suddenly
increased the cost of launch but
we added another meal in there
so
thank you mr chip thank you very
much for the chapter thank you
for your leadership as well
we next is center to biason then
little reps have it at a
representative central vice.
Matter isn't working can you
hear me now okay good thinking
mister chair i'm looking at your
map and I have some questions
although my lunch meet here
senator filled me in a little
bit
i'm looking to the upper right
hand side and you have listed
twenty two i'm trained staff for
the metro i'm assuming you mean
the burning leo metro which is
what I represent i'm is that
because they already had the
train staff or what I mean the
number is so low.
Mr chair senator then this map
actually does not include the
burner lio
training because that training
occurred after we completed our
map and so yeah we did go out to
burned you at the beginning of
the school year and trained all
of their kitchen staff so you
can
when I was presenting is that
for its over four hundred and
eighteen staff so we we need to
add that data into what i'm up
this data includes scores like
explore academy and alba perky
and we also did the sacro
training
and we will also be doing a
training and santa rosa in the
in the next coming month okay
thank you that clarifies except
like well we're missing we're
here in one little corner of it
then i'm not seeing the rest of
it so does albuquerque does aps
have a centralized kitchen for
all or some of their food and do
some of our schools have their
own kitchens.
Also excuse me mr chair senator
our tricky public schools
produces their food at a central
kitchen it's a very large
kitchen
off louisiana and albert and
they do deliver a meals to all
of their scores not all of their
schools have operating kitchens
a lot of them do have new
warmers some do have the
capacity to prepare meals but
they do not currently prepare
meals out of them
where power to say that albert
cricket public schools has a new
food service director who is on
board to meeting the
requirements of the rules that
we're excited to see what she
can do to turn around the the
meals and albert tracking.
Thank you and mr chair and I
just want to say thank you for
all of this information in the
hard work I know it's it's a big
undertaking I was really
attached to by all the students
that I was able to visit with
during the last session and so
many of them the number one
thing they said as we weren't
real food we don't want frozen
meals anymore which that's
incouraging to hear you say that
so thank you for your continued
efforts thank you mister chair
you said
representative little and then
reps
thank you mister chair think
he's so much all for the
presentation this morning I
stopped by saying that the very
as a second grader I believe are
I words at sentenco elementary
school and my mom worked with a
team there she was a head cook
there and I remember walking in
to the smell everybody coming
off the buses with smell the
biscuits or bread being thicked
because that was the first thing
that they put in in the morning
and as you walk through you
already were anticipating lunch
and it was a scratch kitchen
then she's long since left that
job and moved on to other things
but just the
idea that we could anticipate
a real meal was pretty exciting
to a lot of squaking the morning
so I appreciate all of the work
that's gone in by so many here
before me and I want to continue
that support for that so my
question is in that light mr
let's see I recut are the staff
that are in the kitchens that do
have kitchens are they are they
dedicated staff members or are
they read because err some
pulling double duty they would
be in the kitchen in the
mornings and then they would be
shifted to other jobs during the
day so that they work to full
day somewhere bus drivers
somewhere with the facilities
unit others were in maintenance
as so on.
Mr cherry representative and the
larger school districts you want
the double duties for school
food service staff but in some
of the smaller districts and
particularly charter schools you
may have someone that has double
duties because they don't have
the capacity to fill at full
time position for a foods food
service staff and so they may
have other duties within that
school
thank you very much secondly a
in the discussion about
preventing west and the method
back which menus are created i'm
curious to find out when their
students involved at what level
did they become involved to
identify foods that
they would.
Be willing to eat or that they
prefer that they would like to
see offered on the medium
mr cher representative one of
the things that we are doing is
focusing on the student um and
family survey that we want to
encourage all students and
families across the state to
complete in order to be able to
provide feedback to their school
districts but we also encourage
school districts independently
to work with their students to
receive feedback on how they can
improve many developments some
schools already do their own
surveys some schools do food
tastings others have done
futures to similar to the food
shows that foods or restrictors
attend and they bring the
providers in the the students
will go around and due tastings
and boat on the foods that they
like and so there are different
methods uh in strategies that
schools are using to receive
feedback from schools uh thank
you
thank you very much okay and
last two questions
mr chairman i'd be interested in
knowing i'm curious as to
whether
what work relationship where
partnership you might be called
debating with the higher
institutions that have culinary
arts programs we have a as
mister chairman I know of
several individuals who have
completed calendar arts programs
and the generally talk about
going to work.
Establishing a business truck or
some entrepreneurial piece I
don't want to keep them away
from that but i'm discourage
them from doing it but i'm also
wondering what what partnerships
might be built there mister
chairman thank you mr check
representative we are working
with
msu annum and their corner
programs in order to build the
food service workers across the
state and particularly and.
School cafeteria's early
childhood institutions and also
senior care centers we were
working together we have a
nutrition advisory council
that are working with us to
develop that program and we're
working with the leaders at the
higher education institutions in
order to continue growing our
programs across the state
thank you thank you I I would
just like to add to that i'm
sure that the group is taking a
look at all of these mister
chairman but i'd also like to
offer i'm very well aware of
some of the community colleges
that have some excellent
programs and those that aren't
look hit it out in the rural
areas with the excellent ones to
take into as well as the
southwestern idiot tech
constitute
who has had a program there
that a month to certain about it
now but finally mister chairman
thank you
think I got my answer question
cushion answered about the costs
for the kitchens in the school
capital outlet my question is
and it may have been in here is
is there an estimate of the
would you remind me where I can
find the estimate for the budget
request for twenty seven nb
beyond.
Thank you mister chair
so I don't if you're asking
about the agency budget
recommendation that has not yet
been released mister chair and
representative we we will be
releasing that on september
first this year so it will be
coming very soon but I did
mention my president in in my
opening remarks that we do plan
to have pretty much a flat
funding request for the
recurring ask for a white twenty
seven and it has relatively
stabilised initially what's
mentioned that not enough
funding was provided by the
legislature to fully implement
for the first year and we did
have to come back for a
supplemental request but since
then the the funding requests
have levelled off
okay thank you mister and my
questions thank you represent we
are representative of that
thank you mr chair thank all of
you for your for your good work
I am i'm just curious what are
the wages for a school cook in a
rural school in new mexico to
know that
yes medium school food worker
wages are thirteen of fifteen
dollars an hour new mexico
that's often without benefits
staff employed by food service
management companies which again
are disproportionally charter
schools are not covered by
public
what's the word union union
agreements so they may earn less
and then we know that
neighboring states have pretty
similar which levels although
some unionised districts pay a
little bit more seventeen
eighteen dollars.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you for that
uh so in so they're not full
time employees the most of these
cooks are not full time
employees I don't know if it's
most it's very dependent on the
place you know how big it is
what other capacity they have
there so in some cases they're
their part time in some cases
they're full time
um
you know I think that's
important that's an important
question because some
of my colleague representative
bucket did legislation last year
asking for five thousand so that
school disextra make full time
employees with benefits because
that's a huge issue if if the
worker can come to work and and
you know I have some have some
health benefits some retirement
benefits it makes a huge
difference in the quality of the
person you can hire so I would
just like to
put that out there
will probably try and do it
again don't know if it'll work
but III think the the people
that add to the overall.
What are we going to say
the overall
feeling I I don't know what else
to say of a school involved that
best driver involved that cook
involved that custody and I mean
those were very important people
especially in well in any school
district but especially in that
a smart rural school those are
really part of a staff team and
if they are are very very poor
opposed to other people it it
just makes for a a difficult
environment for employment I
just want to say that and then I
want to add have you
how long are these eligibility
community eligibility reports
how long do they take to do what
I think
the commitment
mr chair representative the
community a little bit
eligibility of provision program
is a program that schools can
participate in a base on their
identified student percentage
once they've established a
minimum of the twenty five
percent c p threshold then
they're eligible
to participate and are locked in
for four years that people work
we take the data from or an
oversister to identify the
students who participate in snap
channel medicaid and work with
the school directly to ensure
that we've captured all of the
students that are eligible to
make sure that we have the
highest percentage possible we
typically start that passes
around april so that we can have
them certified by july first and
the beginning of the next school
year but again that's locked in
for four years.
And how many schools have you
looked in at this point ninety
nine percent of scores are okay
i'm not going to worry about it
then thanks.
And you're great you.
Oh here case now you can hear me
that was the thing I was the
most worried about was the snap
benefits but if we if you guys
have taken care of that.
No excellent will now go to
represent that thank you
representative thank you mister
chair I think i'm an answer my
question before I ask but I
still want to ask it that is it
might be a little bit difficult.
But
my children weren't
they didn't follow under what
needed to be for to get free
lunches so we went to the school
we should look we don't qualify
so let us pay you
a zero thought now about how to
make that happen or would it be
too difficult for those who
don't really want to pay for
their children's miles.
Mr chair representative schools
that participate in the c p
program ninety nine percent of
them do not have to collect
school lunch applications and so
only we only have a handful of
schools that receive
applications and those are the
standard schools the ones with
the low student identified soon
percent engine so um there are
no meal dads which is another
great thing about the c e p
program school is no longer
collect meal mill debts from
other students that aren't able
to pay and so although it is
appreciated that some families
may want to pay
a donation would probably be
uh accepted for other suspend
other programs but
thank you mister that's that's
all I thank you thank you very
much for them but center source
in the morning thank you mister
joe just came a very quick
question ah the key
recommendations all are for the
public education department in
both places are there any
recommendations for legislative
changes that need to be made
either in policy other than
supporting anything that might
come out of the federal
government as far as shorting
funding but any policy
recommendations for legislation.
Mister chair center source we
didn't identify any particular
region recommendations at this
time but moving forward as we
continue to collect information
regarding outputs and outcomes
regarding the implementation of
this program we certainly want
to keep monitoring this and work
with ped to develop potential
recommendations as we learn more
mister chair thank you that's
wonderful and I appreciate that
the the PED is already working
on most of the recommendations
that are here that they're
already on the table and in
process of thanking great thank
you very much
we're going to go back briefly
to represent chat field for one
last piece thank you for let me
have a second second bite
something you just said uh
brought forth this question if
we no longer fill out the forms
many many schools become
eligible for various programs
for various types of funding
because of the number of free
and reduced meals so that there
are their students qualify so
how are you going back in and
understanding that information
now.
Mr chair representative we are
using the eligibility criteria
from our systems novicious using
the identified student
percentage to work with school
districts to provide that
information for their title one
and other ground funding
opportunities
we have the usa does acknowledge
that the cp program does
eliminate some of those um
takes the way the application
process that schools use and so
we have we work closely with the
school districts to provide them
the data that they need I
believe this also data on the
new mexico public education
department website where schools
can go for that this is the this
is website that schools can can
access to
gather their information for
other opportunities.
Thank you mr thank you
we're gonna conclude with where
we start with center
thank you chair and i'll just be
super brief and their question
that representative dunkin asked
earlier in carrying the
legislation I got a ton of
people that called me on that
very point and I did find out I
I guess I knew this but I didn't
realize how it could be used mr
chairman with a like aps and
other districts have a
foundation and so you are able
to give the money to the
foundation the foundation
packages it up and makes it
available to the districts for
these purposes because you can
tell the foundation that may
exist in your school district
what you wanted to be used for
and so charged one to offer that
if there's a question that
others mean how that was one way
to get the money that the
district in a great way thanks
great thank you very much
evaluators and pd team thank you
very much great questions from
the committee and and and no
will be talking about a lot
about this as we go into our
budget.
Thank you all very much
please grab some great southern
new mexico food
and then we're gonna go ahead
transition directly with miss
car as well
really appreciate folks
CNN we're gonna course we have
our capital outlay we have some
of our subcommittees so will go
through this
with with car as well and then
as folks are able to stay
breaking the subcommittees
although I think we've
done a lot of work we will ask
folks just because we're in such
a tight space to take any
conversations outside.
The.
Excellent will get started what
we'll go ahead and ask calling
antonio
great.
The.
Please take us away.
It was
mr chair members of the
committee i'm kelly cross while
capital outlay analysts for lfc
during today my my colleague
antonio or taga who is also an
analyst who works on my team
we're gonna present the most
recent capital of capital outlay
corderly report will keep it
fairly short and speed today
since we're rolling right into a
subcommittee discussion on
larger policy issues so i'm
gonna present from the memo on
the top of your hand out first.
Umm as you can see and the
headline at the top at the end
of the fourth quarter of afy
twenty five are outstanding
capital outlet balances have
crossed seven billion dollars
across about sixty five hundred
active projects in the seat.
This number is not unexpected
but it is still big and might
have some of your drivers
reaching toward the floor so I
wanted to take a little time to
talk about
both the how their balances
break how that balance breaks
down between the different parts
of our capital program that we
track.
Um as well as make a couple
points about what it is
reflecting.
So is you can see in that type
paragraph on this memo.
The the different facets of the
capital program that we track
four point two billion dollars
of that balance is projects
authorized by the legislature so
that includes your local capital
outlay appropriations
appropriations to state agencies
and higher education
institutions so essentially
everything everything that is in
the capital outlook bills that
you guys appropriate every year.
It also includes over eight
hundred and fifty million
dollars from our severance tax
fund your mark programs and will
talk a little bit more about
trends in those programs in a
minute
it includes the overall balance
in the public school capital
outlay find which is now
approaching almost two billion
dollars.
I'll just connect give you a
preview that are evaluation team
is working on a project right
now related to the state and
local match.
Formula for the public school
capital outlay find that will
also include some work to kind
of unpack what is going on with
that large and increasing
balance in that fund so we
should have more on more
information on that for you
later this interest.
It also includes a little under
two hundred and seventy five
million dollars in special
appropriations to capital
In current one you can see how
the outstanding projects freak
down by the major categories of
legislative appropriations.
So that includes a higher
education and state agency
projects and the local projects
that you all appropriate
directly to
this chart is showing you both
the overall balances in active
projects in those various
categories as well as in that
blue line the percent of total
appropriations for those active
projects that have been expended
in each of those categories.
So
this chart is connected showing
you another view of some
important trends that we talked
about last month in particular
you can see that between those
categories the highest number of
projects by far just in terms of
number or a local projects and
also the highest balances you
can also see that just due to
the large number of local
projects over four thousand of
them compared to just about four
hundred higher education four
hundred state agency projects.
That there is a lot more
projects smaller dollar amounts
for the locals which is one of
the challenges we have talked
about trying to address um how
do we take this large amount of
money we're putting into the
capital at least system and get
it to accomplish larger things
instead of just a wide
collection of small things.
Okay a couple other points I
wanted to make about why these
balances have grown so high
one thing that are that they are
reflecting is that.
We've now been in a high revenue
environment for a number of
years and that includes
basically all of the years that
are included in the balances
were tracking now so large
appropriations packages means
that the balances that are given
time are going to be a lot
bigger than they used to be
it's also reflecting the fact
that the money were putting into
the system every year on both
through the capital outlet bills
as well as these other aspects
outside the legislature of the
capital program that we track
the money that's going money is
going into the system.
I faster than it's coming out so
there's more money going in that
is being spent at any given time
that doesn't mean that there is
no money being spent under the
key points on this first page
the second bullet you can see
that we're estimating a little
under five hundred million
dollars was uh spent.
Um in the last quarter on
legislatively authorized capital
projects that represents about
fifteen percent of the previous
quarters balance on those same
projects.
That's a little higher than we
typically see and we're
typically looking more around
maybe ten per cent of
and that is reflecting the fact
that this reporting is for the
last quarter of the fiscal year
and we typically see more of
spending happening
in the last quarter of the year
when reversing dates are
approaching we also typically
see with capital projects that
just on a project by project
specials there is more spending
that happens towards the end of
the authorization period for
those projects than at the
beginning
reflecting the fact that
many of the projects still have
project development design work
planning sometimes that has to
be done when they received the
money they're not quite ready to
spend it often i'm construction.
Um rates a couple other key
points that I want to highlight
before we move on and talk about
the earmark programs a bit
in the key points on the first
page of your ramo.
In the balance in the balance
reporting that we have from DFA
we identified almost a hundred
and forty million dollars and
balances remaining on projects
that have twenty twenty five
reversing dates.
This is in part due to the
timing of our reporting and the
end of the fiscal year and then
kind of an additional lag in
the executive agency is
processing reversion so that
number will likely come down
further and next quarter is
report
and will plan to report to you
than um also on actual
reversions from last year
and then in the last bullet on
this first page of the memo you
can see how these balances break
down between funding sources so
are about fifty five percent of
the legislative balances are
general fund or little under two
and a half billion dollars
about thirty percent are from
severance tax funds one point
three billion dollars and then
general obligation bonds make up
about eleven percent of the
overall balances
you can also see at the end
there that seventy four percent
about standing projects are
local and those represent about
forty two percent of the overall
balances in legislative projects
alright if you'll turn to page
two of the memo now.
So as I mentioned and as you all
know well um we have been in a
higher revenue environment what
that has meant for the capital
outlay appropriations process is
you all for several years have
been
entirely or
in large part funding the
capital outlay bills with
general phones
however the other parts of our
capital program
particularly the intermark
programs and the public school
capitalily council
the revenues to those programs
are still tied to severance tax
bonds capacity
and those have seen a really
dramatic increase over the last
few years which you can see and
chart to on the top left of this
page
you can just see how big that
increase has banned since afly
it's hard to read the exact
number but if i'm our calling
rate I think the revenues to the
water trust board back then were
actually under twenty million
dollars and now they've kind of
been in the one fifty two one
sixty million dollars range the
last few years.
One of the effects of this
increase is that it has made the
years programs a more attractive
alternative to capital outlay
then they have been in the past
along with some policy changes.
The water trash board has made
in particular uh to kind of
reduce barriers for small
systems
and I think you know that has
made it possible for you to
start talking about some of the
policy chefs we've been
discussing further incentivising
or requiring these types of
projects to go through these
other grant programs that we
know work better and are more
able to fully find that really
critical stuff for our
communities than using the
capital outlay process to do
those sim things.
So I also wanted to just you
know given this rapid increase
in revenues to these programs I
wanted to give you kind of a
high level update i'm the extent
to edge demand for funding from
these profile these programs is
or isn't keeping up with the
revenue increases.
Um especially given you're a
recent efforts to supplement
funding to the water trust board
in particular to close the gap
that they have had between
demand for funds and available
funding to pay despite these big
increases.
So the water trust forward which
administers and awards funds
from the water project fund the
water project find receives the
largest year mark on our senior
severance tax bonding capacity
at nine percent.
Um a number of different project
types are eligible for funding
through the water trust board
but they primarily support it
drinking water system
improvements and as of this year
they will also be accepting
applications for wastewater
systems
so for the past couple of years
you all have appropriate
additional money to the board
because demand for these funds
has been very high
in the last session you sent an
additional two hundred million
dollars to the water project
find for projects in twenty
twenty five and twenty twenty
six the board has been through
the initial phase of their
twenty twenty five
award cycle and they awarded a
little under a hundred and fifty
million dollars to sixty
projects they also postponed
decisions on an additional
eighteen of words until this
month I think they're meeting
possibly next as soon as next
week to consider those and they
gave those projects additional
time to come into compliance
with some of the boards
regulatory requirements that
communities have to have to pass
before they can be awarded funds
so that includes things like
article plants and they have to
show that they've been able to
spend down previous awards at a
certain rate before they can get
new money or they have to go
through a waver process.
So out that next meeting will
where they will consider those
additional awards and i'm fa
told us that they expected to
award an additional fifty one
million dollars of that two
hundred million that you
appropriated so that'll leave
um about a hundred and fifty
million available for this next
cycle of a words.
And preliminary information on
that next cycle looks like that
funding will be needed you can
see that in the table in the
middle towards the bottom of
this page so the water trust
forward because they require
legislative authorization of the
projects they find their request
cycle for the next year actually
starts now the first thing
communities have to do as they
have to file a notice of
intention essentially telling
animal faith that they plan to
pursue an award for in the next
cycle
the initial notice of notices of
intense that were filed with the
board for the twenty twenty
six cycle had requests totalling
five hundred and seventy five
million dollars that is a big
big increase even under the
require even over the big
requests they've had the last
couple of years and you can see
about two hundred million
dollars of that demand is coming
from this new eligibility for
ways water projects from the
board.
So will continue tracking that
and reporting to you i'll i'm
the status of need for that
those funds as well as
additionally it's going for.
Alright next up the colonious
infrastructure of funds are
similarly this uh find receives
an earmark on senior severance
tax band capacity although it's
half of the earmark for water
projects
colonials are confirmed variety
of different capital projects
and infrastructure needs in the
southern new mexico
um in small community is within
a hundred and fifty miles of the
international border
were we're seeing a little bit
of a different story here in
terms of demand at least just in
the slast year so today for the
cycle the board has awarded only
fifty two million dollars of
roughly eighty one million
dollars available for the cycle
although similarly they are have
given some projects additional
time to come into compliance
with regulatory requirements.
So I asked and am fair you know
what was kind of behind their
slight if demand was just
dropping off from the program um
and what I heard was that the
regular the regulatory
requirements for colonialists in
particular auto compliance and
the same spend down requirements
are meaning they have to have
shown progress on previous
awards before seeking new money
buyers prohibiting a lot of
communities from applying so
they kind of put it as demand
exists for these funds but has
been kind of quote on code
artificially suppressed by some
of these requirements.
Um so that's something we all
continue to follow as well
lastly the tribal infrastructure
of find also receives a four and
a half percent your mark on
annual senior severance tax fund
capacity these funds are awarded
by the tribal infrastructure
board and administered by the
indian affairs department
as revenues to this program has
increased we've seen the board
both funds more projects and at
higher average amounts and in
the table on page three of your
mammo
you can see a trends in average
awards from all the airmark
programs from afly twenty one to
afly twenty five
and we've seen you know kind of
up and down patterns a little
bit but at least once afy twenty
one
the awards from all of the
programs on average have
generally increased um so people
are getting more money from
those programs per project
demand for the tif has also
remained high.
The board received fifty six
applications with requests
totalling two hundred and forty
three million dollars this year
and it awarded its full capacity
to twenty eight projects in afy
twenty five also just wanted to
know it here that the board
approved a policy change that
reduced the amount of total
funding from the overall part
that any signal project could
receive from fifteen percent to
five percent.
And I will turn it over to i'm
tonyo now who will take you
through our report on projects
funded over a million dollars as
well as some of the additional
attachments
we have for you in this report.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee as
kelly mentioned my name is on
tony or tago and today I will be
giving a brief overview of
capital appropriations and their
balances in the state.
So if you'll first turn your
attention to attachment a
million and greater report for
the fourth quarter of fy twenty
five.
You'll see that the the report
provides updates on nine hundred
and twenty seven projects with
appropriations totalling five
point seven billion.
Including fifty three
bluedashrated projects that have
been fully expended or completed
and two hundred and ninety six
red
appropriations indicating no
activity significant obstacles
or delays recently authorization
or no reporting.
Mister you can also find a list
of some of these blue and red
rated appropriations at the end
of the memo on pages three and
four.
And now as you're looking over
the report i'll briefly
highlight a few projects
starting on page two uh with
appropriations administered by
the aging and longterm services
department including three
statewide gob packages for
senior centers from twenty
twenty twenty twenty two and
twenty twenty four.
Here I would note that projects
from the twenty twenty package
where allowed in additional year
to expand funding until june
thirtieth of twenty twenty five.
However we are still seeking
additional information on when
the remaining balance will be
reverting.
And as we consider a new request
from the aging department in
this upcoming budget season we
will work too better understand
why the spending on these
projects has been delivered.
Next mr chair on page five under
the department of finance and
administration
who manages the largest number
of the local projects you'll see
a number of red rated projects
that were reauthorized in twenty
twenty four and twenty twenty
five as well as several blue
rated projects including the
albuquerque north domingo back
park a quadic center and
mckinley county domestic shelter
renovation.
And still under the department
of finance on page ten line one
seventy seven you will see an
update on the new capital
project management system.
The face currently in the
process of taking the system
live and any remaining funding
will be put towards additional
enhancements that may be
required.
And at the bottom of page
fourteen mister chair and at the
top of page fifteen lines three
or six through three fifteen
you'll see updates on the status
of projects administered by the
department of information
technology including the public
safety radio system
stabilization project that
reporting from the agency
indicates is on track with ten
additional sites having gone
online this quarter.
The.
Next mister chair on page
nineteen under the energy
mineral and natural resources
department you will see a number
of state wide twenty twenty
three and twenty twenty four
appropriations that appear to be
on schedule including two
appropriations for improvements
to state park facilities and
infrastructure.
The.
On page twenty four line five
eleven shows a twenty twenty
four reauthorization
administered by the general
services department for the
department of public safety
reality based training facility
and santa fe the original
appropriation for this project
dates back to twenty twenty but
the project is currently out to
bid for construction.
And mr chairman members I would
like to point out as we move
down the report you'll find
summaries on the status of
tribal infrastructure colonious
and water trustport projects as
well as projects administered by
the mortgage finance authority
through the housing trust fund
which is something that is new
to this report and can be found
on page thirty two lines seven
fifty three through seven forty
six.
I'll note that these projects
will be tracked in the same way
that we track all your mark
projects however a more detailed
summary on the status of all
your mark projects can be found
under attachments b through e.
Additionally mister chair
attachment f provides a list of
two hundred and ninety six
projects authorized by the
legislature for which funds have
not been budgeted currently
ninety seven point two million
and general fund sixty five
point four million in general
obligation bonds and forty
million in severance tax funds
are considered authorized but
unissued and these projects they
are typically stalled due to a
lack of audit compliance or
readiness to proceed.
Next mr chair on page thirty
three lines seven hundred and
seventy nine seven hundred
eighty and seven eighty two
you'll see three fully expended
appropriations from the new
mexico institute of mining and
technology including one for the
helly hall construction project
which is currently in
construction.
The.
And on page thirty four lines
eight oa and eight twenty one
you'll see to
a twenty twenty one and a twenty
twenty three appropriation to
new mexico state university that
have reached substantial
completion for improvements to
act science centers statewide.
And finally mr chair at the
bottom of page forty you will
see to appropriations from
twenty twenty three and twenty
twenty four or the early
childhood development center
construction project at western
new mexico university and the
status of those funds
the university has requested
additional funding for this
project from the next general
obligation but uncycle and alfc
is continuing to work with the
institution on options for
reducing the construction cost.
And without mr chair we will
stand for any questions
great thank you very much for
this car as well thank you just
sort of take a will go straight
to questions starting with
representatives.
The.
I think i'm a look like every
we're gonna we'll go with minors
of silver then keep going
fast chair please like drink a
time we're done with
just looking at the numbers and
red rate and looking health.
We're just wasting money or
sitting watching their parked
with no return on our
investments is going to be being
topic in the next hour to
so i'll see my win for them but
and every time I read this i'm
just shot
every time I look at this i'm
just flat outshot.
They come in the bay and they
sell us projects and refund them
and they never do anything with.
They sit there they go away they
have no plan in this who goes to
my district you are
larry barkers have been there
too center of the there's a
sitting in empty building in
there but there's no operations
out of veteran center and we
build this big beautiful
buildings and nothing never
happens and so.
In the next hour we're gonna
taken as changing in.
Figure out how we're going to
see some money.
In that phone project so we just
parked money because we can park
it in better place thank you
mister chairman great thank
their ubank's chair and thank
you to you and thank you
especially the chair length a
for their work and for your work
and helping get us to on the
process of a very much better
place representative so
think you chair thank you both
for the presentation I
appreciated it
I think I also echo center and
when your says um frustration
ends just
truck and some of these numbers.
Um i'm wondering you're i'm a
freshman legislator and the more
that I sit in these spaces and
the more that I am in community
I think more of my role is to be
an accountability person and sit
and and go to the county or go
to these entities and say what
is happening and by when and how
will I know um and here are the
consequences if um we are not
spending our money and they know
that there's lots of reasons
and they you know I sit on tax
and rave with chairline there in
a see
amount of work that goes into
trying to figure out
this process and improve it
every single year.
But I I think i'm seeing a
commitment for myself of who are
the people I need to be talking
to here locally
around the calendar
infrastructure allocations and
making sure that the money is
going where it needs to go in
and people are getting the
services they need to get but my
question for for you both is
like where where does that
accountability lie like would it
be going to the colonials
infrastructure board
the task with creating
accountability on behalf of the
appropriators
and is that where the
accountability is in order to
connect stick some of these
funds think you chair
mr chair representative silver
so one thing I want to say about
colonia's this is the first time
that we have seen a words um
fall short of the total money
available
and yes the board has
accountability measurers in
place and like a lot more policy
than we do in the capital outlay
program
through the legislature
of you know sort of like buyers
that communities have to clear
in order to receive a words and
that is part of the reason as I
understand it from nma that a
words at least so far
were short of the funding
available through that program
in particular
I think that speaks to it seems
that capacity challenges that we
have um in many of our
communities in you know being
able to get audits done
being able to move projects for
word on a timely be assessed and
figuring out how to I think
both.
You know put accountability
measures that you're talking
about in place and also provide
support
so that communities can clear
them and address real needs is
like a challenge we've been
trying to figure out how to
balance and is something that
the new infrastructure officer
DFA is working to address and
mfa has started doing more of
that to
through the water trust board in
particular in terms of providing
a lot more direct technical
assistance to small water
systems for example
you know they'll like do the
procurement and kind of manage
their engineering reports just
for instance that they need to
get done before they can move
projects forward.
Um and I would be happy to kind
of follow up more with you and
and i'm after
uh what's going on in colonia's
in particular and
what happens when the board
reconvenes to consider a words
that we're given more time and
kind of what their options are
and decisions
look like in terms of using any
remaining balances that they may
or may not have this time around
think you chair and and just to
follow up so moving forward I
hear there's accountability
right like we are looking at
audits and your capacity
and we will withhold funds if
you are not meeting those
thresholds but what about all of
these projects and i'm sure many
of us not just the colonials
infrastructure allocations but
in any of these hand outs we're
all wondering like what about
the past like how do we hold
accountable folks and entities
for money that we have already
allocated thank you umm mr chair
representative that's a great
question and tease up some of
the stuff will be discussing in
the submitted so i'll
tell you a couple things to kind
of preview that one as you all
know we send you all
individualized sponsor reports
every quarter of those will be
going out for you next week
representative line had us add
these color codes to those
reports maybe two years ago now
to help them be more useful in
terms of flagging spending that
appeared to be delayed you also
now receive on those reports the
status updates which we do not
at it so they directly reflect
whatever your grand tears are
putting into the system which
they're required to do as a
condition of their grounds to
tell you what's going on with
it.
We have also recently requested
authorization from leadership
and all of your caucasus to
release your sponsor reports
directly to your d l a's at the
same time they go to you
and we have done trainings with
the dla's to on those reports
and capital outlay more
generally and we'll be
continuing those to help get
them up to speed on how the
system works what some of the
challenges are and how they can
support you all and kind of like
bird **** projects.
Um so you know one thing I would
suggest that is up to all of
your individual discretion is
just using those reports and the
staff support you have to you
know as consistently as you can
stay in touch with your
communities about what's going
on like what is challenging
um and once you know those
things
you know we're also available to
help you figure out how to
unstick those issues when we can
identify them.
Um another thing i'm just kind
of like larger policy
that the subcommittee is
considering is limiting
reatherizations on projects
you know the lack of limits on
reauthorizations to date has I
would say created a little bit
of like a perverse incentive to
never get better at any of the
stuff because there was always a
way out you could just extend
extended stand
so I think you know we've been
kind of working on a multipronge
strategy to both put some kind
of reasonable limits on things
like that and also
To support system
for doing better planning and
project development better
coordination of funds having
more support available
to both gable to get better
projects to you on the first
place get better information to
you before you make
appropriations and then on the
back and have sort of more
available in terms of state
support to keep things moving in
the past the primary role that
the state has taken after the
fact is really just an like
administering appropriations
making sure money is spent
legally but not really focusing
on whether the thing that was
intended is actually getting
done and so we're trying to move
in that direction
thank you the keyword I am
taking away from this bird dog
so thank you chair
just in time for dove season and
qualities in right around the
corner
are there any other I don't are
there any other questions have
that better and again we'll be
going into subcommittee on this
very topic by chair
I just want to thank you for
this and for the delay because
we were able to go through every
kind of item on the last this
song we found uh we're we're
just filed in time they are
actually completed but this
report was that the last report
was done before they had filed
their completion records so that
is a good thing to know so this
is the first time i've ever been
able to have a meaningful sheet
to follow up with people you
know just one sentence and and
you know and again in in small
rural areas people change a lot
so I think that's our biggest
problem is is you have you know
city managers and construction
people are people in the
building process in a in a small
city there's a lot of turnover
in small counties and small
cities so it's then sometimes
we've notified people because of
this went down to the level
where who's in charge of the
construction product said hey do
you know that.
You're supposed to do this and
sometimes they didn't know so so
I just want to say thanks for
all this work I it's mammoth and
when you talk about statewide is
that mainly the governors
her
capital outlink
mr chair representative
sort of yeah so we use the state
the term statewide it really
means like capital outlay
appropriations for state owned
stuff so like state agency
projects and higher education
projects are included in that
there's a different
appropriations process for those
projects that is more similar to
the operating budget
appropriations process
state agencies higher identities
have a formal request process
that they go through in the
summer and fall um I said I am
committees for both of those
projects with executive partners
to consider those requests and
then we bring a recommendation
to lfc in the file that then
goes through drafts with the
committee and as adopted and
because becomes like the
foundation for the capital
outlay bill on the state owned
side of things I hope that makes
thank you for that and I just
want you now I I with all the
money we flowed into the weather
trustword I wrote all of my
mutual domestics and I said i'm
not going to give you any
capital outlay you it's too big
you need to match you need to go
to the water transport and we'll
help you do that grant writing
which we did grant reading to
the cogns so so that there that
just eliminated you know fifteen
requests that I got so I just
want to say I think we are
improving I i've seen as
improved one thing we haven't
done is the tribal and the
colonialists
you know they don't have to go
to legislature for approval the
water trustport does that slows
them down kind of a year so I
just want to say we might.
Follow what tribal and colonial
stew uh to you know they they
have a better process they knew
what they're doing you can see
in the tribal report how fast
they're getting that money out
water trust board just takes a
year then the and that's what
and it's because they need our
vinyl approvement at the at the
legislative level so just saying
great points thank you then
thank you for your work here
okay I know we're going to go to
subcommittee shortly we're going
go we'll conclude with
representative dixon and go from
there
thank you mister chair thank you
I just have a question about
some of the
items on
in the packet you prepared for
us with
the red rated projects i'm
wondering here we gave a lot of
money
last year to alba kirkin
bernalio county for housing
and I know the governor just
released a huge trunch of that
funding earlier in the week but
there are a lot of projects on
here from the past several years
that have gone to affordable
collaborative housing
construction
you know uh transitional living
you know a hove variety of
things you know circled probably
a dozen here how
do we have a way to see how
those are.
How those interact with the
plans that of a kirk in bernalio
county have right now with a you
know I know with the eighty
million dollars that was
sort of earmarked or dedicated
to to the that region they had a
list of projects and priorities
with how much money they were
missing you know and how many
houses or units
that would allow for housing do
we know how the is projects
adopted with the larger.
Program.
Mr chair representative not of
the tap on my head although I
have had a conversation recently
about meeting with albuquerque
soon to kind of talk about a
number of
capital issues they have going
on so we'd be happy to set up a
meeting with them on that and I
include you and it if you'd like
us to do that thank you that
would be wonderful just to make
sure that some of these projects
bureau
could be better aligned or you
know just to make sure so thank
you very much I appreciate that
thing you replied to and great
points okay well thank you both
very much this continues to give
us more information and with the
leadership with child a term
when you and so many others uh
represent dix and so many others
were moving in a strong place
so.
I won't keep us here any longer
in this part will go straight
into that subcommittee portion
where we can continue and they
can continue that great work
so thank you very much
director silly how how should we
divide.
Next door we got a ban.
The.
Great okay so we'll go ahead and
break feel free to grab some
coffee or a little bit of food
or what have you for the folks
we're going through the tour
we'll see at the thing chairline
will turn over to you here and
just the second thank you as we
transition if we can take like
less than five minutes to do
that so that we can get on to
our business so that we can get
people out of here by five
o'clock
just thank you.
I already say might predime them
he bad two days.
All right folks if we can go get
those conversations out of the
rooms we can start our sub
committee they'd be great
I don't know if you remember and
they can't even hundred
yeah
okay folks calling do we have
all the hand outs pass passed
out are all the hand of be
passed up.
Where george went to work on
that hammer
i'm going to go to canada
tomorrow some hammering
as I have one as we get the
sheets handed out to all of us.
I think it'd be helpful for it
for me to make a couple of of
comments before we go into
having a calling antonio talk
about the work and again folks
if you can take your
conversations out of the room as
we're trying to get to this last
part
knowing that this last part is
what stands between you and
going home so we want to get
sure that make sure that we're
out of here by it by twelve
twelve to fifteen at the latest
cell again I want to first off
think both chairman small and
chairman when yours for the
addition of this topic on this
month's agenda in the
continuation of our
conversations that we had in
alba current in july I also want
to make a comment that I
appreciate once again the work
and it's it's reflected in the
package that we all got just
before this of calling and and
tonyo and and and the
partnership that we have with
the wesley and in regards to how
we're going to try to modernize
this capital outlet process in
continuation of our work to have
really what I would like to see
is an open and transparent
discussion of how these
inherited capital outlay
programs could again be
modernised to meet these really
maybe once in a generation of
once in the lifetime
opportunities and challenges
that we have today in this
program as we mentioned in july
in alba court you we have an
opportunity to make a huge dent
in the state's infrastructure
needs and improve the quality of
life for all of those new
mexicans that rely on this type
of program to really inject real
money into projects that will
help them in their communities
but as mentioned in last month's
presentation making the most of
that opportunity will in fact
require changes to the capital
outlay system again under the
current system as it is
mentioned before were often
spreading the money available to
thin and often underfunding
projects which means that it
takes too long to complete the
projects.
Or they never get completed at
all
further it means even with the
recent large amounts of
investments that we have seen in
the budget and for our
communities we are strusting
struggling to fund larger
projects that are the highest
priorities in our many of our
local governmental systems next
steps as we look at what we want
to
provide this committee obviously
being transparent in the
subcommittee but obviously it's
going to have to go to the
entire boating membership of LFC
a last month the staff presented
us with options to begin
addressing some of those issues
as we begin the process of
modernization of the capital
outlet program
we directed stability feedback
from that meeting and returned
with a more stream lamp proposal
that we can move forward with
last week I met with both
chairman small and chairman when
yours to review those staff
recommendations and provide any
comment we thereafter actually
the day after shared those
comments with members of the
subcommittee with the note that
we would be discussing those
issues today and support staff
hopefully with some type of
direction to support their work
in their charge as capital
outlet stewarts for the state
the proposal includes directives
to develop legislation to limit
we authorizations and address
many other issues of course any
draft bills and that we direct
staff to develop will in fact
again come back to the committee
to the lsc committee to review
and provide potential
endorsement as you move into the
twenty twenty sixth legislative
session finally before I pass it
over to kelly and to until new
to provide further discussion on
the hand out that they provided
us
we want to make sure that we can
highlight some of the things
that she's going to talk about
today which is the first is.
And I think one of the most
urgent issues that she wants to
have direction on is how do we
look at the capital outlet
development program funds again
that was a twenty twenty four
piece of legislation that was
house bill two fifty three we
will need direction to day to
support lfc and dear face staff
to develop criteria based
application processes for the
twenty twenty six funds that
will be open to local and travel
governments the second part of I
think her discussion today will
be prioritization and betting a
projects to support membership
decisions for investments of
those capital although and then
finally
looking to discuss and and and
provide some direction on
reauthorizations and reversions
beginning to take a more defined
stance really important to
encourage efficient spending and
project development and with
that uh mister chairman and
members I would like to just
ended over to call in and and
have a go through her hand out
with this thank you
thank you mister chair members
of the committee
again i'm kelly carries while
capital outlet analysts for LFC
i'm joined by antonio rotagea
wesley billingsly at DFA wanted
me to pass on his regrets that
he could not be here today but
as antonio mentioned there in
the process of taking this new.
Um capital outlay planning and
reporting system live and so he
is there and that is a tool that
you all have funded recently
that will be one of the
foundations for some of the
improvements that were looking
to implement so as the chairman
mentioned the proposal that you
have before you today is a kind
of streamlined version of the
options that we talked about
last month so I we incorporated
the committee discussion of
those options from last month
into sort of picking between
them and bringing this proposal
to you today
for you to give us direction on
next steps
so I will kind of walk through
what is on here pretty quickly
and than we will open it up for
a questions and discussion so
the first item on here the uses
of the capital development
program funds
as the chairman mentioned this
committee has been talking about
for now at least using the
distributions from this funds
to pilot and alternative
approach to funding local
projects to address some of the
challenges that
to impede local projects that
we've discussed at length
so those would include using
this as a way to support
planning and design for a
significant local projects and
also for funding construction
for important left local
projects that are ready for a
construction funding at a higher
level and through kind of a
criteria based application
process
that is similar to how some of
our grand programs outside of
the legislative appropriations
process work.
So the preference of the
committee was to do this
similarly to how we do senior
center projects right now where
there is an application process
prior to session for those funds
a recommendation comes to lfc as
part of the state wide capital
out a request process and then
you all consider the
recommendation for incorporation
into the statewide framework
that we discussed um so kind of
carbiading what I said earlier
primarily the statewide
framework owns state own stuff
but in a couple instances it is
a kind of venue for funding
certain types of local needs as
well and so this would fall into
that category
potentially some of the really
quickly
mr mister we want to adopt these
one by one and ask question that
might be a cleaner way to do it
yeah I was I was going to
suggest that so based on the
bolded blue let's go and end to
talk about that questions in
connection and perhaps
or we're gonna come back at
least for the capital of the
development program funds yeah
yeah that's what we so we're
gonna go on on your page number
one and then discuss number one
and then adopted or not adopted
and then crap and it's going to
make sure that that may be a
cleaner way to do it so thank
you
okay
sounds good so I will wrap this
up quickly
so just this is kind of for
future knowledge but
potentially if you all so
desired some of the tools that
we would that we would develop
up through the process of um
standing this up as a new
mechanism for local projects
could later be available to you
for your appropriations process
as well at your discretion the
committee also.
Discussed last month preference
first sort of um beefing up the
statute around eligible uses of
these funds going forward so
that's just an action item that
if you all give us the direction
we will further develop um and
bring back to you some more
specific proposals on how to do
that later this morning
thank you kelly and so with that
recommendation by a chairman
when yours let's let's open up
to questions and comments and
then we will provide direction
to the staff in regards to how
we move forward on this first
part of your presentation so
it's going to do chairman you
see have a question comment will
start off with you well I mean I
thought about this a little bit
and we developed that program
fund to write to to offset
capital sweden after bond again
and started to know with cash
over time
are we gonna one thing I think
we got to develop in the
framework is we're going to cap
the amount that they can play
for for planning
and there was a meaning that you
and am and I think you were
there and a couple of other
people they're trying to
understand how contractors bid
large projects in builder at
resk in cpm and there is
comments made about pushing to
outside texas contractors and
and out of state contractors and
that blue of my phone but what
we got to figure out is the way
the system works if you build a
building your engineering and
should be about ten to fifteen
percent of the total cost of the
building and so if the engineers
come in and say
i'm an apply for ten million
dollars and capital out there
they're going to get a million
dollars and design in
engineering well they may not
need a million dollar building
for a food pantry emergency the
food patriot they may only need
the meaning large space but they
may not need that larger design
they're going to inflate these
numbers to get more money along
the system as they go along so I
would go to figure out how we
cap.
That rate because they're going
to get two or three bites of the
apple they're gonna get designed
money by and they're going to
get construction money and then
they're gonna come back for cost
over.
In and if you do biller at
rescue you're going to limit the
number of people that can do
that so when we start looking at
using this project funds to
design that there's going to
have to be some caps in there
can exceed ten percent of
engineering cars some some some
type of capped hole down their
costs the performance example is
going to be a larry bargain I
don't know when the naval nation
built the started as a two
million dollar building for
veteran center and went to seven
million and nobody's in there
and and so
that is a perfect example of a
project where they saw two
million dollars would complete
it and the engineer drew them
the target
and then they saw what they
could get and went to seven
million dollars building and
nobody should that's the perfect
example of how how this could go
arrive and so capping some of
their stuff i'd think mr
chairman as we look forward is
can be critical.
If we're going to give them
planned in design we did this in
in mf
where they could do planning and
is planning money for a
different project right and and
each got twenty five or fifty
thousand in the web wild and I
don't work said today and then
the eligibility for criteria for
programs right
you did we talk about timing
that up for something who is out
or it wasn't eligible.
Remind me of that conversation.
Mr chair senator yes so I talked
about wanting to play it at
least some kind of additional
bride eligible eligibility
criteria for these funds
into statute um I think under
kind of the context of our
discussion around voluntary
measures not being as effective
as as things that have teeth.
So this is something that we
would further develop and have
conversations with you all about
sort of what the right stuff is
to be in statue in addition to
what's already there for says
you know still trying to
maintain some flexibility with
these funds
okay so so
I think that's part of the
discussion later on loggers
after dob that later so we can
develop that criteria but thanks
mister chairman very good thank
you chairman when your chairman
small because I think sure I i'm
just I really appreciate number
one here I think
it's clear guidance it includes
continued collaboration between
lfc and
and I think it very much sets us
in a place to segment money to
encourage the best possible work
in communities and so I
appreciate the guidance
and and also know that it
clearly provides to work
together as you know refining
into a lot more than details I
really appreciate your
leadership and getting us to a
place where we can get to and
everybody's work to get to this
place where details will come
but adapting their save
obviously clearly support
number one
very good thank you let's go
then to
represent it down.
I asked to be on the board
before we decided to go number
by number but is there you
mentioned wanting to fully fund
projects and it takes a very
long time in rural communities
how are what what are we doing
to make sure in the criteria and
the planning and implementation
that large projects and rural
communities are not
set aside for example if i'll
use representative jack chatfor
as an example he'd have six
counties two point five million
it will take him for ever to
fully find a project so they get
submitted in phases so how do we
make sure to keep
equal opportunity for all
communities
mr cher representative dow
so
what we discussed last month
then this is how dfa has
approached this issue with some
appropriations you all have made
to them to stand up special
grant programs for certain
projects like recreation quality
of life projects for example
is they have a sat in policy
that a certain amount a certain
percentage of the funds should
be prioritized for rural and
frontier communities so that was
something that the committee
discussed nest next sorry last
month and could be incorporated
and to the process for
developing this kind of
recommendation.
Okay that's good representative
of her ever
thank you mister chair thank you
for calling for all this work
you know it when you say quality
cost estimates um
you know that that's tricky also
in real community say it's
tricky for smaller grants you I
I know the problems here with
the big grants but the smaller
grounds are just just as
critical I remember once a
volunteer fire department wanted
to shredder to help go in to the
bosca and shred all the street
you know fire prevention it was
a big deal and I gave them fifty
thousand turns out the shredder
only costs forty five thousand
and they could buy for five
thousand a car that would hold
out there much that they shredd
it you know
they went to df and dfa said
well no that was an in the thing
so it's also teaching freshman
legislators how to write these
things if I would have said
equipment for shredding it
wouldn't work but I said a
shredder so so it's really how
we write these things when they
when they go to dfa that makes a
difference in and I now write
him as broader as I can just to
allow for that and i'm talking
about these smile things of
fifty thousand a hundred
thousand there it's just just
difficult m I do know something
that the water trustpoat has
done is they put together as
staff team and there is five
people on I can only remember
three that they have an engineer
a cpa and a grant writer and if
they have somebody that
struggling to put that proposal
together which is difficult you
know.
They go out this is for the
water trust board and they go
out and they have a team that
goes out and helps the community
do that and I think that's what
rural communities really need we
don't have access to engineers
it's really hard to get a
engineer and you know whatever
you put in the budget if you put
a planning project from fifty
thousand guess what they charge
fifty thousand to do the study
so it would be helpful to have
kind of an engineer who is an
honest broker who looks like a
project and can say this is how
much they should cost or this is
how much it should cost for the
planning and design so i'm just
throwing that in from my
perspective from a local
district
good points thank you
representative let's go to
senator schendel
but the thing is chairman i'm
sorry I wasn't at the last
meeting
or kelly it says
can you distinguish between okay
this process and what tif
already does or or is this a
separate process or or how are
the interest mind in excluding a
little bit about
how how this is going to work
yeah mr chair senator yes it
would be separate separate from
tif or any of the your mark
programs so it's more geared
toward
addressing the same kind of
universal requests that you all
receive through capital outlay
but providing an opportunity
to provide funding to especially
some of those like larger dollar
amount local projects both to
support design to get the
project to projects developed
and ready and support
construction at a level that is
difficult to do through member
To both local and tribal
governments and political
subdivisions the same way the
capital outlay process is.
And maybe I can also give you a
little background on what these
funds are
so as senator munios um and
chairman lente mentioned
this is a distribution from
something called the capital
development and reserve funds
that we created two years ago
with a couple goals one was to
stabilise the state's long term
debt commitments so that we're
kind of going at a level more
like this
that is tied to some specific
measures of debt that are
considered reasonable by credit
agencies and start of kind of
website like this with oil and
gas revenues we redirected the
savings into this trust fund
that is making annual
distributions and the other goal
of that was long term
diversification of revenues to
the capital program so the same
kind of insulating effects for
the capital program that we've
done for the general fund the
distributions from the fund are
fairly small right now so
expected to be about twenty six
million dollars
and so over the past year the
committee has taken an interest
in initially at least using
these funds as kind of an
alternative mechanism for local
projects for addressing some of
those issues I described in the
first part of my answer
appreciate that thank you I
missed it conversation I knew we
created that fun but I didn't
realize that that was the idea
to use some of that twenty
million twenty six million that
will be available for that
purpose I just want to make sure
that we're not because you know
it as a representative of her
mention you know when you get
the tribal infrastructure and
they have a process that please
have a vetting process I think
that's working very well course
the money has been going up
lately the only thing I did like
what the board did worse reduce
from fifteen to five percent
which didn't basically know your
spreading you know the wealth
out to more people but they also
limiting.
You know the bigger projects and
so forth so that's something
that I think of the board
probably needs to address again
because it's just a feature
purpose here we're trying to
complete projects and over and
that site I I know we have a
large product and so forth so
but I just want to make sure
that that were not creating
another
prices and placed like the water
trust in the board I mean one of
the big issues I remember that
because I was part of the
I I think I was in conservation
at that time of when there was a
large earth questions about
us as legislators appropriate is
given that authority to an
agency to approve projects when
these are projects in our
community and that was the big
discussion I think as a result
of those conversation that whole
prices was put in place for the
legislature to approve it in the
list which no way I guess it's
great but then it's just delayed
the process for another year
and so that's not the same with
colonials and tif you know they
get their money and the board as
it's the you know there is a
good representation so I think
it's a good process I just don't
want me or I just on us to
create another you know hurdle
for these communities you know
if these were one in the same or
how they're going to work
together so because I want it
but that outdoor because I think
you know uh seeing with me you
know I opened trying to push
most of the big projects to tive
and reserve my elocation to
maybe equipment purchases
because in rural areas in that
we are very small communities
they don't have a lot of them
money available and so forth so
you know some of these are
purchases of equipment you know
work very well the other thing
that I know we discuss before
and I don't know has been
discussed by the committee uh is
in many rural areas in a we
don't they don't have funny sit
around
to up to front the cost of
these.
Is these all reimbursible basis
you know have we looked at in a
process for us to just prove
item agree like a lot of federal
governments do that thorough
government does from many of
these programs you just give the
great and then they at the
moment is been go because a lot
of times I think some
communities are trying a couple
enough money in on to get the
project complete it from various
sources so they can get the
project done and get a request I
just told that out there because
I think I I have you know
outside of real rental which is
most of my
district is rule and
it's not the resource sit around
they don't have bank accounts to
you know pay for the other stuff
so I just do that out there
since I was not a discussion
last month mister bearing but I
just want to get the feel for
worth this is core appreciated
thank you mister thank you
center city thank you california
for defining that this
discussion right now is
exclusively towards the HB two
fifty three funding which is a
twenty six million not tied to
any of our local stuff not tight
to tif for colonial anything
else is just for that fund
itself okay so as we move
forward let's let's keep the
discussion directed towards that
fund itself and next on the list
I have senator woods.
Thank you chairman.
I personally think this is a
very good idea.
I think that
when we start talking about
how do we how do we encourage
rock government to.
To go the extra mile notice to
say they want something to go
the extra mile to to do a little
more internal work
you know I have broken
but I had a commissioner from
certain volte county but told me
they were projects
that they were the financial
agent that they didn't even know
they were followed to age for.
Courses goes on down into the
next part of this but.
The rule local government need
more guides on how they pick
this money and how they
especially when we start
calculated back planning and
design
and if we just stick a whole
bunch of money out there and
it's let's see how planned in
design after they receive notice
they got the money.
My hearts come in mind
all of a certain an architect
gets paid
by percentage
so the more designed so better
more money he makes.
I think it's a good idea of
doing this myself I can see the
difference in the union hospital
and a fair ground project crew
county
how much a difference so
but I think we have we all
understand that
when you have one of those huge
projects that that's going to
mean closer to a billion dollars
than me and dollars it's a
different deal but if we want
our money working we need a way
to have projects
interest caps of our so that
they all know but planning and
design so they'll know what i've
had those local projects out
there in the country they tell
me while we could build that
building and let me give you a
good example of that in case
you're heard of
the rodeo reno at eastern mexico
university
they had local donors come in
and bill the land
bill grandstands
and finally cid came along and
retake the hotel
another trying to fail what to
do
we we need we need these guys to
realize they have to build under
the specification of the rules
and that's not very easily top
too in the rule communities
because they're used to getting
some burning
and have it have it ready for
next month
and it's hard to do that with
its hard to spend state money so
the more planning in design we
do and and still stick on the
whole lot of money up there
that's not being spent to have
some design work done in some
idea of what you can get for the
money you want or what you want
for the money it's going
to cost so much chair.
Thank you senator that we're
gonna go to represent a bin
center that will go back to
center minutes or second time
and then that's the end of my
list of representative
thank you mister chair
on the development and criteria
based application process and
the planning and design is there
is there a
a standard or is there
a merit based to where it's new
mexico businesses they get more
preference than somebody from
outer state and the reason that
I asked that is it's very
sensitive subject right now in
leak in county with
a lot of outer state contractors
come and
and they get front loaded all
this money
and they sent it all back to
where they come from they don't
work any local people
and I want to make sure that in
this development criteria that
we are giving points to new
mexico based
companies instead of hiring out
of district and if we do hire
out of district just because
nobody a hundred percent of
nobody is available
to do the work
mister chair
sure and i'd I what I just want
to clarify mr chair and
representative is through this
application based process we
would not be making
recommendations about a words to
contractors it would just be
like a warrant to communities to
support projects and then as
with their usual appropriations
they would be the ones doing
that procurement
thank you so mister chair
and california we how do we make
sure that the locals are hiring.
New mexico based companies can
we tie view to anything
in order to get the money if you
get the money you have to go
by this criteria right here
mr chair representative
I don't want to get too far out
of united states here but
most of our state procurement
processes do have a preference
for instance contractors
built into the award process
of the type of my head a cannot
tell you if that is just kind of
in rural versus in statute so I
am not entirely sure how it
applies to
local governments which do have
to follow procurement code
but you know might have their
own approaches if it's not in
statute so i'd have to follow up
with you on that and I don't
know if senator minos has
anything to add to that as far
as local procurement goes
so under the state for criminal
code right you are given profit
points if you sign up as a new
mexico business and under
preference right there's ways
that locals get around that like
in making the county they sold
source one contract for one
contractor to solve source every
other contract underneath them
which is really illegal and so
they get around in different
ways
if when you go to bed or gsd
sends out a contract right
under gst precrotion rules you
can use the new mexico
preference you can use minority
preference you can apply for all
the preferences and get the but
that's impressive need an
american preference and get the
wards point well a lot of
contractors will then sub that
job outside contractors and then
they'll bring in whoever they
need to do its can't control it
but in this very first.
Discussion of this you can
control that in this framework
of design and and do that
because they're gonna have to
are I don't think it was under
fifty thousand they don't have
to go out for an r p
and so they can go under that
and do it two or three times if
he read the paper this week
on sunday and do it under the
limit and then not have an r p
process and bill and stack on
and go around it
and so they can get to fifty
thousand by doing an ip for
fifty and then so we exceed it
max that out and do another rp
for fifty backs that another one
they can stack on and to get
around the rp criminal committee
read sundays paper
thank you mister chair I think
that as legislators we need to
build safeguards in there for
our new mexico
folks to get new mexico money
and
there are out of state
contractors that are way bigger
than the ones that we have and
they can come in under beer
and they can build things at a
lower rate and then at the end
they've got a bunch of hot shot
attorneys they do a whole lot of
change orders and there really
not the they're really not the
lowest beard
and I don't think that these
contracts and i've even heard of
some of these contracts that are
awarded they want to come out
the they'll take an outer state
contract they'll get awarded and
then they're going to go to one
of our new mexico based and
they're gonna let them do the
work but they want twenty
percent off the top now that is
wrong they don't deserve twenty
percent we need to keep them
done in mexico money right here
and we need to be working both
of the people
thank you think you represent it
have been sent.
I I think there's a great
questions and also great
comments for for calling and a
donut and especially with the as
you develop the criterias to
keep in mind and again that this
is we're simply at this point
what we're looking for as
directing staff to develop to
develop the criterias to how we
will expend this twenty six
million up as a part of this
program so right so nothing's
been congred at this point we're
not trying to get into the weeds
on how we're gonna detail things
at this point I think we're
giving calling and and doing
your some really
That projects they have the
design the engineering and they
have the cost estimates now do
we come back and take your
slower time frame to do that
yeah cause we want to see what
they are provide
it's not like we want to say hey
I need it nine million dollars
water project in district at the
last minute those projects are
designed have construction
estimates and know that they can
go to bed and and water projects
moving but slower and sewer
projects and that's what we're
trying to get to the end of the
day is a well better process
that may be slower but they have
a five year icipie list and that
may be should be included in
this they got a pick projects
off their icip
and they come with construction
drawings and estimates and then
represent them horrible vincent
says that's a million dollar
project in reindo so via partner
with my other people we can get
you to the million dollars and
we have a concrete trail of
evidence that you can build
design and construct and
complete the project
otherwise we're just shooting in
the dark and that's I think the
end goal that we're trying to
get there if we take the page
of.
Reads that we see it's one point
one billion dollars sitting
there either unexpended
partially expended and the first
page the end goal is to create a
process and our bare values
agreement you may not like the
time printed a lot of trustport
does but they have their ducks
in a row and they know from
start to beginning where they're
headed and probably a completion
in this in the same time once
construction starts that's where
we're headed with capital
and and that's where we gotta go
with capital and so that i'll
make a motion to dock items one
in two hours would want to
I think that's fair to to either
adopt it to his direction talk
for the staff so that they can
move for in in building these
and developing these criteria so
with that motion made by sender
munich second by representative
vincent any discussion looks
like we're all in favor to
direct staff to move for so
calling and don't you know you
have you your orders in the got
what you're looking for as you
move for can we go down the page
and we'll we'll assume the same
type of process again will go
through priorities and betting
them will stop there will take
some questions okay mr chair
members of the committee thank
you so moving on to your
prioritisation and betting
the first two items are just
information that we're discussed
last month
so essentially asking us to work
with dfa to provide you all with
some additional information
prior to session that includes
uh this kind of risk assessment
of local entity is riding us to
receive funding which d f
discussed with you that they
were developing as well as a
list of underfunded existing
capital projects that we would
try to roll out with your last
round of sponsor report its
priority
so this is just information
voluntary for you all to use it
in informing your.
Capital outlay appropriations
for the next session.
Third last year we worked with
lcs to implement an earlier
deadline for a local requests
with the intense of having a
list of those for you earlier
and having more opportunity to
associate those requests with
whatever kind of vetting
information we had again that
you could use just on a
voluntary basis
so leadership of this committee
now discussed setting some more
specific expectations and
communicating those early to
legislative council service in
terms of when you want to see
requests so that's all number
three
what we have discussed is having
a preliminary list of local
requests shared with lfc staff
two weeks prior to session um
which then gives us an
opportunity to put that betting
information that we have in a
easy to use format
hopefully associate it with any
additional information we might
have through DFA and then
provide that to caucastaf for
all of you one week prior to the
session.
Um and forth is kind of the the
media thing here
and in line with the chairman's
comments what we are looking for
at this point is direction I
next steps
in this case in line with the
discussion we had last month
and again the preference of
leadership on this committee
test try to give the changes
that were considering more teeth
this is to give us direction to
draft legislation for a
potential committee indoor smith
that includes uh two strategies
we've talked about winer
proposed mechanism for limiting
a discretionary capital outlay
for water and waste water
projects given what we've talked
about with the water trust for
it and your efforts to
appropriate additional funding
there to close the gap between
supplied demand of those funds
and we would work with our
executive and and i'm a fate
partners to develop this
proposal and bring it back to
you
and the second is a kind of
eligibility threshold for
capital outlay more generally
which would require capital
requests over a certain dollar
threshold to appear on a local
infrastructure of capital
improvement plans.
Pretty good questions comments
from the committee
senator monos thank you and
eminence would go down this road
I just have one question and we
got capital earlier than the
governor and the legislature
required required capital
earlier than ever before but
council services
the day we are trying to get the
bill to the to the floor to get
introduced was still dragging
their feet with changes so do we
need to put a timeline on
council services for a cutting
them off and seeing you can't
keep changing till the last
minute when we're requesting the
bill and included in the exact
because the exact place the game
with us too of on and give my
capital to you guys start
telling us where you give
capital and in some of us when
worked with the executive you
should talk to you but those
times when she when talked to me
because we sooner and so
coordinating with the executive
and ordered a complete project
should maybe should be an
acquirement with a timeline in
the timeline should apply to the
executive too and there should
be something if you
are not if your stuff is not in
by the timeline
then we just take your money I
legislators won't get it in the
incentive or want to serve
always the worst because I have
so many things to do in it's
just hard to decide how to make
a winner and loser with the
amount of money I have that's
the worst thing I do I think is
capability because there's needs
but I do like create winners or
losers but the time lying for
the exact needs to be in there
the timeline for council needs
to be and that way we can have a
little bit of time to look at
that rather than seeing well
here's a funding sheet and but
four days later here's your
other fund she and now you got
eliminate to this funding she
and now you missed a by five
dollars and going to go cut five
dollars or thousand dollars
somewhere.
And that process is just not
very well and I don't know if we
should change it I don't I don't
know if council should continue
to do that or if we should move
it to another place but then you
have this the exact and the dfa
where the exact can all send a
look at capital outlay of
legislators and what people they
don't like
and keeping that exclude seventy
of cruise whose project is what
is is also key to doing that but
the timelines should be applied
to everyone
council service and continue at
the executor should continue it
but I think those should be in
prioritization and betty in
included in the time like it's
included in that priorities
great comments the senate
renewals that's good chairman's
moth
thank you very much mister chair
these are really exciting and I
really
can't plan again the leadership
they get tracks what members
have sort of experience over
time and so that you describe
sort of this process and how
your it reflects sort of a very
much a best practice mister
chair I want to put a plug and
it doesn't belong here and I
know that we're sort of keeping
these at a pretty high level I
very much do want to put a plug
though for changing how the
water transport authorizations
happen I have in my entire time
in the legislature we've never
changed it whatever legit
whatever we get stays it's not
that the legislature's stamp of
approval ever adjust the
projects really the entirety of
what I see that that require
that requirement does is it adds
twelve months it is simply
adding more time when we have a
water trust board that is now
better resourced with more
technical capacity.
The legislature is investing
aggressively in along with the
year marks that are flowing
there so I believe the center
send over really described well
on both points to are also to
avoid our boards as we're giving
them more money to encourage
them to fully fund as opposed to
you know sort of chap in the
smart bigger pies in the smaller
and smaller pieces so sounded
and I think there was a great
point there and as we consider
this legislative change we have
to consider the a similar
legislative change to how the
water trust forward the to allow
them to operate on a rolling
capacity so that more of the
projects in our districts can be
addressed on a rolling basis
with the expertise at water
trust board and not have to wait
up to twelve months or even more
in some cases just for the
legislature to essentially
rubber stamps something thank
you green comments mister
chairman let's go to a
representative of dixon
thank you mr chair
thank you
for the list of um
recommendations and options I
want to
go to number two which is um
regarding a list of underfunded
existing capital outlay projects
per decession one of the things
that number one I think that
would be very helpful but number
two
i'm really interested in
figuring out if there is a way
that we can be more effective
during the session to make sure
that we are actually fully
funding things during session
and I know that are um some of
the regional delegations have
done this for years or where
they get together and
make sure that they're fully
funding things thing in bernalyo
county we have really struggled
with that because it is a large
county
and so we've started to use
things like excel spreadsheets
where we can tally things that.
But that would be really helpful
to figure out a way
you know if it's software or you
have spreadsheets that we use
staff support or if it's having
an earlier you know like a day
ahead deadline and then allowing
for
you know twenty four hours of
assessments to see what things
are short a little bit what
things are over
I would be really interested in
just having that be a more
efficient process as well so as
part of number two thank you
thank you representative it's
got to send a wood
on that same line
as you know i'm going to say
this in the room those i'm gonna
say it
we should have that underfunded
list
and that should be a requirement
for those unrefunded projects to
be caught up with whatever
amount of capped out lay your
issue that you're.
I know that nobody is going to
go for that but that should be a
requirement to catch your
projects up and not leave me
laid out out there.
Or.
The other option is to take so
much money after talk and care
choose projects up now there's
gone better a lot of people grab
they so well my bank to
sufficient enough to get their
project done
you know I don't need extra fund
and I we were sufficient we we
didn't bill quite as much and
was able to do it
but somehow we need to get this
extended money caught up
so those two suggestions that I
have one of the other and
neither one i'm going fast from
neither one i'm going to be
looked at nicely
Thank you mister senator let's
go anybody else questions
comments
if not in our detector the
points that have been made
earlier is that this is just
again and attempt to become much
more efficient right it's an
inherited process that we have
it's and the quarter guess and
it shows by the fact that we
have over seven billion dollars
in ununspent for capital ali
dollars out there and and we
shouldn't have that so if this
means that we're gonna have to
provide a little bit more fire
to the feet of those that help
to create this process or devote
to deliver on this process then
we will be willing to do that
and and that includes else yes
that include the administration
where georgia the administration
to make sure that near the games
that you know that they stop
because there was a point this
pass legislative session where
I was a point where I wanted to
just move forward without her
list because we had become to
that we had come to that point
in the session where we were
going to run out of time and if
we don't have her list but we
have our lists in and she she
she delays it by or the governor
delays it by by by two weeks
that's not all insulting but
it's almost it it's a
threatening gesture towards the
whole process that those
communities wouldn't get their
funding as as as promised or as
discussed so at this point folks
if we can look at point number
four priorities prioritization
embedding of directing staff to
draft legislation for potential
committee endorsement if if you
all are okay with that
and obviously they would come
back and we were review those at
a at a upcoming meeting is there
emotion to support that type of
initiative
motion by a senator woods second
by senation though in a question
comments there's no opposition
staff you have redirection
that's move on to the final part
of your presentation
alright think you mister chair
if you are flip pure one page or
over
we are going to talk about
reathorizations and reversions.
Um so again this is providing us
worth direction to draft
legislation for potential
committee endorsement so you are
would have an opportunity to
review that bill and further
discussion of it once we get a
drafted
and this would be you to include
the following limits to
reathorizations as well as
directives for a future
reversions from general funds
capital appropriations so the
proposed limits on
reauthorizations are a limit of
only one time extension per
appropriation but the extension
would remain at two years
standard
second to allow reauthorizations
for a technical changes and to
correct drafting errors but not
to change the purpose of an
appropriation
third establishing and
incumbents or expenditure
threshold to be eligible for
reathorization so the idea there
that is that there is some
evidence provided that there is
activity on the project that
necessitates the time extension
as opposed to no activity and
then extending the time
for a project that may not be
viable or just not have any
energy
and finally on reversions
directing future reversions from
general funds capital
appropriations to the capital
development and reserve fund the
contribute to future capital
capacity generally by the
legislature but not stay with
individual members or
communities
thank you california first
unless we have a reserve down
here and you ask on interested
based on the prior page
recommendations the first time
appropriation will move to five
years instead of two and then an
an additional two year old so
project could take up to seven
years
mr chair representative tower
not.
Quite so the the original
appropriation would still be
four years standard if it's a
construction project two years
for an equipment and all this is
doing is saying that you can
have one time extension per
appropriation and currently the
standard as a two year extension
so that would remain but they
you can't extend time and then I
do it again and do it again so
it's it's taken care of the
problem like you know recently
we had a capital appropriation
in the reoth bill dating back to
two thousand and twelve so i'm
taking those old projects off
the books and incentivising
communities that you really do
need to be more ready to spend
these funds before you ask for
them thank you thank you mister
and just is has there ever been
an instance where are we
limiting ourselves to a federal
match I mean I think this is
generous but when we say
two remain to the two years
extra have there been
times when the city or minister
politic got there act together
and was waiting on a federal
match that we do we need an
exception for that
mr chair representative I don't
think that's common um I really
only know it's like one issue
that has been very long standing
related to that
and it's the
sippi a tribal college that
depends on federal funds that
has a lot of issues with the
federal government getting them
their money but for local
governments you know as far as
they're taking ten years for
that reason
I have not heard of that as
being a common challenge thank
you mister chair and then just
my final thought on d the
reversions to go into a capital
outlay development and reserve
fun again a lot of us and rural
communities struggle to get
fully funded projects and it's
not this committee but
definitely and like that school
improvement fund.
When all that kay twelve money
was there and it got reverted
your member charles and kelly
and education back then when the
money was reverted so many was
allocated safe for sear county
might work my home county and
then they didn't choose k plus
and so then the money went back
into the general and ended up at
los alamos nothing against less
alamos but it was targeted for a
low income at risk targeting oh
okay targeting title programs in
the lowest performing children
and when it reverted it didn't
go back to see our county in
another form of tutoring your
intervention or whatever it some
of those dollars ended up in los
angeles which wasn't even title
one wasn't even low income and
highest performing school so we
just how do we make sure that if
the small rule community their
dollars are reverted to the
general fund that that they
don't end up
in in bernio.
Noted
insurance
mr chair representative
yeah I you know I want to see
now when reversions happen it's
the same dynamic so we're not
changing anything there you know
restricting reauthorizations you
know does give you a shorter
runway for spending the money
although it's still is
ultimately we're talking about
six years
if a community is serious about
a project and is again able to
have more opportunity to have
support in developing it before
they get those appropriations
you know we should be able to
find a way to spend them in six
years and to our previous
discussion you know we are doing
this all in tandem worth trying
to like look at the system as a
whole and improve both that back
in front end work and support so
you know we are trying to make
it more possible that they can
spend it on these time premiums
very good anything else which is
that
there's no
good well mister chairman we
wrote here and I just i'm just
gonna continue to speak for
rural communities it like every
other year I can do a park
somewhere and there are
districts that are sick square
miles with sixteen parks built
in short ten years just want to
be on the record and we all know
this thank you thanks thank you
representative let's go to a
center on your
I thought she was talking about
districting there for a minute
the population of the
albuquerque out draws the
population rolled the mexico and
that's just the nature of the
beast
kelly i'm gonna go to number one
in in them and it talk about
center rod riggers who had
tripped us the whole time and
never nobody ever had it idea of
what she was doing right should
appropriate money to a project
and they said it and said okay
well I need fifty five thousand
okay why can't give you.
I can give you fifty five
thousand rate and the blement
give you a hundred and then
should come back and just reath
it to another project for the
balance for something else rate
i'll be known to everyone she
was the smartest one in the
capital on capital outlay and we
authorizations and she never let
that out out there that can of
the bag until she was leaving
so not what she smiled she was
under the corner silence and had
its full the whole time in was
an appropriating projects and
and then re authorizing them but
if we look across the paper
today that we got you know we
got some twenty nine twenty
nineteen projects and and the
arbor trawled limit on the
federal penalty is based upon
trolls are going to get us the
amount and the time that we hit
the sixdashyear limit we did
this once where we had a six
year limit and we had to pay a
federal penalty of six percent
because of project wasn't
completed and so we
authorizations is a way to
change the the look of it but a
six year project I mean you
could pick one here and maybe
want to pick when all the
cricket fire and rescue vehicle
right we know that if you have
to order a fire truck it's too
to three years before you get a
fire chuck so there should be
some exclusions to reason on an
equipment because that's one of
the ones it sticks out to me
because it happened to me and
grants the other thing as you
look at some of these and i'm
not picking up anybody
but you look at the some of
these that haven't used anything
i'll use albuquerque for sale
deal nor to expension twenty
twenty one they they use three
percent there's not a number on
here so I can tell you they use
three percent of the project to
try to buying the project and
keep the project from being
reverted back that doesn't work
when you have a two million
dollars project and you.
You took go
about twenty thousand dollars
out of the project
to say that you're expending the
project so you have to go back
and look at the caps in so a
number one
I think the one time extension
per appropriation should maybe
the start at one year
and see because if we give them
two years then we're at a five
year time period rate.
Six so then we're running the
wall against the arbitrage of
are we going to pay a federal
penalty organ cloud
and sold the six year time frame
is going to matter of what we're
out because it works at seven
billion and one one point one
billion in the red
so that's going to to reduce
that so we don't hit the federal
artichokes will be important to
me a number one
and then on our i'm sorry a
but on b on the real untechnical
changes okay what is a technical
change we're going to have to
tine of that language cause we
as politicians can sit or that
was just technical
that was an end and or a but
or not was standing and so what
is a technical change in order
to get that
in but then I go to the second
part of that sense and correct
drafting theirs but if we're
gonna correct a drafting air we
should probably reset the time
limit because it was on us or
the legislator or whoever
appropriated if it was a draft
in there I mean this happened
with
with junior money in senator
baca or there is an air and
drafting for junior and it set
him back a whole year and we had
to come back in and fix it
correctly and give him the time
to do that so so when we have a
technical air the clock I think
should start over so they're
actually given a fair shot in it
through your time period
if it's upon us the drafter
if there's a drafting right I
think that clock should restart
in that in then the incumbent's
threshold I just discussed that
I mean what what is a viable
project for incumbent.
It's not twenty thousand dollars
of a two million dollars project
I mean that that's something I
think the committee has has to
revert and then
just going to we don't know
where at in this economy and an
on d we don't know where at
what's going to hit his next
rate and to see are everything's
going to go back to the couple
development reversion fund could
hand covers if we get in a bind
in the future saying we need to
direct take that money and we
got to put it towards a snap
program or we got it we got to
draw out of the bucket those
listed they would abbey's
buckets he had more buckets than
the store has in we empty all
the buckets one time so
same we want it to go back to
one bucket to read do something
may hand covers something
happens to us in the future when
we need to not draw down
everything but draw down a
little bit out of each pocket to
to make a big bucket for so ID
I am not unsupported but I think
there's some cautionary talks
about how we need to draft that
thank you senator let's move on
to representative dixon
thinking mister chair
I just wanna acknowledge a very
much appreciate the
concerns about making sure that
rural districts
don't lose out unless I think
that's a really important
consideration I actually think
that they'll benefit and what
i'd really like to see is you
know and we're looking at this
list of reauthorizations could
we do some analysis to see
cause I actually think burner
leo county and albuquerque
probably have the most money
that a with river and so it
would be really nice if we could
get a little bit further into
the details.
Of what we think
you know who stands to lose what
um in addition to you know some
of the other questions that have
been asked thank you
very good thank you any other
questions to comment from the
committee
chemismal and i'd think it was
chair
this all looks good to me I
think the the legislation that
will be brought forth is gonna
have to address many of the
details in question that folks
are raising and obviously that
won't that legislation won't be
committee endorsed until the
committee approves of the areas
details and that and that's
gonna speak really to all of
these different pieces if there
is a need to sort of make sure
that there is a
I mean the legislation also
could create for another a
flow through or an emergency
release around the capital
development sort of although I
would caution us the course this
is one time capital money and so
you utilising that one time
capital money for recurring
budget holes in this case it may
be created by the federal
government whoever else
you know we're not we're moving
away from that but just to make
the point that think this is a
great package I would love to
see us endorse it and it to
point out that we'll be working
very close to a staff on the
legislative details that well
address or not the concerns that
committee members have and we
can work through that together
thank you mister chairman before
I kick it back to kelly the
couple comments ambitious yes
something that that needs to be
done absolutely so I think this
is a a great for a step that we
are all taking as a committee to
try to get modernized this
process that we've inherited
it's not to try to put harm into
any community or tick away one
is that they rely on it simply a
matter of trying to.
Be responsible stewart of this
the resource that we have it or
at our fingertips today making
sure that we can make sure that
those that need this type of
resource for financial
injections into the communities
will have that and can be able
to expend it efficiently and
experience so at this point I
want to just follow up then on
the reauthorization the
reversing part of this
discussion and
look around the table and and
and as folks are the ok with
directing staff to draft this
piece of legislation knowing
that it will come back again
before and anything is is
a supported by anyone in the
legislature can I get a motion
to that effect
on moves our second second all
right second buy a lot of folks
any other questions no longer no
opposition so kelly you have
your your marching words at this
point hopefully this is helpful
to your charge in your in your
department to both you and
antonio and to also wesley as a
partner in the administration to
making sure that we can be
supportive in in the work that
you do because we don't want to
obviously through politics in
and and knowing that we only
meet once a month have to slow
you down to prepare for the
twenty twenty sixth legislative
session so that being said kelly
come thank you mr chair
committee just a couple of quick
things to wrap up and kind of
responding to the
last round of comments so yes
many of the issues you all
brought up are details we still
need to meet work out in
drafting a bill
you know we can work with uh the
board of finance and their bond
council around the time
extension issue and sort of got
an opinion
how we can best reduce the
states risk in terms of insuring
where in compliance with irs
laws when we're talking about
banded projects certainly and we
need to define the ta.
Changes issue more precisely
and
to representative dixon's point
and senator many chairman's ball
you know we can do a additional
analysis on the issues you
brought up as well as trying to
estimate you know the kind of
like what are we talking about
and potential reversions in
terms of dollars that can inform
where you all make want to send
this even if we're talking about
keeping it within the capital
outlay universe you know it can
go to the reserve it can go to
the program accounts the program
account could relieve other
pressures on general fund
potentially so we can discuss
all that more and appreciate
your work today and your
leadership on these issues
thanks guys thanks everybody
this will adjourn at this point.
