today. Thank you
Representative Lata
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
good morning, everyone. My name
is Ray Lara. I represent House
District 34
in Southern Donana County. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. Committee and everybody
present here, thank you for
having us here in Gallop. Jaita
Gurola, I represent District 16
and I I was say Albuquerque.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning everyone. I am Natalie
Figueroa, Senator in District 18
in the northeast heights of
Albuquerque.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm Joy
Garrett. I represent, uh, parts
of West Side, Albuquerque, where
the volcanoes are. That's my
district and I just recently
learned that, um, in World War
II, Gallup protected its
Japanese Americans from going to
the uh
internment camps, and I just was
really moved by that as I stood
at the rock in the middle of the
dog park in Santa Fe
commemorating their internment
camp. Anyway, thank you to all
the people of Gallup who stood
for democracy.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
John Block, House District 51,
State Representative in Alamo
Gordo in beautiful Otero County,
and I've been blessed this year,
Mr. Chairman. I have come to
gallop 4 times for committee
hearings, and it's great to be
here a 4th time. So good to see
you all. You're looking great.
Can't wait to hear from you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
Senator Ant Thornton from, uh,
District 19, which is the East
Mountains of Albuquerque
includes Te Harris, Cedar Crest,
and all the way out to Klein's
Corners, uh, and also the east
side of Albuquerque. I'm glad,
I'm glad to be here. This is my
first time to gallop in this
particular meeting. So I'm
looking forward, uh, not my
first time to the Gallup, if
ever, it's my first time to this
meeting in Gallup. Anyway, thank
you for being here and I'm
looking forward to hearing from
you all today. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
State Senator Mimi Stewart from
the International District and
East Gateway area of Albuquerque
District 17.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My
name's Andres Romero. I'm the
representative from House
District 10, which is the far
South Valley in Bern Leo County
and parts of southeast
Albuquerque. Happy to be here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, and I'm Bill Soz,
state senator from Las Cruces. I
think you've traveled a little
bit further coming from
Almogordo. It's a very similar.
It's about a 5-hour drive
getting up here. So I stayed in
Grant's last night and uh but
glad to be up here. It's lovely,
the beautiful, uh, red buttes
with the sun shining on them
this morning and, you know, it
just looked absolutely gorgeous.
Glad to be up here. Um, do you
want to remind people, uh, both
panelists in here when you're
not speaking even in between if
you're carrying on conversation
turn the mic on and off,
otherwise, our tech people in
the back will stand up and kind
of start motioning at you and,
and tell you so that we don't
get the or pick up a lot of the
feedback and stuff as we get
that, uh, John if you introduce
your staff, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My
reputation precedes me and
Gallop didn't give me a
microphone because they knew I
was gonna talk too much if they
did, uh, good morning, uh,
members John Senna, your staff
director here for LESC, uh,
behind me is the illustrious
LESE staff, Deputy Director
Jessica Hathaway, our office
administrator, Alonzo Baca.
Connor Hicks, uh, our policy
analyst.
Mark Montoya, Natasha Davalos,
Evan Chavez, Tim Bado, and in
the back Arlo Mechaca, uh, our
research assistant and committee
services. um, thanks for, we're
ready to go.
Thank you. And Senator Pinto,
just in time as you sit down
please introduce yourself
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, members. Thank you for
joining us in the LSC. Some of
these mics on.
I'm Senator Shannon Pinto. I
represent District 3, McKinley
and San Juan County. Most of it
is Navajo Nation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you.
And again, lovely welcome, what
an incredible spread of uh food
this morning.
I don't think we've ever had
avocado toast with so many
different types of, of things,
so thank, thank you very much.
It was, it was lovely, uh, but
with that, welcome, uh, from the
superintendent, uh,
superintendent Hyatt, please go
ahead.
Mr. Chairman, uh, we asked our
school board secretary to do the
welcome today.
Michael Schaf
I'm Michael Schaft, Gallant
McKinney County Schools
secretary on the Board of
Education. I wanna welcome you
all to Gallup and McKinley
County and to our school, we,
we're happy to have you here and
we hope you have a very
productive and, and good
meeting. So welcome to all of
you. We hope to see you more
often too, so thank you.
Thank you. So I think that gets
us through the community
welcome. So now to the
superintendent panel
Oh the oh it's part of the
committee give me welcome. OK,
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the
opportunity uh to have my team
here in District, be able to
give, have some time to present
to your committee. We appreciate
the LESC, members of the
committee, uh, for taking the
time to come out to this part of
the state, uh, it's a unique,
beautiful, as you mentioned this
morning, part of the state, um,
and especially this time of year
when there's some clouds in the
sky and some rain, makes it even
more beautiful.
Uh, we, we appreciate the work
that you have been doing for
many years, of course, but as of
late we're especially excited
about the work and attention
that you've given to the SCG and
other parts of education, um,
that, as you know, that formula
hasn't been, has been tinkered
with for decades, uh, and so the
work that you've done lately is,
we, we appreciate that work and
what you have done to help
students across New Mexico, um,
in the most fair way possible,
so we appreciate that um amongst
all the other things that you've
been working on,
uh, we've seen an uptick from my
perspective over the last 10
years, um, in the sense of
urgency and attention to some,
some matters that haven't been
paid attention to as much in the
past, and so we appreciate your
work.
Uh, with me today as I, as you
heard from Mr. Michael Schaaf as
the board secretary. Uh, we also
have Mr. Kevin Mitchell, who's
also a
board member who was
board member who is
hiding here to my left. Um, I
also want to introduce Doctor
Ophelia Sanchez, and she's the
director of our cultural
education program. She's sitting
by Mr. Schaff and then here on
the panel or on the, in the
group today, they'll be
presenting uh we have Deputy
Superintendent Giovanna Hanks,
uh, to my right, far right, uh,
director Kindy Keeler, and she's
the director of our college
career and civic readiness and
then to my left is uh Director
of Instruction, Kristen
Bischoff, who oversees
instruction
for the district
We have a presentation for you.
We also have a, a packet of
information in a in a binder or
a folder for you. You can look
through some of the ways in
which we communicate with the,
our community also we put in
there our strategic plan for you
to review, um, and also some
information that kind of uh
piggyback some of the topics
that we'll talk about today.
I've also provided you with the
PowerPoint presentation so you
can follow along there or also
be on the screen.
Um, and we just wanted to touch
on a few things. There's lots of
things that we're doing as a
school district and I've been
doing for several years. Uh, we
wanted to focus on a few areas,
um, talk a little bit about some
of our demographics, kind of
give you a foundation of where
we are here in New Mexico, um,
and some of the challenges and
opportunities that we have.
Uh, also some data and how we
hold ourselves accountable, um,
we'll also talk a lot about
instruction, uh, which we
believe is the fundamental way
in which you change education in
the classroom, um, we're not
uh, uh, we don't, we're trying
not to be dependent on silver
bullet solutions or specific
software programs or other types
of programs. All those are great
resources. We really try to
focus, focus on the instruction
to make sure that we have a
rigorous, uh, curriculum and
environment for our students to
engage in in the classroom.
Next, we'll talk about college
career and civic readiness and
what we're doing with respect to
career pathways and preparing
students for our future, their
future.
uh, and who will take care of us
in the future and also um we'll
talk about finance, which is
always, obviously an important
thing for you to consider as you
get ready for the next
legislative session and the
opportunities that are there.
um
first of all, I wanted to
just kind of, well, there we
are. You can see us twice.
Talk a little about
demographics, as I mentioned,
we're all of New Mexico is
unique in its own way and
different parts of the state,
um, but we also have our own um
data that that shows where you
are and, and some of the
opportunities and challenges
that we have in our county, um
here are some of the ELL
populations, um, some special
education and other data from
our school district, uh, some of
the, the poverty numbers and as
you can see, uh, the
differences, uh, between New
Mexico and McKinley County,
obviously
uh, we have a high level of
English language learners, um,
which is uh an area that we
focus on in trying to improve it
and the way that we provide
instruction.
and the poverty is significant
in our county. That's one of the
most impoverished counties, not
only New Mexico but in the
country I think last time I
checked we're 50th of all the
county as the as far as poverty
level, the lowest echelon of
that, that data.
Um
we also have, uh, a kind of a
younger age population in, in
our county compared to the rest
of the state. It's a um
and it's probably probably for
various reasons.
uh, but also as far as education
levels, and we'll talk a little
bit about the work we're doing
to try to improve that with
respect to uh furthering
student's education.
after high school
Um
and the reliance on the federal
government and the state
government in order to uh for
economics and for keeping money
in people's pockets in our area
and for the job opportunities.
We're the largest provider for
employment in the area north to
Grand Junction south into Mexico
and Albuquerque to the east and
to the west, uh, Flagstaff. So
we're, we're a large employer in
the area.
There's a breakdown of our um
ethnic population in our area.
Oops, I'm sorry, no, sorry,
that's, that's graph
demographics is a graph, um
that's a little bit about our
special education numbers
uh, and
events, and I'm not switching
All right, there we go
Sorry about that
We have 32 schools, uh, almost
5000 square miles spread across
that area, which is really
unique, um, specifically New
Mexico but also the country
we're the most I think the
number 4, 4th or 5th most sparse
school districts in the country.
Um, and seven distinct
communities in our, in our, our
school district and I don't
think that even speaks to how
sparse it is, because 80% is
tribal land
um
the Dane people live across
those areas. If you go to Pablo
Pintado, which is the same
distance from here as it is from
here to Albuquerque. Uh, you can
understand the vastness of our
school district and students
there live an hour away from,
it's our plus bus drive from
their home just to that school,
and so you kind of get a sense
of how vast, uh, our area is and
our school district is, and also
the challenges in that. Um,
there's a lot of challenges in
providing services,
transportation, obviously being
one of them.
The logistics of providing
different opportunities and that
you might find more easy in a
city center versus in a rural
area such as ours, um, but also
that provides a lot of
opportunity for 7 different
communities to, to serve, um,
and then also an opportunity for
us to provide a rigorous and
equitable education to students
from a city center like Gallop,
um, and then trying to provide
the same opportunities, uh, uh,
in the rural parts of our
county.
There we go
What we do is a school district
is based on our strategic plan,
um, and you can see that we have
this is our driving force for
our school district. Our school
board has been very, uh, direct
and their expectations of us as
administration, as a school
district, and how we deliver
instruction to our students, um,
and those things that we should
keep our focus on and how we're
gonna collect the data.
Um, and so we, we are very
purposeful in the work that we
do and, and build the things
that we build and do the things
that we do based off of our
strategic plan that gives us our
focus.
consists of four main goals and
we'll be talking about, um,
several of these things during
our presentation today.
We turn time over to Miss Hanks
to talk about the data portion
of our school district. There's
lots of data that we could
present. We just focus on a few
different areas, uh, but we
believe in holding ourselves
accountable, and so we are very
focused on collecting the, the
data that helps us uh drive
instruction and drive those
things that we need for our
students. Ms. Hanks.
I somehow turned it off. Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, thank you so much for
this opportunity. What you see
on this screen is probably a
graphic that you've seen before.
This was presented in the LESC
in December of 2024 and a policy
brief and I found it very
interesting that the struggles
that we're seeing statewide were
also struggles that we were
seeing as well. And that is
understanding exactly what data
is available, when is it
available, how are we able to
get that data, ensure that it is
accurate, and then how are we
able to make sure that it's
actionable. That's something
that we discuss every single
day and any member of this staff
will tell you often I ask, what
is working and how do we know?
Again and again and again, what
is working and how do we know?
That's very important to me.
um on the next 3 slides, I have
some very traditional summative
data. It is disaggregated. We do
believe in drilling down into
very granular data on multiple
things. This is presented in
three ways. One, the state, 2,
the district in person and the
district online program. You
will notice that the online
students have continued to hover
at or above the state, um, our
online program we saw
significant decline. There has
been much news about this, but
we want to be transparent about
that, that we do track this data
and we are looking at it very
seriously. Our goal is to ensure
that our students are growing
every single year. One of the
things about summitative data as
we go through these next 3
slides that I'd like everybody
to think through is the
limitation and the benefits of
them. Um, the benefits, of
course, is that kind of you can
see growth over time. You can
see that students are all taking
the same types of exams, um,
those types of benefits. The
detraction from this is it's
very limit
ed in what it actually assesses.
Um, it cannot include things
like students who are very well
on track but are just very
anxious when taking the
standardized tests, and we do
see that in various populations
and so testing is not just what
you know, but kind of those
strategies and skills and actual
test taking and the rigor it
takes to make sure that they're
getting through those in their
completeness.
So this was our graduation rate
data and we are gonna drill down
into some additional data
trackers to kind of go through
how we are very specifically
tracking it outside of this
annual kind of pitiful type, um.
data release
This is science and again you
can see that the state is
leading the district in person
has continued to increase, and
we've seen some uh moderate
concerns to severe concerns with
our online population. This of
course is the ASR for science.
We have similar data for ELL,
uh, ELA, especially for the
NEMESA and the SAT again, the
state leading the district
continuing to grow in person and
then our struggles with our
online population.
and then our math data similarly
we know as has been multiply
discussed, um, we are struggling
with math. It is an area of
concern for the state. It is an
area of concern for the district
and something that we are paying
specific attention to.
In order to help us make
decisions on a more timely
basis. The district has actually
built some internal data
trackers.
and so the first one I'd like to
talk about is the student
performance tracker and what
you're seeing on the screen for
protection of all of our staff
and students is a very district
level view of the data tracker.
Essentially what the data
tracker does is at the user
level, so at the school site
teacher level, it gives them
specific student data at the
principal level, it gives them
all teacher data at the DI
level, it gives each one of the
school sites, the grade bands,
and then at the administrative
level it gives us
an overview of all the schools
so we can go from high level
like what you see on the screen.
Down drill and drill down into
the individual level. What we've
built actually takes the cut
scores from each one of the
assessments that's on the screen
and actually gives us kind of a
dark green, light green, yellow,
red indicator with the dark
green being advanced or perf um
proficient and then we've got
the light green where we're,
where we're
we are proficient but we're not
advanced. We've got yellow where
we're not yet proficient, um,
but we're getting there and then
red where we're really seeing
students struggle by having this
indicator, it really allows us
to look at the data that we have
and have a very high level
visual at every level of the
organization to see how our
students are doing throughout
the year to be sure that we're
using data to leverage what is
being taught in the classrooms.
Our course completion tracker
and again this is the very
high-level district data. This
actually helps us with ensuring
that our students are on track
to graduate. So the high-level
data that you see here, of
course, follows our typical kind
of color scheme where we have
students who are currently on
track down to students that we
have significant concerns about
and that the school site level
this drills down even further.
So for all of these students who
are credit deficient, we have
things like credits in progress,
Are they scheduled in our
after-school credit recovery
program? Are they in a summer
school credit recovery program?
Have we worked something into
their schedule to help them
catch up.
Um, when is their credit
recovery dates expected to be
completed? When have we met with
families? When have we talked to
parents and guardians to be sure
they understand the concerns
that their student is facing.
um, when they are going to after
our academy when they are going
to credit recovery sessions.
Have we referred them for early
warning system supports and
notes to keep teachers, guidance
counselors, and administration
at the school site connected to
be sure that we are supporting
every single student.
What we never want to happen is
to have a student fall through
the cracks because we know that
does occasionally happen. By
having this tracker at both a
global and a granular level that
allows us to ensure that every
single student who needs support
is getting support.
The last one I want to talk to
is the family engagement
tracking. This also is that we
guarantee that we see our
families no less than once a
quarter, so we do provide
monetary support for each one of
the school sites to build these
interesting, engaging activities
at their school sites and we
encourage them to talk through
things like core subjects,
specials, um, school culture,
things that are going on, we
provide the funding so that they
can provide families with
manipulatives or other things
that they can take home
and work on skills with their
children to really connect them
to the education. It also allows
families to ask questions and
get a deeper understanding of
what their students are
learning. This is districtwide
in this year, so this is K-12
and so for our secondary
schools, those that are in
middle and high school, the 3rd
quarter they must go over next
step plans with families so that
they understand the
opportunities that are available
for their students and where
their students currently are in
progress.
With that, I'm going to turn it
over to Ms. Bischoff to kind of
go through some of the
curriculum instruction and
assessment type items.
that we've embedded to help
facilitate our instructors.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee, it is
such a pleasure to be here
presenting to you this morning.
OK.
I'd like to start uh just by
demonstrating as our GMCS vision
for our student experience. It's
quite lengthy, uh, but it, it's
very powerful. So I, I just
wanna give us a moment just to
briefly read
our vision for the student
experience.
The vision for this student
experience, it's not only
aspirational. It's also
actionable.
GMCS defines what student
success actually looks like and
we find this in our graduate
profile skills. Creative and
critical thinker, responsible
individual, effective
collaborator and lifelong
learner.
Kindy will dive deeper into this
during her presentation. I would
just like to highlight the
intentional efforts that our
curriculum and instruction
departments, uh, put forth and
ensuring all of our students
are, uh, provided high-quality
learning experiences. So, so
that all of our students have an
opportunity to learn and build
uh the graduate profile skills
in all of our schools.
We want all of our students to
leave our schools with a really
good grasp on these graduate
profile skills.
Our district is poured an
immense amount of time and
resources into deepening the
infrastructure.
so that our curriculum and
assessment is consistent and
sustainable in all of our
classrooms, all of our schools,
so that all students, no matter
what school they attend have
access to quality education.
Beginning with the New Mexico
standards. GMCS has developed
pacing guides where standards
are taught and tested in a
series of 3-week cycles, and
I'll get more into these as I,
as I go on.
Our teachers have access and
utilize the New Mexico
Instructional scope to dive
deeper into standards.
We've built lessons that are
aligned to the standards of our
pacing guides, as well as the
gradual release of
responsibility model, which is
the model of instruction GMCS
has adopted district-wide
In addition to our state
assessments, we've adopted 3
week short cycle weekly
formative assessments that are
also aligned to the standards in
our pacing guides.
All elementary, mid and high
schools also also administer
weekly checks for understanding.
Those will come in the form of
uh weekly formatives or exit
tickets.
We've developed pacing guides
K-12 districtwide, and you'll
see an example of the 5th grade
ELA pacing guy.
These pacing guides encompass
all core subjects, visual arts,
music, physical education,
heritage language and culture,
and career technical education.
From the photo you can see the
pacing guides are developed in a
series of units that delineates
the standards to be taught in
each unit.
Each standard is linked to a
GMCS deconstructed standards
document.
and this is what one of our
in-house deconstructive
standards document looks like.
This is an example of a 5th
grade ELA.
The document unpacks the
standard by identifying
objectives, content, and
language objectives. They align
with the standards, possible
misconceptions, questions stems,
external resources. The document
is intended to be used by our
teachers as they plan and
prepare their lessons.
Lesson resource documents,
they're intended for teachers to
access and use while they're
planning and preparing their
instruction. They've been
developed based on the New
Mexico instructional scope, and
they align to the district's
adopted model of instruction,
gradual release of
responsibility.
They include content and
language objectives, engagement
strategies, aligned
instructional activities.
multiple resources for content,
anchor charts, and checks for
understanding throughout.
We have built these lesson
resources similar to what you're
seeing K through 8th for all ELA
and math.
You're seen at 5th grade.
lesson resource, and I really
want to highlight, uh, the, the
very bottom of the first page,
daily numeracy. This is very
intentional, uh, and something
we really focus on in terms of
math instruction in our
classrooms.
We offer a problem of the day
computational fluency and math
talks, which is mental math. So
these resources are available
for our teachers to utilize
daily in their classrooms.
The next lesson resource your,
you're viewing is one for high
school pathway integration.
Our latest work has focused on
developing high school
integrated lesson resources for
ELA math and social studies for
all 5 of our schools of that
would be engineering, business,
health, media, and technology.
This lesson resource is a 10th
grade lesson plan for RI 10.1,
citing evidence to support
analysis.
As the teacher goes through
teaching the standard, you'll
notice at the bottom of the
document that we included
industry pathway integrations.
We offer industry aligned texts
and resources to teach the
standard while at the same time
exposing students to topics and
themes related to their school
life.
We also on the other side of the
document, we provide curriculum
variations, where activities are
built for students to practice
the standard using an industry
connection.
You will see tomorrow at our our
site visit at Mayaira High
School. You will see integration
in action, and the lesson, this
exact lesson plan is also in
your folder.
We have a series of
instructional priorities that
we've identified related to goal
number one in our elevate 2025,
uh strategic plan, increasing
student success.
One of our main priorities is to
ensure teachers and ad
administrators across the
district have a common
understanding of our
instructional framework.
Layer one instruction, what the
gradual release of
responsibility model is and what
does that look like in
classrooms? What is a layer one
intervention. What is a layer to
intervention.
The gradual release of
responsibility model, as I
mentioned, is, is our dis our
district adopted approach to
instruction in all K-12
classrooms.
This model
begins with a focus on
deliberate direct instruction
and gradually releases the
responsibility of learning to
our students.
The model was initially adopted
to assist in the implementation
of better and more effective
math instruction, uh, though it
does speak currently across all
subjects, all of our teachers
engage in this model.
So what you're seeing is a
visual model of the flow of
instruction that we want taking
place in all of our classrooms.
It's also used as part of our
trainings as we uh deliver
professional learning to our
administrators and our teachers.
This is a
this is uh our K-12 uh lesson
plan.
Excuse me
Our lesson plan minimum
requirements.
These requirements align to the
gradual release of
responsibility model.
These requirements specifically
speak to the needs of our ELL
population, where instruction is
presented, especially using a
visual modality, it's highly
encouraged.
Everything you find in our
lesson resources, our pacing
guides are lesson resources, our
deconstructed standards. All of
those things are intended to be
used uh for teachers to develop
their instruction based on these
minimum requirements. Uh, and
especially me the, the visual uh
kinesthetic auditory tactile
needs of our kids.
I'd like to speak about our
state structured literacy
initiative and how well it's
being implemented in Gallup
schools.
Amir Ice Station has an embedded
dyslexia screener, which is new
to us this year, and we are
really, really excited to
utilize, uh, that data is
critical for instructional
planning and really helps our
teachers, uh, to, uh, it alerts
our teachers to students that
may be at risk beginning in
first grade, uh, those, um,
exhibiting signs of dyslexia.
Teachers are able to
differentiate instruction and
and provide additional supports
and interventions.
Of course, we do use IStation,
Amira Ice Station I set the
benchmark assessments and the
weekly tutoring during our
intervention blocks.
We, um, this year our 5th grade
teachers are the last cohort K5,
all of our teachers will be
certified in letters, uh,
letters is a professional
learning program that our
teachers have really put a lot
of time and effort into uh
participating in learning the
science of reading, learning the
reading strategies, uh, and
applying those in the classroom.
Our district has really
supported the letters program
with
the funding we put forth to make
sure our teachers are engaging
this work and the letters
program work happens off
contract. So it does take a lot
of time and resources on behalf
of the teachers and also the
district.
Well, Letters has helped our
teachers understand the science
of reading and how to employ
reading strategies. We've also
adopted a logic of English
curriculum, so teachers can put
their learning into action in a
systematic way.
Logic of English is a
district-wide K through 2nd
grade Phonics and reading
curriculum. We've developed
pacing guides. It comes with a
series of lessons, formative and
benchmark assessments. It's
based on the science of reading
and alliance to the letters
approach that our our teachers
are already familiar with. So
our teachers know how to teach
reading. Now we've given them
the what to teach reading with.
It's rules space and it's uh it
provides
systematic phonics instruction.
If you look at the graph
this is a picture of 3rd grade
Namesa ELA average percent
proficiency.
In 2022, our district had not
yet adopted Logic of English.
Our first year of implementation
was 2023, and you can see the
success we've had, uh, with the
logic of the English program and
the combined uh support of
letters.
I'd really like to recognize the
work of uh Doctor Ophelia
Sanchez and her team for
developing a robust heritage and
language culture curriculum.
Doctor Sanchez has been very
intentional and including the
voices of HLC teachers around
the district and developing the
curriculum and assessments for
her department that are are uh
employed district-wide
This is very unique to GMCS, and
I believe this is unique to the
state of New Mexico. So I'd like
to highlight some of the
wonderful work that our cultural
ed department has accomplished
over the last 4 years.
As you can see, she begun with
uh the Date content standards.
Her first iteration of the
curriculum was in 2021, where
she took those Dane content
standards in the performance
objectives and laid out a pacing
guide for all grade level bands.
The next body of work was
putting together a series of
deconstructed standards that
align to the standards in the
pacing guide again, these are
resources that are available for
teachers to plan and prepare
their instruction.
Most recently, uh, she, she and
her team have created.
a unit formative assessments.
They align directly to our ELA
and math unit formative
assessments, and they're given
uh and implemented during the
same cycles. These assessments
are given 1 to 1, teacher to
student, they focus on uh
student oral response and the
actual assessment and all of the
data is housed in mastery
Connect, which is also where we
house our ELA and unit for uh
ELA and math unit
formative data
We are very intentional when it
comes to planning master
schedules and bow schedules in
our district.
We offer opportunities for SEL,
especially in our elementary
schools, we did use the 7
mindsets curriculum, but we
really wanted to be, have a more
something more in-house and
sustainable, so our curriculum
department is in the process of
developing their own SEL
curriculum. Our students have
opportunities for exposure to
career-based learning through
employability skills, starting
in 6th grade through 12th grade,
and Kindy's going
to dive in a little more to
employability skills, but all of
our students K through 12th
grade. Uh, do, uh,
take lessons and, and, uh,
follow a series of lessons, uh,
that.
kind of circles around different
themes, so that students are
exposed to um career education
and and career uh preparedness
as they're leaving our high
schools.
We have incorporated
intervention blocks not only in
our elementary schools, but we
are very specific about when
interventions are taking place
and all of our secondary
schools.
based on a, a recent review of
data, we have made the decision
to separate reading and writing
blocks,
uh, K through 8th grade, so that
teachers are really able to
focus on RIRL standards uh
during one session and writing
in language standards during a
whole other section during the
day, we feel like separating out
the instruction of these
standards will allow for more
purposeful and intentional
instruction, so that
students, um.
perform better, especially in
the areas of riding and gallop.
We do offer heritage language
and culture K through 8th grade,
our high school students have
the opportunity to take Navajo
One, Navajo 2, Navajo History
and Government. We offer
specials where in elementary,
which is PE, music or art. We've
recently moved our 6th grade
down to our elementary schools,
and they also take electives.
What you're seeing here is just
an example of an elementary
master schedule. I just wanted
to make sure I included a visual
there for you.
In order to hold up our
curriculum and instructional
systems. It's imperative that we
also focus on this state of
lead, uh, leadership capacity of
our administrators.
So here you'll see uh the tennis
that we've developed for the
ideal state of instructional
leadership in Gallup schools.
All of our professional learning
with administrators align.
uh to one of these tenants.
Our focus is on high quality
instructional leadership with
built-in accountability and
monitoring systems.
We've developed district
instructional expectations for
all of our administrators?
and those expectations.
uh.
are listed in each of those
categories.
This is a, a set of expectations
that we train on, uh, we focus
on with our principles
throughout the year.
Here's an example of our
district instructional
expectations related to layer
one, core instruction and
interventions.
This document allows us to
create common language and
expectations, allows us to focus
on administrator growth and
capacity. It defines systems for
how we lead.
As we know, expectations must be
accompanied by accountability
and monitoring systems.
Some of our systems include
directors of instruction that
offer direct support to our
principals.
a robust classroom walkthrough
and feedback system.
Weekly professional learning
communities.
Principal quarterly report outs?
Giovanna mentioned our student
performance trackers, our course
completion trackers,
individualized professional
development plans, and of course
we followed the New Mexico Excel
evaluation and activities.
All but two of those are unique
to Gallop, and I really want to
quickly highlight three of those
systems.
There are 4 directors of
instruction in Gallup-McKinley
County schools. They are experts
by zone. We have two elementary
directors of instruction, one
director of instruction that
supports middle schools and one
that supports high schools.
They provide direct coaching and
support to all of our building
administrators.
they primarily spent most of
their time at school sites,
coaching and supporting our
principals. We utilize a Google,
uh, site visit tracker that
tracks our data and tracks
trends and patterns, strengths
and opportunities across the
district where we need to
support principles. We follow up
and ensure that the district
instructional expectations are
being met. We provide
professional development.
Uh, we monitor student
achievement data at each of our
schools. We collaborate with all
other departments at central
office, and we have general
oversight of the instructional
priorities and programs here in
our district.
We do offer an extensive and
robust classroom observation and
feedback system.
and I'll just let you flip
through those slides.
We have a robust and intentional
professional learning community
approach where we have early
release Thursday and Friday, so
teachers spend 90 minutes each
of those days, instructional
planning and working on data
analysis.
We have extensive PLC cycles in
each of our schools based on
backwards planning.
and I will conclude my
presentation there because I'm,
I went over.
Thank you so much for your time.
Yeah, I.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, I'd love to present
our college and career in civic
readiness.
department
We come back to our graduate
profile because it's why we do
the work we do for our students
and so as you can see, we want
all of our students to be
successful and to fulfill all of
our graduate profile skills by
the time they graduate.
A little bit of background in
knowing this work because we do
things differently here and not
just today but as well as
tomorrow during our site visit,
you're gonna be able to see how
we've really strategically
planned for the, um, I'll bring
us back to our Elevate 2025,
number 2, create career
pathways. And in that phrase,
career pathways has many
meanings, but we're going to
show you how in depth we've gone
into for
our students here in our
district.
um, some, some beginnings of the
work we did in 2020. We had one
staff in our college and career
department and we gathered
stakeholder information. We
reached out to our communities
and found out what is, you know,
what careers, what areas. We
went to our, our county and our
local um department of um GEEDC
and really knowing that, um,
what, what do we need in our
area? We started next with
building our schools
of support um through our
department and we hired in and
really reached out to the
experts, Connected, um, works
with us, the National Center of
College and Career has been our
consultants in this work. We
reached out and visited other
school districts and saw what
made them successful. In 2022,
we watched, we launched, excuse
me, our school of pathways as
they were. Early on we had every
pathway because there's all the
careers and all the area
s and now we came in and decided
we needed broad themed areas and
we decided on 5, which we will
show you. We focused on those
graduate profile skills and
began paid internships.
In 2023, we started Workface
learning, and we really, um
brought into guest speakers,
taking our students out for
industry tours and getting them
out of the classroom into our
community, into what industry
really looks like.
We've built strong partnerships
in our community and area
because we cannot do this work
alone. This has to be together.
And then of course our career
things really go around the
sense of belonging in the
schools.
In 2024, we launched our student
ambassadors. You're gonna meet
our second group next, our 2nd
year at Miamira and so our
student ambassadors are amazing.
We have those at every school.
Our pathway collaboration
committee was developed, um, and
started last year, which means
that is curriculum instruction,
our leadership team. We had um
PR department as well as
technology all coming together
to do this work because again,
we're not just a department,
this is for all students
in our district and this year
we've brought into all of those
integrated lesson plans as you
just saw with our um in our
instruction team, the leadership
is tied to our graduate profile
and stronger K-12 career
alignment.
We're gonna start with a little
bit of school of background and
just to, you know, bring some
Technical education and real
world experience transforming
the high school experience and
getting students the skills they
need to succeed in college,
careers and life. This is a
great opportunity and for me,
I'm glad that I took this
opportunity at my school. You
don't get any opportunities like
this. I think you should just go
for it. Our automotive
technology program is more than
just working on cars. It's about
mastering the technology that
drives the industry and applying
these skills in real world
settings. It build
s want more skills for you and I
feel like if you're a hands-on
learner's Day, it's a good place
for you to buy cars, if you buy
using tools for like giving any
type of in our welding program,
students learn art and science
of joining metals, creating
everything from functional tools
to intricate designs or gaining
the skills needed for high
demand careers. I like this
program because it's really
helping me better myself to
become a better person into
whatever I'm setting my mind to
Our schools up and
CTE programs of study are
designed to connect what
students learn in the classroom
with the demands of the
workforce, giving them a
competitive edge in high school.
Most secondary education, and
their future careers. But here's
just a totally you don't hurt as
long as you have, you know, an
open mind and
an innovation between your work,
it can be.
Our students graduate with the
unique combination of skills and
experience in that compares them
to succeed in cleaning path they
choose from college to careers
and beyond.
I really love this business
program because it really
allowed me to build my
confidence towards
and allow me to have more
friends who are really
interested in business that it
keeps me motivated and it gives
me a sense of reality of how I
can get a perfect job and have
the good through personally, I
really love this program. It's a
way for me to get introduced to
bigger ideas and how to get to
know more about people as well.
At GMCS we're not just preparing
our students for graduation.
We're preparing them for life
Our school's up and CT
E programs of study provide the
pathways to success, helping
students build a future they
always envisioned.
So that is just a highlight of
what you're going to see
tomorrow. I'm gonna continue
into the presentation, and I'm
just gonna be giving a brief
overview. You will see a lot of
this tomorrow on our site visit,
um, but takes some time to
explore the slides and our
lengthy information in your
folder. So that's a little
nighttime reading.
So we do things differently here
is we have linked learning
through schools of, you're gonna
learn more about those as B
Amira has 4 out of the 5
school-ups that you'll see
tomorrow.
Our School of Engineering has a
vertical alignment from 8th
grade, starting when our
exploratory School of
Engineering, all the way to 12th
grade in our capstones, and so
every school of every program of
study aligned to the NME career
cluster guidebook and so this is
how we are linked and connected,
not just in our school of
engineering but down below.
You're gonna see algebra and
ELA. That's our integration. Our
geometry and chemistry, as well
as history and ELA. We meet and
we work and plan together.
Our schools up meet regularly
and by biweekly meetings. We
plan, we work on our graduate
profile, and we provide student
support with attendant's
behavior and grades. That's a
very important part of the work
we do, not only are we imparting
um having the career pathway
work, but providing that support
from our teachers.
When we come together, we have
our lessons integrations we use
Canva as well as Magic School
AI. So if you're interested, we
can share how we're supporting
the AI across all of our
schools, and we contribute to
school accountability and school
success.
We'll learn a little more about
our integration, what it means
to have career connections,
variations, and enhancements.
You will see that in action
tomorrow.
Our linked learning, this is our
way of that student experience.
We have cross-curricular
projects, and we showcase our
learning.
and so we do this at every
school at the end of the year as
well as district-wide showcases.
We talked about our career
exploration. We started an
elementary school through our
STEM PLTW, um, courses,
electives connected to science
as well as Zello. Our PLTW STEM
aligned electives at middle
school, and then of course our
high school career, um, excuse
me, employability skills class
that they have 85 minutes
weekly.
This brings us back to the
graduate profile and what this
means for our students is equity
access and common outcomes
across the board. It doesn't
matter what school you attend at
Gallup McKinley County or what
school of. We provide the
graduate profile and all these
systems at all of our schools.
We have work-based learning,
which includes student
internships. Here's our growth.
We have many employers and
internship partners from our
city to GMCS to our county and
industry organizations in our
community.
We support and pay for career
technical student organizations,
all the way to the national
level. So Skills USA, etc.
We had 34 students that went to
nationals connected to those
CTSOs and two national placers
this year.
How secondary is also a big
initiative
We provide dual credit aligned
to each of those 5 school ofs,
which is a aligned, it's not
random acts of dull credit. We
are aligned and we are connected
to NTU Navajo Technical
University in Crown Point, as
well as UNM Gallup here in
Gallup.
You can see where we had our
alignment from 2022, we had um a
few schools aligned, whereas we
have 4 out of our 5 pathways
last year.
Our last piece is just knowing
the Community Business
Partnerships and the importance
of knowing that we can't do this
work alone, but we are our
businesses in our community are
hiring our interns directly out
of their interns, us and our
district, RMCHR Hospital, our
city of Gallup, they are hiring
our interns directly into the
workforce in our community.
I'm gonna turn this over.
Mr.
Chair
this these next slides will let
you look those over in your, in
your own spare time, but we just
wanna give a just a brief
overview over McKinley Academy
program. Uh, it's an early
college program. There's many
early college programs in the
state of New Mexico. Uh, what
makes us, what one of the things
that makes it unique here in
McKinley County is that we have
a very vast area to transport
students to colleges, uh, in our
community, uh, University of New
Mexico Gallup campus and also
NTU, um, and so the logistics of
that getting students not only
to those, those locations, uh,
to participate, but also we
allow them to participate in
their homeschool activities. Uh,
some charters and other, uh,
schools across the state don't
allow that. We want to make sure
that students that are part of
our early college program have
those opportunities at their
local high school, uh, to make
sure that they can still stay
connected. Um, one of the things
that, uh, I wanted to just point
out that some of the data is the
increase in the numbers of
students that are participating
in our early college program. I
think we're the larges
t per capita, uh, early college
program for a district in the
state of New Mexico, and I would
suspect that it's many states
around us. We have 611 students,
which is approximately 19% of
our high school students are
participating in an early
college program.
Um, and so we're very proud of
that, giving those opportunities
to students, we have met many
families that are first
generation graduates, and
they're getting 2 years knocked
off at least. We have some
students that are getting 2 and
3 associate's degrees before
they graduate. So it's a great
opportunity for any student in
our county to participate no
matter where they live, uh, no
matter their economic status, we
provide all of the resources to
make sure that students have
that opportunity. And there's no
cost to the students or the
parents whatsoever.
Um, with that, uh, I'll let you
look through the, the remaining
part of the, that part of the
presentation, um, and then we'll
go on to the finance section.
So, as was mentioned, there is a
multitude of things that are
going into specifically our
college current and civic
readiness, um.
preparation for our students and
the third C in college current
and civic readiness is my fault,
no matter what superintendent
says, and that's because Fire
EMS, police and military action
is very important to our
community and it's very
important to our students. So we
wanted to be sure that students
have a great opportunity
regardless of their future
intentions. Um, one of the
specific asks was how much does
this program cost? I owe Mr.
Bade a ton of data which I
promise I will be giving over to
him, um
but I did put together this
chart. So in our state
equalization guarantee of the
$59 million that is prorated for
mentorships, education plan,
scientifically based literacy
programs, career technical
programs and community school
framework we got about $2.4
million on the screen you will
see from FY 18 to FY 26, the
cost that we have expended to
kind of build this entire
program. We've leveraged
operational, federal and state
below the line
funding, um, operational does
include funding for McKinley
Academy, dual credit, um, all of
the amazing, um, technical work
that you've seen behind the
scenes in building these robust
lesson plans, um, federal
funding is largely Carl Perkins
except for FY 2223, which we
leveraged our SR3ARP funds um
through the Carl Perkins Avenue
to really get equipment and
supplies into the school sites
and build out our programs, um,
and then the below
the line funding is largely the
innovation zones. NextGen, and a
little bit of dual credit
funding.
So you can see the comparison in
numbers for the, the multitude
of things, the numbers
represented for GMCS there are
just related to college current
civic readiness initiatives.
Middle of the line funding, what
we've noticed and what I have
heard in many of your meetings
is that you want more
information about what is
actually happening in the
classroom and you want to be
sure that we are being
accountable for what is
happening in the classrooms and
so what we've seen is this blend
of much more uh kind of middle
of the line funding we're a
significant amount of
restrictions are being placed on
funding that is in the state
equalization guarantee. The
struggles that we have with that
is that that it really takes
away local control and the
ability to determine where the
greatest focus is
I will also say I understand the
need for accountability. I do.
And part of what's muddling that
in my humble opinion, is that
the uniform chart of accounts
which we utilize often has codes
like 4020, which is at risk and
alternative programs and
encompasses so many things in
one code, it is very hard for
legislators to understand where
we are actually spending our
money, so I hear you. I did that
big deep dive. I will tell you
if
a statewide system was
implemented, we would have a lot
of work to do because we have
done a lot of internal numeracy
tracking to keep programs
separate and then we do the work
behind the scenes to roll that
up into state reporting because
we want to track things
individually. We want to know
exactly which programs are using
which money. The state does not
have that granular of detail and
so I do understand why you were
often confused where we are
spending our money and what we
are spending it on. I will also
say that some of the changes
have like
ly not produce some of the
outcomes anticipated. I know at
risk was discussed in previous
sessions and so I did put up our
FY 25 index versus FY 26 and the
dollars generated, um, so for
GMCS that was a decrease in
at-risk dollars that flowed to
the district and that was
probably based upon a multitude
of factors. I know it's a
question that's been asked. Um,
also the changes in
transportation funding, we will
be paying over a million dollars
out of our SEG to support
transportation this year. This
is the first
year in many years that I've had
to do that.
Um, below the line and PSCOC, so
we did see a considerable amount
of below the line funding. I
just would like everybody to
think through the fact that
below the line funding often
comes with inconsistent
timelines, copious amounts of
reporting, applications, you
often edge out smaller districts
who are less prepared because
they just can't do all of the
burdensome work that is
necessary to get to the money,
um, there's often confusing
timelines, um, things not
getting here. Many of you
supported the safety allocation
that was given to districts. I
will let you know that we have
not received that allocation
yet. In my communications with
the PSCOC and the Capital Outlay
Bureau. They have not yet got
numbers figured out to be able
to actually send out the
appropriation to districts and
why you say you look at me and
you say it's only September,
we're OK. The realities of
getting things in place, getting
contractors hired and putting
those supports in place take
months, and I want to be sure
that kids get the money that
they deserve
in the year that they deserve it
so that next year we can build
upon that, um, and we know that
that's something that we have to
do in GMCS we have quarterly
checks on expenditures, and
every school site is expected to
have their funding encumbered to
95% by December 31st, and we
check on that on a regular
basis. If your program is not
moving forward, we want to know
why and we wanna know why soon.
If you said you were gonna hire
somebody and we can't attract
that talent. The need is still
there and we need to move
forward.
Other funding delays, especially
through the capital outlay
system have seen an escalation
in costs. You guys have dealt
with that, but as we talk about
college and career readiness
standards. We also want to think
about how do we make sure that
our adequacy standards are
looking at 21st century
facility. Um, I will give one
example locally. We have a
school where we actually reach
maximum electricity. I can't
plug one more thing in that
school unless I want to buy a
Transformer.
Um, grants again, um, just, just
things to consider sustainable
systems, things that we can do
to help you understand how we
are spending your money. If we
can get sustainable systems in
place, program, finance
reporting expectations that we
can follow and make sure that
you are getting the information
that you need when you need it.
We are happy to do that. But
right now it is very much
everybody on their own islands,
um, and people not talking to
each other and we would
like to see that change so that
we can do kind of what we've
done here at GMCS. We've broken
down the silos and no matter
what department you're in.
you understand the expectations
of the district, um, just some
opportunities and constraints.
These are things that have all
been discussed, specific
targets, good data review,
understanding what data is
available, understanding how
we're going to use it, um, how
are we gonna keep systems
running when there is turnover
so that they are not stop gaps
and things happening, um,
consistent global communication
often, um, things will go
directly to principals and
superintendent will not get any
information. We find out because
somebody at a school site tells
us
something is happening. Um, and
then just consistent and
flexible funding.
and with that I expect a lot of
wonderful questions.
Thank you. uh, and committee, if
you're interested in asking
questions, let me get you on the
list.
Representative
Garrett
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that comprehensive
explanation. I just have a few
questions. Um, first of all, in
your strategic plan, how do you
form it?
Um, strategic plans, 90-day
plans, they often look lovely.
Uh, but how do you involve all
stakeholders in doing this.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Garrett, uh, we actually have
gone through, this is our 2nd
iteration of our strategic plan.
We started, um, 6 years ago with
our first iteration and the
process that we go through as we
do, uh, community surveys is one
of our ways in which we, we used
to hold meetings and have people
come to the meetings that didn't
work out very well. So we do
extensive surveys throughout the
year to gain input from
families, uh, stakeholders in
the community, and we compile
that data which we get a lot
more participation that way than
we
had in the past. That's one part
of it. Uh, we also, uh, do use
our school board uh to take that
data and then internalize it and
then to come up with what next
steps are. Some of it's informal
information from the school
board and what they're hearing
in the community. We're also
looking at data, um, as you
know, that we, as you saw from
the slide presentations, that's
just part of the data that we
collect, uh, and so we're
looking at that data as far as
informing our strategic plan, we
compile all of that data, um,
and then make sure that we have
metrics in place to gauge our
progress, so it's not just a
goal, it's not just something an
objective that we want to
accomplish, but we put metrics
behind it to make sure we are
knowing how, how successful we
are being or not being.
Thank you. Um, my second, I, I
wanna just salute you for
including writing because
writing is getting literacy
literacy and hey, writing shows
that kids have integrated
comprehension. So thank you for
pointing that out. Uh, my second
question is, um, I understand
you have about 9500 students
enrolled. How many of those are
enrolled in the online program?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Garrett currently have 600, um,
in the past, it was in the
thousands.
So there's the 4000 last year
and approximately and 600
currently.
And Mr. Chair, is that their
full-time online in those 600.
Correct.
Uh, thank you. And then um my
last question is, um, I really
appreciated, uh, Mr. Chair, the
information showing the DA
program.
What
do you have immersion programs
or strands at schools.
How many uh how many can you
just talk about if it's
immersion, if it's, you know,
just one course, cause a lot of
work went into that
um
explanation, and, and I think,
you know, we're at a time when
the administration
uh, isn't so supportive of these
programs, but New Mexico truly
has
improved trying to improve it,
so how many students are
involved and is it immersion or
just this, what does it look
like?
So currently right now we have a
heritage language program, and
it, and uh heritage language
program, it includes Navajo and
also includes a couple Spanish
courses and we include Zuni also
in the Rama district, and we
don't have a full immersion
program, but right now we work
with um the students take 45
minutes every day in their
heritage language, um, in their
uh D lessons and so, and we're
hoping that that's something we
can build into
the future to look at a full
immersion program somewhere in
our district. It's um one of
those um future goals that are,
that are on our list.
Thank you. I have one more
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, for that 45 minutes, uh, uh
a huge problem I've observed is
sometimes they're pullouts and
then you are juggling, pulling
out kids. Her other essential
courses, is it pullout or is it
a situation where the it's
actually during regular
it's class within the regular
day where they're not pulled
out.
So it's, it's in our schedule
where we don't interrupt um in
core instructional time, but as
you saw in the example of our
schedule block for our
elementary, there is a specific
time, um, the students are
pulled out to go into the
classroom, but it doesn't
interrupt any of our
instructional core instructional
day.
or specials or specials, yes.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, and
next I have a Representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you all for the very extensive
uh reporting today and the great
handouts and presentations. I
have a a
3 quick questions. I hope
they're quick. Uh, first of all,
I want to begin with, um,
because of the demographics of
the area, and I looked at um the
demographics that you presented,
and they're they're
concerning in a way, um, in many
ways actually, it could have a
lot of impact
So my first question has to do
with the Aussie um lawsuit and
I'm interested in knowing how
the district is aligning the
budget priorities with the um
Yazi ruling and state funding
formulas.
That's my question number one.
Mr. Chair Representative, it's
uh
that's for us as a plaintiff,
um, we understand the Yay
Martinez lawsuit very well. Um,
and its purpose and what it's um
been manipulated in some cases
into, um, and, and what it, what
it is and what it isn't. And so
all that we do is try, all that
we're doing with our specific
funding is trying to meet the
needs of needs of our students.
So specifically, for example,
our heritage language
instruction, which is still
something and in my opinion, has
not been addressed by the
legislature with respect to Yazi
Martinez, the
Indian Education Act is, in my
opinion, not funded currently.
It's one of the areas that still
needs improvement in, uh, from
you all and from your
colleagues, uh, at the, in Santa
Fe, uh, to make sure that we
have consistent, appropriate
funding for our Native American
populations to provide the
requirements of the law. Um,
currently, we have to take money
from other areas in order to
support that, specifically with
our heritage language teachers,
the cost of that is significant,
uh, to have a, a heritage
language teacher in all of
our schools, and it is not
covered by the state as far as
those costs. We have to borrow
and use dollars from other
places, and so that's one way in
which we're aligning funding is
using other funding to make sure
that we can still provide those
services under the Indian
Education Act to make sure um
that our students are being
treated fairly with respect to
that law, but also I would like
the legislature to think about
what that looks like statewide.
The formula for that is not
done. Um, by population
of the inputs um are not fair
across the state of New Mexico,
where the largest Native
American school district in the
state in the country, yet the
funding is not equitably
equitably distributed across the
districts into all Native
American students across the
state. Often we're getting the
short end of the stick because
we, because we have a larger
population of Dana students. Um,
so that's an area that is a
concern for us. Um, but yeah,
college and career readiness, we
talked a lot about that. That is
a very important part to make
sure that students, which is
part of the Ozzie Martinez
lawsuit is to make sure our
students have opportunities, and
that's one of the ways in which
we're aligning funding to make
sure that they have
opportunities to look past just
graduation, to repair students
for their future careers, which
is a, a, a big focus of our
district. There's a, there's
just a few areas representative.
Thank you. Um, so I, I, I have a
couple of related that maybe
anyone can interject, uh, but I
don't wanna beleaguer it because
we have time constraints. So, um
related to that, it, it's of
concern for me because of the
population and all the things
that you just outlined, so I'm
glad that we're on the record on
that. Um
we, my, my other concern is that
we have to ensure that the
instruction and not just the
programs, but the instruction
are culturally relevant, and so
that comes to my next question.
Everything that we do is
culturally relevant, uh, to the
students because we don't want
to dismiss that importance. So
my next is, how are you
incorporating student voice
in decision making,
particularly, and then I'm
referring to page 33 to the
programs around college career
and civic readiness. That's
incredibly important. We don't,
we want to create many pathways
for our students, but I think
they need to be the ones
articulating that. So that's if
you can answer that.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
was one of the things when we
were developing the school of,
um, we
got student input on what their
interests are. But one of the
challenges is in a, in a rural
school, where you don't have a
lot of capacity to offer several
school ofs or career industry
apprenticeships or whatever it
might be.
Um, we had to be really creative
and that's why we're really
cognizant of connecting
the learning in the core areas
to the career career pathways of
their choosing the school ofs.
In addition, our internships
aren't necessarily just a part
of what the school of is at that
particular site. We give
students flexibility to be an
intern at any location of of
their interest. And again, those
are paid internships for those
students. So that's one way in
which we give choice, even
outside of what might be offered
at that specific school site.
Thank you. And then uh brings me
to that, that question, uh,
relevant to this is what is the
minimum wage that you referred
to that they are paid in the
internship pay.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
it's $12 an hour. OK. Thank you.
My final question is, um, pretty
all-encompassing if you need to
refer to information later off
outside of this. But how are you
addressing the impacts of
poverty.
housing insecurity, food
scarcity as it relates to
student attendance and
performance.
So I would say in a multitude of
ways, you may have noticed on
the your pathway in every one of
our students receives school
supplies. We do not ask our
parents to buy school supplies
for our students. We do not put
artificial barriers. We do not
make them pay to enter programs
like CTSO, OSA, Skills USA, we
pay for that travel. They're not
going out into the community to
fundraise for those funds. We
are providing that funding. Um,
I would also say that our
counseling program is very
robust.
We do actively attra attract
student attendance. Um, we have
home school liaisons that will
actually go to students' homes
and we track all of those
visits, um, to be sure that we
are connecting with those
students, um, we leverage what
resources we get from the
McKinney Bento Homeless Program
and other resources as they
become available or if we need
to align them to that. Um, I
give specific examples that it
really is on a student by
student basis, um, we had a
student come to school who had
lice, and that student, because
they were living with an elderly
relative, and they were very
impoverished. There was no way
they were getting out of that
situation on their own. We
worked together to get that home
fogged so that that student
didn't have that barrier
anymore. We out without clothes,
we give out shoes, um, we give
food, um, we connect them with
our community partners, um,
board member Mitchell actually
referred a family to me earlier
this year. I worked with
counseling and we got that
family into a home within a
week.
um, leveraging our community
partners and we work both with
the city, the county, and the
Navajo Nation on all of those
initiatives. I will say that we
know that things like ancillary
services, counseling, and social
work are very strained in the
state of New Mexico. I think one
of the unintentional funding
consequences that happened with
the change that happened in
2018, which was the training and
experience index moving over to
the teacher cost index. It
actually removed social workers,
ancillary staff, and nurses out
of
and guidance counselors out of
that funding formula and just
made it teachers. So we actually
reduced a funding generator in
an area where we see substantial
need. So those are kind of those
things as it works through the
legislature that are kind of
unintended consequences of those
funding initiatives, um, but I
would say we are, we are very
intentionally in tune. You may
also have noticed that uh Ruby
Payne book. Um, we actually
brought Ruby Payne to, to talk
to our educators about what
teaching in poverty actually,
you know, the, the signs that
you see of students that come
from an impoverished background,
um, in, in learning how to work
with them. You probably also
noticed two teaching books that
are out there. We gave those to
every single instructional
employee to help support them as
they work through this year. We
also buy supply kits for every
teacher. We do not expect our
teachers to pay out of pocket
for classroom level kits. So
every year our students get kits
and every year our teachers get
kids.
Thank you and thank you for that
um detailed explanation. So just
final comment, right, based on
what you said, is, is there a
way to track all that you're
doing with the outcomes of
student outcomes both from the
placements and career placements
after graduation, maybe, um, and
in addition, how many students
go on to particular pathways.
That would be very helpful. You
don't have to address it right
now
but that would be helpful to
receive and know that you're
tracking that, so I appreciate
it. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you all. If it's up to the
chair. Thank you.
It's very brief. So one, our
guidance counselors actually
call every family the year after
students graduate to see where
their students are. I have been
working for a year to work with
the University of New Mexico
that I understand currently has
data for students who have
become employed in the state of
New Mexico are going to college
in the state of New Mexico or
joined the military. I cannot
get access to that system
because what you speak to is
exactly our philosophy here.
Graduation is just a step on the
journey of their lives. We just
want to
make sure they're prepared to
make good decisions, but we do
want to see those actionable
outcomes and so the in-house
thing is we're actually
individually calling every
single family and tracking that
by student, um, and then we're
still trying to get access to
that UNim data. So anything you
could do to bridge that gap,
that would be wonderful.
Thank you, Senator Stewart
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Thank you for your presentation,
but you really have thought
about this. I mean, the
presentation that you went
through shows many years of
work, um, I'm a very thrilled
about what I saw with Creer
Tech, and I'm looking forward to
hearing more about that, that
video, it's really great.
um,
I do want to uh ask a few
questions about uh some of your
data.
Thank you for being so open
about it.
Um, I'm gonna start by saying,
so last year you had 4000
students online this year you
have 600. What happened to the
3400 students.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Stewart,
uh, we changed the vendors, uh,
we, we were, um, in business
with a bad actor in the state of
New Mexico. uh, we discovered
that late winter early spring of
this year. Uh, we still, we
initially are trying to provide
opportunities for families, uh,
to get access and to have
choice, um, as other programs
that that there are in the state
of New Mexico, um, and so we
looked for uh a more a vendor
that had more integrity, um, in
that space and so we
switched vendors, uh, and, uh,
retained 600 of our students, or
about 400 of our students, and
added about 200 more.
Uh, so Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Superintendent, uh, of your 9,58
students that you have. So last
year, 4000 of those were online.
Mister Chairman, Senator Stewart
that, that was those are current
year numbers that you're seeing
in our slides. That's currently
600 of those 9,000+ students are
online. Last year, the number of
total population was much
higher.
So last year, Mr. Chairman, last
year you had
you had more like 13,000
students. So that's a huge cut
in your SCG this year. How are
you managing that?
The expense, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, uh, the expense, uh, of
providing online services is
less because I have less
students to serve, um,
with 600 versus 4000, uh, and so
we just have to make the
adjustments in order to serve
our our current population.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, I, I'm
really interested in several of
the things you're doing. One is
called this logic of English.
Um, Miss first I've heard
I'm on slide 30, it's page 15.
Um,
so, um, this is thrilling to see
this um
my question is, uh, how do you
teach uh
online. So last year you were
online, you were doing this, all
of this data that we have is
from last year or the year
before. It's not this current
year
So how do you train those online
teachers in the logic of
reading.
logic of English. Mister
Chairman, Senator Stewart,
online students were provided,
uh, instruction through our
online provider.
and so we were not directly
involved in using log of English
in those classrooms, um, that we
aligned to the curriculum online
uh with the vendor's
instructors, and we made sure
they were paced the same as that
we were as far as the school
district, um, but our students
in the online program were not
receiving log English
instruction. It was our
in-person students only.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, so this is
just for your in-person
instruction. Correct. So, uh,
can you put up the graduation
rate and maybe a few of the
other ones. I'm looking at the
math also a pages slide 14, page
7 in our data that's graduation
rate is page 6, slide 11.
I know you can only do one at a
time, so, so from last year,
4000 students were at 5.6% in
math and
6000 were in 18.
9000 we're at 18, correct.
Last year. Correct
2 years ago. We haven't received
last year's data yet. Right.
Uh, so, uh
since I a lot of students
online. It's a, it's almost
half.
of your district, certainly a
third or more. Uh, I'm gonna get
corrected by the math whiz right
next to me whispers in my ear
all the time, uh, so it's a huge
number of students that are not
learning math, and if you look
at the ELA.
which is where is that? That is
our 7's like 13, um, it's
better, but still, uh, pretty
low, so, um.
where are the teachers
Where are the teachers that
teach this, these online
courses, where are they located?
Senator, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Stewart, they are in New Mexico
certified teachers, um, so many
of them reside in New Mexico, or
at least certified in New
Mexico.
So Mr. Chairman, you don't
really have any way to scoop
them into a training to say it's
really unacceptable, having
these kinds of numbers, we want
you to take this type of
training to improve that. You
don't do that, that's the online
uh vendor that does that.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Stewart,
uh, we do now, um, with the
contract and ability that we
have to effect change in that
area. That's one of the reasons,
one of the reasons which we
changed vendors, um, again, we
wanted to have more impact and
more opportunities, uh, to
control what's happening in our
online program. So, Mr.
Chairman, where are those
current teachers located? Again,
it's just New Mexico
Mr. Chairman Senator Stewart,
the New Mexico licensed
teachers.
So unless you want the addresses
of where they're located, I can,
I could probably get that for
you, um, but I don't have that
at the top of my, uh, brain as
far as where every teacher
lives. Yeah, I'm not asking for
where every teacher lives.
That's all right. Well, I'll
just, we'll try a different
tack. And my, my time is almost
out. So. No, no problem. Uh, so
how many teachers do you have in
the Gallop McKinley district.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Stewart,
we have approximately 600
teachers in the district,
including online.
So can you split that up for me?
How many teachers are in person
and how many are online?
Mr. Chairman, Senator I can give
the exact numbers, um, but in,
in person we're approximately
upper 500 level and about 30
teachers on the online program,
approximately.
Yeah, so, Mr. Chairman, that,
that's for now. What about last
year?
I'm just trying to understand
the magnitude of what you all
have been doing here with a huge
number of students online with
very bad scores and outcomes. I
am concerned about outcomes, so
always looking for a way to
improve teacher quality, what
they're teaching, how they're
teaching. That's why I'm so
excited about your career tech.
which you're doing exactly that,
but I'm not excited about this
group of students. What
percentage of online students
are Navajo.
Senator Sos or Mr. Chair,
Senator Stewart, um, you asked
me a couple of questions there,
um, and you switched on me in
the middle, um,
we have a keep up. We can, we
can get you the specific ethnic
breakdown of the students that
are online, but it was too close
to 20 to 300.
were local students, um, that
were in Navajo for specifically
as far as how many are actually
Native American? No, last year.
Last year. Correct. So 4200.
were Native American and and
local Local Native American, as
far as Native American
population statewide, I have to
get you that data to give the
exact number, um, but it was a,
it was across the state of New
Mexico of students that were
participated in that program.
The question I believe that you
asked prior to that, if I'm not
mistaken, is that you asked how
many teachers? It was
approximately supposed to be 200
teachers that were teaching
those students, um, it was a
little bit more than that, um,
but that was one of the issues
that we had with the vendor as
they breached
our contract by not hiring
enough teachers to follow the
student-teacher ratios that are
required by law, um, in New
Mexico and that we're required
to follow and so because I was
one of the main issues. They
were purposefully, in our
opinion, not hiring the teachers
in order to have higher profit
margins, and we caught on to
that.
um this last spring, um, and it
eventually led to the, the, the
discontinuation of that
contract. And so we, we share
the exact same concerns that,
that you do.
All right, well, thank you for
that. One more question, can you
put up the graduation rate?
So again it was 2 years ago, so
it's, it's slide 11 on our page
6.
So I'm just curious, so does PED
is probably a question for them,
but I'll ask you anyway. Uh,
they let you desegregate online
to in-person because, you know,
your graduation rate is not
77.82%. That's your in-person
graduation rate. The 4000 kids
that you had online in the last
two years. It's 27%, so combined
together, uh, is kind of dismal,
so they let you separate it
like that?
Mr. Chair and Senator Soza
actually drops the overall
percentage of about 4%, so it's
closer to uh 73-ish% for our
overall graduation rate if you
factor the online students in.
um, as far as the steps specific
cohort, um, we had, we hired a
data analyst that actually used
to work at PED and that data
analyst in the late winter, um,
during the 2nd reporting cycle,
actually
started teasing out the data,
and so he teased out the data
for online pers in person.
That's when we saw the drastic
problem. One of the, one of the
reasons we, we, we uncovered the
drastic problem we had.
But Mr. Chairman, 4000 students
at 27% and
5500
77 does not lower at 3%
or is it 9000?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Stewart,
I don't know how much we want to
get into correcting math here,
but I wanna make sure I
understand. We have just roughly
just to factor in about 10,000
in in-person students, about
4000 online students. That's
online K through 12. They're not
all 11th grade or 12th grade
students that are potentially
graduating. They're not seniors
and so it's a much smaller
population that are actually
singers that are part of the
cohort for this data that would
be graduating. I hope that helps
clear up that plus other
concerns, or at least
Yeah, it does relationship to.
My final question, how many
kindergarten, 1st, and 2nd
graders are online.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Souls, I
don't have that exact number on
the top of my head, but we can
provide you the breakdown. It
depends on what year you want it
by. Do you want it by last year
or would you like it currently?
He have a very messy district
when it comes to numbers. You do
really well in other things, but
boy, it's just hard to figure
out what's really going on and
where it is. These 4000 students
were all over New Mexico,
correct? Correct. They were not
a state, but they were all over
New Mexico, so, uh
anyway, a lot to drill down, but
thank you for your attempt at
answering my messy questions.
Thank you, Senator. I had to
keep whispering in her ear, No,
there's about 10,000 total and
4000 of the others. That's about
35, 40%, you know.
instead of starting with 9 and
then subtract the 4000 out. So I
was trying to gently help with
the math on this side. Um
Representative or uh vice chair
uh Rometo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
just had a quick question about
what
the two required classes are for
the high school graduation
requirements in Gallup-McKinley
County Schools.
I am forgetting what we required
on this, the two, the two
courses, um
we, we, we did combine it we use
one of the, the three course
sequence electives that we have
tied to our college career
readiness, uh, courses, um, and
so
we can get you the actual
layout. We did it a little bit
differently. You actually had to
create board policy around it to
make sure that it was very clear
for students, but we wanted to
give as much flexibility as
possible, yet still be able to
provide the three-course
sequence and so that's a part of
it.
Yeah, if you could get the
specifics on that, I would
appreciate. I'm certainly trying
to take stock of what the
different um school districts
have implemented for for their
current 9th graders and future,
um, 9th graders and
high school graduates. Thank
you, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Vice Chair, uh,
Representative Girola.
Mr President,
thank you for the presentation
and for all the data that you
shared with us. I, I have a, a
couple of clarification
questions
Did you mention that, uh, the
teachers who are uh being
training, uh, doing the PD for
letters training and are doing
it on their own time. Mr.
Chairman Representative, we
actually have, in order to
accomplish the training that's
required, uh, for those
teachers. It is pri
significantly on their own time
that we actually have to pay
for, um, out of our, our
funding. And so I don't believe
there's a specific, it may be
talked about as money that we're
getting for that, but I'm not
like there's a specific
uh
Yeah, it's it's in, it's a part
of the 59 million.
So maybe
maybe we could, maybe there's
we could ask you to help us
tease that out, so we know
exactly what dollars we're
getting to support letters
training.
Thank you. Thank you for that
information. Um, it is
impressive to have the teachers
doing it and it's it really
talks about the commitment of
the teachers. Uh, it would be
really nice to have the
information of
how many hours and requirement
and how can we collaborate on
that and my follow up question
is, um, are the teachers taking
any other type of training,
especially language art teachers
and math teachers, any
professional development best
practices, strategies training,
also, uh, to help them with
their their classroom.
I'm happy to respond
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Gorola.
Uh, we offer a plethora of
programs throughout Gallup
schools. Um, all of our teachers
are trained on all of our uh
district adopted curriculum.
They received training most
recently in IXL and intervention
program that we've been
incorporated a K through 8.
That's for both ELA and math,
uh, we
oh.
So yes, we, we offer training
and all of our resources, all
the curriculum resources you
saw, how to utilize our lesson
resources, all of our
deconstructed standards. All of
our textbook materials there is
ongoing training throughout the
year to make sure our teachers
can know how to use them and
utilize them well in our
classrooms.
Thank you. And I'm also
interested in in knowing uh Mr.
Chair, uh any uh best practices
training besides
back and forth, um, besides, um,
the one that is offered with a
with a materials that they are
using, that would be something
that I would like to know, um,
but the other question is
something that you mentioned
about um
if I got it correctly, some of
the teachers who are teaching at
heritage language or in their
in their home language.
they're not being funded
properly
Did I hear that correctly?
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
can you please repeat that
question? I'm sorry.
It seems to me that I hear that
that the teachers, some of the
teachers who are teaching
heritage language, uh, or, or,
or their home language to the
students are not being funded
properly. Did you talk something
about it?
Mr. Chair, Representative, I'll
have Miss Hanks talk about that.
It specifically ties to the, the
teacher index piece of the
funding formula.
So the
funding for um the Indian
Education Act is kind of broken
down into below the line program
funding. Um, it is not a
component of the at-risk index.
Um, it is not a part of the SCG
through an index, um, and so we
get these pots of money. When
the legislature actually
mandated the minimum $50,000
salary. Um, the state actually
provided us below the line
funding the first year
subsequent to that. Then we got
$25,000 then we got competitive
fun
ding and this year I have
received no funding, um, so it's
kind of tapered off in that
regard and then our, especially
our uh heritage language
teachers, um, for Danae, um, we
found that we weren't able to
attract enough teachers with the
520 certificate licensure so we
actually created our own
internship program where we're
bringing individuals into the
classroom with a master teacher
in the subject area and they're
interning, we're paying for um
courses or anything that they
need so that they can get 520
license and then we
' re also providing professional
development around classroom
management, lesson planning, um,
all of the things a teacher
needs to be successful through
an alternative pathway. Um, so
those are things that are not
necessarily considered within
the state equalization guarantee
formula. One of our
recommendations for Yasi
Martinez either as a standalone
index or within the at-risk
index is funding formula related
to the Education for Native
American students. Um, I'm sure
that you will also hear, and I
know that Hispanic education
is also having a lot of
discussions. I do watch a lot of
your committee sessions. I read
the reports that you produce,
um, anything that becomes
available to us, we do try to
leverage, but it's really that
consistent intentional funding
that we can provide actionable
data back to the committee that
we want to be able to
demonstrate because in order to
have those wonderful 45 minute
blocks as, uh, Doctor Sanchez
mentioned in order to have those
deconstructed stra uh standards
in order to build a curri
cul ar structure, which I am so
happy to say we are sharing with
the Navajo Nation, the
Department of uh DNA Education,
and they're gonna take that and
replicate it in their own to
help more students become
proficient in the Dana language.
Um, that is our ultimate goal,
but those are things that we
don't see in the funding
formula.
Thank you, Mr.
Sher. Thank you for your
answers.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
we are already about 150 minutes
behind and we have 5 people on
the list, so please keep uh both
questions and answers tight,
please. Uh, Representative
Soreana.
I'll be quick, Mr. Chairman,
just, um, I'm gonna follow along
with, um, Senator Stewart's
questioning. Math. Let's look
specifically on math. So I was a
math teacher, um, 5.6 means they
learn nothing. So did nobody
complain? parents, kids?
What?
Um, 7
Did, did the kids not, I know
when I have subs, my kids will
tell me if that's terrible sub,
so nobody complained about what
was happening for
5 or 6 months or what?
Represent or Mr. Chair,
Representative Seana, um
part of the problem was also
assessment, um, as far as
getting the online provider to
pro to reach the levels of
assessment that were
appropriate. Uh, we did not
receive a lot of complaints from
parents about performance. It
was typically more related to
things like communication, um,
and, and other issues that
surround providing online
courses, so.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So again, 5 points
means they learned pretty much
nothing. So how did you or what
are you doing to help them
really catch up because that's,
that's a lot of not, it's a lot
of mislearning. Are you doing
anything particular for for ma?
Mr. Chairman, Representative, so
again, a predom a significant
number of those students are no
longer with us. Um, part of the
complaint, uh, and part of the
breach of the contract, in our
opinion, was that we were trying
to get the provider to provide
those services, uh, to provide
other opportunities for tutoring
and provide um other ways in
which we could help those
students not only graduate, but
also receive better instruction.
Again, this was found out
late winter early spring, as far
as when we're able to tease that
data out because of the latency
and the data that we do receive.
Um, and so,
to answer your question, we now
have a population of students
that we have a new partner that
we're much more focused on as
far as making sure there's
accountability, um, and that's
something that we're very
passionate about making sure
that we don't have this
situation again with our
students currently.
Mr. Chairman, I hope you track
the kids because um
this, this is, if there, if
they're already
not a grade level or severely
below, they're not gonna ever
catch up. So we really need to
track this, but thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Representative, those
students, most of them are now a
part of Santa Rosa School
District and Chama Independent
School District. And that's
where the vendor, uh, secured a
contract with those two school
districts, and so,
um you'll have to ask those
questions to those school
districts. For those students,
but for our students, and that's
our answer.
So, Mr. Chair Wilmer, so did you
let, do they know what happened
in your district that Santa Rosa
and Chama?
Mr. Chairman, Representative, we
did have one of the
superintendents reach out to me,
uh, before they secured that
contract and I outlined all of
the issues that we had, um, and
so why they continued to pursue
that new contract with this
particular vendor, knowing all
the problems, I can't speak to
that because I haven't spoken to
them since. Uh, but I do know
that I spoke to one of those
superintendents specifically.
And I actually notified the rest
of the superintendents in the
state of New Mexico.
um, and showing the data that
you saw on the screen. And so
everybody had an opportunity to
be informed.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman
Thank you. uh, Representative
Torres Velasquez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, and
my apologies for coming in late.
I was listening on the way, and
I had a question over something
that came up during the
presentation and I'm, I'm
thinking it might have been Ms.
Hanks that was talking about the
differences in operating a
small, um, school district as
compared to a large district and
the difficulties with completing
projects or grants or funding,
can you tell me just a little
bit about that in the short time
that we have. Thank you.
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair, I
um
Representative Torres Velasquez.
What I would say is that because
grant the the below the line
items often come late. They have
tight turnarounds, um, for
example, we got an email last
week at 11:56 a.m. that they
wanted information for from us
by 12 o'clock noon, which gave
us 4 minutes to respond and then
we were locked out of uh uh
grant information, um, so we did
not turn that around quick
enough. That is an extreme
example, but
these complex guidelines with
kind of mixed data and
expectations. It is hard enough
for the individuals who work
here and we're a fairly large
district. um, I will tell you
that any night of the week, you
will find Kendy, Kristen,
myself, 9, 10 o'clock completing
finishing things, answering
emails. I cannot even imagine
how burdensome that is for some
of our microdistricts who are
very much struggling. So if
we're seeing issues even with
the integrated systems that
we have the dedicated staff
throughout the district that we
have. I cannot even imagine the
impact on smaller, even
microdistricts. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and just one last thing,
I imagine that has an impact on
the perception that some people
have that smaller districts
don't prioritize student
success, which is contrary to
what I was hearing in your
presentation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will be
extremely brief because I know
we're short on time. I'm just
gonna go to page 19, slide 37,
just based upon the exemplary
category, and I guess I just had
a question regarding the 5th
bullet point. It says seize
opportunities to enhance
learning by building
spontaneous, building on a
spontaneous event or student
interest while keeping alignment
to the standard. And I've been
one of these people who's been
super critical of the way that
we
put more on our teachers, and we
continue to say, oh, please do
more, please do more, and it's
just, it's really hard to be
spontaneous as a teacher, while
you're forced to do even more
every single day. So I'm just
wondering what resources and
what kinds of
maybe others, other services do
you provide to your teachers to
make their lives a little easier
when it comes to actually being
able to tailor make
an education experience to each
child while being as spontaneous
as possible pursuant to whatever
the curriculum standards are. I
know it's kind of a loaded
question, but I mean, what do
you guys do? Because it seems
like something is working. Maybe
some of the statistics
are not perfect, right? But
we have our challenges. So I
just wonder how, what's your
approach to this, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
we'll probably both answer this
one a little bit, um, but it's
talking about spontaneous event,
not necessarily the teacher
being spontaneous, um, but with
maybe a
creating basically we're trying
to create relevance to an event
that might be happening
currently.
Um, and, and
so I don't know that I speak to
the resources again that we
provide the teachers of my
presentation that I had to
quickly go over, which was uh
our professional learning
communities and really being
able to support our teachers in
being able to develop
instruction that they feel
confident about. Um, and
unfortunately, I'd, I'd be so
happy to talk more with you
about this, uh, but a lot of
that is, is focused during uh
Thursday and Friday mornings
where teachers collaborate, they
learn from each other
they have the ability to be
creative with their instruction.
Uh, we have, um, provided them
so many different resources, and
we did that with intentionality.
So what wouldn't stress them
out, and they would be able to,
to really, um,
use the resources but also have
autonomy to incorporate their
own creativity, uh, during,
during instruction. Uh, but the
time that, that we really do
give teachers is during our
PLCs, um, and I'd be so happy to
talk with you about that.
today.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I,
I'll just talk to you guys after
your presentation just because
of time, but thank you so much.
I really appreciate it. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I just
have a, a, a couple of questions
here, well, maybe 2 or 3. I'm
not gonna beat the, uh, science
and math scores of Senator
Stewart's already hit that was
pretty hard, and I think I
understand now why the online
performance was so poor, so I
appreciate that that background,
um.
I don't like the fact that our
science and math scores overall
state is still pretty poor, so
it's regardless of what you what
you guys are trying to do with
the overall state is having a
problem with that, and, and it's
appalling to me because we have
a state with two national labs
here and there's no reason why
our science and math scores
should be as poor as they are.
And so, uh, that's something I
personally want to improve upon,
um.
so my first question with
regards to, I guess it's a page
8 on your student performance
tracker. I appreciate that you
have your student performance
and your course completion
tracker. I thought those were
really good, um, ways to
identify I, I'm assuming
students who are having
problems. So my question is, uh,
once you identify a kid with a
particular problem, what's,
what's the follow up? What do
you do?
What's normal process for that
Mister
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton
this tracker allows our teachers
a a very quick rapid visual of
what student performance looks
like across the board during the
course of a semester. Um, and
weekly as we track this data,
which is our unit formatives.
Uh, this data allows our
teachers to determine which
students to put into and whether
or not it's appropriate to put a
child into the MLSS process,
which is a system, uh, uh,
of, of early intervention that
is embedded in all of our
schools, uh, so when we look at
this data, our teachers really
use it to determine which
students need additional
support, which type of
intervention students actually
need, and then what the next
instructional steps are going to
be to make sure that student
improves. There's very tight
systems and structures related
to this data in the background
happening during uh again during
our PL
C s when our teachers are
looking at this data and
determining next instructional
steps for these kids.
Thank you for that. I appreciate
that.
Um, my, my next question is
regards to, I guess it's slide
15, slide 29. Um, there was a
mention as you were going
through the structured literacy
activity with regards to some of
your teachers now reaching uh uh
certification on the letters.
What percentage of your teachers
have achieved certification at
this point.
I could almost say between I'm
so sorry, Miss, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh Senator Thornton,
all of our K through 5th grade
teachers.
will be certified at the end of
this year. They, it operates in
a series of cohorts. This year
we're finishing up our fifth
grade cohort. So all K-5
teachers, as long as they're not
new to the district, um, or new
to a school in the state of New
Mexico, all K-5 teachers by the
end of this year will be letter
certified.
Very good. I, I would assume
that you're probably ahead of
schedule with regards to other
districts in that regard, so
that's, that's a good job. Um, I
think I have one final question
if I can find my notes here.
Oh yes, with regards to, uh, uh,
Ms. Hanks. Uh, you had
talked about the code 4020 code
that it contains contains way
too much data.
Uh, what recommendations would
you give for changing that code
and, and so that it would give
us more specific data and maybe
be more useful for us as
legislators.
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton,
what I would recommend is, is
what kind of what we've done
internally is we've created
internal codes that are stem off
of that 4020 code in order to
delineate each one of those
initiatives and that would give
the legislature and anybody else
who's kind of looking at that
numeric language of
expenditures, really full
transparency, whether we're
targeting a whole school
intervention, college and career
readiness, um, wrapround
supports after school, those
types of activities, because
when you look at it now, you're
just seeing this whole
block of funds and in listening
to this committee and reading
the reports.
data because of the way that we
collect it is not granular
enough for you, for us to be
fully transparent with you about
how your dollars are being
spent, how our community's
dollars are being spent and when
we spend dollars we very much
consider that we are spending
public money and we spend it
with the most efficiency that we
can to get the biggest benefit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I
appreciate that. I think one of
the, I guess maybe being a
newbie to the to the group here,
my question is, what, what do we
need to do to be able to change
the code? Is that something that
is done by LESC? Is it something
that is
is that done at the state level?
I'm not quite sure who makes
those code changes, but I would
certainly like to get that list
from you and then maybe we could
figure out how we can get that,
uh, changed so that the code is,
is maybe more um informative for
the rest of us, so thank you for
that, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Thornton, the chart of accounts
is something that the public
education department creates and
so they push out guidance to
school districts about how they
report those expenditures back
to PED and determine the
granularity of each of those
categories.
Thank you, Senator. I have a
couple of questions and I hope
they're gonna be kind of quick
and kind of quick responses. Uh,
the first one on the
very quickly at the beginning,
you indicated that there were 6
about 6% gifted students in the
district.
Giftedness is
um
normally distributed, uh, most
districts have substantially
more, while only 6% are, you
know, how are you trying to
identify additional gifted
students.
Mr. Chairman, um, we do a
standards similar to other
school districts as far as uh
when students are getting ready
for the 3rd grade if they're
identified, uh, we provide the
assess the assessment for that
student to determine if they're
gifted. A parent can request
that. And so it's very similar
process. Um, as far as the
number differences, I'd have to
look into that to see what that
difference is. Um, I, I, I
didn't know there was a, a
specific
ratio that's particularly
appropriate, uh, for giftedness,
uh, but we do provide the
services required by law for
those students, uh, and so I, I
couldn't speak to you, speak to
something unique or special we
do differently than other
districts that I'm aware of.
Thank you. And most districts, I
think it's somewhere around 10%
of the students are indicated as
gifted and, and again giftedness
is normally distributed, but
opportunities aren't always the
same. And so, you know, just
something that, that stuck out
um
you know, you've been hounded a
bunch on the online or the
current online teachers, are
they district employees are they
employees of the vendor?
Mr. Chairman, their employees of
the vendor, but we evaluate them
uh as a requirement by, by state
law.
Thank you as employees by the
vendor, are they all trained in
letters and how do you verify
that uh that the students are
getting the science or reading
through the vendor.
Mr. Chairman, that is something
that we are working on now, uh,
given the situation that we've
had prior, is to make sure that
um the requirements set by PED
in the state are also being
followed by the vendor
themselves.
Thank you, and I don't know that
this is directly a, a district
question, but it's come up in
some other areas around RECs as
to whether they're part of the
ERB if they're not actually
district employees, are they
state level employees or are
they private contract? I mean,
that's a whole other area that
we dealt with in some other
places, uh.
on slide 15, and we looked at it
a little bit, uh, it's on our
page 8.
As I look at that slide, it
looks like over on the right
side from K through 7, the math
achievement level goes down
every year.
Why is that? I mean, I would
hope as they're getting high
level quality instruction, they
ought to be doing better when it
seems like as far as their level
of ability and proficiency seems
highest when they enter and
lowest after they leave our
schools.
Mr. Chairman, can, can you point
out where, what slide you're
specifically talking about
again? I always make sure I'm
looking at the right data that
you're slide 15 on our page 8.
this one
So over on the right, you'll now
3, it goes from 73 to 42, every
one of them, almost every step.
the achievement goes down with
each year they're in school.
And I, I'm, I'm guessing and
correct me, but the jump in 6
and 7 is due to they were on the
online program that's no longer
there. Is that where those
students came from, where
there's the doubling, almost
doubling or more of the student.
we
Senate, uh
Senator, um, yes, Mr. Chair.
You can tell we're not good at
this. Um, so I would say that
this really this data, and it's
just a snapshot. There is
comprehensive data. I just took
a picture, um
but this is really what led us
to make a significant shift in
our middle schools and to move
our 6th grade students back down
to elementary. We took a really
deep dive into that. We saw this
kind of, um, not just academic
but social emotional turmoil
that was happening, and we made
a very strategic choices a
district to make that shift, and
this data is the is the impetus
of some of those changes in
making sure that our 6th grade
students are actually prepared
for not only the, the
difference in rigor and the
difference of type of
instructions switching teachers,
those types of things, but also
really that self-confidence
because what we were seeing and
and I think I hear it all the
time. Middle school is hard if
you're a middle school teacher,
you probably have other words
for that, um, but really giving
more focus to our 7th and 8th
graders and putting our 6th
graders back down into a
situation providing additional
supports to get them confident
to go into that 7th grade level
of instruction, um, that is what
preemptive
that change and, and it was a
significant change and we did it
districtwide.
Thank you and that just kind of
stood out to me, though I
realized these are separate
cohorts. This isn't following
one cohort across. They're all
separate cohorts, but the
consistency across assessments
and, and the grades was, was
kind of what struck me. I was a
middle school principal, I love
middle school kids, but yes,
they can be challenging and
interesting, um.
kind of jumping, changing
topics. How many of your
students get the dual language
certificate, uh, particularly
like in Navajo and English.
Mr. Chairman, in Spanish, um,
at around 6 on average per year.
Um, only a few in heritage
language. Uh, we've had some
communications with it because
the assessments are done
differently. Uh, when you are
taking the Spanish assessment,
you can take that multiple
years, whereas currently with um
the Dana language, they only
give it once a year at the very
end. And so we've been working
with them to see if not only get
more people certified, um, but
looking at changing that so
those students have more
opportunities to take that
assessment because it's, it's a
bit different
in the delivery of that is, uh,
different than per se, what you
would see in a typical type of
assessment. Um, and so we're
working on improving that, uh,
the language loss of the Dana
language has been pretty
significant on the Navajo Nation
over the last few decades, and
we're seeing that in education.
We're really revitalization
program. We're not, most
students, no students
particularly go into the school
that are, that are fluent or
even partially fluent. It's,
it's a pretty significant
language loss that we're working
with the tribe and others to
make sure that we
help build that language again.
from an early age. Thank you.
And that was part of my question
is, you know, when we've got
such a large number of Dana
students within this district.
that, you know, prioritizing
that would, I think, be very
helpful in preservation of the
language. Language is culture,
you know, all of those types of
things that, you know, there's
an opportunity there to preserve
that comes a little bit to my
next question is, you talked
about a lot of the CTE programs.
Do you have an educator rising
program.
We, uh, Senator, Senator Soz,
Mr. Chair, um, we, we do have in
our career pathways at some at
some of our locations, we have
school ofs for Education that
are subparts of our overall
arching school of so students
can pursue specifically, uh, a,
a path to become a teacher or to
become an educator, you know,
in, in the district. It it's not
one of the problems that we had.
We had it in more schools. The
problem was, is there was not
enough interest and so it's, we'
re taking upon ourselves to
drive more interest for students
to participate, uh, in those
programs prepare them to become
educators. Uh, it's, it's
something even myself, I was, I
had no desire at that age to
become an educator whatsoever,
something to developed later,
but there are opportunities in
order to improve that, um, and
we are looking into that because
that's a, a feeder uh for us to,
and we, we actually have had a
lot of students that have gotten
their degree. We incentivize
local local people to come to
our school district to teach and
so that effort has helped, but I
think
we could definitely do a better
job and encouraging students to
go into the educational field.
Thank you, and that question
comes a little bit, criticisms
from the, the lawsuit that we
are preparing enough teachers in
native languages and things of
that sort and the native
heritage, um, and so, building
the certification program,
building educator rising
program, and they also are able
to then come back to their home
communities, making good solid
middle class wages that build
community and, and structure and
provide role models for others
and so you all have an
opportunity to have strong
educator rising programs
that then, you know, long-term
feed into your, your teacher
recruitment, which I know can be
a challenge out on the, the more
uh hinterlands out, uh, away
from the major metropolitan
areas, um.
I hear from Senator Munoz
regularly, the concern about the
UFA high school, I think the
University of Arizona high
school that's doing online in
this area, and then guaranteeing
them a slot at you over I'm
seeing from your confusion,
you're not aware of what I'm
saying, but that they are
providing online high school in
this area and taking students
and then giving them a guarantee
into the university of Arizona.
later, no? OK. And Mr. Chair,
I've, I've seen the
advertisements, um, on social
media for that, um, but it
sounds like Senator Munoz has a
lot more information on what the
tactic is.
Thank you. I was just wondering,
he's concerned about it pulling
students away from the, the
local district, particularly the
students that are more college
bound and giving them a direct
route into uh higher education
in Arizona rather than in New
Mexico and creaming the top off
of this district, so I thought
I'd ask as I had an opportunity,
uh.
Superintendent, uh, Hyatt, you
had made some comments about the
Indian education formula Indian
Education Act formula. How would
you change that? Because I also
don't think that it's equitable
when 80% is based on each uh
tribe
Pueblo and um nation, and then
only 20% based on population
when over 50% of the, the native
students are Navajo. How would
you change the formula if you
had an opportunity?
Mr. Chairman
I know it's complex. Um, there's
several different types of um
laws and things that we have to
provide and which makes it
complex for you as legislators
to figure out. And so sometimes
we're in our seats looking at
you. We haven't been in your
seats looking back to see what's
possible, but I think they're
definitely needs to be a, uh, a
population factor of students
that should be receiving that
funding as a part of the formula
and maybe a baseline amount to
make sure that services can be
provided by the school district.
I mean, if you had
2020 Native American students in
your school district, um, if you
got the dollars per student to
provide adequacy of an education
for those 20 students. It's
gonna cost more than what
probably the per unit amount
would be for that, that pupil.
And so there needs to be a
baseline in order to provide the
basic services that would be
needed, uh, maybe for 100,000,
make sure you can support a
teacher, uh, curriculum
development of the PED can't
provide that or
something of that nature. And
then on top of that would be
based off the population of the
school district to increase that
funding. That way it's more fair
across the state of New Mexico.
Thank you and you know, I, I
think the current formula is
almost upside down in that it
puts the majority of the money
in the baseline and only a
portion of the money in the per
population which has makes for a
huge discrepancy in the actual
per pupil funding at different
levels, uh, kind of my last
question, uh, have you all
applied for the guarantee Basic
Income for the McKinney Vento
grants for students, and are you
aware of that funding that is in
the formula now?
Mr. Chair, I am aware of the
funding. I have not yet seen the
application. If it is available
on PED, I must have missed it. I
do check their website
regularly, but that is on the
LEAs to go and seek to apply.
Um, we don't necessarily get
notified when those applications
open or if we do, it's usually
sent to a principal.
and just very quickly, what is
your unhoused population or an
estimate I need to know exactly,
but about how many students are
we talking about?
Mr. Chairman, it's hovers around
600 students.
and, and my question might be
more for Greg in the background.
Are, do you know, are those uh
grant applications out for that
money?
You know, I'm talking about the
the funding for the guaranteed
basic income for students that
are unhoused or
experiencing housing problems?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I'll have to follow
up. I have not seen them go out,
so I can't say for sure one way
or the other, but let me check
and I'll get back with you as
soon as I can. Thank you. OK,
thank you. I mean that in the
districts that have piloted,
that's shown some very good
results as far as improving
graduation rates for those
students and so hoping that
that's the end of my questions
and thank you all very much. I
appreciate your, your, uh,
presentation. Uh, we ran a bit
over time, but I appreciate the
answers to all of the questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee
I've been told that that's part
of the perf and that the, the
applications and stuff should be
out shortly, we think.
And Team, I'm not doing a very
good job as chair. We're about
45 minutes behind. I apologize.
No lunch for me, I know.
I
as we try to regularly, we
put together a panel of local
superintendents.
and so if that
you all please come up and tell
us about your districts, your
challenges, your hopes and
expectations and
good programs and places where
there are concerns.
Mister Chair, if I could very
quickly, you'll see that you're,
uh, oh no, um, normally we have
our deputy director, uh, Jessica
Hathaway, uh, run these
superintendent panels. She had
to step away. She's actually at
a graduation ceremony, uh, she
completed the Harvard's
strategic data Project
fellowship, and so she's often a
virtual graduation. I don't
think she's wearing a cap and
gown, uh, but, uh, Mark has his
grace gracefully agreed to, uh,
step in
So Mark, please go ahead and
kick us off.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Uh,
I'm Mark Motoya, senior policy
analyst for the Legislative
Education Study Committee, as
John said, I'm stepping in for
uh Deputy Director Hathaway. I,
uh
have the benefit of leading a
great panel that she put
together. I won't do as well as
she did, but here we go.
As y'all know, we have a
standing superintendent panel as
part of our interim this year.
In each community we visit, we
ask superintendents in that
region to join us and respond to
questions that align with the
policies and priorities the
committee has identified for us.
Those priorities include
literacy, math, the funding
formula, funding changes, and
instructional time.
And to ease into this, I'm gonna
ask the superintendents to
introduce themselves and also
share with us how they became
superintendent, and I'll start
to my left with Mr. Carson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
members of the committee, my
name is Steve Carlsson. I'm
superintendent of Central
Consolidated School District.
uh, Steve Carlson Unitier,
Bellegana Nishli, Swedish
pashain, Swedish dasiache,
Swedish Danae. That was for, uh,
some folks here who who might
catch that I barely can try to
introduce myself, uh, in Navajo
and the Dine language, so, um, I
came upon the superintendency,
uh, and maybe a little bit of a
different fashion than than most
folks. I spent my career as a,
as a math teacher at the high
school level.
uh, for 12 years and then as an
assistant principal at the
middle school level.
for 5 years, um, and then I
spent 20 I'm sorry, 17 years,
uh, as an elementary school
principal, first to, uh, grades
4 through 6 and then K through
6, so that's as I speak to you
today and we talk about perhaps
letters and math, um, especially
at the elementary level. Uh,
that's, that's my background and
I wanna make sure that you
understand that's um where I'm,
I'm much more familiar with,
although I, it's sad to say that
high schools, um, have not
changed that much.
and, and a good portion of my
high school teaching was at
Kirtland Central High School in
Central Consolidated as well.
So, uh, I was asked to be
superintendent, um, in March.
of 2022. Uh, so a little over 3
years ago, coming upon 3.5 years
ago, um, and it's been a, a very
much of a, a learning process. I
wouldn't recommend it to, to
anyone, unnecessarily, uh, at
least, at least going through
the way I did, um, I spent zero
time in central office.
uh, which is very unusual. Uh,
and, and matter of fact, most
superintendent physicians
require up to 5 years or so
experience in central office,
um, and so in some ways, um, I,
I
it's been an incredible learning
experience, um, a lot of ways,
but there are so many things
like speaking in front of you
all, um, that I was completely
unfamiliar with. If you ask most
principals what LESC stands for
or LAFC stands for. They, most
of them probably wouldn't know
the answer to that, so, uh,
anyway, thank you all. Uh, it's
a pleasure to be here. um, and,
and I appreciate the time to
hear about our district, uh,
Central Consolidated does have a
lot of needs that uh
we're very, I guess all 89
districts are unique. Uh, I, I
feel like we're a little
uniqueer than than others, um,
but thank you all.
Mr. Hayat
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee and Mike Kayatt,
Superintendent for Gallop
McKinley County Schools, um, my
path started similar to
Superintendent Carlson's. I was
a math teacher, uh, in the, in
this area in McKinley County,
uh, for many years, uh, and went
back.
to school to get my MBA.
uh, and during that, during that
process, I found a lot of
opportunity and education where
the best practices of the public
sector and private sector could
come to better, could come
together to do better for our
students, uh, and so that's got
me interested in what I was
already doing. I was thinking of
doing something different, um,
but applying, uh, the best of
those two worlds in education
became a passion for me, and
that's what kind of led me into
administration as a principal,
uh, during
the, my principalship time, it
had some opportunities to be in
acting and interim
superintendent in the ZUNI
Public School District, um, came
over into, uh, Gallop McKinley
County Schools again as an
assistant superintendent, um,
no, no plans of becoming a
superintendent. I've, I watched
how that goes, um, but I've had
the opportunity and pleasure to
serve as a superintendent in the
school district for 9 years, so.
that's my story and I'm sticking
to it.
Good morning
Mr. Chair and committee members.
I'm Randy Stickney. I'm
superintendent for Zini Schools,
and I have a different pathway
that I came. I came from another
state, um.
please don't hold that against
me. Oklahoma and during my
tenure there, I did everything
from being a library media
specialist, English teacher.
gifted teacher
and the students were gifted
I I I
um, as well as yearbook, many,
many different roles because I
was in in rural Oklahoma and I
became a school counselor at
that point, I was definitely
interested in moving into
administration. Little did I
know that a superintendent's job
would become available.
and it did. I applied for it,
um, I was a superintendent for
Ninicco School south of
Chickasha, small district for 8
years, then Hammond schools in
western Oklahoma.
for 12 years
and then my husband and I
retired from Oklahoma for 3
days. We, uh, immediately knew
he wanted to retire in New
Mexico and actually continue
working in education.
and we did. We took jobs at
Zuni. I started out as director
of curriculum instruction back
in 2014. He's the elementary
counselor there. um
over the time that I've been
there, there often because I had
experiences a superintendent.
The superintendent at the time
would ask me to cover when he
was out of town on travel,
whatever the case may be. The
position became open in
2021 and I took over as acting
superintendent during that year,
and I have now been the
superintendent since that time.
Thank you. So it looks like we
have a great combination of
experience and backgrounds.
Again, I just want to thank you
again for joining us and sharing
your perspectives, very
valuable. So we'll move on to
literacy
The state has made significant
investments in structured
literacy over the past 5 to 6
years.
This has included required
letters training, additional
funding, and policy both at the
state level and through PED.
The question is, how has this
effort influenced literacy
instruction in your district?
and what additional supports or
policy levers could enhance
implementation and student
reading outcomes statewide.
And I'll again start with you,
Mr. Carson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
all members, uh, I have a
different, again, I was an
elementary principal when the
letters started. And so I have a
little bit different take than
than other folks who might be
superintendents. Um, I actually
was able to have the letters
training because it was mandated
that elementary principals have
their training as well when it
was first introduced. So, um, I
was introduced very uh
thoroughly with the science of
reading, um, and, and it did
help, uh, most of our teachers,
uh, at the elementary level. I,
I heard earlier
that uh K-5 teachers should all
be trained. Um, we are there as
well, uh, except for those
teachers who are new to the
district and we're getting them
all hooked up as well so that
they're going to be trained
Um, I, I believe it's something
that probably needed to happen.
Uh, now I do have some folks,
um, I have a
one of the members of the
audience back here is a board
member, and he will tell you
that he does not like the idea
that uh the legislature mandated
that its letters that the
particular uh group that's
teaching the science of reading,
um, and that he would prefer
that it would be um up to the
districts to decide exactly
which program they want to use
as far as teaching that, um, so
I just thought I'd have you note
that. Um, however, since letters
were chosen, I do believe that,
that it's, it's something that
has influenced instruction
um, and I believe literacy
instruction has improved, uh,
in, in a lot of district, our
district actually had to ask Mr.
Frosted if I could share this,
but in the last two years
our district has made some
improvements. If, if folks know
data from Central Consolidated,
you know that we have been
consistently lower throughout
the years in the district. I
will say that uh that does not
pertain to the school that I was
principal and I'm not gonna get
into that if you want to look
that up, you can. It's a Judy
Nelson Elementary, um, where we
had students performing at
levels above the state in many
cases.
Uh, but the district-wide this
last year, uh, we made in the
NMMSSA. We improvements of close
to 7% points from kindergarten,
or I'm sorry, from 3rd grade
through 8th grade, um, including
3 grade, who made a 11% jump.
and, and we're close to Gallup
now that and who have been ahead
of us by a considerable amount
in recent years. Uh, so, so I
believe that there have been
some, some significant
improvements based on the
letters training the teachers
had at the elementary level. Um,
there is some pushback at the
high school level, high school
teachers don't feel like they
need to have the science of
reading, um, but we do need the
training at the middle school
level, in my opinion. I believe
that there's teachers there who
would really benefit from it.
Um, one of the things that I
would like to see from
legislation, um, or, or at least
as a follow up. I don't know if
it necessarily needs to be
legislated, but, and this is
gonna come up probably again and
again from superintendents is
that teachers don't have a lot
of professional development
time.
built in right now. And I, and I
know that that's, I don't know
if you're all provided the
questions in advance or not, um,
but that's gonna be kind of a
theme that you'll probably hear
that, so once they're provided
this, yes, they have some of the
tools, um, but they need more
time to get together, um, to
analyze data, to spend the time
to plan lessons together, um,
because currently they don't
have that much time to do that.
Uh, they're, they're basically
instructing all but maybe 45
minutes of the school day. So,
and I don't know what that would
look
like legislatively, um, to give
districts the ability to provide
more time, but that is something
that we could use.
Thank you.
Mr. Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we talked a lot about
this uh during our presentation.
Um, but, but I would echo that
approach of teaching the science
of, of reading is a good
approach with letters
giving a program that does
things for teachers rather than
is, is not a good approach, but
this particular letters uh
instruction and PDE is good
because it teaches teachers how
to give them tools to teach even
better. Um, I think that's the
strategy that should be applied
in whatever that we do as a
state or as a district. Um, too
often these silver bullet types
of programs that we bring in to,
to solve our educational
problems or academic problems
are not the right way to go.
It's building up the repertoire
of our teachers.
is the right way to go, and I
think
I know there's pushback, uh,
probably the secondary level,
but I think there's an
opportunity there because we do
have a lot of students, um, that
are still in need of that kind
of instruction, even after
they're in 5th grade, and so
there's an opportunity to maybe
as a state to provide that in
that training and development of
our teachers, the secondary
level, but then I would add
again, even though we've already
said this, that there's specific
funding that's tied to paying
for that out of out of work
time, uh, training that
has to take place in order to
make sure students or teachers
are certified in that.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee
I would like to actually add on
a little bit what our district
is doing to leverage letters
training at our elementary level
and grades K through 3 were
actually implementing or have
been implementing for the last 3
years, Hegarty's Bridge to
Reading, which really augments
works together with the letters
training and we, we feel like
because both programs focus on
the science of reading that we
are seeing some benefits. It's
taking a little while, but.
we're being patient
Along with that, we are doing in
order to make sure that our
teachers and our administrators
at the school site level are
being held accountable at what
takes place in the classroom,
making sure that letters is
being implemented with fidelity
as well as Hegarty's, we have um
observation and feedback
coaching cycle sessions are
OFCCs as the principals like to
call them, where they have been
trained as well as um
district-level administrators to
be able to go into a classroom,
observe
and actually the teacher often
most of the time knows they're
coming in along with that we'll
ask if we can video a classroom
and then that classroom is
there's a session held between
the principal and the teacher to
basically analyze what what went
right.
what needs to be improved upon
and, and just some next steps is
what they can do. So we feel
like we've taken the lit the
letter straining and added to it
to make sure that there's
something accountable going on
in a classroom.
Thank you. I appreciate you
sharing how you're implementing
these types of programs. I did,
uh, hear the need for more
teacher development time and
preparation, important to assist
teachers with these tools and
then also including prep time
and development in the
secondary.
Thank you.
So we'll shift lanes a little
bit into math.
similar to literacy, the state
has also been looking at ways of
modernizing math instruction.
with the legislature considering
possible law on this, and PD
supported efforts focusing on
implementing a framework that
includes plotting math training
for teachers.
the development of new high
school math pathways and
proposed shifts and
instructional focus at earlier
grades.
The question, what are, what are
either the most promising
practices or obstacles you're
encountering
in improving student math
outcomes and what further
guidance or investments would be
helpful.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, again, that's quite
the uh loaded question uh
I don't know if I'm gonna
address all of it, um, and my
answer, but hopefully I'll kind
of give you an idea um of some
of the obstacles, especially
um, mostly at the elementary
level, there's been a focus
obviously with the letters
training, um, and reading
instruction.
and in literacy, uh, and math
has not had that focus, um, but
again, as an elementary
principal, I went through a
process a long time ago, um, the
Common Core standards are not
brand new.
Um, they've been out for a long
while
Um, we spent a lot of time in my
building on the math practices,
the 8 math practices, um, we
spent a lot of time diving into
the standards. Um, we have a lot
of teachers in the state of New
Mexico who go through
alternative pathways who haven't
had instruction in elementary
math instruction.
Um, and that's a huge
impediment.
uh because it's not easy. I
mean, most folks can, oh, we can
teach edition, we can teach
subtraction. It's not that easy
to teach elementary math
instruction, um, because you
have to be aware of the
continuum of the standards you
have to be aware of the
progression.
um, and so we need to have more
training for math teachers and
that's why I was, I was a little
disheartened that the, the one
math bill that was out there.
um, was, was sent down. I
thought that was going to pass.
And I think that that's
something
in my district, um, we saw a lot
of improvements in ELA based
partly on the letter's training
and, and getting teachers
trained up that way, um, there's
been no effort
um to provide anything similar
to math instruction. So, um, we
need the science of learning,
the science of math instruction,
and we need time for teachers to
actually
be trained before the school
year starts to get together
before the school year starts.
um, and to have again, I
mentioned it before, more
professional development and so
that's something that, that we
really need to focus on. And I
believe if the, if the
legislature takes that up with
uh the same way they took up the
letters and the science of
reading that we'll see results
as well in math instruction. Uh
we did have math games in my
district last year. I, I can't
mention what the numbers are.
They're, they're not as hardy as
the reading ones, um, but we've
made about 3% points of growth
across the grades that are
tested in the NM
SSA.
So.
thank you for that
I would echo the opportunity to
do something similar as far as
the development of teachers, uh,
again, building the repertoire,
uh, with respect to mathematics
in a similar fashion that we
have done as a state with
letters and reading, uh, science
of reading training, and there's
an opportunity there
This, this might be more of a
local decision, um, but that
doesn't mean there couldn't be
expectations and encouragement
in this area. One of the things
that we have found at the
elementary level, I think it's
very common that some people go
into mathematics and not ELA.
Um, I was a math teacher, a
representative of Sean, math
teacher, and there's a few
others here, um, maybe because
ELA and reading wasn't our um
area of interest as much as
mathematics was, and I think
that happens often at the
elementary level
where you have teachers who are
trying to teach several
different subject areas and
maybe they
instinctually
spend more time in one area than
another time at times for for
some.
uh because they're not as
comfortable with the all the
subject areas and so the more
opportunities we can give them
to get more experience in, in
teaching, uh, in these different
cross-content areas is, is a, is
a positive, but I also think
there's an opportunity there to
have, if, if, if your interest
is in teaching mathematics, you
know, at the elementary level
that we look at scheduling, uh,
so that the person who is really
good at teaching math is
teaching students math rather
than that same teacher having to
also teach ELA and the other
subject areas. And so content
specific opportunities at the
elementary level, uh, where,
where teachers can, um, show off
their skills and, and be able to
teach students uh with their
passions in those areas.
Mr. Chair, Kenny Rivers again,
um, I, some of the very same
things you've already heard. I
don't wanna have, I won't repeat
those, but I will tell you some
of the things that we are trying
to implement in ZUI because um
historically our math scores
have not been great, and we, we
are certainly aware of that. So
we have implemented using
high-quality math, the high
quality math instruction
framework which.
while I don't know all the ins
and outs of it because I'm not
the curriculum person anymore. I
will tell you basically a lot of
it is fundamentals and at the
elementary level and along with
that we're supporting teachers
as much as we possibly can by
giving them specific training in
math pedagogy
Um
for those students who are
behind, we do targeted
interventions
We have after-school programs.
and
um, as Ms. Hanks mentioned many,
many times in her presentation
the importance of data, we take
a long time to look at our data
to see specifically where we can
make improvements.
Have we encountered obstacles?
Yes, some of the very same ones
that my colleagues have, which
again is teacher capacity and
confidence. We have teachers who
are wonderful teachers that they
don't feel comfortable teaching
math.
and that's where we need to give
them added support.
Along with that, we have
students who are not on grade
level
when they come into a grade, so
there is that time where we have
to do interventions with them to
try to get them to where they
need to be.
Thank you for that snapshot on
the effort to make in your
district to improve math
outcomes. Uh, we heard the
importance to focus on math as
we have on literacy. We also
heard this morning how hard it
is to keep and develop math
teachers in the school.
With that, we'll go ahead and
transition over to instructional
time.
with changes to instructional
time in recent years.
there is growing interest in
understanding not just how much
time students spend in school,
but how that time is used.
I have two questions here, so
I'll start with the first. Can
you describe your district's
general schedule and how much
time students spend in core
academics versus specials.
We're just gonna do one at a
time
Uh, that's something that
actually hasn't changed too
much, um, in the regular school
day, uh, based on the, uh.
11:40 and, and we actually do
have the 180 days in our
district. I don't know if you
want to get into that at the
moment or not. Uh, that might be
a sore spot for some people, um,
but, but typically we do have um
um 45 minutes of specials,
sometimes only 30 in our
elementary schools, um, the rest
of the time is, is basically
spent with layer one, layer 2,
level 3, layer 3 instruction,
uh, math, teachers should have
at least 60 minutes a day and
level one or layer one.
um, in, in ELA in reading, they
should have 90 minutes. Um, so
when you throw in the 60 minutes
and the 90 minutes and you want
to try to get in your science
and your social studies, and,
and all the layer two
instruction, all the
interventions uh that Miss St
Stickney talked about. Um, your
day gets pretty full and so
teachers really from the time
they begin in the morning, the
time they leave, they have, you
know, maybe a 30 minute
hopefully duty free lunch and
then just about 45 minutes to
plan instruction,
um, to look at data to do all
the things that professional
learning communities do, um, but
also to do their whatever else
they need to do, grading, etc.
um, so their, their day is
pretty full and it looks like,
and we also have that the uh all
levels, 60 minutes of
instruction for heritage
language.
Um, at CCST we also have dual
language so their schedule looks
very similar to that without the
heritage language component.
specifically in Galt McKinley
County schools, um, for
elementary, it's a 4 hour and 45
minute devoted decor and and
these are all, these are all on
average hour and 15 minutes for
specials.
Um, and we appreciate the added
required time for elementary
schools. You're always worried
about, I think for 5.5 hours
approximately to now we're able
to offer for 6 hours of
instruction. Um, that at a time
you're always worried about
attention spans of different
levels of students, but for us
that has, that has worked out
well with that six hour period
of time.
Uh, for the middle school, it's
uh 4 hours in cops, 2 hours
elective, and in high school,
it's, it's for class periods out
of 7 in core, 3 in electives. I
visited with our curriculum
specialist before I came and
asked, I need to know
specifically how much time do we
devote to instruction and
after a few calculations, he
came up with a number of 80% of
the instructional time is
dedicated to our core
instruction, which is math,
reading, writing, science, and
social studies.
Specifically at the elementary
level, 120 minutes daily are
dedicated to reading and
language arts, 90
minutes daily or dedicated to
mathematics.
and our specials are designed,
which that would include art,
music, PE, libraries, uni
language and culture. They're
scheduled to complement, not
interrupt the core learning. At
as far as
time for teacher planning and
reviewing student data and such.
Each
day in grades K through 6, they
have 1 hour and 45 minutes daily
for planning a collaboration.
grades 7 through 9, 50 minutes
daily for planning.
grades 10 through 12, also 50
minutes.
Thank you um for this follow-up
question, we'll stay with the
Superintendent Stickney.
So we talked about how the day
looks like, um, can you address
whether teachers have enough
time to do the things we know
are valuable like planning.
um, reviewing student data,
collaborating and learning.
Yes, as I indicated, we have
certain times that we set aside
for that in a uh
as you can see, elementary has
almost 2 hours
set aside each day to do that.
In addition, in terms of being
able to look at the data, we
put in 2 days a year that we
dedicate strictly to looking at
the data. Uh, the first one will
be right after the 1st quarter
ends and then the second one is
right after we get back from
winter break, so that is what
the entire day is spent doing
along with that, uh, principles
have to do as as well as Gallant
and Kenley indicated earlier,
they have to do data report outs
each quarter. They
do those first of all to the
director of instruction and to
me, and then they also present
that information to the school
board.
In Gallaer County County
Schools, we talked about this a
little bit, but we have a PLC
opportunities. We have a late
start Thursday and Friday where
between those two days, we have
about 2.5 hours for our teachers
to be involved in the PLC
process. Um, that provides
opportunities for collaborative,
uh,
efforts to make sure that, for
example, the elementary level
that things are paced out
correctly that opportunities to
look at data to inform their
instruction for the the coming
week. Um, obviously, there's
prep time for all of our
teachers, but I, I wanted to
comment on this particular
question about this
intentionality of the state to
increase
more time for students and
adding increased instructional
days in the, in the summertime.
but we haven't really thought
about as much, or at least I
haven't seen the thought about
increasing teacher time.
um, and paying for that extra
teacher time because we're
with letters, those types of
trainings and the things that
our teachers need, uh, we need
some more time for our teachers
to be involved and not only
common planning, um, but also
the just the basics of lesson
planning and providing uh time
for them to be able to do a
really good job in that area.
Uh, we're, we're starting to
stretch our, our teachers thin,
um, and I know there's a
struggle with that because you
have uh unions and you have
those types of things that are
also at the table and those
discussions, but there may, I
think there needs to
be some thought uh from this
body, uh, Mr. Chair and
committee, to think about uh
teacher work time to make sure
that they're having the
opportunity to be prepared for
their lessons and for the
collaboration efforts that we
need to, to inform and to better
our instruction.
So I'm happy to go after Mr.
Hyatt, especially after his
answer right there because I'm
gonna echo a lot of what he
said.
I think it's so true. It's CCSD
and we went away from having
early release, at least twice a
month, um, and, and some years,
uh, every single week, um, to
having nories, no late start, so
teachers basically have that 45
minutes to pretty much do
everything aside from the two
extra professional development
days they have for analyzing
data like they do in in ZUNI
public schools. So with those 45
minutes, they're, they're
analyzing data, assessing
whether their students are
playing for interventions. Um,
they're doing all of their
lesson planning together as a
team, uh, to make sure they stay
together doing all those things.
There's not a lot of extra time
for, for instance, learning in,
in terms of how to teach math or
how to, to do um um a lot of
different things. Um, so I, I do
echo once again, Mr. Hyatt's
words. I think that's something
that this body could look at.
Um, if, how are there ways that
we can have teachers work um
beyond
their contract. And I don't know
how many of you've looked at
statistics of other countries.
Uh, I know I've seen Singapore,
Japan pops out. I believe
Japanese teachers have, and,
and, and I'm gonna make up
numbers, but I believe they have
something like 50% of their time
or 60% of their time is actually
working with students. The rest
of the time is planning.
In the United States, we say,
here's your students, get in
there, teach them.
And we've done that forever. Um,
and we continue to do that. We
need to give teachers time to
plan
Thanks.
we're still on.
Thank you.
So we'll again shift to funding.
So the legislature updated the
SCG in the past session, making
changes to the state's at risk
index, creating a stand-alone
factor for English learners and
changing the factor for
secondary students to include
6th grade students with
secondary students and increase
the factor for all students in
grades 6 through 12. How have
these changes impacted your
district?
And do you have any initial
ideas on what services,
programming or student support
your district might change or
bolster as a result of these
changes. And again, if you don't
mind, we'll stick with
Superintendent Sticky.
As many districts have in New
Mexico, well, not just New
Mexico across the country, our
enrollment has declined, not
significantly, but it has
declined the past few years and
as well as a result of that,
uh we have had declining federal
award amounts.
This year we had to move some
staff that had normally been
paid out of various federal
funds, uh, to operations, and
then after moving
the funding for those staff
members and and adding the
mandated salary increases.
The district SEG allocation only
increased by $11,761. Due to the
lack of funding,
for the mandated but not funded
level one salaries for our
native language and culture
teachers. Our district had to
find $570,000 to fund that
program last year.
We have a very robust
native language and culture
program where we start an
elementary. We have 5 full-time
Zuni language instructors.
at the elementary
and we don't want to stop that,
but this year we've
we're using some funding from
the Indian Education Act to pay
the salary and benefits for only
one of the 10 Zuni language
teachers that we have.
The additional fundings, if we
could get it would help offset
that unfunded mandate. For us,
that, that's a big issue.
um, because we certainly want to
continue the program that we
have.
at the middle school
we have 3 full-time teachers and
then at the high school, we have
one.
We have 2 high schools and we
share, we share that individual.
So, like I said, we have 10
total teachers who we are paying
the level one salaries to and
not receiving a thing.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we had a lot of time
to talk about this in our
presentation, um, I just wanna
echo the work that, you know,
that you have done, um, again,
in, in really how the funding
formula can, can be made better.
I think there's more work to do,
um, but we really appreciate,
especially the ELL um
piece of the funding formula
that you've kind of designated
as an area that I think that we
uh, we need to have uh spelled
out for us so that I think
districts across the state, um,
see the need and see that money
coming in and that they're
have the opportunity to to
specifically target those areas,
um, seeing that it's a, it's a,
um
emphasis of the state without
funding to do so. Uh, and so
that's, uh, those types of
opportunities where not, things
aren't just lumped in the
formula and there's
opportunities to uh parse out
specific parts of the funding
formula to target what we need
to as a state I think is
valuable, but I know there's
also, there's a challenge with
respect to micromanaging with
funding of school districts and
not providing local autonomy,
which can also be a challenge
for the legislature to, to
implement. Um, and so I, I, like
I said, we, we've talked a lot
about this in our present
ation so I'll give, give Mr.
Carlson some more.
Thank you, Mr. Hyatt. I did
listen to that presentation, or
a good portion of it by the way.
And one of the things that Mr.
Hayden mentioned, uh, is that
some of that funding is already
being utilized
the heritage language teachers
um are not paid for out of the
SCG, operational funds will not
cover those. Does that me?
I'll just get a feedback. Maybe
you just turned off.
OK, we're good yeah
Um, so, so we're funding other
things like our we have a
department called the
Intercultural and Community
Outreach Department, the ICO
department, um, that does a lot
of things that are extras, um,
that goes out, it's a, there's a
safety net for communities. Uh,
they go out and provide all
kinds of services, uh, that we
wouldn't normally be able to
provide, and those are not
provided, um, again with the SCG
with operational funding. So
what we end up doing is we end
You don't need to get into that
too much right now, um, but
we've been dipping into that in
order to provide those services.
So the money we're getting for
our ELL students and other
monies in the SCG will basically
go ahead and offset the money
that we're already spending
Um, I'm just gonna mention real
quickly to this body. I know
there's a lot of talk about,
well, uh, certain districts like
probably Gallup and ZUNI and
CCSD. Well, now they have an
impact aid money, so they're,
they're just rolling in the
dough. Um, I want everybody to
understand that CCSD
has lost 2000 students in the
last 10 years and actually more
like 2100, um, the SCG provides
us now about $14,000 per
student, and maybe that was last
year's numbers. Uh, if you do
some real quick math, and I know
some folks on this panel can do
that math real quick.
And others are gonna say, what
are you saying? Um, 2000
students times $14,000 per
student, if you do that real
quick, just multiply the 14
times 2, and that's 28, throw
the zeros at the end, $28
million.
that our district doesn't get.
Our district was built.
for basically for 8000 students
between 3 communities and it was
staffed accordingly.
So as, as a district, we've of
course had to downsize.
And, and I don't know if folks
have ever had to do that, but
it's a really difficult process.
I mean it's something that does
take time, um, and it takes some
effort and it takes some, some
unity between the school board.
and the superintendent and, and
his staff.
And so that's something we've
been looking at for the last
several years, um, to, to try to
figure out how we can actually
utilize that extra funding
without just supporting the
programs that we already have.
Um, so again, but thank you
again for, for thinking about
that. Um, I'm thinking about
those ELL students and providing
that funny funding specifically
for those students. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So, a Superintendent Stickney
does have a prior appointment.
She was wonderful to join us
today, but there's one question
I want to ask her before she
leaves. I think it's a favorite
that we've been asking among all
our superintendents. And the
question is, what keeps you up
at night as a superintendent,
and what would you most want
lawmakers to understand about
your work and your community
needs.
You know, I thought about that
question a lot because we had it
in advance, um, actually
discussed it at length with uh
my our CFO who's sitting behind
me.
and
most of the time I think by the
end of the day I'm tired enough
that I do sleep. I'm gonna be
honest with you, but
for me
it's always trying to keep the
students as being the focus.
even if it's been a tough day
At the end of the day, can I say
we made the students the focus,
um, and when we can't
and sometimes we can't because
something comes in that day that
you don't expect
Um, that's when I have a hard
time sleeping.
so.
thank you
Um, there, there's several
areas. It depends on the night
and what happened during the day
on, on what, what sleep patterns
look like. Um
but this year, I, I thought of
obviously safety is always a
high priority for us, uh, given
the, the nature of um
things that are happening across
the nation and even in our
communities, that, that's a huge
challenge. Specifically, one of
the safety things that we're
really concerned about right
now.
Uh, is
the, the proliferation of THC
amongst our youth with the
legalization of marijuana.
um
in my opinion, in our opinion,
there have not been enough
safeguards in New Mexico to
protect the distribution, um,
the lookalike packaging, uh,
the, uh, mimicking of child type
products, uh, that are laced
with uh THC, um, things that are
happening in Mexico that we're
seeing in our schools is a
concern for us. We've had
students
some of which knew what they
were taking and some of which,
uh, elementary students, mid
school students that did not
know what they were taking, uh,
but because the packaging of the
edibles looked like um items
that they would normally eat or
candy that they would normally
eat or other things that they
would normally eat.
um
that's, that's very disturbing,
uh, that, um
we've had students go to the
hospital because of those types
of lookalike substances that are
being sold, uh, or shared across
to New Mexico.
Uh, and so when it comes to
things like you know there's in
the city of Gallop, they're
talking about the delivery.
of
these types of products, um,
it's, it's, we, we just see it
as more opportunity for our
students to have that in their
homes and potentially take it.
uh, or participate in that.
We're also seeing not only
lookalike packaging, but also
lookalike vapes that are hard to
detect in schools.
Um, even to the point where
we've seen uh hoodies with the
strings as a, as the vape end
for the mouth, um, which is
extremely hard to detect. We've
dumped a lot of, a lot of money
into vape detectors and other
security measures and camera
systems. Um, we've also been
working with local county and
preventative measures with DARE
that we started up this year,
other programs to help students
understand, um, what it is that
New Mexico is, is selling, so
they can tell the difference.
Uh, so that's one thing that's,
that, that's been keeping us up
at up at night lately. Um, when
we have students go to the
hospital for those types of
reasons. Um
funding obviously earlier in the
year, there was a concern about
federal funding
and whether we're gonna receive
some of those title funds as a
school district or as a state.
and that made me start really
thinking about, are we reliant
too much on federal funding, and
we're not providing sufficiently
for our students through our
regular state funding.
And if that federal funding were
to go away, um, what types of
things would we have to cut and
not be able to continue to do
when servicing our students. So
there's a, a couple examples of,
of, of things that have kept me
up at night as of late.
Thank you both for those, um,
I'd like just to add to that a
little bit. And one of the
things I, I, I preach to
teachers and I preached to
principals and to everybody I
can talk to is one of the most
important things, the most
important thing we can do with
our students is to make
connections with them. Um, and
those of you who are teachers in
the past, you know exactly what
I'm talking about. Every single
student in our schools needs to
feel connected and needs to know
that there's somebody in that
building that cares about them
as a person, as an individual,
and
sometimes that doesn't happen.
And even if it happens a little
bit, it goes awry. And so one of
the things that, that keeps me
up at night,
more than just about anything,
um, besides the alarm,
going off is, um, we, we have
had some mental health
struggles. Uh, there's a,
there's a lot of poverty and a
lot of
folks who are experiencing a lot
of issues, a lot of destitute
kind of situations. Um, we have
Mr. Hyatt mentioned they had
something like 600 homeless
students. We have almost that
many up in the four corners even
though we have half as many
students as they have.
And because of that, because of
dire family situations, um,
because of drug abuse, because
of uh family violence. We've had
student suicides in the last
couple of years.
We've had students try to take
their lives.
this year
and, and God forbid they're
successful and, and we don't do
enough to make sure that's not
happening in our schools. We
don't do enough
in terms of providing um the
health services to students who
are in need of, of that kind,
those kind of services.
And when you do a better job in
our district, and across the
state. And that, that does keep
me upmate
Thank you.
Thank you. And just thank you
all for your input and providing
your insight into your districts
and thank you for the role
you're playing in education and
providing services to our
students across the state. With
that, Mr. Chair, we will stand
for any questions or comments.
Thank you, Mark. Uh, I've got on
the list, uh, Representative
Baca and Cullen, others who want
to get on the list, let me know.
I represent Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, in the interest of time,
I'll be very short, so please,
you know, um, be brief if
possible.
One of the
uh one thing that people ask me
all the time is
fix schools
How are you gonna fix schools?
They, they ask us to pass laws.
They ask us to do these types of
things, and I will say.
that is, it is my belief that
it's not curriculum,
instructional strategies, length
of the school year.
thing that's gonna fix schools
is people.
That's what's going to fix
schools
So
I, I think those other things
are part of it.
but one of the things that we
have and it's the glaring.
kind of the elephant in the room
attendants.
OK, so I'm gonna ask my
question.
with about 40% of our students
being chronically absent. What
has that had?
What impact has that had in
classroom instruction?
And I'll just say for me as a
classroom teacher, if about 1/3
of my kids are gone every day, I
would have to spend a lot of
time reteaching and getting them
caught up, which impacts the
experience of those other
students in the class, so are
you guys addressing some of
these attendance issues with
your, I guess tier 2 or the
multi MLSS, right? Can you just
briefly describe.
the challenges that have been
presented and what your
districts have done
to help both the kids who are
qua uh
chronically absent and the
students that are are in class
and may not be getting what they
need as far as instruction.
So, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Baca, thank you
for that question and, and
you're absolutely right. That's
a huge issue throughout the
state. Um, it's something that
its Central Consolidated, uh,
we've been struggling with. If
you look at our numbers, they're
higher than the average numbers.
Um, they're not, not maybe the
highest, but they're pretty
high. Um, and so we've, we've
done is we're, we're approaching
that first off at the building
level, um, but we need more
help. And so we've applied for
the attendance grant, and we've
been told that we're getting
that grant and there is a, um a
session soon. And one of the
things that we intend to do is,
is we actually need boots on the
ground. Um, we need to go out to
families. We need to, to go to
the doorstep. We need to say,
um, is your child here today?
Are they, are they sick? Are
they able to come to school? We
need to actually force them to
come to school in some way or
coerce them to come to school. I
don't know if we can force them,
um, and that's something we
haven't really done enough of,
um, short of that, because
there is no stick for really for
any parents anymore, although
there are laws still supposedly
on the books, but no, everybody
knows nothing's going to be
enforced there. Um, it's based
on, it's the car.
And so what we try to do is we
try to provide enticing programs
we try to provide, like you
said, an environment where
students want to be in school,
um, who want to be, um
wanna be connected with the
people who are there in school
and the activities that they
have there in school. And that
includes extracurricular
activities that includes, um,
enjoying themselves in the
classroom and wanting to be
there. Um, short of that, again,
we just need help going out,
having liaisons who can go out
and visit families and find out
what's going on.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Marco,
basically what we've been doing
in Zuni is we actually started
an attendance campaign last year
where we did, um, we interviewed
students, parents,
school board members, teachers,
principals.
giving an explanation of why it,
it's good to be in school. What
are you missing? In fact, the
campaign is, uh, missing school
equals missing out.
And along with that, we have
everyone likes a little
competition. Our school sites
compete against each other every
month as to who's attendance is
best that month.
In addition to that, we at
our smaller high school where
attendance was is lowest. They
now have an attendance coach who
calls people every day, goes
home.
to home visits
Along with that, we have a
program called EDA that's, it's
a little different than just the
robocalls just saying your child
is not in school today. It will
ask why it's, it, it is an AI
program, but it's
most parents who are not aware
that it's an AI program.
Actually, we'll have a
conversation with them and
sometimes we'll even argue with.
the system, but that way, at
least we're finding out why.
those students aren't there
Mr. Chair, I representative
Baca.
I, I think
there's even a deeper root
cause, which we can't
necessarily address as a school,
a district or schools across the
state. We have, we have
community problems that need to
be fixed.
Um, and schools are looked at as
a, a catch-all for all the
problems to, to fix those
community needs. Um, and so
we understand that we're a part
of the solution, but I think uh
it's broader than just schools
solving the problem for, for
example, for attendance.
Um, but specifically
kind of our approach
actually 2020 until last year,
we had a significant,
significant drop in attendance.
Um,
and we have really worked hard,
uh, with specific goals and
outcomes, expectations from each
of our schools in attendance
improvement. I can't always
affect what laws get passed or
what laws as far as for
accountability get taken away.
Um, but on the ground, there's
resources that we can, we can
put together with respect to
homeschool liaisons for like the
individual contact with parents
and families.
Um
probably one of our biggest
changes in our district is
creating relevance. We talked a
lot about that in our
presentation.
Creating relevance and creating
an environment that students
want to be in is probably one of
the best ways in which we can uh
encourage families and students
to, to have their kids in
school. I'm making sure our
curriculum is not only
culturally relevant, but
specific career readiness and,
and relevant to what they want
to do in their life.
making sure as um Superintendent
Carlson talked about making sure
that we're providing
opportunities for relationship
building with at least one adult
in our school with students, uh,
and so a program, uh, we, we use
those two, we use calls, we do
those types of things, but I
think it comes down to students
feeling wanted in those schools,
in our schools, and making sure
we provide opportunities for
them to find value in attending
school is probably one of the
best things that we can do as a
school district.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you for your
answers. One of the things that
I'm going to say, and you're
gonna hear me say it this month,
you'll hear me say it in
September, I mean October, all
the way through session.
We need to give people a reason
to come to school.
We need to make sure that we
provide, I don't care if it's
athletics, fine arts, I don't
care if it's our clubs, I don't
care if it's the academics.
The other people we also get our
parents to school. We have to
engage our parents. We talked
about partnerships
uh, that we said many years ago
it was a partnership between the
school, the parents of the
community.
We need to make our preg make
sure our parents are
feel comfortable and coming to
the school that they're actively
engaged in that process with
their kids and the, the teachers
and the staff
we wanna make sure that our
staff is trained that they have
what they need.
and that they make sure that
they're working in a
a situation that they can be
successful.
and I think that's really what
we, you know, the way we fund
schools, we put a lot of money
into programs. We put money into
these types of things. I think
that we need to invest in some
of these other
kind of
extracurricular, extras or
co-curricular activities.
to get our students in here.
and to make sure that they want,
you know, that they, they have,
as you say, they feel safe
they feel connected, they have
that attachment
So I do think, and I'd be very,
I'm in this interest of time,
I'm gonna, I'm gonna kind of end
with this.
We need to have the discussion
about how we can provide that
relevance in the engagement.
because what we're doing
currently, you know, I heard
about the 90-minute block.
Think about if you were in your
college classes for 90 minutes,
you have that block. We need
transitions. We need those kind
of to get these guys engaged
we're, we're kind of numbing
these guys
by this. I would love to see us,
you know, I, I joke all the
time, was sitting in our chairs
for, you know, like basically
the length of a school day that
every, after every presentation,
we should have like a little
move break where we have, you
know, yoga or something like
that. We need to look about how
the instructional time and that
time for these guys to get that
reset is not wasted time. It's
time that it basically clears
the mind and prepares them for
that next set. So, Mr. Chairman,
Superintendents
uh, you guys, most of you have
my cellphone?
I would love to continue the
conversation about
how we can as a legislator
because I will say these are my
colleagues. Everyone here is
committed to that process. It's
not education isn't a political
issue. It's a state issue, and I
know that we're can admitted to
that. So thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Um,
so I had to, uh, I want to thank
you all for coming out and one
of the, the issues you had
brought up is, um, basically
professional work hours or, you
know, professional development.
and uh Mr. Chair, last year, uh,
last session I had done a bill
in reference to bumping up the
middle school and high school
work hours to 60 hours versus
the 30, and then luckily
Representative Romero had given
me the history of how that was
changed over the last couple of
years, um, and why that was
removed. So, um, Mr. Chair, one
of the issues that we had, it
got, it went through the house,
you know, um, it went through
education and Senate.
but finance would not hear it,
Senate Finance, um, because the
fiscal impact report actually
showed it was from $0 to $40
over $42 million of impact,
depending on how it was
structured. Um, and so I know
that we're putting so much on
teachers' plates, I mean, over
the years what I have seen is we
keep adding to it and then we're
taking away their professional
development, um, time that they
can work with their colleagues
and I think um
we keep extending the school
year. We keep making more hours
for our students to go, but
we're not really seeing the
improvement as like they thought
they would, and Mister Chair, I
think that really it's getting
back to some of the basics of
where our teachers are able to
get their professional
development and work together
and see on how we can increase
scores and what's working in the
classrooms and what's not
working in classrooms,
especially when we're looking at
math. I mean, we know that the
scores are extremely
low, you know, I go on Vista,
I've checked a lot of the
districts on that over the year
and we need to get back to where
we're supporting our teachers in
our, um, and, and unfortunately,
I think we're taken away and at
this point, I don't understand
why New Mexico's just not going
to a year-round school, because
we keep putting more and more
days on there and we're
expecting so much. So what I
would like is, um, I guess, get
down to the the question, um.
what is one of the
do you think in adding it,
embedding it into the workday
throughout the year or like um
superintendent Carlson was
saying is um.
like before school starts
getting some of those extra
days, um, cause I'm looking at
redoing this bill. We're gonna
have to look at what we're
looking at uh financially, so
that we can work with them to,
you know, with the analysis, so
thank you.
Just
it's loaded, I know
Mr. Chairman, Representative, um
on average, I think in New
Mexico, a teacher is paid for
about 37.5 hours a week. Um.
I think
there an opportunity, I think
there's opportunity, and I think
to, to extend the year, number
of days that a teacher works,
um, to provide that pre-year
training time, which has been
tight for us.
um, given our current current
union agreements and things like
that. But then also during the
year for that.
planning time during each day, I
think
sufficiently funding and
providing that opportunity for
more of a 40 hour a week for a
teacher, uh, would, would go a
long ways in helping alleviate
some of the stresses that come
with the different demands on
them as individuals, um, uh,
coupled with their, you know,
other duties and their families.
So, I don't know if that's an
opportunity or not or how much
the state wants to legislate
that, which obviously comes with
this other uh possible
challenges which you essentially
described earlier, um
I don't know that I know the
solution, but I know that we, we
have a, we have a time crunch
that's, that's growing.
um, as the more PD that we
require and those types of
things, uh, it, it, it
we've had an easier time
recruiting teachers and
retaining teachers, but giving
them the time to actually uh
complete their jobs and to give
their due diligence to their,
their students. There's gonna be
a breaking point that we're
gonna have to address sooner
than later.
Did you want
you wanna add that or no
Mr. Chair
Representative
for Zini Public School District,
it would probably be best if we
actually did most of that
professional development if we
put it before school starts. Um
because we don't have the, the
numbers of employees that the
other two districts have.
Our teachers already have other
responsibilities. Sometimes
they're class sponsors.
uh
or they do after school, other
things like that where I don't
know that we could add much more
to their day. And we've tried
putting some at the end of the
year, but it's almost like
they're done.
We, the students have finished
their year. We, we've done the
responsibilities we have to, and
I don't mean that in a negative
light on the teachers. It's just
they're, they have reached the
end of their year.
So for our district,
before the school year starts,
would be best.
Oh, echo what uh Stickney said.
I apologize for that, Mr. Chair,
and Representative Cullen, um, I
do believe that more needs to
happen during the day as well,
if, if at all possible. Um, but
I, I believe that a full week
of, of teacher planning time,
um, collaboration before the
school year begins would be
super helpful. Um, and, and
again, I don't know how that is
legislated. I would like to take
just a second though to kind of
mention something that I wanna
I appreciate this body first off
for espousing this.
this plan, um, but also, I, I
would like to ask you for more
funding unit, as a teacher
residency program.
Uh, because we have so few folks
going through our teacher, uh,
training programs. Um this is
something that has brought out a
lot of folks uh who have
bachelor's degrees and aren't
sure what to do, uh, with their
degrees and, and I'm bringing
this up partly from a personal
reason. I have a daughter who is
actually in the uh set program
in Albuquerque.
The special education teacher
training program, um, and I can
tell you right now that she's
been in it for a month or so.
She is nowhere near as
overwhelmed
as those folks who are in, in,
um, alternative licensure
programs who don't last.
They, they just typically don't
last and I'm not saying all of
them, but so many of them don't
because they're just thrown in
and, and there's just too many,
too many duties that a teacher
has on a daily basis, um, to, to
be addressed by somebody who's
just barely keeping their heads
above water. So, so I'd like you
to think about perhaps fully
funding the teacher resident
residency program, so it's more
than $35,000 but it's at least
closer to a full salary for a
teacher. So the districts don't
have to kick in
um, to, in order to supplement
that is what we do at Central
Consolidated. We do have a
program, um, that we, in
conjunction with San Juan
College up there in, in the four
corners here. Um, where we do
have residency program and, and
we can only support so many
teachers just because we're
kicking in the extra
uh to get them close to the 50
or now 55, but also for the
benefits. So I just thought I'd
throw that in. Hopefully that
sort of fit right in there.
Apologize for that.
Thank you
Thank you. And, and I've been
reminded we do have a plated
lunch waiting for us. We also
have a very tight afternoon
schedule, so we really can't do
a, a working lunch and we've got
a reception then that we're
gonna be bumping up against. So
please people in keep keep
questions tight and panelists
keep your answers very tight
also. Uh, Representative
Garrett.
Thanks. I actually won't ask for
a response, Mr. Chairman.
Sitting here, I remembered when
I taught for 5 years at a middle
school in Seoul, Korea.
The way that teachers
collaborators, all the teachers'
desks were in the same room.
They didn't have their silo, and
so you'd have a problem with
someone and you'd come in and
say, well, how the heck did you
teach math? So you're constantly
collaborating because you
weren't in your silo. And then
as a middle school teacher, we
originally we had teams. We had
families meeting with the the
same students. And so if a
teacher and a student, you know,
good news, some of us
clash with certain students,
you'd have other people to work
with. And then all of a sudden
there was so much concentration
on test scores that those teams
were often broken up, so that
kids got these specific classes.
So I just think we have to
reflect on not just, you know, a
PLC 45 minutes a week isn't a
lot, but we have to kind of
revisit how we build in natural
collaboration time, just to
comment because I think it was
Superintendent Carlson, you
brought up all the collaboration
time in Asia, and a lot of it
comes about because teachers are
sitting next to each other.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you all for your panel
presentation, uh.
I, I wanna
foundationally
recognize.
that um I believe poverty and
social economic conditions are
systemic.
So because of that I am
directing some questions
relevant to that. I'm gonna
begin with um just quickly, um
the Zuni
and uh
the Zuni
Public school presentation
in your chart,
it shows
it highlights actually a
majority of Native American
population.
So, and you talked about
cultural and linguistic.
education, centering, I believe
I heard centering that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, but I'm
interested in how is it being
embedded.
in the curriculum in the
instruction.
and in the college career
readiness programs. Part one
question. The second, what
evidence shows that it is
improving um
achievement and engagement
overall.
Mr. Chair, Representative
first off, the reason, the way
that we're embedding a, a lot of
that at the elementary level,
not only do we have the
standalone Zuni language classes
where the teacher
is full-time, but we also have
probably 98% of, I mean, I mean
it might have that quite right,
but most of our elementary
educational assistants also have
a Zuni language.
license, uh, the native, the
520. So they
assist the classroom teacher.
So that's one way that it's
embedded in, in the regular
classroom.
Um
the 5 20s who teach full time.
they are actually teaching, I
believe it's 4 classes
per day
and the times that they are not
with a group of students by, by
themselves, they're also going
into classrooms to assist.
Um, at the middle school,
we ensure that there is always
one of the Zuni language
teachers, there's one for each
grade level
They are a part of the team, uh,
the
planning team, the PLC, they
make sure that they're part of
that and um
with reference to your question
as to whether it's making a
difference.
Can I prove there's direct
causality? No, probably not, but
our scores
while they're not going up
drastically, they are improving.
They've improved since 2017.
Thank you, um, for that
I won't beleaguer it, but
at some point, I'd like to see
it
how it's embedded in the
curriculum, the actual
curriculum, not just the
delivery, but thank you for your
response. Just to move
uh quickly across the fact
sheets, um.
I've noticed that rural and
tribal communities, of course,
we went, we know face barriers
such as transportation, um, gaps
in technology.
language access. I'm interested
in knowing what models you are
using to expand
family engagement and wraparound
supports, and how are you
measuring whether these efforts
improve attendance, and that's
kind of tagging on to what
representative Baca was trying
to drill down into, so if you
could eat just briefly
um, indicate whether you're
using certain models and, and
what they are.
I
again, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, and I
apologize but I am going to have
to leave because I actually in
just a few minutes, I have uh a
tribal consultation actually at
1:30, so, uh, what we are using
at
the elementary and middle school
and this year we're meeting and
went up to the high school. It's
called Academic Parent Teacher
Teams.
That's the model that we're
using for
parental engagement
Mr. Chair Representative, we
also use a version of, of
academic parent teacher teams,
um, and we showed the data in
our presentation, so you'll find
that in our packet
Uh, we, we also see, we have
about
10% of our students that don't
have any cell service access to
where they can actually get
internet activity. Um, and so
that has been a, a, a big
challenge for us.
uh, and the cost associated with
that, we have a 1 to 1 device,
um, situation for all of our
students, but the connectivity
is definitely a challenge
Transportation is a challenge.
Uh was reduced funding, that's
becoming even more of a
challenge. Um, again, we have
students driving long distances
and, and, and how we actually
ended up putting internet on the
buses so that students could
actually um do work or do
research, whatever it might be
on the buses during their travel
time.
Uh, but the expense of providing
kind of that wrap-around service
that you're talking about to
provide
Starlink type services fairly
expensive for our rural areas.
Um
again, I've talked a lot about
some of the things that we're
doing with respect to
communication with families and
we have home school liaisons in
every one of our schools that,
uh, administration and teachers
have access to to help
build that collaboration or that
relationship with families if
needed, or to, to expand that
opportunity, um, for
communication. Um, those are a
few of the things that we're
doing. We really do look for,
for gaps that we have in those
areas. Um, some of it's
anecdotal that information that
we receive, um, but we're always
trying to tailor what we do to
make sure that students have
access. Whether it's our
transportation or whether it's
our early college program. Um,
you can live anywhere
in our county and have access to
those opportunities just as they
would as if you lived uh next
door to the college and so we're
really intentional about how we
think through those things to
make sure that it's as equitable
as possible, um, and sometimes
that equity is favors the rural
areas more than the city center
and vice versa, um, some of
those challenges you can't quite
overcome. Um, but we're, we're
constantly thinking about how we
can provide a more holistic
approach to access.
I'll go ahead and add to that,
uh, we have a lot of the similar
supports, but I, I really wanna,
um, kind of jump off of what
Representative Baca said as far
as bringing parents into
schools.
Um, we have, uh, communities up
north where, uh, there are no
amenities in, in the
communities. So there, there's
no access to things that you
might find in here in Gallup.
There's, there's not libraries.
There's not a community pool,
there's not those kind of
things. So we've embarked on a
community school program in
several of our schools and
we're, we're taking advantage of
what the state has provided, and
I'd like to just put a little
bug in the ear of you all, um,
that the funding for that, it,
when it was $150,000 for school,
that allowed us to, to have an
individual uh at that school who
had fully licensed who could go
ahead and, and administer what
services they need, um, but
that the amount has dwindled to
40,000 and, and at 40,000, we
can't really employ anybody. So
what we have is folks who are
splitting their time
Um, and, and that does create
some issues, especially if those
schools are 40 miles apart.
uh, so I just kind of like to,
Because again, if we can bring
parents in, uh, we just had an
event
2 weeks ago in, in Newcombe, and
it was called The Drums of
Summer.
and we probably had 300 people
from the community come in
and they loved it. We had uh
KTNN there broadcasting. Uh, so
we need to do a lot more of
those kinds of things. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. And this
final question real quickly to
um Superintendent Gallop
McKinley, there's, uh, I noted
a, a, a decline, of course, in
your chart on enrollment.
So I'd like to know how will you
balance uh financial and
operational pressures with
community needs, and the second
part is, is kind of loaded if
you need to think about it a
little bit more. What metrics
should the legislature hold you
accountable to over the next
say, 5 years to ensure that Yazi
is wearing compliance is not
only promised but delivered.
It's very important during for
these discussions that we're
having.
right now
Mr. Chair, Representative
if the funding pressures are,
are, are real with declining
enrollment, which is happening
across the state of Mexico. Uh,
we did some research in in last
years about, there's been a
significant um birth rate
decline and then economics is a
significant factor in, in
families moving out of the
state. Uh, and so with that
comes a lot of pressures. We've
actually had to consolidate and
close 3 schools in order to
become more efficient. That's
been our approach from day one
has become really efficient
and intentional with the dollars
that we do receive. And so as
these fluctuations in funding
happen or changes in enrollment
happen, we're able to continue
to services that we think, we
think are the most valuable. So
becoming really efficient as a
district has been a priority for
us for several years, and that's
really helped us kind of get
through some of these storms
that we've, we've been involved
in or foresee potentially
coming. um
but the other thing is
really being intentional about
not doing
too much, but becoming really
good at what we do, if that
makes sense. Um, districts, you
can spread yourselves really
thin and trying to do too much,
not super effectively, but
really focusing on, that's why
we have our strategic plan is to
really narrow down what are
those areas we really want to
focus on and try to do them
really well, so we can build on
top of that as that becomes
embedded in the way that we do
things. And so we've gotten to
the point where a lot of the
things that we do are very
embedded in the systems that
we've created in the school
district, which allows us to
take on more
uh things that you asked in your
first question, for example,
with respect to providing more
holistic opportunities, uh, and
services to our families. Um, so
let's put us in a good place for
that. But again, kind of what I
said, what keeps me up at night
is, uh, funding cliffs, um, the,
the funding in Mexico isn't
isn't always gonna be the same.
And I've, I've been through some
of those financial crisis before
in Mexico and so.
um that's, that's my answer to
the, the first one. I apologize.
Representative, what's your
second question? What metrics
should the legislature hold you
accountable to over the next 5
years, um, to ensure Yazi
compliance is not only promised
but delivered.
Well, I think the first metric
is actually for the legislature
to make sure that they've
actually provided the adequate
funding. Um, it's a, it's a
funding lawsuit, and I think
it's been turned into a, at
times, I'm not speaking any
individuals, but it's been, it's
been
turned into a
how do we
how do we control how every
single dollar, what happens with
it, and I understand your level
of accountability that you need.
I understand that we need to be
held accountable also. Um, but
providing sufficient funding and
then the accountability metrics
could be significant, but as
long as those metrics
are done in a way that's um
we're getting good data. I think
that's a problem in New Mexico.
Uh, PED is probably to some
extent overwhelmed with the
things that they're trying to do
to keep up with just the basics
of what they're supposed to do
with the sports to put on top of
them data and actually collect
it in an appropriate way and to
actually have good data to rely
on is a challenge. And so I
think those are two things that
first and foremost need to be
fixed. Um, but I think there
needs to be attendance. There
needs to be those
basic types of things that we're
held accountable to our
proficiency growth, there's too
much reliance on proficiency
itself, but I've seen in the
data across the last 9 years
where I've seen school districts
that are dropping in
proficiency, yet there's still
overall at a higher percentage
of proficient students, yet
there's other districts and
Central's one of them. I've seen
Zuni and I've seen us, has
consistent growth each year, yet
that's not completely
recognized. I think we should be
focused on growth rather than
just proficiency levels in the
state of New Mexico.
Um,
that's you'll see it in our
strategic plan of one of our
goals is to be in the top 3 of
the large school districts of
the top 20 in growth.
uh because we value that, um, we
know we have still a ways to go.
We've had to dig ourselves out
after uh experienced five years
ago. Um, but those types of
metrics I think are valuable. I
could, I could probably go on
and on that, but there's
Mr. Carlson speak to it.
Thank you. That's OK. I just
wanted to get an idea because
we're involved and engaged in
these discussions right now, I
wanted to get your opinion on
this. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And last, we have
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um
I, I just wanted to, uh, think
the superintendents for the
presentation today, but also for
all of the work that y'all do. I
know that you came into a
district and it's very difficult
to transition and you've done
some incredible work in your
districts. I hear about some of
the things that you're doing.
They're very innovative and very
much in line with what we want
to see our, for our students. So
I wanted to thank you for that.
And um it's just a comment, not
a question
So, um, that was it, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I think that wraps up
the morning session. Thank you
all for being here. Zoe's one of
the areas where I know the
committee gets lots of
information and gets a feel for
what education in this area in
this region is about. So thank
you for taking time out of your
very busy schedules to be here,
uh, for the committee, we do
have a plated lunch by the chef
from the Gallop McKinley Schools
who provided the amazing
breakfast this morning of the
avocado toast. I believe we are
back in another room. uh
we are going to try and start no
later than about 1:15. So that
gives us about 40 minutes or so
for lunch, I think everyone, and
so, uh, if you'll direct us
where we're headed
and with
