housing 118 bed nights,
referrals that I received from
the shelter and also from other
places can grow higher, um, and
for the period I'm talking about
is from just March to July, but
I received 30 referrals, and out
of those, I'm only able to work
with so many.
But, um, we're looking to grow
and expand and do as much as we
can, so, um, anything that we're
able to do to strengthen our
efforts and
um have our operations run
smoothly is beneficial to our
community.
Uh, one of the other additional
grants we've received is a
community
project fund from Senator Lujan
in the amount of a million
dollars.
And so we're working, we're in
conversation with the city of
Gallup to purchase a building in
uh the downtown area to, um,
renovate that and turn that
potentially into a transitional
housing building or into a
shelter.
So,
um,
the need here is, is pretty
strong. We, we need uh
transitional housing
building, which is closer to a
reality than an actual shelter
at this point.
Uh, we, we would
very much appreciate a shelter
and
a shelter close to a healthcare
center would, would be great,
um, a lot of the
effects of trauma um,
you know, require medical
intervention and support.
And so just kind of concerning
the transportation and
you know, how can we help these
people is, is, is kind of our
primary concern. So we're open
for any questions at this point.
OK, thank you. Um, we will start
with Representative Luhan and go
around this way.
Um, let's, let me look at time.
Um
4 minutes, 4 minutes. All right,
real quick. So you've gone over
some of the grant money that you
received, so the Fed federal
money would be under HUD that
you're, you're looking at as a
county given any funding to you.
Just really, and I'm just gonna
ask you really quick so I can
get through the uh
the last time we received
funding from the county was um
before COVID.
OK.
And so since then, you've,
you've participated in a capital
project with them where you've
turned over
um, your title of property, and
they own it now and want to
charge you $10,000 a month for
rent for 1600 square foot
building and and I'm just giving
like my overview all of this.
You want that size of a building
because you want to put multiple
different um programs or those
running these programs, probably
all nonprofits so that you have
better communication and better
handle on things. So how many
from those uh uh from all those
programs and those nonprofits.
what is the employment, how many
people are working for those,
those different that entire, so
right now we're understaffed
because we have no place to put
them. Um, so as soon as we get
into that building, we have a
potentially fully staffed part
of the plan is also to have a
sane examination room in there.
Um, and then another part of
that plan is to have classrooms
where we can actually, um, you
know, run our programs, and then
another part of that building
plan.
um, is to have a children's play
area. So, you know, it's
separate from the actual
conversation when
the advocate is working with the
parent
So reminder to go through the
chair. Yeah, madam Chair, thank
you. Um, sorry about that. Uh,
just I'm like so I'm sorry, apo
apologies. Um, so, um.
with the $1 million that you got
from Senator Ben Ray Lujan.
Is it possible that you can buy
back that building from and just
putting it out there, buy back
the building from or get the
title back from the county. So
then you're not looking for
other properties. Um, I don't
know. I'm just asking. We can
talk about that later, but
that's just one thought I have,
um, Madam Chair, and the other
thing is, um, I think it's a
great idea. I think you're
planning this correctly. Um, and
you, you mentioned SB 12, and 3.
So we have many conversations,
Madam Chair, about the, about
that legislation. It became
SB1 and SB 2 and 3 became SB 3,
just so you know, feed your
conversations, have, has the
AOC, um, the Office of the
courts come to gallop and have
you had a meeting and mapping
and discussions of how they are,
their executive committee is
going to, um, really, um,
integrate with the, cause it's
just not the county that has to
say in this. The public has a
say in the organizations.
Everybody has, and that's what
they're
they're really emphasizing
everyone has a say in this. Have
you met with them, Madam Chair?
So I, for the fir the first
question, it's, it's common
practice for cities and counties
to turn over the property back
to the nonprofit that's happened
in Santa Fe, that's happened in
Farmington, that's happened in
Las Cruces, Riodoso, Carlsbad,
you know, it's common practice.
And so another common practice
is for the rent to be used as
in-kind donations, so we can use
that as a match fund for our
federal grants.
And so that was a practice that
happened here prior to the
change.
Um
and, and so
I don't know, it it's using
federal funds to purchase a
building that was renovated by
state funds, kind of seems like,
um, illegal.
uh,
and then so to the next portion
of the question, um
I, I did send a reach out to
Esperanza with AOC and they just
released an RFP which is only
available to representatives of
local governmental entities or
tribal entities to coordinate
the funding distribution of
that. So there, there's not a
lot of appreciation in this
county for the work that
nonprofits do. And, um, we just
hope to be invited into that
conversation. And one of the
other things I'd like to mention
is
that no other entity could do
the work that we are doing
because by uh Boca.
regulations, um, city and
government entities can't have
access to the confidential
information that we, we do.
Thank you, Madam Cho. Those,
those are really good answers.
I, I have a few others, so I'd
like to talk with you after.
Thank you, Mancha.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for your presentation
and I really appreciate all your
work. I think it's incredibly
important. So I am thankful for
Representative Lujan for getting
to some of my questions
regarding the capital outlay and
everything with your actual
building when it comes to the
the rent and everything.
And I'm just wondering if you
have had conversations lately
with your county and your and
your legislators in one room to
see what you can work out to get
that title back to you guys.
I've, I've reached out, um,
Senator, um, Pinto has been
great. Um,
I've left messages. I haven't
reached out to Represent
Johnson, so I will make sure I
do that.
Um, and I've left messages for
the others, um, there's been no
return calls feedback,
uh, just because of the
tenseness of the relationship we
do employ an attorney, and that
attorney has been in contact
with the county's attorney
Um,
and so that correspondence has
been there.
And so currently, um,
uh we received a letter from the
county saying that we've, we
originally had a management
agreement in place prior to us
turning over the title.
After the renovation, we were
presented with a lease agreement
that's substantially changed the
terms of that management
agreement, which we didn't agree
to. So we did not sign that
lease agreement, followed by a
letter from the county saying
that because we haven't moved
into the building, we're in
violation of the previous
management agreement, but we
don't have the keys and we've
requested for the keys.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. And it sounds like
a circular firing squad
situation. So if I was your
legislator, I would say, you
know what?
If the county wants to give me
any more requests for capital
outlay, I'm not going to honor
any of your requests until you
fulfill your promises. So that's
what I probably would do in my
county, because if they did
that, I would just be like, OK,
sorry, I'm gonna give it to the
city or some or someone else. So
it's it's a little bit the wild
west Island sounds like it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And so,
next question regarding the
COVID shutdown, the governor
closed down. I thought that
domestic violence shelters were
essential. I mean, in my
opinion, every business, every
every entity is essential, but
can you tell me more about that?
And are, you said you're still
in a hotel right now. So how's
that working security wise as
well? Um, not very good at all.
In fact, uh, we've had a, uh, a
few very close calls.
very close calls
Um
so the building that we were in,
uh, previous to COVID is a
two-story, 8-room building which
has a common kitchen and a
common bathroom and shower area
and the ventilation of that
building was pretty bad
Um, and so, um,
complaints were made to the
governor's office, CYFD
investigated, issued a letter to
shut down the building
And so we shut the building
down, moved, uh, the clients
into better uh hotel rooms.
and we've, we've actually gone
through a few hotel rooms and
eventually found one that met um
the skill that we can actually
afford.
And so we've continued working
with that business owner since
then. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair, and I, I'm so sorry that
this happened to you because I
know especially in one of those
situations where it's that
person could
their their life could be on the
line and just not having that
security to keep that individual
out and away from this
individual who was the abused
victim. I think that's
incredibly scary. So, thank you
for what you do. I, I don't know
what we can do as a legislature
to, to help you. But if you have
any suggestions, I'm probably
out of time, but go ahead,
ma'am, I would say, I mean,
regulate some of this capital LA
funding and you know
preventing from entities like
the county from benefiting. I
know they're protected because
it's a state arm, but um there's
abuse in there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
right on time this time.
Senator Pinto, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um
thank you for the work you do.
Thank you for your presentation
and I know it's we've tried to
be patient in that sense of
seeing um things come to to
fruition, which they haven't.
So I'd like to um
I don't have much questions for
you cause I'm kind of in the
loop on this and I will, um,
talk to the chair here before um
questioning ends here and see
what we can do as far as support
for, for you guys.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Good timing. Um, and, and just,
just for the members to know,
I'm going to um contract, uh
contact the president pro tem
and try and get Senator Pinto
appointed, so we will have a
quorum, uh, Representative Block
has been kind enough to say he
won't question the quorum
because we, it's been rolling
kind of, um, but we have had 4,
so Senator Pinto will make 5,
and once I get word back from
the Senate pro tem, we will have
a quorum and we can make a
motion.
So Representative Johnson, thank
you, Madam Chair. Good morning,
colleagues, and good morning
everyone. Thank you for your
presentation. All of you, uh, my
colleagues, my community
members, relatives, I just have
a couple of questions. Hotel,
what, what hotel are you in? I
wasn't aware you were in a
hotel, uh, the Howard Johnson,
the Howard Johnson. So I thought
that the Howard Johnson was no
longer a hotel
and it was transformed into
office buildings and a place
where um we hold conferences
because I don't
is it really a hotel? Yes, yes,
so it's a pretty large, I think
it's got what, 200+ rooms, so
half of it's a hotel, but where
you are at is not a hotel,
that's what I'm saying. That's
correct. OK, so it's really not
a hotel where you're at.
Technically, well,
it's the structure of a hotel
building, and it is incorporated
as a hotel.
Um,
I just want to confirm the, the,
the picture of where you're
located, you're actually located
in an office and not in a hotel
room, is what I want to confirm.
No, we're actually located in a
hotel rooms. I've been there,
you're in an office. The office
buildings and a. There's been
some concern that um that, that
may be privileged, the location
may, we may not want it to be,
um,
too public. Gotcha. OK. I'll
stop there. And then my other
request is, is it possible for
you to um
give us a list of
the funding that you um went
over, um, you know, your funding
from a congressman Luhan, and
our earmarks from the state are
capital outlay over the years.
And then have they all been
expended? Do we have any
reversions according to the
county, yes, there was one
reversion, which was our initial
request back in 2019.
Um, might have been 2020, and
that was to remediate mole
in our administrative building
And so I believe the county
spent like $6000 worth. And
that may have been um returned
back to the state funds. Um
and but the rest, the rest would
have been expended by the county
at this point. Do we know how
much that was?
Um, I believe it was 3.8
million. OK, that was reverted.
No, not reverted, spent on spent
spent on renovation of the 103
West Aztec property. OK.
And then, but we don't know how
much was reverted, maybe.
Uh, we reauthorized a lot of
that, and so very, very few. I,
I don't, in fact, I don't think
any funding has been reverted.
Maybe the initial request just a
reminder to go through the
chair. I know we're we're all
tired. Madam, we just want to
talk. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, just one more question. Do
you, do you, you mentioned, um,
looking for location for a
shelter near one of the
hospitals or clinics.
Have you done any studying?
um, or shopping, building
shopping or land shopping or any
type of feasibility study
regarding that. Uh, no, I don't
have any funding for feasibility
study. Um, we did get 6 acres of
land donated to us from the New
Mexico.
um, western New Mexico
University out of Silver City.
And so we, we have that, that
land which um has been deemed a
little difficult to build on.
Um, but I do know that the IHS
building has been being planned.
and wherever that location is,
it would be nice to be, be, be
around that area. Um, generally,
when I do
uh, everything that I, that, you
know, we do, we have to follow
procurement processes, and so
that's, um, what we do.
So, but at this point, um,
there's, there's not a lot of
buildings available in Gallup.
There's not a lot of homes, um,
so we, we would have to bill for
our needs, and I think in terms
of the office building, I think
you're talking about Hozhou
because they have offices,
whereas we're strictly out of a
hotel that we've modified into
an office.
Um,
Madam Chair, about the IHS
Hospital. Um, my understanding
is that Navajo Nation all they
need to do is pick a location.
The funding's there. We actually
lost kind of like our place in
line to have it started to, I
think, um, White River down in
Arizona.
um, but that's the only hold up
is that the Navajo Nation just
needs to decide where they're
going to put the hospital, and
then they'll be moving forward
on it. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
you're right, I'm thinking about
Hozhou. My apologies. Thank you
for your presentation and uh
don't forget, I am in the
community, so reach out and let
us know what we can do for you
if you want us to facilitate a
meeting.
uh, let us know. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Pope
Thank you, Madam Chair. Out of
respect for not being here and
listening. I'm gonna go and
pass, but I would like to say I
want to thank you all for what
you do and just want to say hi
to Emily. I haven't seen her
since the session.
Senator, and it's nice to know
that people listen to my words
sometimes.
I got to follow the rules.
and they say all the time, they
give me so much trouble. Um,
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Madam Chair, I think I will also
pass. Thank you. OK.
Representative Anaya.
Oh no, is it unlucky number 13
isn't working. 13 is actually my
favorite number. It just so
happens to be. Well, you broke
it. I know. What can I say? Um,
I, I don't have, I believe my
questions were answered. I just
want to make a statement, and it
sounds like y'all are being
hoodwinked. Um, and that's
really unfortunate, just given
the state of everything
happening in our state right
now. Um, I also just want to
assure you that I have, um, I've
reached out
to Esperanza Lucero after this
presentation, and I said, please
make sure that y'all in
particular are reached out to to
be on the planning committee for
what happens to um
the, the behavioral health
money. She has assured me that
you are on this list,
absolutely. And so please um
follow up with us. Um, if and
when you see that happening, and
if you don't have a seat at that
table, um,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for taking that
initiative, Representative.
Oh yeah, I'm pretty mad about
it, so points into the um
freshman of the Year award.
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Madam Chair. I, I don't
have any other, I don't have any
questions either, but I just
wanted to make a couple of
comments.
Thank you for your work, and
it's messed up what's happening
with you guys, right? And we
need to figure out how to get it
fixed. And I wanted to follow up
on um Ripinaya's comments in
terms of Esperanza at the AOC.
They meet on a monthly basis.
And so, um, they do have a
website that you can also look
at and and look at the the
reports that they have for every
month. And I was looking at the
uh August report and basically
part of it is that they're going
to be scheduling
mapping workshops, continued
travel and community engagement,
integrate with health councils
and local behavioral health
collaboratives, but the other
thing that I wanted to say is,
don't wait to be invited. Invite
yourselves. You have a right to
be there.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, most
of my questions have been
answered, but yes, again, thank
you for your work. It's very
important for
us to have in our communities
and um I was wondering about the
3.8 million that the county said
they invested in the
infrastructure of the building.
Do you know, was that design,
because most commercial property
is, you know, if some, they're
going to rent, they are
responsible for um providing the
infrastructure that is needed.
Was this designed for you? Yes,
yes, it was. So we worked pretty
closely with the architect
And so they, they provided us
input or asked us for our input
and, um, you know, we thought
about everything. We actually
did a survey of the staff and
even our clients and asked what
their needs were, and these were
some of the things that they
brought up. And so we gave that
over to the architect.
And, um, Madam Chair and Emily,
thank you. Um, did you realize
or did they make it clear that
that was going to create such a
huge uh rent responsibility? No.
So I wouldn't have think thought
you would have taken that on.
The
I, I think I would have maybe
gone a different route in terms
of
who our physical agent would
have been.
Um
I guess some, some backstory,
uh,
in
2019 when I took over, um
we, we didn't have enough
buildings, so I met with the
county, county officials, the
commissioners, um, and the head
of their facilities and explain
our needs, and they let me know
that I had to get on a waiting
list of 7 years because they had
projects already lined up, and I
explained to them, well, this
can't wait because it's been
neglected for so long.
And they said, well, we're not
going to, um, support it. So
went to the city, said, hey, you
know, we need this. He said,
Sure, we'll, we'll sign and be
your physical agent, signed.
the city manager came back and
said,
um, the county says they're your
physical agent, so we're giving
it back to them because we don't
want to fight with them.
And so we went back over to the
city or to the county.
and then the county said, um, so
I, I think they believe we're
taking funding from their
projects. And that's why we have
this issue, but really, um.
that's public funds and we have
a right to that, even if we're
not a priority.
Madam Chair and Emily, um, when
the governor's office, um, or
CYFD, um.
decided to close down your.
facility. Did they offer any
support or any suggestions or,
you know, did they know?
your situation? Uh, they did,
um, the CYFD, uh, manager at the
time increased our funding to
cover the rooms, the cost of the
rooms, I think our funding
increase, um, significantly
after that.
But also they had to know the um
security problems that that was
going to impose. Right.
OK. Right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um
Thank you so much for your
presentation. So, um
kind of walk me through how you
went from where you were to the
county owning your building.
Um
so this, this building, uh, that
we were in previously, the
governor shutdown.
was
purchased through a hu through
a, um,
a block grant through HUD back
in the 80s. And so since that
purchased no improvements were
made on that building. It was
simply given to the county. The
agreement at that time was an
unsigned perpetual agreement.
and that unsigned agreement
basically said the rent from the
county is going to be in-kind
donation, and it was listed at
$26,000 a year.
So we use that $26,000 as a
match to our federal funds as a
donation from support from the
county.
So after this happened, uh
moving to the hotel, we had the
building, and I
focused on getting that
renovated.
And as soon as we got the
funding through uh Senator
um
the county took the funding and
the county manager met with me
and said,
the anti-donation clause says
that we cannot give funds to
nonprofits, and I said, I
understand that.
And so you said you're gonna
have to turn over the title to
us. And so the building that we
owned.
appraised that $700,000.15 years
prior.
So at today's market rate, it
would be well over a million.
Um
we said, OK, well, before we
sign over the title of the
building, we're going to do a
management agreement. And so the
management agreement listed out
everything.
which
I believe that management
agreement was enough to um move
into that building and operate
it in the same way that the
previous agreement was as an
in-kind donation.
Um
but as soon as it was renovated
and completed, uh, the county's
presented us with a lease
agreement that
um
you know, basically told us when
to mop the floors.
Thank you for that answer, and,
and that, that is not how our
system works. That's why you
have a fiscal agent, so that
nonprofits can get capital
outlay. So, um, I'm pretty darn
suspicious, and I would
appreciate it if your lawyer or
someone else could uh
investigate where Senator Pinto,
Madam Chair, um, I'm also going
through this with the Ko Tucker
Museum, the, the same thing with
the wanting to change the
physical
agent to the county, um, with
one entity doesn't agree or
refuses to, it goes back to the
other fiscal agent, and then we
know that anti-donation clause,
um, but they can't come into
agreement of um
they just don't trust the Navajo
Nation, the code talkers, to
kind of do and we're hearing
about it, it's really happening
that there's entities out there
that are not, um, abiding by
what they, um, had intended to.
I wonder if this is something
LFC can look into.
Yes, ma'am.
OK. Thank you. Thank you so much
for that. So we will do what we
can to help you and this
committee will definitely try to
be on top of it, and we will
depend on Senator Pinto and
Representative Johnson to keep
us up to date if we need to do
more if we need to, um, what we
need to do, but we will do a
letter once, once I get word
back that, that senator, you are
appointed, we will do, we will
talk about a letter, but
Representative Johnson.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, can
I add another note to the LFC,
um, if they could also look into
how we can manage our physical
agents to draw down funds sooner
than later. Sometimes our
physical agents take a long time
to draw down the funds that we
earmark for emergency services
such as HVAC.
building repair, bricks and
mortar, etc. Thank you.
Thank you. And, and, um, just
kind of as an update.
it's taking longer than we
thought it would to get the
senator appointed. So it may be
that we have to discuss the
letter today and can't approve
it until our next meeting in Las
Cruces. I hope that isn't the
case, cause I think we need to
help these folks. ASAP, but um
unfortunately, rules. So
Representative Vinaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just,
um,
clearly I'm new to the body, but
throughout the years, I have
heard that the caveat in the
anti-donation clause is actually
for cases like this when you
have vital services needed, um,
safety, housing, protection, and
I'm wondering if this could just
be a case study in directly
trying to give money to an
organization like this. So just
something to keep in mind, um,
Madam Chair, and senators and
representatives because I think
it's
a
great example of how we might be
able to test that language of
the anti-donation clause. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative Wuhan, and
cherish my understanding into
the community, um.
is it community needs, uh, under
anti-donation clause that
they're for vital services and
things there are or possible
exemptions. Thank you. Yeah, and
I think LFC will be very helpful
in figuring out what, what are
possible actions could be, cause
I, I don't think any of us on,
well, I don't know if there's
anybody besides Michelle who's
an expert on capital outlay cuz
it's so complicated and
anti-donation clause has its own
mysteries, so, so, um, so.
thank you, Harry, and, and when
we hear back from LFC, we will
share it, it, we will share with
the committee and um and but
please know that, that we have
heard you and that we um are in
agreement with you. We are
empathetic and we will do what
we can as a committee to make
sure that these vital services
and
are able to be provided.
Thank you very much.
you want
Oh, so, so, like briefly, let's,
what, what, what, what do we
want the letter to say so Xander
can work on it even if we don't
get a quorum.
I think um in lieu of the, uh, I
believe it should go to the
county, or you want to weigh in
a little bit on it, about what,
um, some of the um
I guess supporting language
would be from us, but I think
it's more a little bit detail of
where you're at right now of
what um they would like it to
say. I'm wondering since we are
almost at time, if, if, um,
Xander, would you be comfortable
working with Senator Pinto at
yeah,
we can take it aside. Yeah,
yeah, either, either now or via
email or whatever, um, it's just
so, but we, we definitely will
do that
once we get once we have a
quorum to be able to approve it,
but it can, you can start uh
Representative Johnson if you
also want to be involved since
it's your community, um,
uh, uh, Xander Zander's very
dependable, so, so thank you for
your time and thank you for the
work that you do. So next we
will have um a report from
Rahobeth McKinley Christian
Healthcare Services. That's the
RMCHCS that we've been hearing
about, um,
I believe Representative
Johnson will remain in her seat
and the update will be by David
McGrae,
Chief Financial officer and Jeff
Link, Vice President of Quality
Compliance and Risk. So if you
wanna come up,
Madam Chair.
may I also introduce Marianne
Yustick. She is the RMCHCS
board. Mary Anne, good morning.
And then just want to say good
morning to David and Jeff, if
you would just introduce
yourselves a little bit before
you begin your presentation and
tell us a little bit about
yourselves. Thank you.
Yeah, a staff member will, will
hand those out. I'm not sure
where they are, but.
Hey
uh to turn on your mic, you
press the person, and we try to
only have one mic on at a time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us today. My
name's Jeff Link. I'm the vice
president for Quality Compliance
and Risk at Rehoboth McKinley
Christian Healthcare Services.
I've been in New Mexico for
about 2 years now. Uh, I'm also
retired Army colonel, and um I'm
grateful to serve the, the
Gallup community. Thank you.
Loeb, Madam Chair and committee
members, thank you for having
me. My name is David McRae. I've
lived in New Mexico. It'll be 4
years at the end of this year,
uh, I've been the chief
financial officer since the
beginning of this year at
Rehoboth McKinley Christian
Healthcare Services. Thank you.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for allowing me to a
few minutes this morning to
discuss some of the challenges
we have with medical
malpractice. I know this is a, a
subject that probably comes up a
lot through your travels
throughout the state, but I'd
like to discuss how it affects
us as a small community hospital
trying to serve our community
here in Gallup.
Recently, Gallup lost two
primary care providers. Those
primary care providers supplied
primary care to about 8000
people in the Gallup community.
Now Gallop's a city of roughly
22,000. So that's over a third
of our patients in the community
that now, uh
are seeking new primary care
providers. I know there are
efforts ongoing to recruit new
providers to replace them, uh,
and maybe one of them will be
able to sell their practice, but
right now, one of the things
that we're challenged with is,
uh, capacity to provide primary
care services to our community.
Another issue we have is that
premiums are unsustainable at
the current rate, and I will
talk more about that as we, as,
uh, I go through the slides, uh,
recently, so, Madam Chair,
there's a, a flavor of the day
lawsuit, uh, in medical
malpractice right now that is
going on across this country and
that has to do with the use of
Depo-Provera. It's a drug that's
commonly used for
contraception in women. Um
that case, we, as Rehoboth have
been specifically named as a
defendant in one of those cases.
Um
uh, it's being run by a national
law firm out of Houston, and
they have partnered with a law
firm in Santa Fe with Brian
Eagolf to bring this suit
against us. Now that is a
strategy for them to try the
case in New Mexico, where we
have high punitive damages, and
limited, um, and high caps, and
it's a strategy to keep it out
of federal court just to try it
in New Mexico. The other thing
is this case
is being filed in Rio Riba
County, and venue shopping is
something that I will talk about
as we progress through the
presentation also.
Um
you know, we're, we're a target.
Fortunately, we've been named
with Big Pharma on this suit. So
we have, fortunately have the
resources of, uh, big pharma to
help us defend this, but, you
know, we're just a, a small
community hospital trying to
serve, and we've been brought
into uh a, a fairly significant
lawsuit as a strategy just to
keep the case in New Mexico
State court because the damages
are higher.
The other problem we're
struggling with, Madam Chair, is
excess
insurance carriers are not
writing policies in the state of
New Mexico, and I will discuss
that as we go through our
challenges a little further.
Just a reminder that this is an
update on, on the, the hospital.
This is not a medical
malpractice, um.
venue. So, yes, ma'am. So, um,
OK, I'll, I'll confine my
remarks to, to Rahopa then thank
you.
We are currently a member of a
risk re reciprocal risk
retention group, and that's 10
hospitals across 6 states. We
pull our um resources across
those hospitals to provide um
medical malpractice, uh, to as
shared risk, we are now the only
hospital in New Mexico that's a
member of that risk
retention group, uh, San Juan up
in Farmington was a member, um,
but they have since, um, not,
um, rejoined the committee.
Uh,
I, I'll briefly talk about the
next slide. I borrowed this, um,
and, uh, I'll
cover it really quickly to, to
maintain the update about
Rehoboth, ma'am. Um, but if you
look at this slide, New Mexico
is the only state of the six
that we're a member of that has
gotten increased risk as a
result of, um
uh malpractice, insurance claims
and policies across the state.
I'd like to go to the next
slide, which is, uh, the graph
and I'll get specific to the
update about Reho Bair.
So if you look to the very top,
so it says, um, 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
and 5th excess layers.
In 2024, Rehoboth was insured
for $34 million maximum per
event.
In 2025, we were refused that
excess insurance. And our
premium went from 1.2 million to
1.4 million for a $20 million
less
cap on our coverage.
The update for 2026 is our
estimated premium is going to be
$1.8 million and we have been
told that we are not eligible
for any excess insurance. So at
this point, we're gonna pay $1.8
million for a $6 million cap on
our policy.
Sorry, could you page 5 isn't,
um, what's your source on this?
Uh, this is, this source is our
risk retention group. This was
put out by mountain states. OK,
thank you. Yes, ma'am.
Um
so that's, that's our update,
um, and I, I did have a couple
of recommendations for some
assistance here. Um, New Mexico
is one of the few states that um
does not cap or allows punitive
damages and medical malpractice
claims. That is a serious source
of angst for most hospitals in
the state, and especially for
us. With a cap of $6 million per
event. We are just one judgment
away from going out of business.
Um
and that's
regardless because there's a $6
million cap per specialty also.
Um
yeah, so what I would, what I
would propose, Madam Chair, is,
um
either eliminating punitive
damages for nonprofit hospitals
in New Mexico, there's not a lot
of um
the
out of out of state companies
are not well liked by juries,
but if we could limit punitive
damages to not
being allowed for nonprofit
facilities. We're not out to
hurt people, I promise. We're
not out to punish folks. We just
want to do the best we can for
our community.
Um
the other thing, um, the venue
shopping, so being able to try
cases anywhere in the state is
also something that is fairly
unusual across the country, and
it allows trial attorneys to
find um
uh
sympathetic juries to their
cases and not keep cases in the
local community. And then also
with the state patient
compensation fund. It is, I have
been trying to find some
information on that fund, so we
can look at joining, uh, from
finding my records when that
fund was first started a few
years ago, it would have cost us
about $4 million to buy in.
I don't know what the rights are
now, but, uh, simplifying that
and allowing small hospitals to
participate in that and get a
cap on damages would also be a
perfect help. Thank you for your
time, Madam Chair, and I'll
answer any questions you may
have.
Did you have
are you, you're just here for
questions? I, I have an update
as well. Oh, OK. Please go
ahead.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
First, I wanted to thank, uh
the state of New Mexico for
coming to the aid of our
facility without
state aid, we certainly would
have, uh, we wouldn't be here
today. I also wanted to thank,
uh, the city and the county for
being patient with us at
Rehoboth, uh, as we were in
arrears on several, uh, overdue
bills. Uh, so I,
I really appreciate it. We
appreciated that the facility
and it doesn't
I am well aware that, uh, there,
there's only so many chances
that this facility will get and
so it's very important that we
are judicious with our scarce
resources.
When I started at the hospital
in early January. We had 4 days
cash on hand.
As of the end of July, we had 87
days' cash on hand. Certainly
some of that comes from the HDAA
plan, and we've uh looked to
preserve those funds, and we've
also worked hard to improve our
operations. Our core operations
of taking care of patients and
families in the local community
and to be able to do that in a
cost-effective way that we can
also put money in the bank or
make
profits. Um, that allows us to
have more cash on hand that
allows us to invest in the
community, the equipment, and um
our employees.
One of the challenges I've seen
at our facility is in the past
we've relied on one time
state aid, uh, the path of least
resistance and kind of thinking
that the state or somebody would
always come to our rescue, and
we are working very hard so that
we're not in that position
and to stand on our own 2 ft.
as, as we continue on through
this journey, we're gonna have
to make some, some unpopular
decisions and make some changes
at the hospital.
But it's for the good of the
long term standing of the
hospital because this hospital
needs to be here in 20 and 30
years. This community needs a
hospital, and it's a vastly
underserved community.
What we're currently working on
is a back to break even plans so
that on our core operations, if
you come in for a test, if you
come in for a procedure, that
there's a little bit of money
left over.
to put in the bank and invest in
capital,
uh.
down the road. Um, one of the
other things that we've been
able to do this year, uh, with
the enhanced funding and some
improved operations. It's just
so far year to date, we've been
able to invest $2.9 million back
into the facility
Uh, one of the most recent
acquisitions is a 3D mammography
unit, which, uh, I was shocked
to learn when I arrived on site
that we only had a 2D. So that
was uh very important. So
working on getting the correct
equipment here to care for the
community.
Unfortunately, uh, most recently
at the end of July and the
beginning of August, we had two
back to back, uh, flood events.
One is shuttered our operating
rooms. Uh, we have 3 operating
rooms.
and the other is uh display some
imaging, um,
we reacted quickly. We had uh
remediation company on site and
they're currently remediating
the operating rooms and the
water damage.
Uh, we're working through our
insurance companies now to
ensure that that's, that's paid
for, uh, and we'll, we'll
continue to do that, uh, it, you
know, the silver lining to this
is, is we, we never would have,
you know, updated the operating
rooms and modernized them. So
now this is an opportunity to
do that.
and to correct uh
when you have an older
infrastructure and there's the
deferred maintenance, these,
these type of things happen when
I was in Oklahoma, uh, both of
my facilities were built in the
mid-50s. So I've, I've been,
these are now the 3rd and 4th
catastrophic floods I've been
through. So we're working to get
those, uh, that corrected, get
everything remediated so we can
get back to caring for patients.
I, uh, opened it up to
questions. I'm happy to answer.
OK, thank you. So we will start
with um Representative Block.
Um,
let's say
4 minutes. OK, 10 minutes.
Thank you, madam I know I
hesitated. We'll go 4. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair. So I really
appreciated your presentation
and the data-driven approach
that you have here, and I know
we've talked about data and
medical malpractice reform in
the state. And so, Madam Chair
and experts, I forgeternel
Link
Link. OK, great. And then Mr.
McGrill, thank you both. So can
you just tell me a little bit
about that statement that you
made, Colonel. We're just one
judgment away from going out of
business. I know that we talked
a little bit about how much cash
on hand for however many days, I
think you said it started at 4
days, and it's up to 80, 84 or
something like that. So can you
just tell me how much of that
would, would it take just one
lawsuit to wipe out this
hospital in this community.
Correct. Correct. uh,
Representative Block, um,
so 2 years ago, we had $34
million worth of insurance per
incident.
Uh, 2 years ago, we had a
judgment against us for $68
million. Had that occurred now,
we would have shut our doors
Um, and
you know, unfortunately, $6
million just isn't enough to
cover any bad judgment in New
Mexico.
And you know, that would take
out, you know, so something
happens 2026, when we, when we
have $6 million anything above
the state cap to include
punitive damages, would force us
to go out of business.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that. And, and the
more plaintiffs, the, the more
because it's just, it's an
endless open door of lawsuits,
which is why so many people,
both on the Democratic and the
Republican side of the aisle
have had issues with the current
makeup of our laws, and we've
always heard a lot of the time
people saying, oh well, this is
just a phantom issue, this
doesn't exist. It does, and it
hurts communities, especially
rural folks like you who are
trying to stand on your own 2
ft, but you can't because these
there's a cloud, right? And so,
Madam Chair, and I appreciate
the answers and the
recommendations, but
specifically for this community.
I know we talk about getting
more doctors and things like
that. Do you see this as the
number one stifling point for
recruiting and retaining doctors
in this community, in your
opinions, according to your
facility, from what you've
heard.
Thank you, Representative Block.
I, I think in the past what
we've done, um, is I've, I've
lived and worked in some rural
communities. Uh, there's a lot
of talented physicians out
there, and there's a lot of
opportunity here for physicians
that we can recruit physicians
here. We can't attract
physicians here, whether they're
sort of
you know
close to Gallup
Phoenix, Albuquerque, El Paso,
or physicians that may have
lives elsewhere that come in and
serve the community for for
weeks at a time. Uh, we've had
good traction on recruiting,
recruiting and recruitment and
uh the challenges always just
trying to get over that, um
get, get the contract done. But
there, there are, and we're
continuing to work on bringing
new providers and, and looking
at services to bring providers
to the community here because
it's, it's needed and uh
let's say you just wanted to
follow-up appointment with the
cardiologist, you know, not
everybody wants to drive 2 hours
to Albuquerque. So, and, and
that's not just a Gallup
problem. That's a New Mexico
problem. The other thing from a
physician's standpoint is we
need to make access available,
and the answer always needs to
be yes, to care for patients
that we can in the community
appropriately.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and we,
yeah, we need that stability. I
think that you hit it right on
the head there, stability with
the hospital. I don't want to be
a physician going to a hospital
that's going to close in 6
months, right? So it's so
important that we look at all
the factors involved and thank
you both and especially myself.
I live in Alamogordo. We have a
hospital, but if you need
something specialized, you got
to go to El Paso or Cruises or
something. So thank you both.
Appreciate you and I appreciate
your time, Madam Chair.
Representative Johnson
thank you, Madam Chair.
May I be last? I because my
remarks are um
just closing an appreciation.
And also I want to apologize. I
did not inform Xander about the
malpractice topic that we were
going to, we were expecting an
update and um we we we we are,
we will be taking on medical
malpractice at our meeting in
Albuquerque in October with,
with having all sides
represented, etc. etc. So we
really do care about um what
happens to Rehoba. That's where
I got my care as a child and was
at Robe back when it was out at
Rehoboth.
So Representative Torres
Velasquez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
this is a really serious topic
as I drive in to gallop, um,
for, um, various purposes and
and I see, um, the healthcare,
you know, in, in the facilities
that are visible from the
freeway, um, it concerns me that
there's any threat for any
closure of any hospital out here
because I know how important
your facility in these
facilities are for the health of
the people in Gallup. I, I don't
know enough about tribal
resources to know, um, how, you
know, how
the numbers, um, and how things
are impacted for you all, but I,
the question that runs through
my mind is something that comes
just from my lack of experience,
um, in this committee and also
um with uh with
with the facilities here. The
question that comes to my mind
is if there is some kind of
collaborative where the
providers from this area are
able to come together
and, um, at least have
discussions about what it is
that is affecting the stability
of your facilities and the
providers that are staying or
leaving, um, and I, and I say
this because there are so many
communities along the way that I
passed that I know need to come
to Gallup for, for services, and
it's, it's just not right that
they have to go by helicopter to
UNMHH or
drive all that way, and this is
a very, very much a social
justice issue.
and um and a human rights issue.
And so I would hope that you
collaborate with the other
institutions or facilities, I
should say, um, and, and with
UNM, um, and see where you can
create some kind of action plan.
And you may have that already.
It may be something that this
committee has already worked on
before, um, but identifying all
the obstacles, all the
challenges, and then
identify where y'all can work
together for, um, for stability.
And I guess, I don't know if
that's a question, um, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative.
We do partner with Gallup Indian
Medical Center on some things
such as we, I meet monthly with
them, and we talk about
emergency department high
utilizer. We discuss our um
housing and shelter, uh, issues
with them, and patients that
have, you know, frequent,
frequent admissions to the ER
resulting in substance abuse.
Um, you are correct there we
cannot transport people out of
Gallup by ground. It's always by
air. And the challenge we have
with partnering with Gallop
Indian Medical Center more
closely is many of their
providers and professional staff
are not licensed in the state of
New Mexico, uh, and that, that's
a barrier for us to be able to
work closer with them.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Just to follow up on that. So,
so you transfer no patients via
ambulance? Not by ground. No,
no, Madam Chair. Even, even
non-emergent. That's correct,
Madam Chair.
An air ambulances are
incredibly expensive. Oh
why?
I mean, why, why are you not,
you
like I said, I got my care
there. Um, I know Crow, the
Crown Point Hospital used to
ambulance folks to, to
Albuquerque. Uh, it, it, that
seems like I, I
a, a waste of money
Uh, Madam Char, it may very well
be, but the issue is if we
transport somebody by ground, it
takes the entire crew out for a
day.
And the air ambulance Services
are more state assets, and they
come from different places. So
the limited resources in Gallup
taking ground ambulance crew for
an entire day. It's just not
something that, you know,
happens. And so I'm sorry to, so
the cost falls on the patient. I
mean, and, and I, I did a bill
several years ago. There are no
parameters on what air
ambulances can charge. I know
one of
our own members had a, a
grandchild transferred from
grants to Albuquerque and it was
in the $70,000 range.
Um, so that's a, that's a major
concern that we need to uh
yeah, that's tough on patients.
Representative Anaya.
thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
going to ask for a short yes, no
answers if possible because I
only have 4 minutes. Um, my
understanding is that you all
have, uh, management company
called Ovation. Is that correct?
Yes. OK, thank you for this. Um,
my understanding is that ovation
is owned by private equity
company. Is that correct?
I believe, I believe so. I
don't. Thank you. Um, do you
know how much this management
contract costs?
the base fee is
about $27,000 a month.
Thank you.
Um, my understanding is that
under this management company,
y'all have cut staff, is that
correct?
Not, not at their direction, no.
Um
All right, I have a couple other
questions. I'm gonna move over
to medical malpractice. Um, do
you, as Rehobeth pay for medical
malpractice costs or do your
doctors?
We pay our premiums and those
premiums cover
physicians, nurse practitioners,
PAs that are employed by
Rehoboth. Great, thank you. Um,
I'm just gonna hop over to the,
um, $68 million verdict case. My
understanding is, um, there are
some hospitals, yours perhaps
being one of them, where their
insurance company actually
covers punitives. So in that
case of the $68 million
my understanding is that the
insurance company may have paid
the punitive damages. That's
correct. And
um
So just to clarify, the hospital
did not pay the insurance pay
that, yes,
um.
we were going to file a bad
faith suit against them, and
they, they ended up settling.
They ended up paying the full
fee.
Yeah, I, I was wondering about
that because I also saw that
your CEO, you know, spoke to the
news and said, we wanted to
settle. We knew it was a bad
case. Just to remind folks, this
is a case where there were a
couple of ducks who were texting
back and forth. There was a
medical malpractice mistake. One
of them said, You're lucky I
covered your ass. It was a big
deal, right? And in that case,
I'm also wondering, in that case
and in other cases of
malpractice, one of the, one of
the purposes of punitive damages
is not necessarily to go after
individuals, but to go after big
systems
where there are some problems.
And so I'm wondering, after each
of your malpractice cases, have
you done anything to change the
habits of the
hospital itself to make it a
safer place.
Yes,
Representative, we have, uh, one
of the things is
you got to keep
patient information private and
SMS messaging is not private.
You have to use HIPAA compliance
stuff, so, you know, we were, we
did things wrong in that case.
So I'm, I'm not saying we're
innocent, um, at all, but, um,
we have certainly made some
changes since. I and I really
appreciate that, um, because I
really feel like we need to get
into the details of these cases
when we're talking about medical
malpractice, um, because I don't
think a lot of people understand
that insurance companies pay,
right? Not necessarily out of
the pockets of the hospitals. I
do, however, appreciate you, um,
telling us about your
malpractice insurance premiums,
um, because this is data
that we very much look forward
to collecting because if
insurance companies are then
hoodwinking people. We don't
want that either. And so to me,
we actually have a shared fight
in making sure that we're
holding insurance companies
accountable. Yeah, and
Representative Ona, oh, sorry.
Can we pause my time for? Oh,
what, what additional, um, when
they decreased our insurance
last year from 34 million to 14
million. They refused to cover
any punitive damages, judgments.
Yeah, that would make sense. So
are you within the patient
compensation fund or outside?
We're outside, outside of the
patient compensation fund. My
understanding is that it's
cheaper to get
malpractice insurance outside of
the patient compensation fund.
Is that correct? That's my
understanding too. OK. And um
let's see here. I had a couple
other questions. Who's your
current insurance carrier? Uh,
we're through mountain states
reciprocal risk retention group,
and they're, they're the primary
layer and on one of the slides,
uh, the colored slide, the
excess carriers are listed on
there, so it's a quite a few
different
carriers that for the excess
levels. Thank you. And then for
the big pharmaceut, um, can you
tell me a little bit more about
this relationship? Are they, uh,
are they the folks who are
paying for the lawyers, paying
for all of the litigation. I
don't know any of that
representative. I, I just know
that I received the subpoena.
OK. And I'm working on
interrogatories right now to
answer the first set. Thank you.
And I would love to know about
that relationship, um, into the
future as you come to learn
more, um.
this, um, chart on page 4,
by Millman, it looks like
Milliman. Milliman, yeah,
they're an actuary company that
works through risk um with our
risk retention group.
Great. And I may have Madam Char
gotten through all of my
questions. All right.
All right.
That's what I have,
Madam, Madam Chair, if I, if I
may just inform the committee
about our, our management
company. When you, you look at a
big health system, whether it's
Presbyterian or Lovelace or
whatever. They have subject
matter experts in it. So if we
were to incur something here,
uh, at Rehoboth that we weren't
comfortable with. Hey, is this a
compliance issue. That is what
they, they serve for is they
help us with compliance. They
help us
where we have a, a peripheral
knowledge of it, but not a uh an
in-depth knowledge. So when I
worked for the parent company of
Loveless, if you had issues,
they, they would do that and
their job is to help assist us.
I've worked with
good, good managers and poor
managers, ovation is
uh, we're lucky to have them.
They're very strong management
company, and they
advise us they don't dictate
direction.
of what we want to do for our,
our strategy or what have you.
So I just wanted to clarify some
points on that.
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm glad that
you, um, added that additional,
um, those additional comments
about ovation because then what
that says to me is that if we
ask you for information, you
won't be prevented from, uh,
giving it to us. So one of the
things that I, you know, I keep
hearing about, um, you know, um,
medical malpractice and the
insurance going up and, and we
really just don't have any
evidence of that. So one of the
things that I'd like to ask you
for is to
provide us with those documents
in terms of, you know, your
insurance being increased, um,
now up to, I think you said 1.8
million, um, and you're not
eligible for the excess
insurance, whatever that is. So
I would love to see if you could
provide the committee with those
documents. um, both in terms of
the what you're paying and why
you're not able to, um, you
know, apply for the or
participate in the excess
insurance, whatever that was.
Um, the other piece is that I
also wanted to point out
Madam Chair, that a lot of the
financial problems of Rehobith
are sort of self-inflicted. Um,
there was a uh article, um,
probably a couple of years ago,
how to run a rural hospital into
the ground. I mean, you've
probably seen that, but it, it
sounds to me like that
continues. Um, there's been
mishandling or allegations of
mishandling funds, um, as well.
So what I'd like is for um you
to provide this committee with
um information
about what the financial
conditions are right now at the
hospital so that we can really
take a look at that.
Um, the other thing is that,
Madam Chair, you talked about
the doctors who are leaving. The
other problem that Rehoboth also
had was they were chasing
doctors away. I remember a time
when the doctors were um
unionizing. I don't know if
there's a union contract right
now, is there with the doctors?
It's still pending. The final
bargaining agreement has not
been signed by the physicians.
All right, so that also causes
me uh concern, perhaps there um
the bargaining agreement wasn't
um what they needed, right? Um,
so, so the other question that I
have is you talked about a
couple of doctors who have left,
um, I'd like to know their
names. I'd like to talk to them
and find out from them, you
know, why did they leave? Was
it, was it other things in
addition to what you said it
was. Um, and also, Madam Chair,
do you have, um,
documented a documented study
that shows why doctors are
leaving. Is it attributable to
malpractice because we hear that
a lot, but I haven't seen, we
haven't seen any cities that
really verify that. So do you
have that information?
In the study form, have you done
a study? I don't have it in
study form. No, no
Representative Chavez.
So you're just basically
reporting what you hear. It's
the conversations that I had
with, so the two providers that
left were, um, Adra Andrati and
Lawrence Andrati, and in my
conversations with them because
the female Adri Andrati worked
for us, and she told me why her
husband was leaving. She was one
of our employees. He was in
private practice.
OK.
Um, and then you also mentioned
that you have difficulty
recruiting and retaining doctors
because of um medical
malpractice. Can you provide us
with that data as well.
I'll, I'll take that
representative. Um, I, I think
that's in, in a sense, um, I
don't know why the Andratis
left, but it's very hard as a
single standalone private
practice primary care doctor to,
to make it on his, on his own.
So, uh, I think they went to an
employed model where they just
have to take care of patients
and see them, and they're not
responsible for malpractice, the
EMR, any of this stuff that a
small business person would,
uh, manage. Uh, we have not,
when we recruit doctors, and I
think getting them over to sign
the contract and come here, it
could be, um, we, the, the
hospital will pay for their
malpractice. So that, that's not
a concern for them. Their
concern is take great care of
patients and see a lot of
patients. Um, also, to, you
know, I, I don't know what, I've
only been here for 7 months, so
I don't know what happened
before my time. It's, it's
my intention to run this
hospital appropriately.
uh above reproach.
and to be financially viable
and, um, as, as I said in my
presentation, sometimes we have
to make difficult decisions
when, when we do that. Um, but
I, it's for the long term, uh,
prosperity of the organization.
Can you, you provided the names
of the ducks. Can you also
provide their contact
information, and you don't need
to do that now. You can give it
to us offline. Thank you,
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and it,
most of, well, all of my
questions have been answered,
but, um, from what it sounds
like, um, the Andretti's, uh,
didn't really leave um
due to med mal. It sounds like
administrative, you know, things
that they have to go through
like we heard yesterday, a lot
of the administrative uh time
and effort and, you know, um
um
frustration over not having
things covered, um, for their
patients.
Would you agree with that
Yes, I think one of the things
that we're striving for when we
work with our partners, it, it,
you know, and managed care
organizations, um
that they're getting paid on a
on a claim. Patient comes in for
a standard procedure is
exceptionally difficult, and it
can take 45 days for that claim
to get adjudicated.
Then what will happen is the
insurance companies then request
medical records. Then they
request all the medical records,
and they make it very difficult.
Um
in state, not to talk out of
miles, and that makes it very
difficult to conduct business,
and we have the infrastructure
to handle that. You imagine
being a solo physician, solo
dentist, trying to get paid by
some of these payers. It's, it's
very difficult and cumbersome.
OK, thank you. And um, I guess
it was mentioned about um laying
staff off. Um, how many have you
laid off and what were some of
their job titles?
I
I've not laid any in my
departments that I oversee, I
have, I mean, it's either been
through natural attrition or
replacement to a better, uh,
staff member. So I, the, when
you, when you do that, it's
devastating not only to, to the
individual, but the community
and we really seek to avoid
that. So one of the areas that
we will look at is if an
employee decides to pursue an
opportunity elsewhere
is at a position that we need to
fill, are, are we able to
do the work and optimize things
without that position being
filled.
So that's one of the things that
we really look to do because
you know, I don't have to tell
you when you, when that hits the
newspaper and that affects
families and all that. We're
very sensitive to that and I'm
sensitive to it because it's
happened to me. So that's no fun
for anybody. And so we want to
be very mindful of how we do
that
um, rather than just saying, you
know, give me 25 names. That's
not a good way to conduct
business.
Right outside of your department
where there are other layoffs,
and I worry about, you know, not
filling positions because then
you create unsafe staffing and
that that we are
our staffing levels are well
within all national metrics, and
they're on the, the high side
and particularly from the
clinical areas, those are, those
are very difficult to, to find
and recruit. So those are areas
that we, we do everything we can
to continue to hire RN's allied
healthcare. So think of all your
uh
respiratory therapist, radiation
tax, all those are positions
that we continue to look for,
uh, you should,
you're well aware, I'm sure that
we don't produce nearly enough
allied health professionals in
the state, nor do we produce
enough LPNs or registered
nurses. And that's not unique to
Gallup. That's nationwide. So
there's not a, a facility I've
talked to that said, hey, do you
have enough nurses? You know,
we're full up on nurses. There's
no, I mean, we're, you know, we
still
have travelers and those, that's
one where we would rather have a
local employee pay them rather
than a travel agency.
OK. Um, and sir, do you have,
uh, have there been layoffs?
I don't necessarily know their
layoffs, but there are positions
that we have let go, um.
you know, Rehoboth used to be a
very large facility. We're
critical access hospitals now
and in the two years I've been
here, I think we've done some
right sizing with staff in the
non-clinical areas. So, in the
clinical areas we maintain on
the inpatient side, we try to
maintain a one nurse to 5
patients. Um, but we're not the
same facility we were two years
ago when we first converted to a
critical access hospital.
If I, if I could also
add to that representative.
prior to my time it was it the
decision was made to outsource
our revenue cycle, which is
registration, collecting of
bills and all that, uh, it's, it
became abundantly obvious within
a month or two, that that was
not a sustainable model, uh, and
we've, we've rendered notice to
them in that contract will end
in um
January, sooner if we, we can
get out of it sooner. So what
that means is, is I will need
more employees on site or
employed by Rehobus to, to do
that work. And so that's uh
important to me because those
are sort of all the unsung
heroes that when you come into
the ER at 30 in the morning or
the face of the organization
that are registering you that
are helping get the claims paid,
so that's, that's one of the
areas that we've, we've
eliminated because, uh,
candidly, you, you have a, a
a real gem, uh, our senior
director of revenue cycle,
Monica Torres is, is as fine as
any individual I've worked with
across this country. So to have
her here, you, you'd be wasting
your talents, not outsourcing
that, so. OK. Thank you. Um. My
time's up? OK, thank you. My
phone is sometimes loud and
sometimes not so,
um, Vice Chair Lopez.
That's
The batteries are tired, Madam
Chair.
Uh, thank you. And just uh some
comments, Madam Chair.
The, uh, and, and I read this
information, I think earlier
this week too, but this is an
article by New Mexico News
staff, and it was posted on the
Roosevelt, um, General Hospital
and clinic's website and of
course there's information here
about the, the B2, the 3 bill
that I call.
And of course, uh, and I did
read the list, Madam Chair, in
committee, and of course, um,
your hospital is listed as one
of the
possibilities, right, of
potential closing due to the
high Medicaid share, and most of
our rural hospitals and actually
Madam Cha is our hospital system
in New Mexico.
Um, so it, it's, I, I think
we're aware of not just this
facility, but others in our
state and we were one in in Las
Vegas last month. Alta Vista, of
course, to his, is having
problems and you look at the
miner's Hospital in Reton and
others, right? So we know that
we're in dire straits in our
state.
And I know, Madam Chair, there's
this in the B to the 3, there's
a $50 billion
chunk of change that I know
Secretary Armijo said they're
waiting for the feds to issue
their rules, whatever they're
going to put in place, but, um,
I'm hoping that the distribution
comes soon enough for this
facility, madam.
Madam Chair, and the others in
our state just to make sure that
at least we have some
relief, but it's not going to be
enough
And quite frankly, Madam Chair,
I still worry about what the
actual federal budget.
is going to have in it
Um, because we're just working
on a resolution for a
continuance on the other.
budget that was never really
passed, and this new one, so
stay tuned. So I think, Madam
Chair, there's still much more
on the table that our committee,
um, needs to work with the LFC
and others, right, about what
should be happening to sustain
healthcare delivery and services
in our communities, so I just
wanted to make that comment.
It's on it, I know it's on our
list, but there's that a federal
funding stabilization
subcommittee that's meeting next
week on the twenty-eighth in
Albuquerque, I happened to sit
on that and we're collecting
information and hearing
a lot of um
not so good information, but
again, we're hopeful as to what
we can do at least to kind of a
stopgap, at least, Madam Chair.
We'll see, but that, that's all,
Madam Chair. Thank you. Thank
you. So I have a few questions.
So who actually owns the
hospital?
We're a
private independent nonprofit
hospital.
Who owns it? So we own it, uh,
and the board members are
responsible for the overall
leadership of the hospital.
OK. So, um, so the management
company, you said the, um, the
monthly fee is, what, how much
did you say? 20 something?
27,000. OK. And does that
include like your salaries or
OK, so, so your salaries are on
top of the 27,000, correct? So
the two of you and how many
other, um, employees of the
hospital are, are from the
management company
We don't, we're employees of
Raho with McKinley
Hospital. We're not employed by
the management company. OK. We
are not, as, as I said, they
are, um,
uh
outside company that helps us
with.
expertise that we may lack
internally that would otherwise
be difficult to get. So, uh, say
like case management, for
instance. I have an individual
in there that has been running
the case management department.
She lives in Florida, and while
we are working to, uh, you know,
hire a full-time person. We, we,
we lack the requisite expertise
internally. So what if you don't
have somebody good in that
department, your claims aren't
going to get
paid. You're gonna get in
trouble with compliance issues.
So that's where we, we lean on
ovation for their expertise and
uh just assisting us, but our
day to day operations, they
don't have any say so. Um, I'm
not responsible to them. Uh, we,
we work with them, you know,
through the financial close and
what's our performance, uh, but
it's a very
uh, collaborative relationship
and we don't work for them, nor
do we have any financial
interests in that so the case
manager that's in Florida. Is
that included in your contract
or is that an additional charge?
That's, that's outside of the
charge. There's certainly items
outside of our charge that we
have to pay for, uh, again, this
is not a long term strategy,
right? That's to replace that,
move that out the door, uh, as I
said, we were able to replace
our director
of materials Management and a
one for one with a gentleman I
worked with and really no, no
cost difference in salary or
anything. OK. So, um, and it's a
concern that the case management
person is in Florida. I mean,
no, no, no, she, she is at the
hospital right now. OK. She's,
no, she, she, what I'm saying
is, is, is if you have somebody
that happens to reside in
Tennessee, for instance. It's a
subject matter expert on
you know, quality of care,
compliance, whatever. They have
those people on staff, they're
able to come out and assist us,
um, and again, this is not
because we, we, I'm just, just
for the sake of time. So she
comes out to assist you. Does
she live here? Does she come
out, you know, one week a month.
How does, what does that 4 weeks
a month. 4, OK. Yeah, she's 4
weeks a month. She takes some,
you know, getting from here to
Florida is not a, so she'll take
some longer weekends, but she is
here
all the time. OK. And, and I'm
just gonna try and keep us
moving along. So in if it's
floods, I was surprised to hear
about floods since you're at the
top of the hill where those like
pipe breaks or? OK. OK. OK. Two
pipe breaks. That would be
serious if those hospitals over
there were flooding. Yes. It
just, just making sure. No,
that's OK. It is a flood, but um
and so I think this has been
requested before, but we as a
committee really do not have the
data. We hear anecdotal stories
about malpractice, but we have
yet to see the data. So I'm
gonna request that you please
share with us any denials,
increases, what your costs of
MeddMel are, um, etc. um.
so that we can start to build
you know, if not a study, at
least some some numbers that are
not that are more than just, um,
anecdotal. Um, and what is your
CEO salaries?
I, I don't know that. OK. I
remember there was a point, um,
where I believe it was in the
media that and it may have been
a different company, it may have
been a different iteration, was
around a million dollars. That
was with, uh,
Dave Conejo OK.
I, that was with Dave Conejo,
who had a management contract
and also was paid a salary. I
have the forensic report from
the forensic accountants on my
desk. I think that was in 2018,
2019. OK, and needless to say,
it kind of has um created a
shadow, shall we say, over
Rehoboth. Absolutely. And, and
so if, if, if, I mean, I don't
know what the proprietary of
the, of the um that forensic
audit, but it would, I would
love to see that. And if, if you
could be
if you could provide us with the
CEO of the salary, uh, the
salary of the CEO, um, let's
see. And then in uh my, my
healthcare used to be through,
um, Optum. And my provider had
on her whiteboard in the room.
No more than 15 minutes, no more
than one topic. Are you doing
any of that? Are you forcing um
are you setting parameters for
your providers that they must
see a certain number of patients
a day. They must do it per
certain number of procedures.
Any of those kind of quota
issues? No, so, um
one that's illegal. I, I cannot
do that. I cannot. It's being
done. No, I, I, I can't, I
can't, I can't do it, and I'm
not gonna go to, go to prison
for it. That's, that's not
appropriate, um, I think
twofold. One, you want to see
more patients because this is an
underserved area and patients
need, need the care, and that's
not unique here, that's across
state Optum
is owned by UnitedHealthcare.
which is an insurance company,
so
the lower the optum doctors
because I dealt with these
doctors in Loveless, OK? Patient
is there, critically ill. Needs
to be admitted to the hospital
is an observation status for 9
days.
What does that mean? Observation
status gets paid a much lower
rate than an inpatient. That's
Optum. So, um, what they're
doing is, is gonna pay lower
claims
on those providers or those
visits and not address all your
needs. You can have really
effective, talented physicians
spend 15 minutes with you and
take care of all your needs.
It, yeah, I agree in some cases
I had many issues, more than
one, that it took me 6 months to
get a primary care appointment.
So I'm just, I'm just hoping
that that is not becoming
becoming the norm and that
that's not happening here. Um,
and then, um, you talked about
right-sizing non-clinical
positions. So can you talk a
little bit about what those
positions were that you let go.
So,
Madam Chair, one was a person we
had sitting in the mailroom, um,
and
we don't need, didn't need a
full-time person in the
mailroom. We had a separate
full-time person to do supply
for the operating room, and, you
know, we're not running 100 beds
or 60 beds anymore. We're just
25 beds, 3 ORs. So those are the
types of positions that have,
that we have gone for that. And
I'm going to go to
Representative Lujan very
briefly because you missed most
of the presentation. Then I'll
go back to Senator Pinto quickly
and then wind up with
Representative Johnson. So
quickly,
Representative, I appreciate the
time, Madam Chair. Um, and this
may be, may have asked, what are
the premium, how much have
premiums gone up, Madam Chair.
Representative Lujan, that,
that's why I don't like to have
people who haven't been here for
those questions have been asked
and we did ask them to provide
us with information about the
premiums, so I, I heard those
questions and I asked that, but
I didn't hear whether they, they
know those, that information
manager. Yeah.
They, they gave it to us. So, so
I will, I will go to repres a
senator Pinto briefly and Madam
Chair, it's just, um
what's your ask of the
legislature?
I think anything we can do to
get additional funding, um,
through, uh, our, our operations
have been, uh, negatively
affected by these two floods,
and that would be extremely
beneficial. Having gone through
these before with friends at
insurance companies, and they've
already started
uh, the process of looking at
subrogation, i.e., blaming
somebody else for the flood.
Um
it could take us 2 to 3 years to
get paid for business
interruption.
So that would
that's, you know, we've done our
best to keep everybody
working, uh, and, and doing
other things around the
hospital. So if, if we could get
some additional funding for
that, which would be a one-time
ask, that would be greatly
appreciated, uh, you know,
thank you. Oh, Representative
Johnson, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, colleagues, and thank
you RMCH for this candor and
hard conversation. It's very
important and, um, we need our
hospitals. We need
all of our hospitals. We have
GIMC, New Mexico Cancer Center,
the VA Veteran satellite clinic
here in Gallup. We also have our
community health clinic, uh, run
by Doctor Wangler.
and I have a long history with
RMCH. We live on the east side,
um,
and, uh, my aunt my aunties and
uncles were born at McKinley
General Hospital before it
became RMCH. So I, uh, support
our hospitals and um I thank you
for presenting and also on a
side note, Jeff, you will be
leaving RMCH and I want to
thank you, um, so glad to know
you. I appreciate you. We've
become good friends and
colleagues, and I learn a lot
from you and um my family and I
wish you and Kitty, your amazing
wife, the very best, and um.
we will continue to work on all
of the questions my colleagues
presented to you, and I continue
to support all of our hospitals.
Thank you. Thank you. And I just
have one more request. If you
can get us the CEO salary with
benefits and how much you're
paying providers by type. We're
trying to figure out how, you
know, how we can help with
salaries, etc. We know, um,
medical people are expensive and
we'd like to know
what that's gonna look like,
Madam Chair, could I just ask
one question, really, really
quick question. So I, I just
want to make sure I got it right
from the presentation, I wrote
down some notes, your insurance,
you said it went up from 1.2
million to 1.5 million for $20
million less coverage. I didn't,
it's not in the presentation,
but you did say it. So I'm just
wondering if you could res
repeat that for me. Yeah,
Representative Block. So in
2024, we paid $1.2 million for
$34 million worth of coverage.
Last year, we paid $1.4 million
for $14 million of coverage.
And I'm still waiting for the
final quotes on this year, but
we're looking at a 20% premium
increase on top of some other
things. And so my best estimate,
and I should have that actual
number.
probably within the next 30 days
as they're shopping the policies
I anticipate it'll be about $1.8
million for a $6 million policy.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. OK,
so $1.6 million you said 1.8 for
$6 million worth of coverage,
and I really appreciate
Representative Lujan for asking
that question. I apologize that
she was cut off before the
answer could have been given. So
thank you.
Um, so, um, so your, your
insurer is the mountain state's
reciprocal risk or they, they
negotiate insurance with someone
else.
They are the primary carrier for
the lowest level. So when a
claim comes in, Madam Chair,
they do the claims management
for us up to $6 million and then
anything over 6 million, they
mark the group to excess
Insurance carriers. OK.
And then there is a cap if you
are in the PCF, um, so that,
that could, I mean, I, I won't
ask you a question, but that
could be.
an answer to your problem is
that if you join the PCF, um,
but with that, I, we are time,
uh, to go to the next. Thank you
so much for your time. Um, we
have our last presentation
committee. It is, um, early
childhood tribal advisory
Coalition, Joni Swena
um, who's the Assistant
secretary for Native American
Early Childhood Education and
Care, Early childhood education
and care department.
I would hate to have to
introduce myself with that
title.
So whenever you're ready, you
can begin.
Good morning, Goetzihopa Buenos
dias Yat A. My name is Doctor
Joni Swena, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you so
much for having me today.
As mentioned, I am the newly
appointed Assistant Secretary of
Native American Early Education
and Care?
I'm an enrolled member of the
Pablo de Cocheti, and I earned a
doctorate in educational
leadership from the University
of Washington. I'm also proud
Lobo alumna.
Great to be back on uh UNM
campus. My professional
background also includes native
language teaching within my own
community, and I also previously
have served as a Head Start
director as well.
But most importantly to all of
these roles, I am a mother of 4.
I have 4 teenagers and have also
had um the lived experience of
being a part of what the New
Mexico early childhood and
education care department has to
offer through early
intervention, New Mexico pre-K,
um, Languageness, Early Head
Start Head Start, etc.
What you can expect from our
presentation today is an
overview of not only our mission
at ECECD, but more specific to
the nation's pubs and tribes
that we serve within the state
of New Mexico and part of that
includes, of course, my role as
Assistant secretary and a
snapshot of the statewide
network that we support. We've
also included in your packets
today copies of our latest
report, which is the state
tribal collaboration Act
published a couple weeks ago,
and I must say we're actually
ahead of the schedule from what
we've previously published in
former years.
We know that we've continued to
make some great strides in the
state, and we're really proud of
the continued commitment that we
support among the sovereign
nations of New Mexico.
and today I will highlight how
our partnerships with the New
Mexico Early Childhood Tribal
Advisory Coalition or Nummectec
for short, is not only shaping
quality but bringing access and
support to our nation's pebbles
and tribes, and I will also
touch upon a learning tour that
we will be commencing upon in
September.
So slide 2, our vision and
mission is to support all of our
New Mexico families, young
children, and that they're
thriving along with their
families respectively in the
nation's bubbles and tribes that
they're part of, but most
importantly to support that
cohesive, equitable, and
culturally responsive prenatal
to 5 systems that are grounded
in where they come from and
their indigeneity.
Moving along to slide 2, as you
may know, in 2019, um, led by
Governor Lujan Grisham's
leadership, our office launched,
and the cabinet level focus on
early childhood, um, development
began specifically to Native
American early education. I
think what's also really
important to note about our
office is that historically we
are not only setting precedent
as a state, but also being very
unique that we're the only state
level government office that
houses a Native American early
education office that works one
on one to support tribal
consultations among the nation's
pebbles and tribes.
Slide 4
a little bit more about our
enabling statue and the mandates
for the Assistant secretary and
our team, which I will introduce
here shortly, but our overall
goal is to strengthen that
government to government
relationship.
among prenatal to 5 programs and
services within the respective
nation, pubs and tribes, or MPTs
for short.
Again, this is so significant
because we are not only nation
building, but we are setting
precedents in a model that
centers language, culture, and
sovereignty in early education.
Slide 5, you will see our team.
before you and today I have
brought with me our deputy
Assistant secretary, Doctor
Michelle Sosi, who is seated
right behind me, and she is
Chickasaw, Semino, and Choctaw.
And then we also have our policy
analyst Mark Hume, who is a
member of the Navajo Nation.
He's not present today. We also
have Juliana Baca, who is our
tribal grants and contracts
fiscal specialists who seated
with us here today as well. And
then our administrative
support Alvaro Quintana, who is
at our ECECD office in Santa Fe.
So our focus has really been to
work across the division within
ECECD to support coordination,
to respond timely to technical
assistance requests across the
agency, whether it's from New
Mexico pre-K to home visiting
early intervention and the state
tribal collabboration Act
report, which you have further
details some of those ongoing
partnerships that we've
established within the agency
and making sure that when we're
looking at data, we're fine
tuning it
and aggregating it down to our
native populations and children
that we're serving. We also want
to make sure that transparency
is um forward and on the table
so that we have clear contacts
for our communications, and that
one on one support with our
respective nations' ubles and
tribes, and their own
intergovernmental agreements as
well as any ongoing
communication about happenings
across the various tribal
centers as well.
And then moving into slide 6,
our Native American early
childhood centers. I'm really
excited to share that we are
continuously building and adding
to this map, and this is just a
small snapshot of some of the
work that we've commenced with
our partners, and we're still
building um specific to their
respective programs, whether
they have, in addition to an
early childhood program, perhaps
a language nests under them or
an early head start program.
New Mexico Pre-K and I always
like to use Coach D Pablo as an
example where my children were
not only raised and had a
opportunity to participate in
these programs, but, um, KochiD
is a classic example of uh,
early education beginning at the
form of language nest to Head
Start to New Mexico pre-K and
then lastly to our beloved Kari
Children's Learning Center,
which is an early childhood
center, um, that utilizes the
Montessori method for their
language immersion.
And so my children had the
opportunity to participate in
all of those programs. I'm very
familiar with them as well.
Diving deeper into our um
purpose for today. I want to
highlight our New Mexico early
childhood tribal advisory
coalition or Nemectech for
short, and as you may know, they
were established as a community
tribal advisory body to ECECD in
2022, and all of the members
that are a part of the coalition
that are representing one of the
nation's pebbles and tribes are
actually appointed
by the respective leadership of
those nations poles and tribes.
We do have some urban centers
that we've included as a part of
our um body for the advisory
coalition as well, and the goals
of the coalition are to further
guide continuous consultation
between nation to nation, uh,
community voice and also to
guide and support tribal
investments.
And as of June representation
from those um nations ubles and
tribes includes 19 specific
nations, and we've been working
one on one with the um
respective tribes who are
missing from the table, and we
want to make sure that their
tribal leadership are fully
fluent and aware of the
opportunity to join the
coalition and some of the
ongoing initiatives that we're
supporting through our office.
We also, um
hold regular communication and
gatherings including a monthly
collaborative meeting through my
office, which supports the
vastness, the uniqueness of each
nation pubble and tribes
distinctive cultures and also
simultaneously being able to
further inform policy and
programming at ECECD and across
the state. And specifically, we
look at uplifting. What are some
of those best practices that our
tribal nations are carrying out.
within their programming and
what kinds of evidence-based
curriculum is also present, and
many of these um being a former
educator, follow along the
traditional calendars of these
respective nations, pubs and
tribes, and so what they're
teaching at the level of early
education in these respective
classrooms are usually
happenings that are taking place
across the span of that nation,
Pablo or tribe as well.
So bringing you to slide 8.
Overall, some of our goals are
to continue to hone in and
identify community strengths,
identify gaps across the birth
to five continuum and also to
co-develop co-curate
culturally relevant assessments,
evaluation, and family
engagement models. We know that
we don't have to reinvent the
wheel, and we really look to our
nation's pebbles and tribes as
the experts and what they know
best as a forest biased approach
to how they carry out their
early education in their
communities.
We also support best practice
collaboration from an agency
standpoint and being able to
enhance communications and
collaboration across the agency
through teaching about general
communications within our ECECD
community, how they can approach
tribal leadership? What are some
of the best practices when
they're visiting a nation pueblo
or tribe, and then also how can
follow-ups and overall general
communication support.
executing intergeneration um
excuse me, Madam Chair, um,
intergovernmental agreements and
meeting those deliverables laid
out.
And it really goes to show how
we want to continue to support
that equity and quality of
services for our native families
and New Mexican families as a
whole.
Moving to slide 9, you will see
all of the participating
communities and programs, which
are very um all across the board
from our Apache nations to our
distinct Pablo nations to the
Navajo Nation, and I must also
add that Madam Vice President
ichelle Montoya of the Navajo
Nation is a MEctech coalition
member. She's been a very active
member and attends all of our
meetings as well. And then we
are also
looking to continue our
communication with the pueblo of
Cochiti, the Pablo of San
Felipe, and the pebble of Tesuki
who are missing from this list
as well. So we've been in
conversations with Governor
Herrera specifically at Cochiti
to make sure that these
appointments are happening as
well as uh Governor orchi San
Felipe Pablo, and then another
center which I mentioned earlier
in my presentation that is also
um another invited member is the
Carers Children's Learning
Center, and so
we've been in discussions with
them to bring them, um.
upon the committee as well and
to be able to provide their um
best practices within their
Montessori methodology as well.
You'll also see that we have
epics, or education for parents
of Indian children with special
needs, um, and then we also have
uh the New Mexico School for the
Blind and Visually Impaired, and
MSD New Mexico School for the
Deaf and Saidlia dene language
nest.
We've been very intentional
about bringing these partners to
the table so that we can ensure
that disability and sensory
supports and expertise are
brought into the classroom and
along with that moving forward
to slide 10.
I want to share with you a
learning tour that we will be
commencing, come September,
which we're entitling Sacred
Beginnings, a learning tour of
Native American early education
in Karen, New Mexico.
and really the goal of that is
to continue to build upon our
government to government
consultations that are required
by our enabling statute, but to
come at it from the angle of
building upon our relationships
with the nation's pebbles and
tribes, walking among the
grounds of these centers and
alongside of the staff,
celebrating our students and
their respective languages,
their traditional regalia and
welcom
ing these families to come to
these um gatherings as well so
that they can not only learn
more about what we do at ECECD,
but so that they can access
these resources as well. And
another aspect that
the office of the Assistant
secretary has taken on has been
to work directly with our
communications team to ensure
that the assets that are
developed, whether it's
brochures, handouts, reports
like you see before you are not
only um aesthetic in nature that
are reflective of our indigenous
values, but really speak to
something that if a native
family is walking through a
resource fair, they see a
pamphlet that is targeted
towards
supporting services that are
offered to them as well. And so,
um, our communications team has
just been really great at
supporting that and
last but certainly not least
within the sacred beginning
learning tour, we also want to
engage our tribal leadership to
join us alongside, and we're
inviting not only them but the
early childhood center
directors, the home visiting
staff, as well as our ECECD
tribal liaisons, which you can
find listed in the very back
page of the sticker report.
There's a list of our executive
leadership, and then also to the
right of
that is our tribal liaisons for
um the agency.
Specific to bureau or program.
Some of the outcomes for the
um sacred Beginnings learning
tour are to support elevating
those culturally grounded
practices, being more
linguistically responsive and
continuing to uplift the
existing curricula and the
teachings that these nations,
bubble and tribes know best for
their their children and also to
continue to support informing
our FY 27 policy technical
assistance and ongoing funding
strategies for tribal
investments.
And then, um, slide 13 details
our executive leadership
contacts. I'm they're listed 2nd
on the list, and as I do
encourage our nation's pebbles
and tribes and native serving
early education centers, please
know that I am just a call or
email away. You may reach out to
myself and my staff at any time.
We would be happy to also
provide additional
data snapshots specific to your
counties as well, with how many
native children and what
programs they are, um,
participating in as well as
their families, and then lastly,
slide 14. I encourage you to
sign up for our newsletter,
which will further detail some
of our updates about the sacred
Beginnings learning tour and how
um all of our visits unfold as
well. So we're really looking
forward to that. And with that,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I open it up for
questions. Yeah. Thank you so
much for your presentation.
We'll start with Senator Pinto
and uh
let's go with 3 minutes. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I thought, uh,
this is the first time
presenting, so we have unlimited
time for questions. Yeah, that,
that's, that's the way I roll,
right, right, committee.
Keep her here for 2 hours. Um,
thank you, thank you for your
presentation, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the work you are
going to do for our people.
Um, I was because this was uh
the report I first report I saw
was in the Indian Affairs
Committee, and it was from this
department and have't read
through it yet. We had a lot of
um material to read through,
but, um, I see the map here, um.
a slight presentation on 6 and
um I know we have a lot of
challenges with um Navajo Nation
as far as trying to
I'm trying to get my kids out of
portables and into make sure
we're getting into real, um,
infrastructure buildings. Um,
and I know that takes time, but
I see too in the report that NTU
is one entity do, is it easier
going through higher the higher
ed institutions to kind of
incorporate this in or build
this up, uh, madam chair.
Madam Chair,
Senator Pinto, thank you so much
for the question. So in terms of
the intergovernmental agreement
that we have with Naval
Technical University. That's
really specific to supporting an
early childhood laboratory
program that would be modeled
much like that out of
southwestern Indian polytechnic
Institute SIPI, and so, um,
they're using one of those best
practices models to see how they
can establish that kind of
programming at NTU, um, but
in regard to facility support,
one of the other partnerships
that we also have with uh
consultant is um
thrive, and that is to not only
gather data, but to put together
full fledged assessments on what
um
on what facilities and centers
are needing, and so I realized
that that partnership has not
been fully utilized in the past,
and so within my tenure, that's
something that I will absolutely
push forward with to ensure that
we're making sure that we had
those assessments so we know how
much investment.
needs to be made forward towards
those, yes. And Madam Chair,
and,
um
with that too, I know we put a
bunch of money into this
department to create it and, um,
so I don't think funding's an
issue, but I know we should
utilize or maximize. So the
technology too, I do encourage
you to make sure, um, this, uh,
Representative Seano always
tries to tell me we need to use
that tech money to, um,
especially in our rural areas
with internet because in one of
my early childhood facilities,
there was no cell
service, but I don't know if
they had internet, and I know in
my area where the cell service
goes down. I use FaceTime um
through my Apple phone, through
the internet, so, um, especially
when we talk about, um,
emergencies in that sense,
especially for our young
children. But thank you for the
work you're doing in taking this
on, and thank you for being here
and coming out here to present
to us and uh good luck on your
endeavor and don't, don't be
afraid to reach out to me for
any support. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Senator, thank you very
much.
Good timing, Senator.
Representative Johnson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your presentation. I
don't have any questions, just
appreciate your work and your
presentation and
uh, joining us here in Gallup
and, uh, ditto everything
Senator Pinto said. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
thank you for the presentation
and thank for all the hard work
you're doing. I'm wondering if
you could touch on a little bit.
I know within the department, I
think there's always additional
work that needs to be done and
how we increase the workforce,
how we deal with um
you know, issues like
regulations, licensure, things
like that, and, and what we want
to do going forward, um, when it
comes to our indigenous
communities and language and
cultural competency. Is there
any additional resources or
barriers or things that we need
to uh look at improving to make
sure that um all of our
communities are getting uh this
vital uh education. If you could
touch on that. Madam Chair,
thank you, Senator Pope, for
your question.
Absolutely. I think that just
coming in and being in this role
for the past 9 weeks. One of my
biggest questions because of my
background as a researcher and
as a scholar has been looking at
the existing literature that's
available across the board, and
we know that we need more data
to be pulled that is specific to
our nation's pubs and tribes as
well as our urban Indian
populations, and so that's
another focus area of my office,
and in addition to that, I think
that's what's really great
happening in the news now is
that New
Mexico has recently ranked 5th
in our early childhood
programming in the nation, which
is incredible for all the other
statistics that we, you know,
normally pop up at the end
within. I also want to mention
that I think that, you know, as
a part of that and this idea,
um, alongside of sacred
Beginnings learning to, it
really goes to speak toward how
we are doing something right in
early education and supporting
our children and families as
they
transition and our uh school
ready. So data is definitely one
of the missing links that I feel
like I would love to hone in on
and and gather more information
about. Thank you for the
question, Senator. Well, thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
for the response and, um, just
continue working with, with us
and, um, we appreciate you being
in this position. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Thoris Valesque.
I'm big congra Madam Chair,
sorry, Big congratulations on
your appointment to this office.
It's always wonderful to have a
member of the Swena family. Um,
in leadership, and
congratulations. I have a few
questions. Um, one of them might
have been something that Senator
Pinto asked, but I was so
engrossed in the materials you
provided, which are wonderful. I
appreciate them. Thank you.
Um, that I realized I wasn't
listening completely. I'm
wondering, um, so cultureti
Pueblo has a long-standing early
childhood strength and program.
And, um, I'm hoping that that's
one of the places where we can
tour and legislators can join on
an in-person tour, perhaps, um,
but it is a model for like the
rest, well, you know, the rest
of the country isn't like
Cochiti Pueblo, but it, the
things that they did to develop
that program are, are really,
really important. Um, so I, um,
hope we
get a tour, but I also on page
9, I'm wondering
are is Coachchete's program
listed on the participating
communities and programs. That's
one question. And then I'd like
a little more information on the
epics, uh, program that you have
listed, and I would like a
little more information on how
kids with disabilities are
served in early childhood in the
programs that you all have
going.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, Representative Torres
Velazquez, thank you so much for
the question. Absolutely. I'm
proud to be a daughter of the
people of Kocheti and have had,
like I mentioned, that firsthand
experience, not only being a
student in many of these
emergent programs, but also
teaching in these classrooms as
well and having my children go
through them.
In terms of your questions, we
recognize that Cochiti um
specific to the Kerri language
um immersion program, KCLC that
they are missing from the table
and so we are working very
closely with Governor Herrera. I
actually spoke with him last
week to ensure that Kocheti not
only appoints a member of the
Pablo de Coti but also that we
extend the invitation to the
Kari Children's Learning Center
in addition to that specific
seat, being that we
do have programs such as Epics,
such as NMSD, as well as the um
Dane language nest in
Albuquerque as well, but those
being more representative of um
some of the rural and rural
programmings that aren't
necessarily directly linked as a
part of um that nation public or
tribe.
And um this has gone through
several layers of discussions
with not only KCLC, Tricia
Mochino, um, Doctor Curtis
Chavez as well. And also, um,
like I mentioned through the
public de Kochiti Governor's
office.
In terms of how we continue to
um work with um our partner
collaborators such as Epics.
That is one relationship that I
want to keep the momentum going
with, um, and since I'm very new
to my role, I would have to hop
offline with you and share more
about some of those partnerships
as they exist from my
predecessors. Madam Chair, I
have a serious consideration
that either we come back or if
you would allow me to clarify my
question about epics briefly.
Yes, ma'am. Um, Madam Chair
I'm, I'm, I'm not, I'm
questioning, I'm a little
concerned seeing that you've got
the Epics program. I'm hoping
that's a school, um, and I'm
glad to see epics here and back
on the page, um, in the program,
but I'm wondering if all kids
with disabilities are sent to
that school. I'm wondering if
kids with disabilities are, I
served on the Epics board for 15
years. It's not a, um, it's a,
it's a parent support, um, dust
metal.
an advocacy group. And so it's,
I don't believe anyone has sent
there per se. It's kind of a
word of mouth. Great. So I'm, my
concern would be that kids with
disabilities would be served in
their own um home site. And so
that's what I want to make sure
is happening, this is not a
congregate or I mean it, they,
they don't provide services per
se. They provide education and
support.
Education to parents and family
members, Madam, a nonprofit
organization that provides
advocacy to individual parents
that might have questions and
might not be able to find those
particular resources in their um
center or.
on the reservation. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and that might be
an item for clarification for
later. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
think one of the most beautiful
pieces about the early childhood
department is that it's new and
we get to create it in the way
that we want it. And I think
that's really exciting and
hopefully we get to K-12 in that
way too, right? where we're like
thinking ahead and able to
create, um, but I was wondering,
I was checking out the map here
on page 6 and I was wondering,
how are we thinking about urban
native children. Um, and the
early childhood centers there.
Just because clearly we have
just such a mix like how are
we approaching urban native
kids? Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Anaya, for the
question. So in terms of our
internal audit that we're
conducting currently. We want to
invite our urban Indian centers
to also be a part of our
learning journey as well. And so
we recognize there's partners
that are missing from the table,
including Napper, for example,
Native American parent
professional resources based out
of Albuquerque and so this is
really a call to action for
community to tell us, help us be
informed.
beyond our research and what we
do internally within ECECD to
make sure that we have everybody
called to the table.
Definitely. I'm
definitely not criticizing who
or who is not at the table, but
are there any ideas of like, how
do you address cultural
relevance when you have so many,
um native kids from a lot of
different places who have a lot
of different experiences. And
I'm just wondering, like,
theoretically speaking, like,
how is it that
like has this model been
approached before? What does
that even look like? Madam
Chair, Representative Anaya,
thank you again for the question
and for further deepening that.
I think, you know, really going
back to the literature and
expanding upon that, a lot of
the literature that we see out
there about methodology is
pre-COVID, you know, 2019 and
older and so it is another
initiative of my office to
ensure that we're gathering some
of those case studies and
putting together some kind of
collaborative manuscript that we
would be able to support as some
of
those case by case analysis of
what is evidence-based practice
curriculum and how they're
implementing it. I think the
public of Hamas is another great
language immersion, um, case
study as well, and we continue
to deepen those partnerships and
in our um
final year, next year when um
we're wrapping up and moving
into a new administration. One
of the goals of our office is
also to um include a concluding
report that would touch upon all
of those aspects for some of
those best practices models.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have one quick question, well,
maybe two,
so Madam Chair, one of the
questions that I have is that I,
I noticed in, in your vision and
mission you include infants,
which is really great. I I think
that we always forget that they
also need early childhood
education as well. But so my
question is, as I'm looking at
the table, I think it's on, uh,
it's on page 6.
Um, some of them, um, like some
of the pueblos have head starts.
So does that mean, so how do you
incorporate
the infant education, um,
in, in some of those areas, or
in all of the areas, I guess. So
all of the ECECD, um, programs
and services from early
intervention to um home visiting
to one of the newest programs
that launched on July 1st, which
is family connectsi Mexico,
offered locally at, um,
hospitals, including UNMH,
Sandoval Regional Medical
Center, specifically working
most likely with families that
are coming from Sandoval
County, Bernalo County, um,
McKinley County regions, we
recognize that all of our
children and families
participation is voluntary and
so encouraging them to come and
um take part in our programs is,
um, you know,
upon their um interest in the
program, but we also respect the
nation to nation relationship
that we have with the NPTs, and
so in doing so, as a part of
their own portfolios of early
education, it would be more
specific to what, um, their
respective communities offer at
those distinct levels for infant
care, um, using the pubbble of
Kochiti as an example, language
nests is something that's
available from 6 weeks of age to
3 years old, and then they would
transition.
um into a different early
education program.
And then my other question is,
um,
sort of like, what's the
timeline um
for the, the, the publics that
don't have.
um
early childhood or Head Start,
what sort of the the timeline to
bring everybody.
in. Yeah, so actually right now,
all of our nation's pebbles and
tribes have some form of early
education program that's
supporting community, um, more
often than not, it's been the
Office of Head Start through ACF
at the federal level that has
been um an existing precursor in
the community, and I think that
right now with what we're seeing
with indigenous sovereignty,
educational sovereignty, and the
move towards language immersion.
It really is a reflective way to
continue to embody healing as
nations poles and tribes and
really looking at global models
for how assimilation at the
federal level was once used as a
tool to force English-only
principles upon our um children
and families, and now, in fact,
these programs are the forest
bias model where they're using
language immersion.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Lujan.
Ma'am, I didn't have my hand up.
Thank you.
Everybody always wants to ask
questions, so I just call on
everybody. Oh.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have a quick question and thank
you so much, Doctor Swena. OK,
good. I didn't want to
mispronounce your name, but I
just am wondering, I think uh
Senator Pope touched on it when
it comes to data and thank you
so much, Senator Pope for that.
Uh, what are we doing to get the
data from all of these different
programs to make sure that
they're aligning with state
standards and then also I know
we can't tell a nation what to
do and how to do it, but we
certainly can give them the
resources. So I'm just wondering
how we do that,
how we track it and ensure that
everything is moving on the same
pace as all students in the in
the state. Madam Chair,
Representative Bloch, thank you
so much for the question. It
really leads into the focus for
the sacred Beginnings learning
tour, and that is so that we can
not only hear firsthand again
and walk alongside of these
respective centers as well as
tribal leadership, but to do and
conduct internal data sweeps
that would further dive deeper
into some of the existing issues
that we know
exist. Some of those needs that
might be around facilities.
Additionally, at the level of
the agency, one of the first um
tasks that I
provided direction toward our
tribal liaisons was to give us
the office of the Assistant
secretary, more information
related to what do our
demographics look like when we
funnel them down to our native
children, and how can we further
aggregate that data so that
we're not just looking at one
line item that consists of total
population for this particular
county, I want to know what are
their tribal affiliations? What
are their age groups, and how
can we further support families
and then in turn work with
tribal programs and the
respective tribal leaders of
that particular nation public or
tribe, to enhance those services
and really build transitions and
bridges between those. So when
we commence on sacred Beginnings
learning tour will also be doing
um our internal data sweeps as
well, and I am really looking
forward to an even more robust
state tribal collaboration Act
2026
report, which will be published
next July, and I also have to,
um,
shout out the partnership that
we have with New Mexico Indian
Affairs Department through
Secretary Monet's leadership and
the continued efforts building
relationships with the nation's
pubs and tribes, as well as
Secretary Gurginski's leadership
in my new role as well, and I
think it really paves the way
for a great future forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that. And so we got this
presentation in LESC Legislative
Education Study Committee from
LFC Legislative Finance
Committee, so many different
whatevers like EC ECD it's not
very easy for you either, but it
was talking about the specific
dollars going into early
childhood and Head Starts and
those
programs initially being
putting those kids above their
peers who did not get it, but it
waned 3rd grade. So I'm just, I
just want to make sure that we
touch on that to ensure that
native children are also getting
the opportunities that we're
trying to button up our system.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Appreciate it. And just a
question, I don't believe state
dollars are going into Hearts.
Is that correct? Yeah, that's
all federal, it was just like
looking at the data, making sure
that people are clear, um, what,
where, where, where, where,
yeah, it's the end of a 3rd day.
Senator, uh, Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And as
always, appreciate the
information, um, uh, for what we
are doing within um our Native
American communities in the
state, and I think this is
definitely
trending in the right direction.
Um, Madam Chair, I remember, uh,
the LESC we had an opportunity
to go have a committee hearing
at Walitoa Head Start a few
years back, and that was so
interesting and wonderful to
have an opportunity to, to, um,
listen to the elders who were
there with some of the children
and just kind of observe and
watch. That was just
an education for me, um, and I'm
sure maybe for some of the other
members who were there, and I
noticed, of course, I would hope
that uh Haus Pueblo or the
Waatoa Head Start is going to be
also part of that list that
you're working on uh for
membership too, um, because I
know that they too have been
doing some good work.
Um, Madam Chair of, you know,
with regards to Head Start
Moneys, um,
is there any effect from the
federal government about uh
lessening monies for Head Start
within um our our Native
American early childhood
centers.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez,
thank you so much for the
question. In regard to the
ongoing federal updates that
continue to change hour by hour,
day by day, we have continued to
stay abreast and work very
closely with our nation's pubs
and tribes to ensure that we can
support any of the ways that
we've been, they've been
affected, but in terms of um
current dollars being frozen, to
my knowledge, the only challenge
that
exists right now that is
specific to funding being cut
would be to our tribal colleges
and universities for whom we
have partnerships with for early
childhood educator pathways. In
terms of um federal dollars
coming from the administration
for Children and Families, to my
knowledge right now, no.
However, again, we are working
across the agency to um stay
abreast with what's happening,
and we'd be happy to contact you
offline as well to share more.
No, and I appreciate that, Madam
Chair, because I think it just
needs to be on, on in the
vision, just to see where and
what is coming, as we all know,
the federal budget is being put
together at this point in time.
So just to see where any
potential cuts may be, and Head
Start, I know, is one area
that's so important for our
state, for both um indigenous
communities, but also others. I
talk with my hands, so I hit
this thing as well as other
communities across the state.
Madam Chair, just a one more, I,
I do believe that ECECD, I think
I finally got that right. Um,
you're participating in, I
think, listening sessions with
regards to the Martinez and Yazi
lawsuits against the state, um.
Am I correct, Madam Chair
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez,
thank you for the question. In
terms of the Yazi Martinez
litigation and the listening
sessions. Our staff has been a
part of one of those listening
sessions, which was the um
beginning of commencing within
the community led, uh, listening
sessions. So we worked directly
with PED and Secretary Padilla
to learn more about the
initiative and the approach for
how they're going out and
gathering their information so
that should be, you know,
receive any questions from
community or our partners.
our nation's pubs and tribes
that we can provide further
support on what's happening.
Um, in terms of any follow-ups
where staying abreast on that as
well.
Thank you, and I ask that, Madam
Chair, because I know they're
listening sessions happening
right now. There's one tonight
in Albuquerque from 4 to 7 at
the embassy suites, but they
also have some of those
listening sessions for
information, um, online too, and
I know it's, it's listed um.
someplace on the web, but
there's information as to where
we can do and participate.
Uh, Madam Chair and I mentioned
this just because Head Start,
um, again, as I mentioned across
the state provides such a
wonderful, it's a wonderful
resource in teaching, working
with our children and families
that um we need to participate
in some of these sessions
because it's an opportunity to
have a voice. So that's all.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you so much.
00, Representative Johnson. She
says tiny. Thank you, Madam
Chair, very, very tiny. I just
have, we have, we were curious
if you worked with CYFD in any
manner as part of your, uh,
community partners.
Yeah, absolutely. We definitely
collaborate with our sister
agencies and I can't directly
speak to working with them since
I've come on board in any one on
one meeting that we've had, but
our staff has been actively
engaged in making sure that
those transitions are
supportive.
Thank you, and we did have our
meeting, our Indian Affairs
Committee meeting last summer at
Za Pueblo, and we did tour the
childhood, um, so
congratulations and continue the
good work. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. So I just have a
couple of things, um.
are you related to Gladys
Swena? Yes.
Tell her I said hi.
I was a PT in Bernal Leo.
Well, um, so, um,
in terms of fit, I, I sit on the
interagency coordinating council
for the Family, infant toddler,
the birth to 3 program with, uh,
for, for kids with disabilities
are at risk. And I'm a big, uh,
and I, every time I talk to
anybody from ECECD, I say we
really need to beef up the
at-risk and qualification for,
forfeit, and back when I started
with in early intervention
decades ago. It was really
robust and it was a way for us
to help families.
um, that maybe didn't fit into
the little boxes that we make
them fit into. So, um, just a,
just a big supporter on
expanding the, um, the
qualifications for at-risk and,
and allowing for more services.
Back in the day, we could
provide, if two different, um,
I'll say agencies like the early
inter uh Laguna division of
Early Childhood in the WIC
office or whatever thought there
were issues with the family. We
could provide them with the
services that worked for the
family and now it's down to, I
believe, one hour a month of of
services and, and I feel like a
lot of kids are slipping through
the cracks. Um, and I was
disappointed to see that Laguna
and Haus and San Felipe, and,
and nothing on you. Just Laguna
used to be a national model. I
mean, we, we, we kicked butt
when we we did Child finds at
all the villages where we had
dentists and um audiologists and
medical and we made the
referrals right there. It was
really a good program, and I
hope that kind of um that that
kind of thing is happening or it
comes back. Um, just out of
curiosity, I know that um some
of the Hearts also have early
head starts. Do they all now,
it's been a while since I've
been practicing in, in, in those
places. So do, do all or most of
the Head Starts also have early
head starts, Madam Chair, uh,
no, actually, some of them are
just standalone head starts, OK,
and for committee members, early
head starts are basically birth
to 3.
before you qualify for, and it's
a great way um to get federal
funding as opposed to just doing
child care for those kids to do
services, education, those kind
of things.
Um, and then just, just one more
thing, and I believe it was
Indian affairs we met in Hama,
and, um, we met at the senior
center and I was so thrilled to
see the senior center in such
close proximity to the early
childhood center, so that there
could
be, um, yeah, some years ago, I
don't even remember if it was a
bill or a memorial. I think it
was a memorial to study how to
use seniors in our early
childhood education, care,
development, because it's good
for the seniors, it keeps them
young, it keeps them active, it
makes them feel like they're
part of, you know, part of
something bigger, and it's great
for our youth. So, just throwing
it out there that um that's some
that's something I would love to
see more happening and it seems
like it's
a natural fit in the tribal and
nations and um Pueblo
communities because of, because
they are such a community. Thank
you for taking on this role. um,
please know that I'm a huge
supporter of, I was one of the
sponsors of the Constitutional
amendment and, um, thank you for
what you all are doing and keep
it up and please keep us
apprised of what you're doing
and if, if there's ways we can
help you and please don't
hesitate to ask. So thank you,
thank you.
you so much, Madam Chair, and
again, our, our door is always
open digitally and um
physically, so please feel free
to stop by the office and we
will also invite you to join us
on our sacred Beginnings
learning tour as well. Thank
you.
And though we don't have public
comment uh listed on our agenda.
I do understand there are a few
people here who would like to
speak. So if you would like to
make a 3-minute public comment,
can you please raise your hand?
OK, so I see 2. So if you ladies
want to go ahead and come on up.
um,
and then Senator Pinto will talk
to you afterwards.
And if anyone on Zoom. Yeah, oh,
and yeah, if, if there's anyone
on Zoom who would like to make
public comment, please raise
your hand, and we will come back
to you. And if you could turn
off your mic,
and, oh, can I turn this on try
again.
OK.
It's the person, you push the
person and go ahead. You'll have
3 minutes. OK, all right. So my
name is Doctor Connie Liu. I am
a community organizer and I am
an OBGYN working in Gallup, New
Mexico. I'm also the president
of an organization called the
McKinley Regional Health
Advocacy Committee, which is
comprised of community members
who liaison with RMCH. I also
have a PhD in health policy. Um,
my group MMRAC was uh the
advocacy committee formed 1.5
years ago, and it's actively
working with RMCH to disseminate
a community needs assessment
this year. And I will tell you
from a community perspective
that the hospital is in a very
different place than it was two
years ago, when the hospital at
the time was under direct
contract with the management
company called CHC, um, and that
contract is no longer in place.
So I do think that the hospital
is actually from that
perspective doing much better,
especially since the board is
now comp
ri s ed by members of the
community who take an active
interest in um community
priorities. So, um, I do want to
just mention some stats to
provide a little bit of context
from a community perspective
about the health of rural, um,
you know, communities like ours
in New Mexico, so the USDA put
out a really excellent report
last year that shows an analysis
of mortality rates in rural
versus urban areas, and it's
very clear that the disparity
between health and urban rural
areas is growing, and that is
primarily due
driven by um an increase in
natural, what we call natural
cause mortality among working
age people between the ages of
25 and 55. So that means younger
people are now dying in rural
areas more frequently from
hypertension and diabetes. And
so as an OBGYN and somebody
who's been looking at the stats
for a community, I can tell you
how that looks. So, 20 years
ago, 13% of my pregnant patients
were experiencing diabetes
during pregnancy, and now that
rate is 40% and 20 years ago,
14% of our patients had some
form of hyper
10 s ive disease, and now that
that rate has increased also to
about 25% as well. And that um
sort of goes with that USDA
reports, which shows that women
who live in rural areas are
dying at a rate 3 times, um,
higher um from pregnancy related
causes than they did 20 years
ago, and that especially impacts
Native American and black women.
So, um, we also know that this
all corresponds with the
national trend that rural
hospitals are closing at an
increasing rate, and the team
from RNCH I think did a nice job
of sort of trying to demonstrate
to you the challenges that they
face in running our hospital
even as there's been progress.
And I will note that because we
are in an area that is primarily
served by IHS that um that a lot
of the um problem, this is going
to be compounded by um care
being slowing at local IHS
hospitals. There was a stat
article in July
that um demonstrated that talked
about how um you know,
particularly at GIMC since mid
July um because of staffing
issues that um a lot of patients
have had to be transferred um to
outside facilities. We do 300 to
400 deliveries there a month.
Um, and nearly all these
patients are now having to be
transferred very frequently by
plane because um ambulances are
not, um, don't have this
adequate support, and when I
try, when, you know, before when
I tried to arrange for um
transport by ambulance, and it
would take
at least 24 hours and that's
just so it's just not workable.
Um, so I should be talking about
how my concern that federal cuts
to Medicaid will impact my
community since, you know, 54%
of us rely on Medicaid, but I,
and I do think that you need to
address the thorny, you know,
question of how we get from a
system that disadvantages small
hospitals to one that aligns
financing of medicine with the
needs of the community, but I
cannot talk to you about rural
healthcare without telling you
that we need malpractice reform,
and we need it urgently. So as
somebody who follows research, I
think it's very
difficult to study and health,
um, you know, but it is very
clear that world rural workforce
is impacted by malpractice
liability costs, even as urban
centers seem to be more
protected from that impact. And
furthermore, that malpractice
risk does not result in improved
care. In fact, caps on
non-economic damages are usually
associated with a decrea an
increase in defensive medicine,
which is not an not an
improvement in care, it is just,
you know, physicians who order
tests and
you know, turn away patients and
turn away care or provide care,
not because it's good for the
patient, but because they're
trying to protect themselves
from a lawsuit. I can also talk,
yes, and then, and also Doctor
Andrade has been very, very
explicit, and he will be very
happy to talk to you. That
malpractice is one of the main
reasons why he left several 100
patients here without a primary
care doctor. So, yeah, so I, I'm
just here to tell you I support
everything that RMCH says, you
need to address tort reform. I'm
here as a physician and patient
advocate. So, um, that is my
primary concern, and that
' s why I will be talking to
legislators about this season.
Yeah, thank you.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
so I'm Dr. Valerie Wengler, a
family physician, uh, that
served McKinley County here
since 2010. I've worked as the
chief of staff for um ZUI IHS,
uh, Chief Medical Officer at
RMCH and then 3 years ago
founded Gallop Community Health.
Um, and totally support
everything that, um, Doctor Liu,
uh, just expressed to you. Um,
I'll say that 3 years ago, 3.5
years ago, you know, a small
group of concerned local
healthcare workers got together
in my backyard to think about
what
we could do for healthcare in
our community. We were very
concerned about the trajectory
of the hospital, about providers
leaving the area and really
wanted to find a way to make a
sustainable difference. And what
we know is that primary care is
the only type of medicine that's
been shown to consistently
improve both outcomes and health
equity. Um, and so we have over
the last 3 years, we've
recruited, um, 19 currently
working. We have 5 more incoming
providers and now serving more
than 13,000 patients in McKinley
County through pri
m ary care, behavioral health,
dental. We're starting our first
school-based clinic here at UNM
this fall.
So I want to talk a little bit
about the challenges that rural
clinics like mine face, um, and
certainly coming Medicaid cuts
and enrollment cutbacks are
chief among those. Um, we are a
federally qualified health
center lookalike. So we have a
little bit of buffer from that,
um, but New Mexico has done a
fantastic job of supporting
primary care from the Medicaid
perspective, currently paying
150% of the Medicare rate, and
that will drop to 100% as these
cuts go into effect, which will
be a huge impact on rural clinic
s across the state. Certainly
mine included, um, to speak to
malpractice for a minute, I
totally agree that this is
something that needs to be
changed and changed urgently in
our state. Um, my clinic
currently pays about 150,000 a
year in malpractice, we've never
had a case. We don't have any
pending cases. That is just the
base of what you can expect um
in our state. That would allow
me, if I could redirect those
funds, I could hire 3 more
community health workers to help
connect patients to care. I
could hire two more quality
individuals to help make sure
we're providing the highest
quality care to everyone. I
could hire another nurse
practitioner to increase access.
So I think that's a really key
issue, and I urge the council to
take action. Um, finally, coming
back to primary care and primary
care cuts, uh, studies show that
if you add 10 primary care
physicians to a population of
100,000, you increase life
expectancy by 50 to 100 days.
McKinley County has a life
expectancy almost a full decade
shorter than the state average.
So we
are desperate for those
improvements.
Um
we also know that primary care
saves money, results in a 27%
decrease in cost of care. I went
an individual has an identified
primary care physician. Uh, yet
primary care only receives 5% of
the national healthcare spend.
So we're spending 5 cents on the
dollar for the type of care that
we know has the greatest impacts
on our communities. Um, so as we
look at these cuts, as we try to
figure out how best to weather
the changes to come. I
appreciate everything that you
all can do to help make sure
that we have the resources we
need to be able to continue
to take care of those 13,000
patients.
Thank you for your presentation.
Thank you for your work, um, and
with that, I think we are
adjourned until, oh, OK.
Madam Chair
I, I have a question because I'm
new to this committee partly.
Um, but I have been listening,
um, to the presentations that we
have received over the past 3
days, including yesterday, even
though I wasn't here, I was
tuned in online
and I am wondering, um, for this
committee, how do we follow up
with action items because there
were a number of presentations
that required follow-up actions,
including presentations today
that I know my colleagues will
be following up and, and taking
care of. But as a committee, how
do we bring it back to
for follow up for updates.
That's my, the best I can do
with that question. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, we do the best
we can, I'll say. So, so Xander
has been getting texts from me,
emails from me, Remember, we
have to follow up on this. We
have to follow, uh.
one of the fortunate,
unfortunate things about this
committee is we cover so many
areas that we can't possibly
hear everything we need to hear
and everybody wants to present
to us, so the senator and I,
along with the staff, have to
sit down and figure out who we
need to hear from. So it would
be wonderful if we could have,
um, you know, follow up
presentations, ity is not quite
that way, and some of us have
been asking for a professional
uh legislative Health and Human
Services Committee with staff
much like LFC and LESC because
of the breadth
and importance of the issues we
haven't had much success. I'll
just say it that way. So any of
you that want to give a push to
the powers that be that this
committee needs to be staffed
and year round with we did get 5
additional days for meetings,
um, last year, um, but that's
not near enough, and I wish we
could do in-depth follow up to
everything we do, and we, we
don't have the manpower and we
don't have the
number. We don't have the
committee hours to give to it.
So, um, it's frustrating. I'll,
I will just leave it at that.
It's frustrating. So thank you
