Okay if we can come back to the
table please will get started
with public comment so are we
ready okay so if you are on zoom
and would like to make public
comment please raise your hand
we will
we will take public comment in
person and then we'll come back
to zoom so as soon as the
members get
can get organized a little bit
you can go ahead and come up to
the table
yeah right here.
Yes you gave me one.
The.
Okay.
Okay ma'am you'll have three
minutes to turn the microphone
on you press the person
go ahead.
Did I turn it on
okay
well
I wish I could say good
afternoon but it's not a good
afternoon for me and the
citizens have do makes it though
my damage frances williams I
have been
resident of new mexico since
nineteen fifty two and I came to
the state
and
I love this state I love the
city and there isn't much that I
have not done
when I have been called to do
work for it
however
I am
representing
the citizens of new mexico I
mean all of them
and it has to do worth the
shameful
medical care we are not getting
I had a doctor for forty five
years and he had to retire
it took me four doctors to go to
an available would take me
except if I waited two or three
or four months.
And at that time
my physical condition had been
deteriorating each part of me
so it was very painful for me
and to wait that long
I felt was a transgression.
When I looked into it and I
started investigating their
sovereignty and I have thought
to see what was the problem and
the problem pointed to almost
every time to the medical mail
practice insurance that doctors
had to pay it new mentioned both
when I was investigating it I
found that for the most part new
mexico heard that one of the
highest medical mail practice
and trip liability insurance
premiums and it was because of
this that they were leaving us
and I understand that the cost
was twenty four thousand five
hundred dollars
so many doctors couldn't pay it
and they have left the state and
we are in a medical crisis
and
I was very surprised and
somewhat alarmed when I read the
agenda of this meeting it never
mentioned the issue of the
specific suffer doctors who are
leaving leaving and they're not
coming back and they're not
being replaced I personally have
had
i'm I mean every day this
something growing inside of
being outside of me that was
there the night before
I should mention that I will not
tell you my age because i'm
jewish and the typical will get
me a fight tell you but I was
born in nineteen twenty eight I
will be having a birthday in
october.
God willing in the quick dog
rise so the issue here is the
doctors they're leaving they're
not coming back they're not
being replaced and when I have a
appeared and I have testify i've
also been in touch with the
severe servantes about the
medical malpractice I have been
entouched with the head of her
medical society doctor berson
i've tried to get them together
to talk and fortunately the
times have been worked out but
i've got their statements on
both sides and of course they're
incompatible with each other.
And
if you have but if you could
i'm sorry if you could wrap it
up we we allow three minutes
then you're over the commerce
three three minutes and end it's
oversold you could just wrap up
your comments we have other
folks who would like well you
know man
okay there's nobody I don't see
anybody who are lined up to talk
but I am telling you
to have this committee meet
and not even mention the dark as
shortage it's criminal it's a
shandow and I was very disturbed
about that now you can shut me
up I will not shut up I have
been all over I will continue
i've been as a and I fixed
commenter i've been five
commissions and by the way
interestingly enough the ethics
commission did a a complaint
against the try lawyers who are
are paying people off and
basically I got a list of those
and thank you
disparaging comments of other
people saying so much so I will
tell you that the governor is
hosting a summit on medical mail
practice on friday and
in santa fe it's it's the
governors mention and and this
committee will be doing a deep
type of medical malpractice at
our meeting in october in alva
I live in a screws and i'm in a
while chair and i've tried it
keep in touch but I am speaking
for the rest of new mexicans
that they are are all we are web
guess
hurting we are.
In such limbo here and god for
bill you should never be in your
condition as a ever ever to know
what I have to go through to get
medical care they thank you map
thank you but for what
it's a shandom to don't even
have it on your account okay
next we have shaun a read
richards.
Is shannon here that's yes
oh i'm sorry i'm sorry I I was
thinking you were here in person
uhm yet yes we can hear you go
ahead shannon
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak today and I
want to acknowledge doctor
derike for
representing my project this
morning my name is shannon read
richards and I am a family in a
cute care nurse practitioner
from hobs I am a doctor of
nursing practice candidate at
new mexico state university in a
mom i'd like to introduce my
doctoral project which is a
nurse lead policy initiative
that is endorsed by new mexico
state school of nursing and the
new mexico nurse practitioner
council i'm also consulting with
linda siegel lobbyist on the
legislative process my policy
initiative is simple infeasible
be well in m are state insurance
marketplace offers only hmo
plans while hmo plans work well
for some in role in border
communities they often mean
narrow provider networks
referral requirements and long
travel to see specialists
particularly pdatrics behavioral
health and complex chronic care
from my family this is not
theoretical when my eleven year
old son was diagnosed with tape
one day beatties last year the
nearest pediatric
intercornologist within love
texas our marketplace hmo denied
his hospital in specialist care
as out of network while we
eventually got his care covered
the only only through filing
formal complaints with the
office of superintendent of
insurance ultimately we had to
change insurance to avoid more
delays in denials if it is
there's hard for clinician
parent imagine the burden on
families without resources or
health care knowledge my
proposal is to add additional
insurance options.
That include ppo and epl options
that include broader networks of
providers alongside the existing
hmos on be well in him other
states already do this arizona
california and oklahoma offer
ppo's on their exchanges as well
as nevada who has a diversified
mix that includes hmo's ppo epos
in possess new mexico can do the
same in a way that fits our
geography adding additional
insurance options allows
families to choose the plans
that fits her needs see the
nearest qualified specialist
which is often across date lines
without unnecessary referrals it
shortens the time to specialist
and improves can't new idea of
care for rule native hispanic
and border residents my request
to this committee is modest and
actionable one as be well in the
office of superintendent of
insurance to report on
operational pathways to add
additional insurance options to
schedule a hearing to hear from
patience clinicians brokers and
insurers about access barriers
under an hmo only design and
finally consider a bipartisan
legislation in twenty twenty
seventh session that enables ppo
and epo offerings on the
exchange I believe i've provided
my one page policy brief with
references I appreciate your
time and service and i'm happy
to serve as a resource as you
explore options to expand access
while preserving choice for new
mexico families thank you so
much think you show up I don't
think we have your proposal oh
it's oh I just heard it's in our
email and so thank you sean
thank you for that in itself I
look forward to hearing more
about it from you and and for us
to take a look at it makes it
makes a lot of sense to me
so thank you so much on a and
next we have.
Lela cerano.
Eight afternoon
good afternoon you'll have three
minutes go ahead
alright so my name is sorano and
I live in a hubs new mexico so
back in twenty twenty I was.
I started working out a non
profit and I did not have
insurance and are non profit due
to our nonprofit being in short
being very very small so at that
time and did end up having to
buy insurance on marketplace so
that year I ended up having a
miscarriage I knew that
something was severely wrong
with me I just didn't know what
it was I started calling around
so we live
it's a very rural town in earned
there are some bigger cities
like labor taxes in midland
texas that are in hour and a
half away now albuquerque and
santa fe is about five hours
away from us so when I started
trying to reach out I needed to
find a reproductive
interconolitious and it was
there was nobody near us the
nearest person was in love book
and it was actually out of my
plan so I knew that I needed to
do something that were several
there was about three doctors
that actually denied me care
because I was not
my insurance working visit in
there network and so due to this
I had to actually work extra
extra hours and we were not able
to get insurance in our non
profit until I was able to get
more grants in getting more
funding and there have been so
many things that have had to
work around I I bought a new car
that was a hybrid just because I
knew that I was going to have to
travel an hour and a half away
now here we are a twenty twenty
five and I have a three month
son but I can tell you that had
I not found another insurance
through my job and it did what I
did if I would have kept my
marketplace insurance my son
would not have been born and I
would not have gotten the care
that I needed to receive now I
can only imagine the people that
aren't getting the appropriate
care because either they don't
have the means they don't have
the appropriate job and it is
really actually a disgrace that
we are doing to our rural
communities and so
I really really agree with.
What miss read richards stated
there should be more ppo any po
options for especially our rural
people thank you so much.
Thank you for your comments and
i'm sorry for what you
experienced but i'm glad you
have a a healthy sun
representative and I have has a
comment to make I just have a
short comment madam chair
i'm really sorry that the person
who is here is no longer here or
at least I don't believe so um
if you see this when you see
this think you I know it's
really vulnerable coming up here
telling your story and being in
front of eventually legislators
I have been on that side
but yeah one of their things
that I think is really important
like as we go into this summit
is to recognize a couple of
things I may spoke with the osi
yesterday and the actuary and
there were two things that
really set out to me in that
conversation in relation to the
actual cost of medical model
practice insurance in the state
one you know we are consistently
approached and being told that
insurance medical on practice
insurance is raising anywhere
from about twenty five to thirty
percent but in my conversation
with the osa yesterday and I
hope we bring it out during the
summit is that we need to
separate out the actual cost of
insurance which is raising at
about three percent right now
and what they're calling a
deficit surcharge which is
essentially the debt that
hospitals o that is added to
costs related to the patient
compensation fund and so I want
to get that clear I know we're
going to talk about it tomorrow
the second piece that I thought
was really interesting from this
meeting is that here in new
mexico are a litigation drags
out so long because we refuse to
settle we meaning the patient
compensation find insurance
companies are now refusing to
settle at much higher rates and
it drags out
litigation so long that the cost
of defense attorneys is actually
driving up the majority.
Of the uptake when it comes to
medical malpractice insurance
rates last I will address the
last two folks who commented
thank you for that the last four
years or so
I have been trying to get dig
now so finally got diagnosed
with loophest but I couldn't
find anybody and it took that
amount of years and I even up
how to conversation with blue
cross blue shield and I said
look where am I supposed to go I
have an hmo i'm paying like
everybody else I have nowhere to
go and I can't go out of state
because I don't have a ppl so I
just want to say I whole
heartedly support that please
contact me I know you have our
email addresses and they like
linda seek all an hour that I am
very much in support of this
thank you matter
we don't usually do this but a
representative look on thank you
round her yeah III appreciate
the time
contrary well there was just
different information that's
going around manager and I think
we really need to get some
clarification on some of this
information because what I am
understanding from the questions
in the in the
the research that I am doing is
that during litigation that when
a client is being there are
they're going directly to
settlement which is then they
they get a bulk some rate
settlements instead of going
through another option that
clients have to to take
a type of settlement but have it
directly towards their medical
costs throughout duration of
time now that is an issue and so
that's that's a that's something
that we need to bring into this
conversation I won't be here
tomorrow I apologize but I will
be at the summit on friday okay
I I mean I don't really want us
to get into what's happened what
in
representative and I had talked
about what the osige actually
said but in terms of what
actually is happening we do have
we did have a report from a leg
doctor like.
Hernandez and always forget that
last year that said that
actually the malpractice rates
the insurance costs were fairly
flat and that's the data that we
as legislators have to go with
this what we get from lfc we
have been told many times
anecdotally about what's going
on we don't have that data we
have I have personally asked
other people have asked for
providers to provide us with
their cancellation notices
their rate increases we don't
have that data and it's really
hard for us as a legislature to
solutions when we don't have all
the data we have tried to get
the doubt up from from the
hospital association
they say it's proprietary it's
so it's it's not as cut and dry
as people make it seem there are
many factors i'm including our
crime rate including our
education system including the
fact that years ago the american
medical association choked
residencies so the country is
short of positions not just in
mexico and I I want to make sure
that people do not believe that
if we wave a magic wand and six
malpractice whatever that means
that the doctors are going to
come flooding in because there's
a shortage everywhere so without
we will move on with the we have
made of chair I think I still
have the time I have the floor
in point of order I just would
like to conclude that yes
there's so many factors here but
they're there there's not just
one side here and every time I
get to I have the opportunity to
talk I get cut off and I just
would like to say that there are
many factors here and there is
many questions that i've
proposed and asked and I don't
believe that this is there's
that we have all the information
we're going to get all the data.
Due to other factors that
doesn't mean that that data or
that these things are not
happening because it is too
frequent that we are getting
this notification this
information from our physicians
who sit in front of us and tales
this
year every opportunity to dead
at it is that we need to really
nail this down and not you know
shut people down because they
have a lot of questions or we
have unanswered questions the
fact of the matters we had an
opportunity to provide certain
kind of caps during the
legislature thinking about where
we are off of topic and so we're
going to go back to the agenda
we will cover many of these
issues in our october meeting
but right now we have the lfc
folks
here to present on pre
kindergarten.
Representatives of a reason I
cut you up is because we don't
have the data we don't have the
people in the room and I don't
want to get a side tracked on to
something that no one here is
prepared to talk about and we
don't have we don't have the
right people that we don't have
the right data and that's why
we're waiting until october
until we do so go ahead
thank you madame chair members
of the committee thank you for
having us here this afternoon we
appreciate the opportunity to
present our work I did one asked
madame chair whether you would
prefer as to run our two
presentations back to back and
then hold questions till after
that or have an opportunity for
questions after each report
generally we do and back to back
perfect let let let's let's see
how complicated this we have the
next I think I mean personally
have the brain power to keep up
with one and then go back to the
other so so will play it by air
for now wonderful thank you
manager right my name is doctor
sara robing i'm a program
evaluator with the legislative
finance committee I know some of
you have heard this report
already and thank you for your
your patience this is starting
to feel like pre k the reunion
tour but we're glad to be able
to share this really important
work in some good news for the
state today my colleague doctor
ryan told me and I will be
presenting the committee with a
progress update on new mexico's
state funded pre k program
before we begin I would like to
thank secretary lives with
gregonsky and the staff of the
early childhood education and
care department for their close
collaboration on this report as
well as the pre kind of
guarantee teachers
administrators and coaches
across the state who welcomed us
into their classrooms and
contributed their insights to
this evaluation
madame chair and members of the
committee if you'll turn with me
now to page one and the report
which looks like this
you'll find the executive
summary which outlines the major
findings of this report.
This update builds on a twenty
twenty lfc program evaluation
which found that participation
in new mexico pre k was
associated with improved student
outcomes across numerous social
and academic measures since that
time the state has significantly
expanded access to preca for
three and four year olds and
established a new state agency
to oversee early childhood
programming
we are pleased to share with you
today that the fightings from
this progress report reaffirmed
that pre k continues to deliver
strong academic results
especially for low income
students these results have
bounced back from and even
surpassed what lfc observed pre
pandemic not only have state
wide beginning of your
kindergarten test scores
recovered but pre kindergarten
students are getting a bigger
boost than ever additionally
thanks and protected his
investment and a validated
system for measuring classroom
quality we can show for the
first time that high quality new
mexico prekindergarten
classrooms produce better
outcomes for their students
using these same tools we can
also better understand how
quality differs across pre
kindergarten classrooms and how
to potentially address those
variations the twenty twenty
evaluation found disparities and
the standards and outcomes of
pre kindergarten programs across
the state and recommended that
ecc work to standardize program
requirements quality
measurements and data tracking
to date eccd has made
significant progress and
implementing many of the twenty
twenty reports recommendations
however challenges remain
especially when it comes to
collecting and using student
data equalizing teacher
qualifications encouraging the
use of evidence based teaching
tools and helping providers
leverage their current.
Precake grant funding
madame chairman members of the
committee if you'll turn with me
now to page three the background
section of this report provides
a brief history of new mexico's
prepaid program
launched in two thousand five
new mexico's pre kind of garden
program was designed to improve
ken of garden readiness and
close at achievement gaps by
expanding access to high quality
early education
since that time lfc has
repeatedly found that pre kind
of garden works and leads to
improved student outcomes in
twenty twenty lfc found that
participation in pre
kindergarten was associated with
higher scores on early literacy
and math assessments better
attendance and a higher
likelihood of exiting special
education services lfc
researchers also use monster to
no analysis to show that pre
kind of garden students
eventually graduated high school
at higher rates compared to
demographically similar appears
turning to page four and looking
at chart too you can see that
this progress report extends
these findings showing that the
statistically significant bump
in graduation rates persists
across the three most recent
cohorts of high school graduates
the twenty twenty report also
found that for every dollar the
state invested in pre
kindergarten it saw about six
dollars in returns
these findings are consistent
with a large body of national
research showing long lasting
benefits of pre kindergarten for
at risk students and a
consistent return on investment
looking further down on page
four you'll read that the
expansion of new mexico's pre
kindergarten program brings
quality in access challenges
even as the program continues to
serve a high need population
when the program first launched
a targeted students with one or
more risk factors.
Today even though the most
recent cohort of pre
kindergarteners was more than
ten times larger than the one
the first one two decades ago
new mexico still serves a
population more likely to be low
income and english learner's
compared to statewide
demographic averages on page six
you'll see and chart three and
chart four that under ecd
programs have largely shifted
from half day to full day and
that slots for three year olds
have also grown rapidly
rapid pre k expansion has
benefits but also risks recent
studies from other states
suggest it can be difficult to
maintain quality and to ensure
that at risk populations
continue to have access to the
highest quality classrooms
if you all turn now to page
seven figure one shows the
variety of the programs that can
apply for new mexico prek grants
in our state you'll find pre
kindergarten classrooms
operating at your local public
school with nonprofit providers
such as day cares and child care
centers and recently within
federally funded headstar
programs although eccd has
consistent standards for all
classrooms this means that
everything for me single
classroom operated out of a
licensed home to the ninety nine
pre k classrooms across the
albuquerque public school
district used the same new
mexico pre k label as shown on
page eight inter five most
students enrolled are enrolled
with either very small or very
large providers
on page nine you'll read that
program funding has nearly
quintupled since the school year
twenty eighteen that investment
previously focused primarily
unprogram expansion but new
mexico pre key is now at a key
point and it's growth.
If you'll turn with me now to
page ten charge seven shows
enrollment versus slots and
fiscal year night since fiscal
year nineteen
even a few years ago some of new
mexico's prek programs were
wildly over enrolled in the most
recent school year enrollment
settled out around eighty five
percent suggesting that program
that the program state right is
reaching scale as supply catches
up with demand having made major
strides and statewide access e c
c d is now turning to the
related problems of quality and
outcomes considered in this
report I will now hand things
off to my colleague doctor tolen
to introduce the first two major
findings of this report
thank you doctor roving madame
chair members of the committee
if you will please follow with
me on page eleven I will discuss
our first finding that new
mexico continues to improve
reading proficiency in
kindergarten especially for low
income students
as we've discussed one of the
primary goals of pre k is to
build a strong academic
foundation for students before
entering the cater twelve system
as your call when you mexico pre
key launch nearly twenty years
ago the primary goal was to
serve children from low and
confamines to help close
educational opportunity gaps as
my colleague dot rooming
highlighted with graduation
incomes outcomes pre key new
mexico continues to deliver on
that promise
so how is pre key in our state
been doing if you will turn with
me over to page twelve later
direct your attention that
charts eight and nine
or nine.
So even in the immediate
aftermath of the pandemic on
average all pre kindergarten
students were still more likely
to score proficient and I
station assessments at the
beginning of kindergarten
compared to their peers which
was particularly true among
lower income students who
qualify for free or reduced me
given that we were particularly
concerned with the pandemics
effect on young children and
this was a period of rapid
expansion for pre key in the
state we find the pre kids still
effectively boosting reading
levels in kindergarten.
Is the ecd and the legislature
of work together to ensure that
pre k conscious substantial way
which has helped me mexico avoid
some of the pet- false
experienced by other states and
the move toward universal prek
access.
So prekey seems to provide
students with the bump at the
beginning of kindergarten but
what is precase effect long term
over on page thirteen as to ten
highlights these academic
benefits are not just short term
gains
utilizing large tunal data
analysis we found that the pre
key bump last longer for low
income students compared to
their non f r l peers indicating
that the program is helping with
the students more for whom it
was originally designed
in other words our analysis
clearly shows that in
imprecation is not only
preparing students for
kindergarten the actively
helping to close achievement
gaps for those most at risk of
falling behind
if you will now turn with me the
page fourteen
now for the purposes of this
evaluation we have used student
test scores on beginning of your
isolation to measure the effects
of pre k or kindergarten
readiness the state however
continues to operate without a
set of steet wide bench marks
for kindergarten readiness which
makes it difficult to monitor
progress comprehensively despite
recommendations from the lfc's
twenty twenty pre k evaluation
report
over on page fifteen figures
three and figure four highlights
the various other assessments
implemented in pre king
kindergarten that seeks a
measure various domains and pre
kindergarten most of these
assessments that you see cd has
selected emphasis social
emotional growth and executive
function however starting in
kindergarten assessments like
ice station are set up to
measure academic proficiency
as a result pre key teachers may
be aiming for one set of goals
or kindergarten teachers are
measuring something entirely
different
is the city has recently
invested a new tool called the
early development instrument
which is nationally validated
observation of tort that
continues our variety of
academic and social outcomes if
implemented correctly.
And connected to other data sets
this new tool should provide
targeted insights to inform
future policy making a target
quality improvement
however if you will turn with me
now to page seventeen
we find that these assessments
are siloed and the states
fragmented data informed
structure continues to hamper
accountability the states
ability it's a leverage and
learn from tools like the early
different development instrument
depends on its ability to die
just analyze and use this data
however neither of the early
childhood integrated data system
or esids nor the new mexico
large tuna data system is fully
operational and cannot track
individual students as they
progress from pre insicated
twelve
given the comprehensive sweet of
support programs ec city now
offers we need to understand
which programs deliver the
biggest impact even what
combination
the stalled progress on these
data systems limits the state's
ability to ensure we are
investing in what works
if you will turn with me now to
page twenty
I will discuss our next finding
the instructional quality
matters the differences across
providers persists
in this chapter I will discuss
why quality of instruction and
pre key matters and highlight
two ways to improve that quality
primarily teach your training
and evidence being some
structural torts
when I was he last evaluated new
mexico's pre case system in
early twenty twenty the early
childhood education care
department had only just been
established until that point
school based prepaid the garden
programs were administered by
the public education department
and community based programs
were overseen by the chat
children used in family's
department that by fricated
structure let's a major
differences and program
expectations data tracking and
access to supports.
Since it's creation ec city has
made significant progress and
standardizing practices and
a lining expectations across
provider types however
meaningful differences for me
particularly in the quality of
instructions and in the
resources available to support
and monitor quality
over on page twenty one
one of the most important
findings from this chapter is
that quality matters students
and programs with higher and
structural quality tend to
square better on kind regarding
the assessments
this finding reinforces what
national research has long show
that investing quality
precaution improves student
outcomes
so how can we measure pre key
quality
beginning in school your twenty
three easy easily begin using
the class or the classroom
assessment scoring system across
both school and community based
providers which was one of our
recommendations from our twenty
twenty evaluation classes in
nationally validated tool that
assessors three key do means of
classroom quality emotional
support classroom organization
and instructional support it
provides not only a high level
view of class from teacher
student interactions but
specific actional data they can
guide coaching professional
development and continuous
improvement
so how is the quality of pre key
classrooms in new mexico well if
you will turn with me to page
twenty two and look at chart
fifteen
you'll see that on average only
mescal classrooms are doing
quite well and score high and
measures of emotional support
and classroom organization
however schoolbies pre key
classrooms tend to on average
scored nearly a full point
higher and instructional support
than their community provider
counterparts
so why don't quality of
instruction in the precave
classroom matter well over on
page twenty three church sixteen
shows that instructional support
appears to be linked to student
outcomes.
For the first time lfc
evaluation staff were able to
match class quality scores with
kindergarten ice station scores
and found that higher
instructional support scores are
impressed or associated with
better kindergarten reading
outcomes
this type of analysis shows the
power of linking dot assets and
it underscores the importance of
the launches tunal data systems
I discussed in the previous
chapter
if you will turn with me to page
twenty four and look at short
nineteen
it's worth emphasizing that the
overall gap and student
proficiency
between school was in community
based providers is not insurance
you can see that students from
school base pre key programs
were on average more like the
score proficient and I station
in kindergarten whilst
significant there's a lot of
overall at between community in
school based providers in fact
we calculated that it would take
just a hundred and fifty more
students from community based
providers scoring proficient
online station to close that gap
completely with targeted quality
improvement that goes well
within reach
so again what can we do to help
improve pre key quality over on
page twenty five or discuss one
of the first ways we can improve
quality instruction in the
classroom which is teacher
preparation
so as you can see in chart
twenty as the state has rapidly
expanded its pre kindergarten
work force differences in
teacher conditionals have
widened the share of school
based pre key teachers with a
bachelor's degree has remained
stable while the share among
community providers has declined
prior ls research has shown that
bachelor's level preparation is
correlated with improved student
outcomes
if you will turn with me to page
twenty six
chart twenty three highlights or
analysis which finds that
teachers with the bay are more
likely to remain in the
community provider.
Community for four more years
offering additional return on
the state's investment and
professional development
instability
on the bottom of page twenty six
this makes the state's new
professional development
information's system especially
important once fully implemented
the system will allow the state
to monitor the impact of its
investments like which
supplements and scholarship
programs and evaluate whether
incentives such as pay party are
sheeting their intended results
over on page twenty seven the
second way one can improve
quality of instruction precade
is the use of evidence based
tools
schoolbies pre key programs are
more likely to use correctly
aligned subject specific tools
that are demonstrated impact on
soon outcomes for example mini
school beast prekey programs
used to digital learning tools
however despite strong evidence
that they can improve early
literacy they are not currently
used by community providers
if you were pleased to turn with
me over to page thirty
curriculum in coaching also go
hand in hand
is easily has taken important
steps to expand job embedded
coaching and provide support
stable school and community
based providers however the
structure in intensity of
coaching models still differ
significantly across settings as
you can see there and table
three.
Moreover data tracking systems
for coaching remains
inconsistent limiting the states
ability to align practices
between public school and
community providers think you
and I will now to the
presentation back over its
doctor robing for next finding
thank you doctor tomorrow madame
chair members of the committee
if you'll turn with me now to
page thirty one of the report
the final major finding reads
that technical assistance and
improved coordination can help
providers leverage funding new
mexico has made a generational
investment and early childhood
and the state currently ranks
number four in the nation for
per child's pre kindergarten
spending the national institute
for early education research or
near found in twenty twenty four
that new mexico meets nine out
of ten of the institutes quality
benchmarks nearer estimated that
new mexico would only need to
spend twenty five million
dollars to meet that final
benchmark as you can observe on
page thirty two and chart twenty
seven beginning and fy twenty
six new mexico pre cable receive
fifty five million dollars in
new recurring revenue from the
early childhood education and
care fund or more than twice of
that estimate that I just cited
from near
the challenge now is then not
raising new revenue but ensuring
that existing funds are directed
toward the strategies that will
yield that the greatest return
for students
on page thirty three you'll read
that ecd should encourage best
practices to help community
providers navigate a complex
financial landscape what
budgeting looks like in how new
mexico pre key grants are spent
can look quite different between
provider types public school
programs tend to have more
financial wiggle room stemming
from larger economies of scale
and the ability to blend pre k
grants with operational dollars.
Curriculum funding and other
district resources and as
discussed further down on page
thirty three not all school
based new mexico pre k grounds
are being fully spent
for community providers by
contrast financial viability
depends on hitting the right
student enrollments and staffing
ratios and keeping operating
costs within a narrow band as
shown in the cost model on page
thirty five even with the
adequate per child funding
finding the right balance can
prove a technical challenge
especially for smaller providers
one third of the community based
programs operate only a single
pre k classroom and an
additional third only operate
two pre k classrooms this
smaller providers may struggle
with administrative overhead
facilities maintenance and grant
management in ways that larger
programs do not
to address these challenges the
report points to several
strategies starting on page
thirty four and continuing on
page thirty six one is
incouraging greater
consolidation of grants and the
formation of shared service
alliances which can help small
providers pool administrative
functions share staff and
improve purchasing power ecc
could also expand
could also support expanded
access to backoffice supports
and technical assistance for
smaller grantees
the report also points to the
importance of unicort uniform
attendance tracking and
clarified enrollment policies to
ensure that funding is going to
the programs where children show
up regularly and stay in rolled
continuing now on page thirty
six you'll see and table eight
that new mexico ranks tenth in
the nation for average pre kind
of garden teacher and
achievement worth celebrating
focusing on teacher pay and
retention has been a
recommendation of pastelfc rep.
Ports and ecd has created
several programs designed to
encourage teachers to pursue a
higher degrees and to remain
with community providers ecect
is also implemented new in
direct cost policies that place
reasonable limits on
administrative overhead but
continued attention to this
issue will be important to
ensure that funding remains
focused on the classroom
starting to half way down on
page thirty seven the report
also addresses facilities which
remain a persistent challenge
for many community providers
while there are multiple funding
sources available including the
recent expansion of the child
care facility revolving loan
fundsmall business loans and
local government grants many
providers lack the technical
capacity to access these funds a
statewide facilities needs
assessment combined with
targeted technical assistance
would go a long way to helping
providers improve their physical
environments
turning to page forty one a
final strategy this report
suggests is the creation of the
universal application portal a
centralised system would make it
easier for families to navigate
available auctions reduce
administrative burden for
providers and ensure that
children are placed in open
seats as officially as possible
such a portal would also support
better data collection funding
forecasting and equity and
program access state wide
this progress report contains
several key recommendations
which can be found at the end of
each chapter we will highlight a
few here in closing
the legislature should consider
creating a statutory definition
of kindergarten readiness based
on a future recommendation from
acc and then support of that
recommendation if cc should
after refreshing the states
early learning guidelines.
Recommend a definition of kind
of garden readiness to the
legislature for consideration
the report also recommends that
the agency develop and present a
planned lfc for the use of the
increased early child her trust
fund with focus on quality
improvements by december twenty
twenty five and reiterating a
record recommendation from the
twenty twenty valuation this
report recommends that ecd use
pre kind of garden and kind of
garden assessments to track
students short and long term
success and inform quality
improvement and support for
educators and administrators and
finally the report recommended
recommends the agency used the
new professional development
information system to track the
effort to see of the
department's various
professional development
initiatives starting in the
upcoming now this school here
thank you so much for your
attention and will either now
stand for questions or invite
our colleague josh to join us I
think what will do is the
secretary of ecd is on zoom
so we were going to allow her
some brief comments but our zoom
operator is
oh great
I should have no greases magic
of rep met secretary will give
you a five minutes
read thank you kind of chair
members of the committee and
thank you sarah and ryan I feel
like I wish I could be there
with you and severe third time
doing this together and I just
want to appreciate everything
that the lfc a progress report
is highlighting so much here to
celebrate as a state that's a
best item it's youngest children
and I wanted to give the
committee a couple updates I
think on just so you know
currently in new mexico we are
funding over twenty thousand
three and four year olds twenty
thousand one hundred and sixty
three across one thousand two
hundred and thirty four
classrooms.
And of those of those children
being served almost ten thousand
four of five hundred are being
served in community based
settings and child development
centers or child car centers
eight thousand seven hundred and
sixty two are being served in
school based classrooms and four
hundred and seventy nine are
being served by our sober
nations and we have about nine
tribal partners who have
precared that they're offering
within their own culture their
traditions and then we have four
hundred and seventy one that are
being served in our head start
programs across the state some
of those are being served dually
as both the head start at a new
mexico pre k
yet too and so they're able to
maximise some revenues and be
able to pay their educators the
wages them we want to see and
then also some are actually
surveying a non head start
eligible so there there are
blended classrooms new mexico
pre can had start eligible
children.
We're really happy to see you
know that the focus in our state
one high quality educators and I
just want you to know that our
professional development
requirements for our pre k
educators of course are the same
a big focus on structured
literacy and implementation of
that and coaching that support
said you know what we do agree
with the LFC n findings about
needing to continue to pay
attention to improving the
delivery of our coaching making
sure that it's addressing the
needs of as they said the very
small a programs that are
offering maybe only one or two
classrooms at to those as they
said aps with ninety nine and
everything in between so the
team is working on that and
there we have asked for some
funding in twenty seven to as
one time I to continue that work
and make sure that our coaching
is top notch because we know
this is the time in a child's
life and development where they
are really they need that access
and the educators need that kind
of support to take up the
learning in the structure of
literacy and apply it in their
classroom.
Our classroom assessment scoring
system we really appreciate the
lfc making that recommendation
in their twenty twenty report
and took us a couple of years
but we were able to implement
that and we are going to be
similar were doing that right
now across all of these one
thousand two hundred classrooms
and last year we were able to
observe five hundred and forty
classrooms in the fall and then
another five hundred and eighty
three in the spring it gave me
some concern because classrooms
are very different from the fall
to the spring so I have asked
our consultants to do all of
them in the fall so that we're
getting apples to apples in and
that we know you know spring in
we want to make sure that we're
measuring the same type of
at the same time and this kind
of data but as they said things
are looking very promising we do
see a little higher scores in
instructional support in our
school based programs but again
that's the focus of our coaching
ongoing professional
development.
And the requirement that our
teachers in our community based
settings also have bachelors in
early childhood and their
assistant teachers have aa's we
asked them to you know take up
the opportunity scholarship and
roll in those six college
credits and we know it's a lot
and we know that it's important
that our children have access to
well credential to um teachers
we also agree with them just on
our data collection I were very
excited this year were the only
state in the country to be
actually measuring executive
function in our children three
to five which is so important
because this is the first period
and human's life where you can
start teaching and developing
executive function it's a two to
five minutes assessment done on
a tablet but it's done with an
adult with the child and that's
all in then all the development
of the executive function
happens with the teacher in the
interactions and but we just
want to recognize that it's
important that we assess and
know where our children are and
that we can do the interventions
and the good teaching strategies
that are educators do so I know
I may have taken up my five
minutes madame chair and I know
you you run it a tight ship
there so I just wanted to let
you know we've already collected
over i'm ten percent of our
children I had that assessment
and it's only done twice a year
and again it's two to five
minutes on a tablet with an
adult assisting the child and in
the professional development
that aligns with it is going to
be supported through that
coaching and for what the
teacher already knows how to do
to develop their childhoods
executive function
next week will release the rfp
for a new developmental
assessment will bring together
school based and community based
providers to serve as advisors
to us and we will select a new
developmental assessment that
can be used to again give you as
legislators as his
administrators and program
leaders good data they can help
them drive even.
Stronger instruction and better
outcomes thank you
thank you madame secretary and I
thought you are winding up and I
was looked watching the clock
it's like she's gonna make it
and then you had one more
thought but you did great so
thank you and i'm sorry we we
did some tried to rearrange
things and different people were
available on different days that
we would have loved to have had
everybody in the same room but
i'm all of us probably in this
room understand that life gets
in the way of
what we want to do sometimes so
if there are burning questions
for this presentation
theoretically we
should be going to the next one
so will keep them brief
as so who has questions on this
on the ok so so just
representative blue hunt
okay so too minutes each for you
guys thank you very much and
specifically regarding the
executive function in testing
i'd like to know
what you are really assessing in
a three I mean what is the age
of the child before executive
function
can be measured when you know
there's there's some psychology
there are there's some there's
some missing information there
i'd like to know III have a
as some burning questions around
that what are you assessing why
are you assessing an executive
function in a child that that
age and if you can elaborate
madam secretary.
Absolutely madame chair
representative blue hon thank
you for that excellent question
i'm executive function has you
know has to be taught him and
learned admit that it what it
measures is inhibitant and he
putoried control working memory
and cognitive flexibility and it
really is critical and has been
determined through decades of
research that it truly is the
key to long term success school
readiness
at children being able to pay
attention a whole manager
emotions and this period of
development is where it really
starts you can be taught all the
way through your mid twenty so
there's there's opportunities
but a week bill that this are
being able to quickly in a very
short order with adult at the
teacher with a child playing
some fun games and I have gone
through it and we're happy to do
more demonstration you get data
that then helps you as a teacher
no where to help support that
child through all the play all
the interaction on all the other
great strategy so that the met
tool itself the assessment
itself I think is from two to
six years old I think it can go
older but we don't use it until
I pre kid so it's it's exciting
teachers are loving and we get a
pilot last year people felt very
positive about it and we're
learning a lot of good
information that killed we can
use to help our students be
prepared for thank you I just
have some concerns about this
man chair amount of secretary
and we are taking measures and
rip measuring executive
functions I I mean i'd like to
know what company is your you're
working with wired you know why
you're doing this and how this
information is going to be used
I I mean you gave us a brief
information on that but I just
have some concerns about that
because
children at this age being
measured with these types of
cognitive functions brings a red
flag from email and terms can be
honest with you.
I'd like to have more detailed
information I don't have the
time now manager but I think
it's it's worth the invitation
to get that information
and it's just basing on my
background and development so
psychology and having a child
that's been assessed over and
over again and really what it
what is that really bringing to
the table and why we need to
even do that thank you very much
representative on I I think I
failed to have the two of you
introduced yourself so if you
could just introduce yourself
i'm sorry
I introduce myself but they do
but I don't think representative
okay okay represent and send it
to pope so we'll start with
senator pope since he does not
questions and then we'll come to
you representative tourists for
less thank you manager senator
hope of junior district twenty
three northwest our kirky burner
leo county sorry for arriving a
little bit late when I was
listening to the webcast and
senator pinto
monument and chairman visit the
community center to shame into a
representative three and was
doing the same thing listen to
the webcat thank you so you
don't get marked off for not
doing your homework could you
online itself
start here with their taking I
listen to the website and I
still don't have any questions
so that's
representative tourists for last
gift
madam chair and think you I also
listened on the weight to the
web counselors you could tell
when I arrived
and I will I will pause your
timer and
and she brought me a blanket I
said that it was cold in here so
she brought me a blank get so
she she gets brownie points for
she could have an extra cookie
matter
okay
thank you madam chair first of
all I I just love your report so
much data so much information
that we can look back to and
that we can read more carefully
and to help us in making
decisions about where and how
much and.
How we spend money on very very
important and very valuable
information in terms of quality
and history of this round of
early childhood and madame
charity know you're still
listening and so this is a
little bit of a repeat of a
question I asked before but we
didn't have this report
in the let's see and my question
is two questions one you refer
on page forty two second bullet
to the new mexico fiscal year
twenty six new mexico pre k
program standards and I would
really appreciate knowing where
they are and then the second
question has to do with the
standards that were being
implemented in twenty ten with
some incredibly stellar pre k
programs that I I had the chance
to observe and I can see that
the literacy uh is there a
appreciate that greatly because
we really need to make sure that
our kids are set up to learn to
read they want that very badly
and so to their families
but there are some other
standards that were in place
down there i'm not sure because
I I didn't see the program
standards i'm not sure if
where they might be and so maybe
the program has changed I don't
know but they are physical
development
numerous sea and special
relations
as that it creativity
scientific conceptual
understanding self family and
community and approaches to
learning overall so I was just
curious where those went and
where I can find the current
standards thank you madame
chair.
Manager representative
secretary begins get matcher if
you want me to take this one or
you would like to take this
matter matter I think and
representative and or as boscas
they are on our website on their
own our pre k website I can
happily I can send those to you
directly but we do have those
honor when our agency website
the current ones
thank you manager.
Okay so I think actually I have
just have one quick question
I hear anecdotally that a lot of
the teachers are leaving the
private centers etc because they
can't pay what public school so
is there any discussion on
how to either from from the two
of you are from the secretary on
how to
lessen the gap.
Absolutely thinking madam chair
say a very good get scared on if
you want to speak to the pay
parity program and some of the
other
the wage supplement program that
ecds implemented
yes thank you i'm out of chair
and think you serve the so
couple things that we do we use
the pundit on the funding levels
for teachers so when last year
the legislature's past year the
legislature increased teacher
salaries at level one to fifty
five thousand we updated our
rate for pre cake so that they
would be able to pay those lead
teachers at least fifty five
thousand and then we have the
pre cape parody for those
teachers that have more than a
bachelors a more years of
experience and so that has done
tremendous tremendous impact on
keeping batcher level teachers
and community base said it's I
just thought there's a couple
providers i've talked to right
there in las cruces recently who
pat teachers go to the schools
another coming back because they
like that the community base
setting one provider who has
seventeen classrooms has fifteen
of those a teachers are bachelor
level and they've been there
with her for a long time so we
have seen that with the prepaid
parody and us modeling though
the rate based on being able to
pay that teacher the same as a
school based teacher
we have seen a reduction in that
i'm not going to say it is not
still an issue and our community
based providers do feel
sometimes like they're the
training ground for teachers who
go into the public schools but
those efforts have seen that to
help tremendously with that flow
that out flow from community
based on schools
thank you madame secretary thank
you for your presentation there
if something pops up i'm sure
you're not going anywhere so if
if somebody thinks of a question
will have you come back up but
we will go ahead with that the
school lunch folks thank you
madame share thank you for
informative presentation.
The.
Is there anyone left at the of c
there's so many of you here it's
it's unusual it's great to see
and so many new faces
have they ok
that they're working go ahead
yeah we have a skeleton crew
holding down the four back up
and see how to pay.
They let you go through the sun
one yeah the base but everyone's
congratulations don't get used
to it
we'll think you get in madame
chair good afternoon members of
the committee again thank you
for having us here again my name
is doctor ryan's home and i'm
sure with my colleague josh
shathen and give a program
evaluated legislative finance
committee and we're here to
present our evaluation new
mexico's healthy universal
school meals program the report
looks like this very similar to
the prior on just different
title
and yeah before it begin I want
to think secretary marianna
pidea of p d
frost that and lord henry hand
and the staff of the student
success in wellness bureau of
the public education apartment
as well as kindle charters she's
policy advisor on this topic in
the office of the governor
answer the less see for their
close collaboration on this
report as well as all the
district and charter
administrators food service
managers and food service staff
across the state who welcome
this into their school kitchens
and contributed their insights
and experienced into this
valuation
so madame chairman members of
the committee if you will please
turn with me now at a page one
you will find our executive
summary.
Which outlines the major
findings of our evaluation.
And so prior to the state's
universal school meal program in
twenty twenty three schools
relied on its heart federal
reimbursement model in which
schools were reimbursed at
different rates based on a
student's income eligibility
status and placed much of the
burden on families particularly
those who do not qualify
in twenty twenty three the
legislature unanimously passed
the healthy universal school
meals legislation the law now
mandates free high quality meals
for all public school students
regardless of income and
includes ambitious calls for
improved meal quality namely
scratch cooking local food
sourcing and reducing food waste
this evaluation aims to provide
a status update of the program's
implementation of quality
provisions analysed fiscal trins
and costs of food service and
look at potential outcomes
related to student participation
in nutrition standards overall
our findings touch on a couple
of major things first regarding
universal access participation
in school meals has increased in
consistent with similar states
implemented in other states
participation gains were
greatest among us poor students
who would not have previously
qualified for free or reduced
meals
second although the status
started uh serving with free
meals in twenty twenty three
improvements in meal quality or
still little unclear since pd
has not been tracking in
monitoring compliance with the
quality provisions.
But should start in the coming
school year it's first full year
program implementation
we find that charter schools and
smaller districts in particular
have fees challenges with food
program costs kitchen
infrastructure staffing and
limited access to food vendors
with pd starting to monitor
compliance in performance in the
coming school year new mexico is
poised to achieve its quality
standards and strengthen its
meal programs
if you will now turn with me to
page four
I will discuss the background of
our state's healthy universal
school meal program oxbling how
meal programs work and how the
payment mechanisms work I like
the very disorganizations
responsible for implementing
these programs in touch on some
of the initial challenges that
have let us to conduct in this
evaluation
so wire meal programs in school
so important
as shown in chart to their own
page for in twenty twenty three
twenty three percent of children
in new mexico experience food
and security higher than
nineteen percent nationally in
one of the highest in the nation
for many students school meals
are the most consistent
nutritionally complete meals
they receive national research
has also shown that square meal
programs can improve students
academic performance boost
attendance and promote healthy
outcomes
over on page five as you can see
figure one each states have now
made their school meal programs
universally free to all
students.
In twenty twenty three new
mexico join these other states
by unanimously passing health
universal school meals
legislation.
If you will now turn with me to
page six you can see and figure
two some of the key features of
the law highlighted primarily
universal access meal quality
standards
at such as local ingredients
scratch cooking in reduction of
food waste together these
features of the program are more
comprehensive than any other
universal meal program in other
states
after a passage of the law new
mexico started providing free
meals to all students starting
in fall twenty twenty three
however the meal quality
standards have not been required
until this upcoming school year
as rules not finalized until
september twenty twenty four.
Next over on page seven I will
try to provide a quick crash
course in house will meal
programs are funded and how they
operate.
New mexico school meal programs
funded through a blind of
federal and steep dollars as
figure three highlights most
federal funding comes through
the usta which administers the
national school lunch in school
breakfast programs.
Which reimbursed schools based
on permeal served
stee education agencies in this
case pd distributes funds to
districts squalls and charters.
School food authorities or
inensities such as the local
school district or charter
school are responsible for
administrative oversight and
compliance with federal state
regulations administering meal
service operations determining
student eligibility and tracking
reimbursements
if you will turn with me over to
peach eats
one highlights how federal
reimbursements are higher for
meals serve depending on
eligibility primarily based on
family poverty level the freer
reduced reimbursement that you
were likely familiar with
with the health with the healthy
universal school meals act the
state is essentially paying for
students who do not qualify for
these free or reduced
reimbursement.
Traditionally student
eligibility would have been
determined by their parents or
guardian completing some kind of
family income application form
and the reimbursement re
determined by their income level
however the state law now
mandates the school food
authorities participate in
direct certification through the
community eligibility provision
or sep
this process is summarized in
figure for where students are
directly certified through their
participation and programs like
snap tanner or medicaid
in the identified if the
identified student population or
isp in these programs at the
school meets minimum threshold
of twenty five percent a
multipliers applied in the
person of students are
reimbursed at the free federal
and the state will then cover
the remaining percentage of
students so for example if fifty
percent of students qualify to
particular school through
participation in these programs
after that multiply eighty
percent of the scrutiny students
of the school their meals served
are then reimbursed through
federal dollars and the
remaining twenty percent
are reimbursed by the state.
If a school food authority does
not meet the minimum twenty five
percent threshold they are
considered a standard school in
collect family income
applications for reimbursement
knowledgeability
over on page nine chart three
highlights of the men this
mandate has lead new mexico to
leave the nation and see peace
participation at around ninety
nine percent.
If you will turn off me to page
turn
I want to highlight some of the
agencies and organizations who
are responsible for
administering the healthy
universal school meals program
which are highlighted in finger
five.
Service can come from very forms
such as your on site school the
peace kitchen central kitchens
like aps which then delivers to
multiple sites or contracted
food service management
companies which handle all the
operations
food can also come for multiple
sources mostly broadline
suppliers like cisco or the by
usd a commodities in a smaller
percentage come from local
producers.
Of particular note over on page
eleven is pd's student success
and on this bureau which
overseas two hundred and ten
school food authorities.
Whose responsibilities include
processing reimbursements
monitoring compliance and
providing training and technical
assistance.
Turning to page twelve
now that have explained how the
programs work I want to touch on
some of the challenges with
funding and program costs
new mexico like other early
doctor states overspin its
budget initially prompting the
legislature to appropriate
supplemental funding as
highlighted over on page
thirteen in chart five
as you can see the new mexico
legislature appropriate twenty
three million in the first year
but then required in an
additional twenty million and
supplemental appropriation.
Finally if you were pleased term
with me to page fourteen I want
to quickly highlight
implications of the recent
twenty twenty five federal
budget reconciliation bill so
the healthy universal school
meals program here in our state
the federal budget
reconciliation could primarily
affect student eligibility to
receive federal reimbursement
through direct certification in
programs like snap and medicaid.
Given our high rates of cp
participation due to high rates
of sooner participation in these
programs elsies staff analysis
indicates that about three
percent of the student
population could be affected by
these changes.
Reducing about twenty schools
from cp participation
knowledgeability
and reducing an additional sixty
scores from four federal
reimbursement which could shift
a small cost to the state pedy's
work to direct certified school
starting in the upcoming school
year for four year period
indicates that these changes are
unlikely to affect the state
until the twenty thirty school
year.
If you will please follow along
with me to page fifteen I will
discuss our first finding
that increased investment in
healthy universal school meals
has lead to modern schemes of
participation
so after passage of the
universal school meals act the
steel increased its investment
in universal school meals by
twenty percent from a total of
two hundred and six million
school year twenty three to two
hundred and forty seven million
in school year twenty four so
what are we getting for this
investment
so as you can see and chart
seven on the right there since
implementation participation has
increased in participation rates
for now higher than the national
average.
Overall we saw participation on
lunch increase by eight point
five percentage points in
breakfast by eight point three
percentage points from school
you're twenty three to school
you're twenty four
turning over to page sixteen you
can see and short eat that much
of the largest increase in
participation was among students
who do not qualify for for your
reduced meals.
In fiscal year twenty five we
estimate that the state spent
seventeen point four million on
students who did not qualify for
free or reduced
we also see that participation
also increased among students
who do qualify for free meals
which is the majority of our
students in the state
over on page seventeen chart
nine shows that total spinning
on food service programs
increased by twenty point three
percent from school your twenty
three to school you're twenty
four or the number as soon as
participating only increased by
eight point five percentage
points which indicates that the
increases in program
expenditures are part driven by
increases in student
participation but does not fully
account for overall increases in
total program expenditures
will five there on the bottom of
the page how it's the school
dishearts which receive the
highest allocation of speed
funding which is driven by
districts with higher percentage
of students who do not qualify
for free reduce meals and
overall enrollment.
If you will turn with me over to
page eighteen I wonder how it's
some of the trends that we see
instead of participating
chart ten on the left list or
ten largest school districts
which all experience increases
and sooner participation
particularly albuquerque and
rear and show.
Chart eleven highlights
districts with the highest
percentage of students who
qualify for for your reduced
meals which many already had the
high reads of participation it
was still experienced modest
increases and sooner
participation indicating that
universal access for all
students is indeed increasing
rates of militicipation and
communities most in need
so the states investment is
leading to increase
participation but we are also
seeing increased program
expenditures
on the bottom of page eighteen
overall program expenditures has
increased from hundred and sixty
five million in school you're
eighteen to two hundred and
forty eight million school year
twenty four
over on page nineteen use you
can see in chart twelve this is
equates to approximately four
dollars and sixty one percent
student per day
the proportion spent on food has
increased from a dollar three in
school you're eighteen to dollar
seventy one in twenty twenty
four an increase of seventy one
percent which is out peace
general inflation during this
time.
On the bottom and page nineteen
in chart thirteen you can see
the
overall program expenditures has
increased the proportion spent
on food has remained about the
same indicating that we have
also increased expenditures for
staff and operations as well
so with raising program
expenditures however school food
authorities budgeting in
planning for meal services.
Turning over to peace twenty
turn fourteen highlights the
both federal and steep funding
for food service operations has
increases the passions of
universal school meals
over on page twenty one two six
says the school food authorities
are budgeting more and federally
reimbursed mill programs then
they are receiving in an
expending this seems to be a
common practice amongst school
districts to overproject
participation among federal
reimbursement categories for
budget authority.
Another thing we found here's
the use of a c g expenditures
which typically would not be
budgeted for food service
operations although this is
technically allowed the primary
purpose of security funds
support classroom instructions
turning over to page twenty two
as you can see interest
seventeen at the bottom of the
page suggesting expenditures are
a small percentage of overall
food service operation
expenditures but has been going
on for a while in may be
increasing
as you can see a chart sixteen
on the right charter schools
tend to disproportionally
utilize sseg funds per student
over on page twenty three this
might be because many charter
schools like kitchen
infrastructure prior passage of
universal school meals in
contract with food service
management companies.
Chart nineteen there on the
bottom of the page highlights
that mini school districts
particularly small ones have
utilised often the supplement
staffing or food events
thank you and I will now turn
the presentation over to my
colleague mister chaffan to
discuss our next finding and key
recommendations
mountain members of the
committee I start to tell me
mentioned universal free school
meals programming in mexico goes
beyond other states by
implementing strict meal quality
requirements the state started
delivering free meals to all
kids immediately and we find
that the program is still
working to overcome some early
challenges in achieving and
measuring the quality so let's
start with scratch cooking by
ped's new rules scores must
insure that at least fifty
percent of weekly meal
components excluding milk are
prepared from scratch using
whole unprocessed ingredients if
you look at short twenty on page
twenty nine and informal server
that pd conducted which is not a
perfect sample but it's one of
the few data points we have
suggests that most school food
authorities aren't yet meeting
that threshold today
chart twenty one on the same
page shows that the majority of
schools are increasing their
efforts to cook from scratch.
One of the schools biggest
barriers to scratch cooking is
outdated kitchen infrastructure
the legislature is allocated
over twenty four million dollars
for equipment and upgrades since
twenty twenty three and less
than a third of those funds had
been spent
most schools prepare meals
themselves on sight some
districts including alert
cricket use a central or a
shared kitchen between multiple
schools and about eighty seven
of the state's two hundred and
ten school food authorities
especially charter schools
contract with food service
management companies if you look
on char twenty two on page
thirty you see that just a few
companies dominate this market.
Charter schools are twice as
likely as traditional districts
to use these companies to cook
their meals the concentration of
vendors can bring some
efficiencies but it also drives
costs up especially among
charter schools and it raises
questions about how well these
vendors can comply with the laws
provisions like scratch cooking
and local sourcing ped says that
they share these concerns and
the agency is asking these
companies to reapply as vendors
this year in efforts to tighten
controls there on the topic of
local sourcing school food the
statute that the legislature
passed direct's ped to incourage
greater use of new mexico grown
new mexico raised or processed
food in school meals local food
may be fresher van food that
source from further away and it
could help students understand
where their food comes from and
of course it supports local
producers neither the statute
nor ped rules require schools to
source local food but schools
can receive grant money to do so
buying directly from farmers and
ranchers who are only list it's
approved by the states new
mexico grown program.
New mexico groan is a small
program funded at about one
point seven million dollars this
year and it won't likely grow in
coming years without major
changes to the grant and the
program structure
pd points out that some unknown
amount of local food also comes
into the cafeteria from outside
the in and grown program but
they don't have a system for
tracking that right now so
looking at what we can track
last school year school spent
about two percent of their total
food budgets on local products
through and am growing and
that's about half the national
average and districts say they
can't scale up easily given a
current barriers
these barriers include small
award sizes limited number of
local items that are eligible to
purchase and cost barriers as
local food is often more
expensive for schools to buy.
Unam is embarking on an
evaluation of the nmgron program
as we speak ped and the state
department of agriculture are
supposed to report to the
legislature in november on their
plan to increase the amount of
beef a local beef local cheese
and milk in school meals.
Turning to the issue of food
waste PED is requiring schools
to track food way starting this
year right now and again this is
from pd's informal survey but
only about twenty five percent
of schools reported tracking
food waste at all and most of
that tracking was informal
ped interprets this deficit as a
positive given that these food
waste reduction strategies were
not required until the current
school year
once strategy for reducing waste
that allowed under the rules is
to let students decline certain
components of a meal that they
don't intend to eat but this has
to be monitored in the cafeteria
to make sure that meals still
meet the nutritional
requirements and school say it's
hard to do that well with
current staffing levels.
Speaking staffing all of the
above quality perfect provisions
require qualified staff of
course on page twenty nine pd's
survey found that fifty seven
percent of schools are expanding
their training for scratch
cooking and response to the law
the schools tell us that keep
being qualified and kitchen
staff is a major challenge
especially in rural districts
skills are another bottle neck
for getting to quality as a
school mention that is the
school menu transitions toward
more scratch cookie.
To oversee all of the changes
ped is rightly focused on
whether schools have the menus
and the rest pease and
invoices and the feedback
surveys that are needed to
verify compliance with quality
standards some districts conduct
service of students and families
but what has been missing is a
statewide system for capturing
student and family feedback on
things like taste and freshness
satisfaction cultural relevance
because this feedback could be
an early warning of
participation trends and a tool
for improving menus
madame share members with some
of the strongest quality
provisions in the country new
mexico has a real opportunity to
contribute to the national
evidence base on universal free
school meals and by addressing
these gaps through robust state
level data collection and
ongoing evaluation ped can
strengthen its own monitoring
and accountability systems while
informing best practices
nationwide we think are focus on
outcomes is warranted in
addition to the outputs that the
department is statutory required
to track outcomes such as
effects on hunger effects on a
tendence health things that
policy makers here and in other
states are interested in
if you're now turned back to
page two at the beginning of the
report you'll see our key
recommendations listed first is
for ped to provide schools with
guidance and monitor the use of
s e g funds with special
attention to smaller districts
and charter schools pd should
look at schools that received
less in federal funds than the
budgeted to determine why this
is happening
they should launch a
standardized student
satisfaction survey to inform me
of quality improvement efforts
pd should work with dfa and lfc
to develop a state why
performance monitoring system
that aligns with the
accountability and government
act to track expenditures food
wastes local food sourcing
scratch cooking participation
rates and education and help
outcomes.
Pd should expand its technical
assistance and training supports
for kitchen staff particularly
and scratch cooking food safety
and compliance and ped should
require contracts between
schools and food service
companies to include
expectations for these new
quality standards that are
discussed above
finally the public school
capital outlet council should
insure that the disbursement of
kitchen infrastructure funds is
completed by the end of the
fiscal fiscal year to address
some of the equipment
bottlenecks that schools are
facing and now madam share and
members of the committee with
your permission will turn over
to ped colleagues for response
and stand for any questions
good afternoon madam chairman
members of committee my name is
gregory frosted i'm assistant
secretary of education at the
public education department and
it's a pleasure to be here this
afternoon to talk with you about
health universal school meals
which in my estimation is one of
the biggest accomplishments of
the the legislature and the
executive in the last several
years.
The agency has been working on
this initiative from the
beginning of this administration
and this initiative really puts
new mexico as a leader a
national leader in this area
this program not only literally
feeds our children but it will
also increase educational
upcomes for students as was
mentioned this morning there's
ample evidence to support the
link between healthy meals and
academic outcomes for students
the agency is pushing hard to
maximise federal funding this is
an expensive uh it it's an
expensive program but the
recurring costs to state funds
has stabilised and the agency
has requested flat funding in
the recurring request for
healthy universal school meals
for FY twenty seven we have
submitted our budget request as
required for fy twenty seven and
there is an additional five
million that is set aside also
for a potential cost to overrun
in that budget as well as doctor
toman mentioned during his
presentation changes to
eligibility in the snap program
after the one big beautiful bill
act will likely reduce the
amount of federal reimbursements
but the public education
department is pushing hard to
get all of our schools to
qualify through the community
eligibility program and we're at
ninety nine percent to stabilize
the number of qualified students
over the coming years
we appreciate the work that
doctor told me that mister
chaifen and elipsi staff have
done to study the implementation
of the healthy universal school
meals act and we accept many
other recommendations most of
the recommendations in the port
were already
scheduled to be addressed by the
agency over this coming year and
it is the first year in which
the administrative rule becomes
effective
and with that i'd like to
introduce laura henry hand from
the student successful on this
bureau to directly address some
of the reports findings
good afternoon madame chair and
members of the committee I want
to thank you for the opportunity
to be here today and lost
customers in mexico my home
town.
To discuss the great work that
the ourself is doing to insure
schools have the support to
successfully implement the
healthy universal school mills
program we are proud that new
mexico is one of the states
leading the nation and
addressing food and security and
childhood hunger by being one of
the first states and implement
universal meals for
our department is committed to
ensuring every student has
access to nutrition's high
quality emails during the school
day so that they can focus be
engaged in the clashroom and
ready to learn I want to think
the lfc for its collaboration
with our department and taking
the time to learn about our very
complex program and forgiving us
the opportunity to respond to
their evaluation report the
letter in closed includes our
response to the lfc
recommendations which are
addressed which we are
addressing this squeer being
that this is the first year of
full implementation I want to
think the legislature for
prioritising and dean childhood
hunger since two thousand
nineteen and passing into our
the healthy universal school
meals as one of the strategies
to do so
once they were signed into la
the department was intentional
in building any transitional
period in the timeline for
schools to meet the requirements
and worked very closely with
lease to develop a rule that
would not only address hunger
but would also improve mule
quality one thing we can all
agree on is that programming
valuation is important however
this programming evaluation may
be too early to accurately
assess the long term impacts of
the program
with a certification period
taking place in the spring of
twenty twenty six it will give
the department it true picture
of where sfas are in the
improvements including freshly
prepared meals food race
reduction strategies the
incorporation of locally source
foods and how they are using
student voice in their future
menu development
most school food authorities are
eager and well on their way to
meeting the fresh of the
prepared requirements of the
rule.
Many school food authorities
have reached out to our staff
requesting feedback and for a
review of their many use to see
if they're meeting the
requirements a great example of
the work liaisor doing a student
nutrition director debit to heo
at burned public schools who has
used almost two million dollars
and school kitchen
infrastructure improved my
grant funding to purchase new
equipment for all of the for all
of her schools that will ease an
assist in the preparation of
freshly prepared meals
another important component of
the health university school
meals program is having finding
available for a new mexico
the new mexico ground program to
improve the healthy part of
healthy universal school meals
the department has a two million
dollars that aside to reimburse
districts to purchase new mexico
grown products
the department has awarded more
schools than ever before and it
has also adjusted the formula to
increase support for schools
they do not receive any state
reimbursement
I would like to take the time to
share a great sort of new mexico
grown story with you cars and
start with the previous student
at farming ten unicipal schools
who was exposed to an unlearned
about new mexico ground in
school and became a farmer and
is now selling produce to
bloomfield public schools the
department continually
encourages schools users state
funding to purchase local and
some school districts like
raswell use only local beef and
their school meals and have
spent over one million dollars
in the last school year on local
beef this year renewal public
schools were also only will only
be using local drivings and
their meals and farming ten has
committed to using ten percent
of their total food budget to
purchase new mexico grown
products these are just a few
great examples of the way
schools are going above and
beyond for our students
the department is committed to
providing continue training and
support to all school food
authorities to insure students
have equal access to culturally
relevant and nutritious meals.
And the map that you will see in
front of you you should have a
copy.
You can see the results from our
culinary trainings that have
been taking place across the
state and are provided by a
staffed
with incordination with the
department of health for the
first time this year our
department is also hosting a
chef symposium in october
bringing together cafeteria's
staff and new mexico chefs for
hands on training to create new
recipes together and learn
scratch cooking techniques that
can immediately be applied when
they return to their kitchens we
also have monthly online let's
talk to say meetings with food
service staff where we cover a
variety of school food topics
and provide technical assistance
or healthy universal school
meals program manager presented
to superintendence on the PED
monthly call in august and
shared the launch of our program
took it that includes fast
resources for schools to share
with students and teachers and
community
one of those resources includes
posters for school cafeteria's
promoting the program all
posters and handouts such as the
one on the backside of the map
that you have in front of you
have an embedded code with a
student and family serving this
survey will be distributed
widely across the state and the
department will be able to
provide school districts with
specifically feedback based on
the results for their la
for schools that have contracts
with food service management
companies the public education
department is working with to
update all food service
management forms to ensure
vendors to meet the requirements
of the rule
I also want to think the
opportunity to address the
lifeseas recommendations on
funding and accountability the
department will continue to
provide finding to support and
support and monitor so phase to
ensure the online with approved
food program operations
specifically the smaller schools
and charter schools who may rely
on other sources of funding such
as their signing to successfully
implement their program.
We are also tracking monthly
expenditures to ensure we are on
truck with your leave budget
projections but I would like to
share an example of what our
budgets will look like this year
if male participation were to
see the sim because there was an
increase in the usda
reimbursement rates we are
looking at a four percent
increase in costs totally
in closely two million dollars
even if our mule counts stay the
same
our department will continue to
do everything possible to
maximise federal dollars first
but we ask for your continued
funding support for our program
to ensure all students have
can start their school day with
a nutritious meal and be ready
to allow thank you that will
send for questions
okay thank you
so we will who has questions on
to everybody okay
and we are slightly we have four
minutes left i'll give you three
minutes will start with senator
pinto thinking manager members
of the committee if these aren't
followed but let's the important
madam chair senator because this
is the first year of
certification
scores that do not meet the
criteria this year will receive
a lesser reimbursement in the
following school year.
So
madam chair so that's because
the top comply or data
i'm not so ducks to penalty is
taking away money because
so they could take away money
because they don't comply.
Madame chair senator
it will be they will still
receive additional finding to
support the improvement of
healthy to increase to improve
their mail quality but it is a
lesser reimbursement until they
can meet all of the requirements
of the certification
made
the only reason that because
we're you know the there's gonna
be a change in administration
and probably a change in the
agencies so I guess we'll wait
and see how that goes up that's
all madam chair thank you.
Representative and I thank you
madame chair I just have a quick
question you all were talking
about the unspent funds for the
kitchen upgrades I always tend
to ask why some of the funds
aren't spent and so I was just
wondering
what what the dealers with that.
Madam chair representative
we're not entirely sure why the
funds have been unspent my
understanding is that it's.
Much of it as identifying the
need for the particular school
charter.
In those cases and then
implement seeing what particular
structure is needed in some
cases like charter schools they
may need to build entirely new
operations and facilities and so
that could take more time than
simply replacing some others and
some equipment.
Okay thank you matter.
Or I hope I did scare people
actually representative ferrari
thank you
along at the same line um about
the kitchen infrastructure um we
have our food bank custody
period
and
a suit kitchen elgar detail your
cooperating to try and get funds
to build some different kitchens
that can be used could the
schools also use one of those
three kitchens on for the
scratch
to.
Process you know production.
Madame chair representative
schools have different methods
of preparing their meals most of
them most of the public schools
to prepare their meals on site
whether it's at a century
kitchen within their own
district or a individual school
sites some do have satellite
kitchens and so they prepare out
one kitchen and deliver to
different schools
we do have also a food of
service management companies
that prepare offsite at the at a
central kitchen and then deliver
to the schools or food service
management companies that
prepare on say at schools
if.
A school needed to prepare meals
perhaps a charter school that
didn't have a kitchen the they
could come up with an agreement
with another organization to use
that space those are things that
they would have to discuss
to be able to come up with an
agreement of vendor agreement
for that.
Okay thank you madame chair and
also
this I i'm glad to see this
survey that you know
will help give better input on
you know what students like is
that part of what that survey
is.
Madam chair representative that
is what the survey is that in
either a student into a parent
family member can complete that
survey schools are encouraged
and should already be collecting
feedback from their students
whether it's tasting surveys
various methods of a data
collection but this is another
way that the state is trying to
take a look at what school
districts and out i'm sorry what
students and families across the
seat
can provide and so we're we're
hoping to get feeder back so
that we can share with the
school districts if they don't
have another method of
collection
thank you a matter of chair and
you also mentioned about how
this the budget is flat
are you not taking into
consideration some federal
funding that might help with
these programs in that we need
to shore up.
Madame chair and representative
at least presently we're not
aware of any any impacts for FY
twenty seven that we would see
from federal funding cuts to the
national school bunch program
the the changes too snap will
will have an effect that leader
but again with a push for
getting all of our schools to
qualify under the community
eligibility program that will
stabilize our funding over the
next several years.
And just one last on the um
map that you have and the coding
is the number of schools are
reached by training that forty
one is that lost crucials I was
hard to tell the green.
The differentiation of the
different greens.
Battle chair representative for
lost choices that is the number
of the forty one is the number
of schools we had staff
representative from every school
participate in the training at
last cases.
Scrape into that means also the
the number of students reached
is the twenty two thousand seven
hundred correct
thank you thank you matter up
signature pop.
I'm going to matter sure we get
an update nearly a okay.
Representative heard it i'm
sorry you're you're hiding over
there thank you thank you madame
chair so my question goes to the
rein the
question that was raised by
senator pintelle what happens if
the school doesn't comply you
say they get a lesser
reimbursement that sounds to me
like the students have been hurt
and that the people who are
implementing the plan so why
not.
Take away part of them they are
salary because they didn't
comply with and take away money
from the food reimbursement.
So the
this is all called out in
administrative rule madame chair
and and representative and it is
the move to that the healthy
meals it's an incentive it's not
really meant to be a punishment
if you don't provide healthy
meals it is if you provide
healthy your meals that meet
these qualifications then we
will provide fun additional
funding as an incentive so it's
not that we're taking way
funding from others it's that
we're giving funding to those
who are providing who are
meeting those requirements of
the healthy of the healthy
meals.
Thank you madame chair thank you
for that response it to me that
still sounds like the children
are being hurt but and in but to
move on to two more questions
right quick that was a a
constant statement on locally
ground beef and how that would
become important coming forth
with the students only beef I
mean what are you doing with
respect to fresh ground for a
fruits and vegetables which I
heard from the students were
missing from their school lunch
program.
Madame chair representative then
new mexico grown program doesn't
compass all of the products
available that it is produced by
the farmers that participate on
the poos supplier list and so
it's not just beef we we those
were just some of the examples
that we used but a lot of the
school districts it used to only
be
produce and fruits and
vegetables that the program the
program recipients the grant
recipients were able to purchase
later on beef was added and so
schools can only use forty
percent of their new mexico
grown to to purchase beef um but
and so therefore sixty percent
of that does have to at least be
spent on fruits and vegetables
so thank you better and thank
you for their response are you
aware that students came to the
legislature last year to
complain about the food that was
being served in that free lunch
program that it wasn't healthy
that was prepackaged and it was
not of the tight that they
thought we support a healthy
lifestyle.
The.
Madame chair representative yes
and where work there were
continuously working with
students trying to gather
feedback we've done tone holes
and we have done we have visited
schools to meet with students to
get their feedback and so we are
aware of their concerns and we
do encourage schools also to
take that approach into
gathering feedback from their
students so that they can learn
about the meals that they want
to eat and the food that they
want to see
thank you madame chair thank you
for the response representative
look
thank you very much here i'm
just gonna turn to page twenty
three in the alace report here
regarding the charge schools
spending more per students.
Um in the second paragraph there
this when you
like mid paragraph uh it says a
waiting reimbursement from ped
or my arm is coding funds so
even though the charge schools
are probably spending more
because of you know they're
they're their capital
predicament if you will they
they will be reimbursed is that
with this means manager.
This.
Manager representative luham yes
they'll still be reimbursed of
waiting reimbursement there's a
reimbursement process that
occurs will we have heard from
talking with staff
administrators food service
managers often times that
reimbursement process can take
up to three months on average
for seems to be a an improvement
and so after types of might have
to use their operational funds
in the meantime manager is a is
that hurting anybody in any
major way
manager representative of luham
we didn't in our conversations
with staff and districts and
charters it wasn't necessarily
hurting anyone I mean they're
still able to kind of proceed
with operations at food service
sister and that time but using
operational funds to carry it
thank you thank you matter I
just wanted to clarify that the
I appreciate you're putting this
information but and if it's a
process thing than to ped how
are you improving that timeline
process for reimbursement.
Madam chair representative we
are continuously working to
improve the processes for
reimbursement schools submit
their claims on the tenth of
every month and so at the
beginning of the school year
sometimes there is a little bit
of a uh
a slow down just based on the
way that claims are submitted
and then they have to be
approved by our division
if we get there i'm sorry I
forget the the the other bureau
but um it's there is a little
bit of a lag in the beginning
but we have worked on improving
the processes to get schools
paid out sooner thank you so
much and I just wanted to say
this we did something right in
the state this is this is what
we did right in the state and I
and I just want to commend.
Uh for you know working so hard
to keep you know keeping things
in processes in place and rather
recommendations and that's
worked to tighten up things and
tighten up those costs just to
be do our due diligence because
you know one should always do
that but and these times you
really are going to have to do
that so thank you thank you
member.
Thank you when we stop this
representative tourist balaskis
oh manager i've got two
questions and the first one is
piggy back off of rep hernan's
question and i'm just wondering
if we could think about what
kinds of incentives we could
give for schools who are
actually working together with
their community and with the
students to gain feedback on how
to improve the quality or the
meal that is being served at the
school so that students actually
do eat and um and enjoy that
meal that's question one to
think about for later you don't
have to answer right now
but i'd like to see some way to
really reward them for doing
that because that that is a very
big deal um the second question
is a follow up to a question I
asked at this leos see meeting
and i'm asking it because of the
discussion this morning on
ethnic studies and so at the
earlier c meaning I brought up
that sometimes we have classroom
teachers who know how to grow
gardens and they grow gardens at
their school and the students
really love to learn how to grow
their own food and also love
eating that food because they
helped grow it or they knew
someone who grew it it's fresh
it's healthy it doesn't have
pesticides it's healthy ground
and are very nutritious and i'm
just wondering what a school
could do cause you you mentioned
at the time that the speed was
passed that that there was some
discussion about those types of
programs in this bill i'm
wondering what a school could do
to work with you to build that
kind of initiative or what we as
legislators could do to support
that kind of initiative.
Thinking madam chair.
Madame cherry representative
thank you for that this morning
we received announcement from
the usual that the patrick we he
grant is going to be released
again we had initially applied
for it
earlier this school year and
were anticipating to be awarded
for that for firm to school
programs programming but it was
taken away and so that we it was
announced this morning that it
was released and so we have
already scheduled meetings with
our counterparts that the
department of health to
gain planning are application
process for that
that is wonderful thank you
madame chair way ahead of the
game thank you
for presentative I mean
flashbacks vice chairman is.
Thank you madame chair
I guess with regards to this
particular one a presentation
I think the standardized student
satisfaction survey would be
very interesting to get feedback
on I have a thirteen year old so
I hear I get feedback but to be
interested matter of chair to
to see what other students would
say about
the quality etc what's available
to eat and such although I do
know that she did ask about
sellers so that was a question
which i'm very happy she asked
about that one last time
and I I guess madam chair just
on one of your
on on page three were you're
asking to require contract with
food service management
companies
I think where the clear
expectations for quality
standards is think is important
that way everybody is
understanding what the
expectations are too I I think
that's that's a an added value
for that otherwise I think this
is something that we've done
right thank you madame share
thank you I have an I eight I
too think this is something we
did very right and i'm proud of
mexico port and my I have a
concern about using the s e g
for I mean and we all know that
kids need to be nourished to do
well but I personally don't
think the s e g is enough to do
what we need schools to do
yourself so what's the long term
um
answer to that it is the is
there anyone discussing you know
filling the gaps with something
else limiting ex I I know there
are limits but just give you
good discussed just briefly how
how might concerns might be a
late.
I'll start so
as
as was mentioned madam chair it
it's not wrong to use s e g
funds it is allowable to do but
as you mention it it may not be.
The the suggests typically used
for instructional expenses for
the classroom but if a school is
deciding that hey this is an
area where our our families have
said this is something that we
really want to see as part of
our school lunch program and
they decide to invest some
additional funds from the seg to
support
the funds that they receive
through the healthy universal
school meals program that it is
allowable and it's not
necessarily wrong
I get that I just I I do have
concerns and I would hope we
would plug those holes with some
other funding so that we are not
and then just the final thing I
have your map and it's a little
concerning considering that more
than twice I mean more than the
the um what is it called the
south
southwest or southeast that that
don't unaccounting or terrible
county has more than twice as
many as the rest of the state
combined and aps has nothing so
it feels like um maybe there
were some cherry picking or me I
I don't know how this ended up
like this but it it really
I mean you just you look at the
graph and it's like this this
doesn't represent new mexico in
any way.
Madam chair these are
some of the trainings that have
taken place this fire doesn't
include all of them burner leo
public schools was left out I
notice that but our department
is continuing to provide
training and so we hope that as
the year goes forward that you
will see more areas of the map
being covered we also
had an release that's where
working with a we're going to
have a contractor that's gonna
also provide hands on training
to school districts the costs
are said and so we'll be meeting
with them to ensure that all
areas of the sea are covered
but this says it's for the
twenty four twenty five school
year so that was and it's it's
really concerns me that aps was
not so how were these sites
chosen
if I can map madam chair
specifically for aps we met we
had several meetings with a ps
one on one two with their foods
are restricted in the last year
and with the governor's office
and we met with them we know
that it's the largest school
digits district in the state and
we want to make sure that they
were moving in the right
direction they now have a new
food service director who
previously used to work at
farmington who's a champion for
health emails and the stand were
happy to see that she's there
and so we know that
aps is going to be making a
change
to improve school mail quality
and so we will be working with
them
then the near in this school
year to provide training to
their staff we need it's gonna
be a lot of work because they
currently provide meals out of
their prepare meals out of their
central kitchen and so it's
gonna it's going to take time
but we're working with them
we've been meeting with them
almost monthly since the last
school year
how how were these districts
chosen
there was a survey sent out for
school districts our interested
in receiving training.
And we also worked with our
corner staff um to provide
training other availability and
so some most of these school
districts did reach out to our
staff to request training and
and that's part of my concern is
that the people who are doing it
right want you to come in and
help them the people who are
doing it wrong don't want to get
any more near you so that that's
that's part of my concern is
that you know if you're if
you're on board then you say
yeah you know come in and help
us if you're saying we're not
doing this then you're not going
to see come in and help us so
that that's just the statement I
don't need to
so thank you so much for your
for your presentation.
Very helpful and thank you we
will move on to.
Um
philip houston life house and
update on providing behavioral
health services in a rural
setting.
Madam chair yes if I could I
know i'm a little bit leave on
comments but I wanted just to to
put this on record on the
previous presentation where we
talking about um
the prek quality and educational
outcomes
and I mentioned this to you I
just wanted to put in the record
where we talk about delays
related to the covered nineteen
pandemic and how it talked about
how it was modest with regards
to the three to four year roles
I i'm just curious as to we
could have a steady done some
day to look at those children
who were in already in
elementary school are during the
covered times and see it what
how that affected those students
and I know they're now older
you either in middle school or
high school and i'm just
wondering if that's had an
effect on some of the issues
that we're dealing with
societily right now umm I see
that it's listed here but i'm
just curious you know how that
could be extended expanded to
see what.
What effect that has and I think
it did because it it affected
adults too and then the other
thing madam chair
the
but I thought I had marked it
but there is
I guess it's I haven't heard
enough sugar this afternoon I
guess that's my problem
they're still more cookies are
those cookies are asked them if
anybody wants to cooking but
there is another comment madame
chair that I wanted to make
and
i'll be done if I don't remember
it at this point but anyway at
least I wanted just to touch
recently so that on with regards
to the covered because I I just
think that is really oh the
other thing was absentees
because I I do believe that
there's there is a correlation
in of course when you're
tracking students from the
precade accord that's all data
related but just seen if there's
improvements as time most
forward because I I know that
does have a definite effect and
I see it with my thirteen year
old and listening to all the
concerns that i'm being educated
matter on a lot of different
issues that are affecting our
students at different different
ways so that's all thank you.
Whenever you're ready
thanks madame chairman members
of the committee
though appears that i'm the
executive director and founder
of life house
or main officers in eddie county
but as i'll tell you out where
expanding beyond there first I
want to thank you all for your
work around behavioral health in
the last session
it's made a big difference for
us in the field particularly
house bill when seventy one
madam chair you sponsored along
with representative of jones and
brown there improved access to
detached medications and it was
endorsed by this committee at
pasting animals through both
chambers and was signed and so
very thankful for your support
and work on that to help
facilities like ours
it's always a pleasure to to
share with you all we started
life house about nine years ago
with a single server living home
with the desire just to meet the
needs in our community
I came to this committee two
years ago
describing the rare services
we'd grown into and you guys
have a brochure that kind of
explains most of the areas
services we have but since I
came and spoke with you all two
years ago we've doubled our
services again we'll get
providing about fifteen million
dollars in behavior health
services in the next year
next week will have a narcan
vending machine delivered to our
lobby would be one of the sites
that
has that we recently were named
by newsweek for the second year
in a row is the best edition
treatment center in new mexico
and we've just been like I said
growing to meet the needs around
us we've also as I alluded to
expand it beyond that he county
we recently purchased this the
task renewal center in tas
and so we're starting to do some
work in northern new mexico
we're looking particularly at
partnerships with the published
for access to quality
residential treatment
we also were one of the first
ccbhs in the first one that was
completely rural
this january.
And that's the first day I want
to talk about it is cbc which
stands for certified community
behavioral health connects ccbhs
provide an array of outpatient
services that include crisis
care
peer support veteran services as
well as kind of the basic
diagnostic and treatment
services you that you would
expect.
One of the neat things about cch
as the the array of services is
based on a community needs
assessment not under the
generalized fee schedule and so
it allows us to adapt to the
needs of our community it
provides increased access
standards in a in a federally
recognized standard of care
as well as providing an
alternative payment model
through the prospective payment
system and so
you're able to cover costs that
may not be traditionally covered
in fee for service and types of
encounters that aren't
traditionally covered in and it
rolls into that perspective
payment system which has allowed
us to to do some great things I
want to highlight two of those
first we have a fully active
mobile crisis response team so
twenty four seventy sixty five
or someone in early county has a
behavioral health crisis they
can call our team out and we can
send people into the field to
meet them where they're at to
help stabilise them and get them
connected to resources
or team is increased it's
utilization through partnerships
with local law enforcement in
first responder's community
education and it's been a great
benefit to the community
and because that partnership
with law enforcement they really
see the value in it in the
reducing the risk of situations
escalating that shouldn't
helping people end up in
treatment rather than in jail
it's a great great program in
great service
it's also one that's very
difficult to bring up on a few
for service model and so the
ccbh really enabled us to do
that the other program that we
brought up kind of
simultaneously as our sort of
community treatment program
which is designed for folks that
are at high risk of
institutionalization and so
mostly folks with gets a friend
here severe by polar that need
intensive care and so you have a
team of providers but include
prescribing nursing counseling
substance use cancelling in case
management and we provide
services in the home in the
community at our office.
But it's a rap around the the
meets the client multiple times
a week helps with med compliance
and works really are to
stabilise individuals was
challenging middle health
conditions if it weren't for c c
phc and that the pps funding we
wouldn't have been able to to
stand that up um we've also
significantly improved access
about two and a half years ago
we had a weight list of two
hundred and fifty people for
outpatient counseling and today
that weight list is basically at
zero
so both the standards and the
the funding that comes through
cbh have really made a
significant difference for us
and for our community I already
kind of alluded to the the needs
assessment having to to base it
off of community needs but also
it really has helped us create
community partners because we're
able to include things they
don't normally reimburse we're
able to do work with law
enforcement with the schools
with our local hospital we do
work in the correction side as
well with probation and prolong
in the jail and
we use all those opportunities
to try to shorten the the length
of time from when someone's
identified is having it to when
they can get into our care
because a lot of times there are
folks in the community that you
know someone has a problem but
getting that connection into
services.
It has all sorts of obstacles
and barriers and cbh and the
partnerships who developed in
the community have reduced those
barriers and really helped
create that pipeline the one
thing I want to ask you guys to
do and I I provided you guys
with a a little hand out with
just five opportunities that I
think you will have is
legislators to impact our
behavioral health system in a
positive way in one of those is
to include a value based program
attached to ccbh this is
something that's been done in
other states it's recognized as
a valid program at the federal
level the down side to the pps
system is we're paid exactly
what our expenses are to provide
the program
it's better than losing money
but it makes it really hard to
expand services based on that
kind of reimbursement in terms
you if you add a value based
program people that can show
exceptional outcomes would be
paid additional rate to be able
to expand and so you had have
your providers that can show
reality value expanding which
seems like a a very good thing
an initial pilot program would
probably cost a couple million
dollars to get that started in
our state and so I would
encourage you to support that as
we move forward into the session
one of the things i've talked
with this committee about in
some of you were there and some
of you weren't is our detacks
program
as you guys know both our
colours i'm in operate use are
significant problems in our
state and often the first step
for folks to get out of that is
the details to go through the
chemical withdrawal process in a
support of medical environment
there are very few of these
facilities in our state and
having started one over the last
few years I I can test the why
that is the case that's
extremely difficult um in
cumbersome to to start one the
the whole almost every step in
the process is challenging
in in confusing and difficult
and expensive one positive
though I will say the health
care authority and bh is the
change the.
Reimbursement structure for
residential treatment in details
this year to improve it from a
system there almost guaranteed
that you would lose money to one
that there is a a step in the
right direction
but like the ccbh the rates are
still based on a zero margin and
exact cost which isn't
particularly a great way to have
a system that expands
and really the biggest problem
with that it cost us about half
a million dollars to get our
program to the point where we
could build medicaid
in so if you're getting paid
exactly what it cost to provide
the service you can never
recuperate that money we started
billing medicaid almost exactly
a year ago and in august the
twenty twenty four and we
currently have over half a
million dollars of unpaid claims
some of that you expect cause
there is a timeline from when
you submit a claim to when you
get paid ideally that'd be like.
Two to four weeks something like
that
occasionally it works that way
but often it doesn't the reality
is that the largest
administrative burden for
behavioral health providers is
trying to collect payment from
the mco's
just as an example with our
details we have claims from
twenty twenty four from blue
cross and blue shielding them
out about a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars that we still
haven't been paid for bs this
sent three deliverables we had a
meeting in february where they
acknowledged that we had
properly turned in all of our
paperwork so that's over six
months ago and we still haven't
gotten a dime for the detached
services we provided in twenty
twenty four the blue cross and
blue shield
clients.
Um in contrast
the mcos are able to do audits
on us we got a a very short
notice fraud waste and abusive
it is what they call it and you
have five days to turn in all
your documentation and if you
don't turn in everything which
we had a case where someone was
sick and out of the office when
we got the notice instantly they
could take away twenty thousand
dollars based on five days
notice and here we are a year
later for a claims in the amount
of a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars in the mco still hasn't
paid I assume we will eventually
get that money but the system is
definitely waited against the
provider
in those cases and so
that the reality is the the
mco's insurance company's profit
from delaying when they delay in
contract when they delay in
paying they profit off of that
providers give up people give up
on fighting claims and the
longer your money is in the bank
the you know the more it makes
into anything we can do to make
sure that providers are paid in
a timely way it would make a big
difference I would say that in
general in the behavioral health
system as providers we spend
nearly ten percent of all of our
revenue and expenses on the
billing and collection process
and so that's a a pretty
significant chunk that's lost
they could go to a lot of other
things
there's also a significant nine
medicaid portion of behavioral
health spending in the state and
I know it'll be getting
attention because of the special
session also because of the
federal landscape and the the
risk the reduced medicaid access
in funding and I want to talk
just briefly about that because
are non medicaid pool for
behavioral health spinning has
not increased when the other
rates have increased um dr
medicaid and we actually rely on
this for several important
programs and I wanted to just
kind of make sure that you guys
were aware of those so there's a
whole few scheduled that the
state pays for non medicaid
services.
And these are for individuals
who aren't eligible for
medicated medicaid but still
have a financial deficit and
unable to pay on their own do
have commercial insurance or for
things that aren't covered by
other things so for example
residential treatment is not
covered by medicaid that are
sorry medicare and so I met a
person that has medicare
is eligible to have the state
page through these nine medicaid
funds for their residential
treatment
these rates in this few
scheduled not changed for four
years at least
and so they pay significantly
less than even our medicare
rates or less than commercial
insurance rates we rely on them
in a few different ways
another thing you may have been
aware of medicare does not pay
for room and board ever in a
residential setting and so the
state pays a supplement out of
these funds for a room and board
to cover that side of the
expense for providers we at
fifty dollars a day to provide
room and board
to our residential clients and
again that rate hasn't changed
since medicaid residential
treatment became medicaid
service four years ago
as you heard in the last
presentation food costs have
gone up you may notice that in
your own grocery bill since
twenty twenty one and has not
gone up at all fifty bucks a day
just the math doesn't work it's
not sufficient to provide room
in board for clients and so that
that's another area where this
pool
could easily help additionally
our crisis services I told you
guys about our mobile crisis
team I think that's a huge
priority for h c a b HSD with
nine eight eight coming online
and
we see that as a critical part
of improving outcomes in our
state
in the the claims that we've had
so far only about twenty five
percent of our mobile crisis and
encounters are billable to
medicaid
and there's a few reasons
some people have other insurance
that doesn't cover medicaid if
you're going to work with.
Uh homeless population or other
disadvantage folks they may not
have applied for medicate or
their medicate may have expired
in a crisis situation we're not
going in leading with hey can I
get your insurance card we're
trying to help the situation and
so
funding crisis spending with
these non medicaid dollars is
also critical so as you go to
the special session and and look
at next year's budget I hope
you'll consider not only doing
we need to consider the coming
federal landscape changes but we
also need to catch up for some
neglect to these kind of funds
that that we have used
just two other things real quick
and then i'll look forward to
your questions that that I want
to encourage one is
it life house pure support
workers are central to so many
of the things that we do we hire
at least twenty five certified
peer support workers these are
folks that have lived experience
and the middle health and
substance use round and they
have proved a time of of
willness and recovery and then
they go through special training
to be ready to to share their
experience to help other people
they're one of the most
impactful services that we offer
we use them at our crisis team
we use them in our residential
treatment we use them as in case
management we have peer support
workers through the rise grant
that we get to be hst going to
the jail every week and help
people make transitional plans
in learn life skills
there some of the most valuable
folks that we have in in the
return on investment from from
the state's perspective should
be really good because they're
less expensive than paying a
master's level person
they make it an impact on the
work force cause it takes the
burn off of how many counselors
and therapists and masters level
folks we need it doesn't
eliminate it but there are times
when it can definitely
supplement and and is that and
it gives folks in recovery a
career path where they're
helping others and they have a
purpose in a passion and and
they really are the heart of our
agency unfortunately the last
few years I feel like new mexico
is kind of regressed in terms of
their peer support program.
We made it harder to become a
peer support work are going
against kind of national
standards requiring a three year
weight instead of a two year way
which we lose a lot of people in
that window because they go to
find other jobs uh we have a lot
of folks that will complete our
programs they want to work for
us they might come and start is
a cook and then they may become
a residential treatment
assistant and then they have to
wait till they have three years
before they can get into a a
real career path position and
not an entry level position um I
think that's a regression also
that the process to get your
support workers train
has become more limiting you
have to have a very narrow
window if I hire if I have a
good candidate for peer support
I might have to wait a quarter
before I can get them trained so
that to pay him for three months
or tell them wait don't get
another job i'll hire you in
three months and obviously we
lose opportunities both in the
service they could provide but
also opportunities in them
finding other opportunities and
so
the challenges we've had per
support workers do take
additional supervision they
don't necessarily have a lot of
professional experience we need
to focus on our changes on
developing them providing more
support better support systems
better safety nets so that they
can develop their careers and
less on making more barriers to
weed out whether scene is maybe
more difficult uh peers together
I think there's a huge
opportunity for us to have a
better system around peer
support that will address our
work force needs and the access
to care in the last thing I just
want to mention you guys did a
great job in appropriating a lot
of funds to behavioral household
health less session
right now with the trajectory
that things are on
i'm afraid that after having
allocated more money than every
four to behavioral health we
will not get any of that money
out the door in this fiscal year
right now at the federal level
there are no real mental health
funds because of the changes the
grant programs.
And ran out the state because
everything was was tied into
house bill to in the SB three
planning process
which the timeline forgetting
those approved is getting well
into next summer um we we have
no grants to start new things
from the state and federal level
I would already have c c phc on
track to start and chove his
county if I had any way to get
funding to do it but it's not
there
um obviously we're working to do
things still we're looking at
all the options but state and
federal grants are are really
hard to come by now and we need
to find ways to get all that
great money you guys allocated
out the door there's twenty
eight million dollars allocated
for c c b h c and if we had one
of those millions of dollars
we would be building a new c b h
CNN county that doesn't have it
so whatever you guys can do to
help move that process along and
and get money out the door that
you guys weren't so hard to get
allocated would be greatly
appreciated and I know many
providers would be ready to put
it to use expanding services
like like we've been doing an
eddie county and beyond now
again I thank you all for your
support and i'd love to answer
any questions that you guys have
thank you so much so we will
start with um representative
heard in um
thank you madame three minutes
thank you betterment here
with respect to the ccbacy money
where is it stuck right now.
What agency is it healthcare
authority apartment madam share
the allocation in house bill to
tie the spending of that cool of
money to the regional planning
process there
is part of senate bill three
that the administrative office
of the courts is currently
developing
and so I think it's it's in that
process the things are currently
held up
okay thank you member here thank
you for that answer and with
respect to the billing that you
can only get reimbursed for your
expenses is that a rule is that
a policy regulation why is that
because you have to to know your
lights like everybody else.
Madame chair representative and
I really appreciate your
sympathy on that
so it it depends by the program
so in c cba that's kind of the
federal model is that the way
the perspective payment rate is
based on your aggregate expenses
and that's where an incentive
program really makes a lot of
sense to reward people that they
have good outcomes in the rest
of
the medicaid fee schedule
it's it's kind of the attitude
of the state to determine how
those rates are calculated I
know there were some changes at
the federal level on the
allowance to have rates that are
higher than the medicaid rate
which would affect things like
uh individual and group therapy
but by large wouldn't affect
most of the higher levels of
care and community been a
community behavioral things that
we do on a regular basis so
there is plenty of lattitude for
the state to reimburse things
like residential treatment
detacks better than they
currently are and and I would
encourage them to do that in
your to support that if we're
able to
thank you and then one final
question is with respect to the
peer supporters that is a great
program and concept that's what
they use in acs the albuquerque
community safety people who have
lived experiences are there to
help others and do doesn't
legislate you need to provide
you with more money to ask
provide that support in training
help me to understand where that
instant
so I I think it's too far some
of it is in policy and the
regulations that are promotated
by h s the around peer support
they could fix some of these
problems
I do think there is a need for
robust training of peers and
continual ongoing training
because of their
the their point their career and
development and so
I think it'd be a fairly modest
increase there would be needed
to make that training program
more real bus.
But I think that is something
legislature could could impact
incurred
help be hst get going in the
right directional thank you
manager all right thank you
better thank you.
Representatives
thank you thank for this
presentation this is what before
I have a a couple of questions
regards to the pier support
expansion h c eight is
due to one border to create I
think like seven hundred new
pure support positions from
state so I would incurred you to
contract
um
contact them and and look into
that
what is the other thing here
my questions addressing the the
mountain when how much.
Um.
How much money did you have you
received a state state money
manager.
Madame chair representative are
you asking about like grant
funds through the state
so in in the ramp up for cbh we
received uh one point six
million from the real health
care delivery fund that was
critical for us to being able to
launch and we received a few
other smaller grants for crisis
and cch that were
maybe in total around three
hundred thousand over the last
two to three years and and
ramping up that program in in
terms of the the c c c psw's
adam chair we basically have
people when every training class
the they offer
one of the challenges we look at
a total number in the state but
they're very concentrated in the
metro areas in the rural areas
don't have them and they don't
get reimbursed that I kind of
rate to afford housing in carl's
bad or tales
and so it's it's tough to even
though we have a lot of on the
train that stuff that distribute
and and mobilise them into rural
areas so that's really one of
the challenges thank you thank
you for expanding on that that
is absolutely too in regards to
how you are your program is
working with you mentioned at
the legislation that we pass the
three of course as be one is the
funding bill but speed three in
working with our local
government particularly or
county is how how is that how
what is the outreach how are you
working with the aoc and helping
develop the plan with them
adding
yeah madam chair representative
we we've had a great real
relationship and great
collaboration from the county I
think it depends on the county
in the relationship with the
provider on how that's going um
we'll know a lot more at the end
of this month when they
designate accountable and it is
in each region
I think there is a lot of
concern about making sure that
all the stay called as
particularly providers are
adequately included in that
process
and in the plan is were the ones
that are most directly on the
ground and.
In
interfacing with these
challenges every day so
been very thankful for eddie
county and how it's going by can
be concerned about how it's
going to go as we get into the
regional planning process that
we really can't have started yet
because they're just now have
the rfe for the accountable
energies thank you so much I
really that's that's really
incredible feedback and just to
clarify your five one c three.
Manager yes madam chair or five
one six three non profit.
Representative tourists for last
guess.
I'm thinking madam chair um I
was wondering you mentioned the
change from two years to three
years for the peer support do
you know why that happened was
there a reason that you were
given for the change of another
year
madam chairman not exactly I
think
there were a few situations
where
they they had some negative
outcomes with with folks that
were in the the peer support
program and decided that
extending the time framewood
reduced there's
my opinion there trying to
provide better support and
better investment better
training would be a better
approach than adding the barrier
of time can you think you and
madam chair i'm wondering how do
you foresee that your fiber one
c three might be affected by
federal funding cuts
yeah madam chair representative
I think that the biggest
challenge the that we face will
be with the additional work
requirements in keeping people
on the medicaid rules
we know that we already spend a
lot of time getting people
signed up for medicaid that
clearly qualifier getting
medicaid reactivated for folks
that are leaving jail or prison
is a major issue major delays
sometimes and so having to
research people more often I
think is going to be the thing
that's the biggest burden for us
but there's so many variables in
how that's going to go there
it's really hard to predict
thank you madame chair in one
last question if I have a moment
how do you foresee what is your
future vision of expansion in an
ideal world in new mexico
manager
yeah madam chair
you know like I said it the
beginning we really just started
by seeing and even the community
that we could be and we did.
And that's really how we've
grown from that point um so
wherever we see a need that we
can meet we're going to do it
we're fortunate to be at a a
place now where we have kind of
the infrastructure in support to
be able to
get into other areas and help
other agencies even and so
we have no interest in going
places where people are getting
the help they need we're just
trying to go the places where
they are and.
That's what we're gonna keep
doing think manager.
Thank you representative and I
thought
silly me that we had taken care
of getting people medicaid
before they were released from
corrections on the the thinking
that the most dangerous time for
a fatal overdoes is when you're
getting so once again it feels
like a legislature has done
something and.
We have passed the law and it
has not
become into through
and
i'm cranky
madam chair if I could i'll just
speak to that but there is an
effort and it it is finally
rolling out to the county jails
now for medicaid to be
reinstated before release
which hopefully will be helpful
to that the the challenge that
we often have is
there's not always sixty days
warning before people get
released there's not really the
mechanism at least that we've
seen in our part of the state
where the communication between
the jail and medicaid happens
really smoothly so I don't you
think your work hasn't helped
cause it has but there's still a
lot i'd like to go in making
that smoother yeah I I believe
we pass that two years ago it
seems like if somebody really
took an interest in making it
work it could have been done but
again silly me representative
and they are.
Thank you madame chair I always
appreciate when you present
thank you.
I missed part of what you said
and when you were talking about
the expanded pure support I know
you talked about the three year
weight for so two year wait but
then you talked about an
additional I think some kind of
hiring timeline
and you said it was three months
as opposed to being able to
higher right away can you just
repeat that part yeah madam
chair the process now for
getting the training completed
that this the state so when they
can do the training they offer
it four times a year the way you
sign up as there's a window
opened up on the in in recovery
website and so
you have to be available and
ready at that window sometimes
it's closed within a few hours
sometimes it stayed open for a
couple of days
but
the time between those windows
is three months and then we
leave and had times or something
this is one or you know a
document they didn't upload
right or whatever they caused
additional delays
got it thank you that's what I
missed um have one more question
if I can read my own hand
rating.
Oh best late plans it was just
about the getting the money on
the door um
with the regional process I know
you confirm that it's the
regional process yes it's good
we want all of this input in
support it's also delayed the
money getting out the door i'm
wondering you know on the
current timeline now with these
regional plans supposedly being
wrapped up soon
would you imagine that I
question mark yes the ice but I
would imagine that it's a little
bit closer to that deadline i'm
also wondering would it be your
recommendation to change any
part of that law
in order for
folks to receive money a little
bit faster well but your plans
are being set in motion
yeah madam chair
a few things and it can be a
little hard to address because
that is still being kind of made
up as we go which makes it hard
but currently the timelines that
i've seen are to do to regional
plans a month
in across the fifteen or sixteen
judicial districts and these
plans are two day training
sessions it seems it to me for
something so critical to the
state that we would work four
days a month
we certainly don't get by doing
that their life house so I think
we could easily make more
regional plans more quickly um
and that seems like a pretty
easy thing to do I mean
I i'm not sure why the delay is
there
I think a little more sense of
urgency and the steps of the
process getting along could
easily be accomplished
getting the account when it is
getting the
the decisions made
it I don't know I want speculate
anything else on that having a
portion of the phones
available immediately.
Whether the regional plan are
just through clear state
priorities because a fee fair
amount of the the the
allocations in that bill are
given the specific areas that
are clearly priorities for the
state like c c c like just this
involve folks like housing and
so it seems like a portion of
that could go out and we know
that those are things that need
to be done in areas where we
have projects that are ready to
go I don't know the best
mechanism to do that but.
Just from my perspective those
all seem like things that we
could do our expectations we
could raise to get it done a
little quicker
thank you matter.
Representative free.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you also for your great work do
you have a youth
treatment program that courts
could refer young people to
early on in there.
Course of.
Juvenile offences
yeah madam chair we do several
things one great thing about c c
b c required to treat the whole
life we have to have services
for all ages and we have several
counselors that work
specifically with children youth
recently and conjunction with
our juvenile probation office
and carls bad we started to use
anger management group and they
use substance use group and so
we have started doing things
that target youth
um we also as I was telling
representative of live on about
a lunch we just started doing a
partnership with the local
soccer league to try to provide
some middle health training to
coaches and provide youth middle
health first day classes to the
community including people that
interfacing with kids so we do
have some initiatives
certainly there is a lot to be
done last year we tried to start
an ad to less and I op in our
high school and we got one
referral across the whole year
which obviously doesn't match
the clear demand but what we
found was that in the the school
system the
it's very punitive when they
find that there's a kid with the
substance use this order and
typically kids are expelled
before they clearly identify
that they're ready for a high
level of substance use treatment
also even though we were willing
to provide on campus the
competition for getting
educational hours if they're on
campus in the the pressure for
the school to have that became
an excuse for not being able to
get them in the classes that we
could offer
kind of my crazy idea would be
making it possible to have an
elective class that was offered
at the high school where they
could get treatment during their
elective hours and still not
miss the other classes instead
of I mean if you get your kid
for drinking at school you
suspend them
they're not going to go home and
make a choices
unfortunately you know we've
learned this lesson even in the
just the system but I don't know
we've learned in the schools yet
that when we identify substance
using middle health we need to
start help right there and not
punish that that's not going to
get there and so I think our
schools have a long way to go in
that area.
Thank you very
I agree totally and see what we
can do with their schools my
next question is about um with
your residential treatment how
long a period and if you could
just make that kind of short
because of another question yeah
I madam sure it's typically
thirty days which is a a
fragment of old artificial
limitations by insurance
companies and has nothing to do
with what's best for clients but
it's hard to get an approval for
anything different than that
totally agree that we need to
extend that time also you are
the sober living uh the
transitional housing um do you
and you mention something about
psycho susan's schizophrenia do
you have that residential
treatment for those of clients
needs
madam shares so our suburb
living program when we open two
more suburb living houses swing
out a forty eight so we're
living beds in eddie county
we
really are working with people
stepping out of a residential
programmer out of incarceration
and it's it's more of a
focused on kind of learning at a
new way of life in the practical
stills is someone who's come out
of intensive treatment the
program that we have for
folks who skids are from him by
polar is a sort of community
treatment where we treat them
either in their home or in the
community in residential
treatment we do take co
occurring disorders but if
someone has undreaded skits are
for nearby polar where unstable
in those conditions it's very
difficult for them to
participate in a group setting
and so often if that's two
severe there are really not the
right fit for a group
presidential treatment program
so we were trying as you can see
the fill in all the gaps in the
continue most care but there's
always one more to figure out
and plug it right we're working
on a lot what we're doing are
certain lost cruises
in a forescaster for new bipolar
um and irresidential and um.
Maybe you might be once we get
ready to expand throughout the
state which where we have a high
demand throughout the whole
state um you might be a minimal
to you know uh taking that
approach to support so thank you
again.
Place to look at.
And thank you madame chairman I
I really want to see thank you
very much for your presentation
this afternoon and some of the
concerns that you listed i'm an
advise reboard member for hope
works which is an entity and
albuquerque that serves the
homeless community primarily in
downtown albuquerque and um
there's some similar issues that
have been shared with the board
on some of these same issues so.
I think there's room for
improvement and being polite
but the
the pure support is I think is
where the state is missing in
all honesty madam chair umm i've
talked to some persons who have
retired
from the state they are have
also shared some information
that have worked within the
corrections department and how
important the piers support um
ill entities groups whatever it
is that we're not doing
correctly and I think he pointed
out exactly of that that extra
period of time and it's so
crucial madam chair that we
don't have the extra amount of
time we need something here and
now to take care of the issues
that exist in our community and
the entity in albuquerque
they're trying their best and I
think they've made some
wonderful inrodes
for instead of having a police
officer come out you actually
have somebody who can do some
more intervention but we need
that times a hundred million
thousand not just an albuquerque
but across the state so
I know they think that's another
part of that conversation as to
how we need to wrap up this
whole issue about pure support
and madam chair i've have
mentioned it years ago I think
it's something that we need to
look at for pure support for our
young people too
and i'm talking about those in
the juvenile system as to how we
can help our young people
because many of us may not be
heard they feel they're visible
whatever all the other issues
are bulling and stuff but
I had read an article that also
talks about spear support
development of that.
Kydre of persons that could
actually help and work with
their young people and it's so
important for us right now um in
think you represent a frery for
asking that question about
juveniles and and how
service is that we can provide
and again asset support and as I
mentioned to the chair women's
at executive functioning that
still is in development and how
we can work with them to help
give them I think the proper
tools that can help move them
along with supports of course
but
you know I just think that's
that's another area for us to
look into but that's all
thinking madam chair
thank you and thank you for
presenting and thank you for all
what you're doing it's a a lot
of folks could learn a lot from
what you all are doing there so
I was just talking with zander
some years ago they all run
together I passed the bill that
was regarding diabetes supplies
and it was brought by a patient
who who was unable to get the
supplies she needed for diabetes
at through her health insurance
and she ended up having to go
out of network and pay for so
what this bill does which I I
mean I I it wasn't my idea I
didn't write it I but it said
that uh insurance companies had
thirty days to reimburse the
costs of these and if they don't
then they start paying the
patient interest
so I ask sander to start looking
into that about the m c o's to
see if we can
um you know I i'm I don't think
carrot is quite what we need I
think we need a swift kick in
the pants and so xander is going
to look at that I mean I don't I
don't know if it's legal I don't
know but I i'm throwing it out
into the world that
we are we're not going to take
this anymore it's ridiculous
that i'm i've done medicaid
billing.
It's a pain in the neck and and
so
I don't know how many hours
you're agency spends in billing
but there is no code to get that
time reimbursed correct so so
they make it hard they make you
jump through billions of hoops
over and over and it's out of
your bottom line when your
bottom line is already just
costs up for care so it it
almost feels like we are
intentionally trying to put
organizations out of business
when we're screaming and crying
that we need more behavioral
health
so once again i'm frustrated i'm
cranky and
like what the hope is to say you
won't like me when I may
increase
so i'm leaving with that thank
you so much thank you madame
chairman thanks for this
opportunity and the support of
the whole committee.
Okay
i'm sorry
depends on what can I use your
way
how worse soft shoes so so we
are in recess for this evening
and we will be back tomorrow at
um
probably nine nine am
we didn't have it on the edge we
had on the agenda rate after
much so and I unless my dla
wants to come up and tell me to
act right I think we're done for
the day
oh okay don't confuse me I don't
need help that
thank you so much.
