Equity policy analyst today we
are, um, we will be presenting
on the bilingual multicultural
education advisory Council and
the Hispanic Education Advisory
Council.
I do want to note that the other
three, advisory councils such as
the Indian Indian Education
Advisory Council, the Black
Education Advisory Council and
the federally mandated
individuals with disabilities,
education advisory panel are
still being reviewed, so we'll
be discussing those later on,
um, but today I am joined by
lovely people that represent the
advisory council, so I'll let
them do a quick introduction
before I go ahead and dive in.
So
Mariata.
Uh, good morning, uh, chairs,
uh, souls and members. Uh, my
name is Rita Holgin. I am a 4th
grade teacher from Hatch Valley
Public Schools. um, thank you
for having me today.
Good morning, Maira Maltirez,
and I get to serve as director
of language and culture. This is
the only time I'll stand,
Senator.
I guess I'll stand. Good
morning, everyone. I'm Julia
Rosa Emsley. I'm the Hispanic
education liaison for the
department.
Good morning, uh, Doctor Adam
Almador. I'm the chair for the
Hispanic Education Advisory
Council. Thank you for having us
here.
Perfect. Thank you. Um, so I
will begin with a high-level
summary of the brief. Then I'll
turn it over to Miss Ugin and
Miss uh Valtierrez, where the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act and conclude with
Doctor Amador and Miss Emsley
for the Hispanic Education Act,
um, they will provide further
details about their advisory
councils and share insightful
perspectives about their
experiences, so behind tab 7 of
your binders
is the policy brief that guides
my section of today's
presentation followed by the
bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory council's
presentation.
The policy brief provides the
statutory roles of these
councils. The themes of their
advisements and over the past 5
years NPE's response.
beginning with the bilingual
multicultural Education Act
which was passed in 1973 ensures
equitable access to education by
promoting bilingualism,
biliteralism, uh, by literacy,
cultural identity, it requires
districts and charter schools to
provide culturally and
linguistic responsive
instruction and professional
development to support English
learners, heritage language
speakers, and all students
learning through two languages.
The
advisory council consists of 15
members, including 8 educators,
including one with special
education background, 2 parents
and 5 tribal representatives.
The council advises on
curriculum.
instruction, assessment, teacher
preparation, and family
partnerships. While the council
has recently experienced
vacancies in its membership. Its
role remains critical in
ensuring that bilingual programs
are high quality and culturally
affirming. So over the past 5
years, the bilingual
multicultural Advisory Council
advisements have consistently
centered on three themes.
expanding professional
development and recruitment for
bilingual educators and that's
including the la Priba, um, the
tea for teacher certification,
uh, creating rigorous culturally
affirming by literacy pathways
aligned with statewide literacy
reforms and strengthening
accountability and communication
between PED and school districts
to ensure equitable access.
The Hispanic Education Act was
established in 2010 and admitted
in 2025. Its purpose is to
improve academic and lifelong
success for Hispanic students
while protecting and preserving
New Mexico's heritage, including
the Spanish language and
culture.
The act emphasizes par parental
involvement, community
engagement, and the expansion of
education opportunities.
The Hispanic Education advisory
Council advises PED on
strategies to improve outcomes
for Hispanic students by
statute, it can have up to 23
members representing public
schools post-secondary
institutions, educator
preparation programs, parents,
and historical cultural
community and business
organizations.
With attention to geographic
representation.
The current membership consists
of approximately 20 members
serving at the pleasure of the
PED secretary.
The 2025 amendments include
stipends, mileage, and per diem
for advisory members,
strengthening capacity for
participation.
The HIAC, um, is also, uh, has
focused on establishing the
Hispanic Education Bureau at PED
which was created in 2021 and
has since become a central
vehicle for implementing the
act.
Increasing family and community
engagement, including tools like
NM Engaged and Family
Partnership training, expanding
access to culturally and
linguistically relevant
curricula and professional
development, strengthening data
systems to track demographics,
program access, staffing, and
student outcomes.
While PED has implemented some
of these recommendations, such
as creating the bureau and
updating family engagement tools
council members have also noted
uneven responsiveness, capacity
constraints, and higher
thresholds of proof required
compared to other education
acts.
I would like to briefly share
the direct uh direct legislative
funding the bilingual
multicultural Education Act and
the Hispanic Education Act have
received over the years as
funding levels can determine
whether the council's
recommendations are realistic in
practice, whether programs grow
beyond pilot programs, um, and
whether schools have stability,
sustained progress over year
over year.
So on page two of your brief,
you will find in table 1
that the bilingual multicultural
Education Act has fluctuated
appropriations, for instance, an
FY20, no direct approach
appropriation was made to the
act. however, Ped did receive a
special appropriation which
included a $2.5 million
allocation to support bilingual
programs. More recently,
appropriations ranged from a
significant 5 million in FY 24,
followed by no direct
appropriation in FY 25 and 5000
in FY 26.
The Hispanic Education Act also
experienced limited direct
appropriations. While no funding
was designated in some years, FY
23, um, the A received 500,000,
which increased to 1 million in
FY 24 before declining again to
500,000 in subsequent years.
In summary, both councils play
vital roles in advancing equity
by literacy, family engagement,
and cultural responsive
education in New Mexico.
On page 7 of this brief, you
will find general
recommendations that could
impact advisory council's
effectiveness, including
sustained dialogue with PED
consistent legislative support
and reliable funding.
With that overview, I will now
turn it over to Miss Uin and
Miss uh
al Terrez for the BMEC and then
to Doctor Amador and Ms. Emsley
for the IHA.
Yeah
Good morning, Chair souls and
esteemed members of the
committee. Uh, my name again is
Rita Holguin. I am a 4th grade
bilingual teacher for Hatch
Valley Public Schools. Uh,
currently I'm serving as the
secretary of the uh BME uh BEA
sorry thank you for having me
today. I'm gonna go ahead and
discuss some of our uh bilingual
multicultural education advisory
council.
Um
here we go
There we go. Um, I'm gonna
repeat a couple of things that
Natasha had mentioned, um, the
bilingual education, uh, Act was
in place in 1973, um, the act
does many important things for
bilingual education within the
state, uh, to include
establishing the multicultural
education programs that we have
in our schools as well as the
advisory council that I have the
privilege to speak to you about
today, um, the bilingual
multicultural Education Advisory
Council or BMIAC.
Uh, the bilingual, the BMX
serves many functions with its
primary purpose, being, uh,
subject matter expert groups.
which range from pre-K to higher
ed we have parents, we have um
tribal representation and uh
admin as well, uh, develop
annual advisements for the
Secretary of Education support,
uh, instruction for bilingual
learners, uh, a think tank to
inform the New Mexico public
education?
as a partner with the Language
and Culture division. We work
closely with the LCD, uh, as you
can see
we strengthen educational
programs for students focusing
on multi uh bilingualism,
biliteracy, and academic
achievement. We ensure that
culturally and linguistically
relevant instruction materials
are supporting the BMEPs, uh,
recruitment and retention of
bilingual educators, support
program monitoring and
management, and we create uh
the com and community
partnerships.
The council is not doing all of
these at at once, but everything
the council does should connect
with at least one of these
bullets.
Keeping the purpose at its core,
the BIA strives to function in
practice as a body that is um
dedicated to significantly
impacting and improving BB BMEPs
and outcomes for students across
the state as a council, we
function within bylaws. We host,
um
work sessions with outcome-based
agendas and annual advisements.
Central to the work and our
collaboration with the language
and culture division in the is
the outcome based agenda. Here
you can see that it can be used
as a mechanism to ensure that we
know the outcomes that we are
working towards have connections
to the act and our purpose as a
council provide space for
feedback and collaboration with
the LCD so that we can get
feedback about our work, what is
happening in the division and
specifically about advise
ment s This is especially
helpful, uh, when coupled with
the written advisement's
response that we received from
the LCD.
um
our agendas, um
also provide a post meeting
questions so that we can ensure
that everyone, um, has a
productive meeting, knows what
their action actions are for
their next steps.
Um, a core piece of the work
that we do is, uh, determined uh
to determine the advisement. So
here are some of our advisements
that we have done um in the
previous years, um.
there, yeah, there you go, and
then more more recently is um
the ones that we also, um,
advised in this cycle, this, the
ones that are awaiting the
response, but all of these, um,
advisements, uh, typically
consist of a direct ask
historical context that we
address, purpose, alignment with
the act and the LCD and the
implications to either higher
ed, financial, or any other
implications that we may have.
Um, we include research, um,
data, articles, survey responses
that we get from all of our
stakeholders.
and, um
we also make ourselves available
for anything that we could do to
assist. Um, with the outcomes
and impacts of these
advisements.
As members of the BIMIAC, I feel
privileged to have had the
opportunity to be, uh, to
contribute uh to this important
work being done to enhance and
uplift the bilingual education.
Much of our council is new at
this time. I myself have been on
the council for 3 years, but uh
it is new because we've had
members that recently um served
their full term as per our
bylaws, um, but regardless, I'm
very confident that our new
members, um, will begin to
engage
and bring in their lens and
their expertise into our council
and then we could continue to
thrive for our multilingual
students, um, some of our
recommendations would be
uh, establishing like a calendar
for advisements so that we could
advise when it's still early
enough for the advisement to be
actionable and impactful, um, a
system of dialogue after the
advisement so that as practice
they are refined and adjusted
based on their feedback and of
course membership a support to
ensure that all our stakeholders
throughout the state have a
voice.
And
thank you for having me
Uh, got me out of my classroom
today.
Uh, typical audience would be a
10 year old, so this is a change
for me. Thank you.
Oh, the last slide, I'm sorry,
the last slide I included my
contact information as well as
the current members that we have
on our council.
whomever's driving is going to
have to drive, uh, at one point,
but let's start with the first
two slides.
This is me and Julia.
OK
1 and 2
OK, so these two items that will
cover are related to um the
advisory functions and how both
of these advisory councils are
set up, so I've had the
privilege to work alongside
Julia Rosa to make sure that we
have a structure of some sort to
make sure that we can really
collaborate and really, really
leverage our advisory councils.
So the advisory councils don't
necessarily serve a governance
function, um, but they do
provide advice through the uh to
the Secretary of Education, um.
to the NMPED and then of course
my team or Julia's team, or any
other designee team, um, they
have expertise that we just
don't have in the agency.
They're subject matter experts,
um, and they feel all the gaps
of knowledge, particularly when
we have teachers who are much
closer to our, our kiddos and
then also our parents that get
to um really be part of this
space. So really I like to use
the term think tank, um, they
really are our think tank that
informs us and supports us and
provides um that information.
that we still don't have. So
this is the annual advisement
process.
and does Miss Loin mentioned,
you know, building into this
process additional pieces,
particularly to make sure that
we're following anything related
to the legislative process, so
there's research and review,
there's engagement usually with
any community members sometimes
teacher surveys depending on
what the focus is of of
potential advisement. There's
narrowing and consensus among
the advisory council members,
uh, to make sure that we have 2
or 3, sometimes
just 1 advisement, um, that is
viable. There's subcommittee
work that is done outside of the
work sessions. There's whole
group design as well and then
there's Part feedback from
either myself or Julia Rosa or
whomever is overseeing um the
advisement directly. There's an
advisement delivery to the
Secretary of Education, and then
there's a conversation around
accountability and conversation,
which usually is in the form of
a response from our
teams for um the, the advisory
council.
I think we all do have paper
copies, so you probably can
continue if that works for you
all, OK.
while we work on the technology.
Mr. Chair, thank you for the,
uh, suggestion.
So,
my name is Julia Rosa Hensley.
I'm the Hispanic Education
liaison for the department. I'm
gonna start on page 5. A lot of
what I'll cover in the
beginning, Miss Davalos
mentioned at a high level. So as
you may know, the Act passed in
2010 and then was amended
recently in 2025. The Hispanic
Education Act does 4 things. It
develops educational systems
It encourages parental
involvement. It promotes
Hispanic ethnic identity through
the protection and preservation
of New Mexico's heritage Spanish
language and culture, and then
it promotes community
collaboration between all
stakeholders, um, for services,
resources, support, and to
enhance educational
opportunities for Hispanic
students.
What the amendments did were 4
things.
So the First Amendment was that,
uh, we changed the language from
close the achievement gap to
lifelong learners. Oh, I skipped
one, sorry. Uh, to lifelong
success, um
we, uh, it further promotes the
Hispanic education identity by
protecting and preserving New
Mexico's heritage language, as I
mentioned.
Uh, it established the biannual
Hispanic Education summit. This
year will be the first summit at
Saint Albuquerque and you all
will receive invites
and then it brings parody with
the other acts by allowing for
the Hispanic Education Advisory
Council to receive myage and
perdium.
The act also in 2010 established
the advisory.
um, as, oh, there it is, as Miss
Davalos mentioned, there's 23
members, and they're from all
areas of education and
community, public schools,
post-secondary, um, cultural
community and business
organizations, other business
organizations and interested
persons and parents.
and it says that the secretary,
uh, shall give due regard to
geographic representation.
So the council advises the
secretary on improving public
school education, increasing
parental involvement and
community engagement and then
increasing the number of
Hispanic high school graduates,
among other topics.
So the council must by law elect
a chairperson who is sitting
next to me.
The council may me as necessary,
but at least twice a year at the
summit.
The council advises the
secretary on matters related to
Hispaniced in New Mexico and
members may receive my legend
per diem.
Here are the current advisory
council members, their county,
and how many years they have
served.
We have a seven year in in their
current bylaws we have a
seven-year max to serve.
Here are some of the successful
advicements from this
administration.
um
in 2021, the HA recommended that
the Department operationalized
the Hispanic Education Act.
by developing a bureau, that's
the bureau that I run
and the collaboration there is
with all programmatic and fiscal
divisions and bureaus. In 2022,
um, they recommended arts and
music programming, which I'm
implementing currently in 203,
they recommended um Latinos in
Action Programming.
and also in 2023, um,
they recommended also uh
national partnerships with the
Hispanic Institute and then the
New Mexico High School Musical
Awards programming that we are
continuing to implement.
um, they also recommended uh
parent microcredentialing which
are and badges which are
available on Canvas as courses.
and then they established the
VIP breakfast, which many of you
have attended, um, that kicks
off our annual student
conference, um
first year was in Las Cruces.
Last year was in Albuquerque.
This year we'll be in Las
Cruces, um,
they also, um, advised on the
passage of House Bill 487
which, um, we have the sponsor
here in the room with us and
many of you that co-sponsored
and supported. So thank you so
much for that. And then um the
Martinez and Yazi stakeholder
engagement was another
advisement. And then in that
other column, it just shows you
kind of who we partner with
internally and how some of these
advisements grow legs and also
impact the rest of the
department.
OK.
OK, so, um, I'm on page 12. So
the most recent advicement and
Dr. Amador can talk more about
this during his time, but the
most recent advisement was on
the current Martinez and Yazi
stakeholder engagement and the
um advisory advised on in 4
areas of content design,
location, and regional
suggestions, specific questions,
and then strategies for, for
hosting the engagement.
So, um, let's talk about the
impact of these advisements.
so the Hispanic Education Bureau
conducted our first internal
study. We got about 50, 50%
study participation rate. And
here's what we learned, um, from
this data. We learned that um
students in Hispanic Education
Act programming had higher
ethnic identity and greater
belonging than their
counterparts?
We learned that HEE students
with greater ethnic identity had
fewer school absences, and these
are actual students that are in
our programming that are in the
photos on the slides.
We also learned that HEA
students' ethnic identity
predicted their school belonging
and their engagement.
and so we know that increasing
ethnic identity is a good
strategy for increasing school
belonging and school engagement.
So what does this look like in
graph form on page 17 is the
first graph. So this is the
school belonging where we
compare Hispanic students in HEA
programming to Hispanic
students, not in HEA programming
and you can see that the
belonging rate is higher for
both elementary and secondary.
And then on page 18,
this compares to the national
average. Um, Hispanic Education
Act students in all grades have
a higher ethnic identity rate
than the national average.
And then on page 19
um
this is the graph that
represents HEE students with
greater ethnic identity, having
fewer absences across the 24, 25
school year. So if we continue
this work, we can expect greater
attendance with the greater
ethnic identity. And then
lastly, these are elementary
students that participate in
literacy tutoring in the Latinos
in Action Program. They had less
daily chronic absenteeism as
compared to the state average.
So one of our goals is to
continue to increase ethnic
identity, um, as a key component
to student success.
and so, um, future data
collection for this year and
analyzation that we're hoping to
do. We want to gather and
analyze graduation data now that
we've had programming for 3
years. Our bureau is about 3
years old. I think we can
finally look at graduation data
for the kids that we've had in
HEE programming and English
language arts data.
and then we'd like to continue
to invest in due to this data
that I've just shared with you,
the Latinos in Action, the
Hispanic Arts and Music, the
college and career summer
programming that I mentioned
earlier and then the Spanish
heritage language and culture
work.
Uh 23
OK
So for the bilingual
multicultural Education Act is,
you know, it's one of our oldest
state acts. Uh, we've passed our
fifty-year mark. Um, so just
some data on that on the next
slide, uh, particularly because
believe it or not, sometimes
Julia gets all of my emails, um,
they think she runs language
programs, so just to make sure
we're really clear, um, this is
not specific to eth any ethnic
identity. We have 38,000
students and yes, of course, the
majority are Hispanic students
as they are in the state and
then our second largest group is
Native American students, but we
do have language programs in
ASL, Mandarin, French, German,
Italian, he got apache, Carris
Lakota, Mescalero finally Ridoso
took us up on that offer and
Navajo Spanish Tegutiwatoenzuni
with more coming soon. So this
is really for any student. I
partner a whole lot with our
curriculum and instruction team
because bilingual education
is general education that
happens to be in two languages.
Um, just a quick reminder of
funding that is provided in the
SCG that is separate from the
department dollars that Ms.
Davalos talked about earlier,
um, we are at 52.2 million and
as we continue to add languages,
we expect that to continue to
grow, um, and the funding
awarded to my team helps us with
all of the things that were
mentioned, making sure that we
have work groups, making sure
that, uh, we can support the
advancement of the actual act
outside of
what's in the SCG that I of
course get to hold districts and
charter schools accountable for,
uh, and that includes our
monitoring visits and on-site
visits for continuing, uh,
improvement of the programs and
how they're implemented.
So there wasn't an advisement,
um, that led to an amendment to
the Act that was done recently
and that was to add the advisory
council before that they were
the state bilingual advisory
council. They were ad hoc. They
were not in law. So again,
moving towards um some sort of
parody for our advisory
councils.
um, and they are here to make
sure that they advise on issues
related to bilingual and
multicultural education for all
of our students and they provide
advice to the department on
anything having to do with the
curriculum, the instruction,
assessment, teacher prep,
teacher evaluation, professional
development for our leaders, uh,
licensure student and family
services, so it really is about
the whole system for bilingual
education funded under the Act.
These are current members.
and um yeah, most of them are
brand new, you'll see most of
them have a term of 2028, so we
have turnover after the first
group, um, that was part of the
SBAC before we became part of
the law, um, and had the
advisory council there, so many
of them stayed a little bit to
kinda help us make sure that we
transitioned appropriately.
Um, we have various BMEC
advisory, um, recommendations.
These are some notable items,
particularly since 2021, which
were to develop a Spanish
language arts instructional
scope and sequence, and so I
have a model of that coming up,
and then we did have a dynamic
by literacy framework guidance,
um, to make sure that we worked
with the literacy and humanities
Bureau. Uh, there was an update
to La Preva de Espanol, uh,
which was
funded recently and is going to
be released this fall. So we
just did the review this summer.
It will be released this fall,
and our team is working on
making sure that it's available
across the state and uh easier
to grade, uh, somehow virtually.
So we're really excited for that
and by when I say our team it's
Eastern, uh, New Mexico
University who oversees that
work.
And then the uh advisements most
recently from this summer were
two that will be advanced, we
just haven't had a chance to,
um, share that with our advisory
council until 3 weeks from now.
A surprised. Uh, the Spanish for
heritage language work will
continue for specifically our
bilingual programs that are in
our districts and charter
schools and then the dynamic by
literacy framework content that
we were provided by a couple of
our um members who are no longer
part of the team
will be added or folded into the
structured literacy work.
with the literacy and humanity
sphere.
Um, so yes, one of my huge
partners lately has been the
literacy and Humanities Bureau.
I am very grateful to them and
others in the team that have
made bilingual education their
business, not just my business
and uh they have supported with
things around making sure our
bilingual and multilingual
learners are supported in
literacy and they actually led
the work of the instructional
scope for a Spanish language
arts. So what we were hearing
from teachers is some of us
don't have a scope and sequence
provided by our district or
charter school, particularly in
our rural communities, can we
please have something that we
can really leverage and so that
was the gap that was filled, if
a district or charter school
already has a scope and sequence
and has it all figured out. They
can do their thing, but if not,
just at least provides something
for our teachers.
and it's aligned but separate
and unique from the language
arts English, uh, version.
and was developed independently
and then of course our Spanish
language arts standards are what
define what we do and is aligned
to that work.
So this is like a quick
screenshot of the um scope and
sequence for our Spanish
language arts. Once upon a time
I used to walk into classrooms
and ask what was being taught
and all sorts of things were
happening all over the state and
now that we have standards and
of course scope and sequence,
that's what we can actually look
for or guide teachers towards if
there isn't something really
solid in place, um, particularly
so that it's grade level
appropriate and that there is
productive struggle
and our students are actually
being challenged.
And that's our contact
information.
I guess we'll stand for
questions. We're all done.
Thank you. I was waiting,
wondering whether Dr. Arnodora
was or just here for technical
support and advising. If I can
add a couple of things if you
don't mind. I would appreciate
that, uh, Chair. Um, so I, I
will tell you that the, the work
we've done with the HIA was one
to make sure that we had
statewide representation and
you, you see that, so we're
working very uh hard to do that.
Um, it was a challenge driving
um all over the state, uh, to
get people involved, um, in
education, right? So, uh, quick
trip to Ros
we ll leaving Las Cruces at 3 in
the morning and then going to
Albuquerque and coming back to
Las Cruces to make sure that
that we're reaching who we need
to reach, um, but I, I think the
results are there and, and I'll
use a, a kind of an economic
development thing. Um, education
is economic development, and
when we look at economic
development, especially in
tourism, they call heads and
beds a success. So what we're
doing with the programming here
is, is students in seats where
they're gonna be in school,
they're gonna be learning and
they're they're their progress
is gonna grow
Um, so I will tell you as an
educator who's worked all over
the state, um, really, uh, if
kids can relate to anything, it
doesn't really need to be, it's
an identity thing, right? They
have their own cultures in
school. They'll go to school,
and if there's relatable things
going on in that school, guess
what, they'll show up and
they'll perform for you. Uh, we
call them the Traviaso
sometimes, right? And some of
those traviasos are the gifted
students that aren't being
reached.
And then we began to reach him
in leadership, culture, heritage
language, music, dance, and then
they grow, and, and we've seen
that, um, you know, from
Albuquerque, I was at a Triscoll
Heritage, Carlsbadha, uh, Las
Cruces, Lordsburg, and, and
they, they want to belong to
something and so I'll, I'll
leave you with this, um, uh,
deal that I tell people. How
many of you are Boston Red Sox
fans.
OK, how many, and then, and I
want you to think about this.
How many people are, are Dallas
Cowboy fans or New York Yankee
fans that have never been to
Dallas to see the Cowboys or
never been to New York to see
the Yankees, but they're fans,
and they'll watch the games
religiously, right? It doesn't
matter what's going on. And now,
now with the, you know, Library
of Alexandria here, they'll
watch him at work and we have
kids listening to stuff at
school, so when they're
interested in something, when
they want to belong to
something, they show up, they
participate and they perform
and so when we look at the
Latinos in action, it's a
national program in 24 states. I
said, why not our kids? And when
I mean our kids, I mean white,
black, and Hispanic kids, Native
Americans, they're all
participating in LIA, um, and,
and so when we look at that
some of the parents, uh, that
I've worked with said, why would
my, my white student want to be
in LA? I said, so they know how
to work.
with other people
It teaches them better. It's a
cultural thing, right? Uh, and,
and we have to define what the
land of Manana means. It doesn't
necessarily mean tomorrow in New
Mexico, right? And so these are
cultural things that we we start
learning about one another as
New Mexicans, so we, we, what I
try to do is be uh as inclusive
as possible with all students,
and then we're seeing the
outcomes for that. Um, imagine
in the last year or 2 years, our
students that have participated
in LIE have met Doctor Jose
Hernandez from a million miles
away.
The astronaut, right? Amazon
made a movie about him. uh
Ricardo Montagnes, the Hachiro
guy, he came down to Albuquerque
and, and they got to meet him
and um I brought down Thomas
Vyas from McFarland USA and all
the kids were relating to their
stories, whether they were
immigrants, whether they were
coming from
uh, you know, distraught
families or socioeconomic
issues. All the kids were able
to relate to these stories,
right? And one of the things
that I'm gonna pull from Rodolfo
Anaya is our kids learn in New
Mexico culturally better by
storytelling.
And that's one of the things
that this is enabling us to do
is, is beginning to tell a part
of the story of success,
especially for students who have
never experienced it or never
had the opportunity to belong to
something bigger than they are
and contribute positively in
their communities. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, gonna head to
questions and first, uh, Miss
Holguin, are you at Garfield
Elementary or are you in town at
Hatch Elementary? Um, I actually
live in Las Cruces and I drive
what, 25 miles to Rio Grande
Elementary, the 3rd through 5th
grade school, and I'm a 4th
grade teacher there. Just
wondered. I was principal up at
Garfield, I actually taught my
1st 5 years in Garfield. I love
that. Yes, yes. It took me a
while to find it, but I found
it. Yeah,
um, first, uh, Representative
Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for your presentation.
I support this wholeheartedly
because this is what we talk
about when I mention, give the
kids a reason to come to school.
So I do think that we
need to celebrate all cultures
and all histories, um,
Mr. Chairman, group, we talk
about, you said that the biling
the funds for bilingual flow
flow through through the SCG.
How do we ensure that funds that
flow through under bilingual
units. Some of the money's
filtered into these other
cultural activities to support
that? Do we have a mechanism? Is
there a separate fund or those
or is it up to each district to
take the money they receive from
their um bilingual units to fund
some of these cultural
activities.
I can give it a shot. I've been
deposed and asked this question
many times. Um, I don't know
except saying leadership matters
and we have seen that districts
and charter schools that
prioritize their programs, uh,
we'll prioritize funding for
them, however, in lieu of that,
we make sure that we show up and
do monitoring and that we ask
the questions of how is this
money that is intended for these
students actually being
leveraged that has been my best
bet is showing up and asking
those questions.
um,
because the SCG is at their
discretion.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and that's, that's
kind of my point.
is that if we're talking about
going be others that the funds
that we give to schools through
the SCG, which this committee
and others have been very
supportive of our schools.
How do we ensure that moneys go
to these other facets of
education that will make kids
not only want to attend but feel
that they belong, which in turn
will help.
with the attendance, with the
engagement, so.
Thank you, Mr.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Baca, so what, what we've done,
uh, with the funding through the
HIAC is the way we know it goes
directly to students. We have to
prove that it went directly to
students, right? So when we, we,
uh, we have an event in
Albuquerque, we get a bus, the
the the everything's itemized
and it's sent back to the HEB,
um, and there's an academic
return on that investment. How
many students participated? What
did they go do? What were their
learning outcomes, and they have
to come back and present, right?
So this is
kind of an internal mechanism
that we set up, and the kids,
they perform, they have to
perform or they have to present
art or um anything, right? They
present. And that's how we know
that money went directly to the
students, right? It didn't
create another position. It
didn't, uh, uh, add to someone's
salary. It went directly to
those kids, so you see a direct
line from funding all the way to
the academic return on
investment and that investment,
the ROI there right now is
attendance in schools. And then
you're seeing the data.
it'll start coming up. So the
way Julia set it up, it's, it's
returning, uh, making sure that
those receipts reflect the
investment directly to the
students, right? So it goes all
the way around everybody and it
goes right into the to the
kiddos that we serve.
If I may add, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, I, I planted
him, I think, because what we've
been able to do as we get this
funding that comes below the
line or that is earmarked is the
same thing. So we've done many
sub grants to make sure and I'm,
I'm happy to provide the data on
that. Many sub grants to make
sure that when money is actually
flowing through the department
and has to go through a
reimbursement process. We're
able to make sure that the
funding is actually being used
to advance what's required in
the law
Um, differently than what
happens when it goes into SCG.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and, uh, my next
question, and these are very
kind of closed questions.
based upon the work of this
Hispanic education, do you guys
have any idea as far as the
number of dual language programs
in New Mexico, and if that
number is trending up or
trending down over the last
several years.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Baca, I will look up that data
and I'll get that to you right
away, um, just give me a few
minutes. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and, and Natasha, we
can, we can talk about that
later. The cause my next
question is going to be, Mr.
Chairman, is the number of
teachers that actually are
bilingual certified.
And if we, you know, what, what
we, what we currently have and
how or what efforts are being
made to increase that number to
provide more access to heritage
language, uh, and my final
question, Mr. Chairman, and this
is probably also Natasha is
based upon the efforts and the
work of this group.
What is the number of students
that we see graduating with that
bilingual seal on their diploma.
and uh I think that's an
important thing that we
that's another measure
of success or outcomes or
participation in these programs,
so Mr. Chairman, I know that
you're going to get back to me
with that. So I thank you for
your time and I thank you for
your work.
Mr. Chair, if I could,
Representative Bacage when it
and, and for the rest of the
committee, we wanted to focus on
the advisory councils because
they've been the subject of a of
a couple of discussions in the
last few sessions, so we wanted
to provide this sort of preview,
if you will, to the larger
bilingual conversation we'll
have in October. Natasha's also
working on that, so we'll have
that information for you,
representative, but for the rest
of the committee about the
number of programs, the kind of
funding that flows out, which
school districts are using the
different kinds of bilingual
program, programming. So we'll
have a more comprehensive look
at biling
ual education across the state
in October in Las Cruces.
Uh, next Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, and, and
thanks, John. Um, that just took
away about 50 of my questions,
which I
which I will provide with
Natasha, directly dealing with
the councils, cause it gets
confusing. We have a bilingual,
multicultural, and we have a
Hispanic, um
the first request I have is send
out these outcomes, um, as you
get them, send them out to LASC
members, send them out to House
and Senate Education Committees.
I know people like a
representative, uh, Torres
Valesquez stays much more in
touch, but some of us, um,
Representative Gurola, myself
and others, we've done
legislation kind of often with
the same goals the council have,
but not related. So it'd be
very, very helpful.
um,
to get, we, we are suggesting
this, this and this. So just a
request. um
and then a second observation
is, we can talk about Hispanic
identity, but that's so
different. My husband taught at
Highland High School. The
Mexican immigrants and the
Mexican-American longtime US
citizens would have fights, um,
which I have to, what's the song
that do the Malegua, what is it?
Macarena was very helpful in
bringing them together, which is
the power of Hispanic culture,
but I just, as you look, it's
not just identity, it's there's,
as you know, there's class
issues. Sometimes people think
Hispanics in New Mexico are all
like immigrants and living, you
know, paycheck to paycheck.
Well, I have many rich Hispanic
friends, and I just mentioned
that because there's identity,
but as you all know, there's
complexities that affect
everything we're talking about.
So I just think we have to
acknowledge that um
and so I think every single
other question, uh, Natasha,
I'll send to you because they're
all about next month.
But just thank you, because even
if you get a per diem or
mileage.
This is demanding work, and I
just salute everybody who serves
on the panels of our PED people
that are involved, um, it's just
in light of some of the recent
uh federal handdowns from
various people in the
administration, which are
utterly depressing because some
of them are being implemented or
they're attempting to implement
them. I'm so proud of our state
that we really, really
acknowledge the beauty of our
diverse heritage. So thank you
for everything you do and I'll
give all my questions, but thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Alara.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Thank you for the presentation,
Doctor Amador. It's good to see
you, sir.
I think we need to take a
picture and send it to, to a
mutual friend before you leave.
Uh, I have a question regarding
the advisory councils, Mr.
Chair. So the advisory councils,
what role, if any, do they play
in the selection of the
instructional materials.
for our schools
I can speak to that once upon a
time I wore a Hispaniced hat,
among others, um, so in the
instructional, uh, materials
rule.
there is actually an addition to
it that allows for the Hispanic
Education advisory council and
the Indian Education Advisory
Council. At the time, there was
no Black Education Act to be
able to provide recommendations
for advice, uh, for advisements
towards instructional materials,
particularly those that are
unique to our populations here
in the state, and that's part of
the collaboration that we're
doing through that advisement
with the BMEAC.
Uh, thank you for that because
you know it's, uh, it, it's a
struggle to find especially uh
culturally and linguistically
relevant materials, uh, you
know, it's just not a matter of
translating from English to
Spanish or or or just a matter
of translation and so I was, I
was curious as to what role the
the advisor's councils had in
this because it's, as we all
know it's very critical uh that
uh that we do have that.
option in there and that it is
being looked at and it is being
considered, so that, that,
that's all I have. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you all. Nice to see you all.
It's
it's, um, absolutely wonderful
that you're engaged in the
manner that you are and that we
are elevating, um, our
communities in the manner in
which they deserve.
So I wanted to, I have several
questions
directed to specific persons,
but in general, I wanted to, to
just mention that identity
is important, is critical
as you've mentioned in your
presentations, and it is defined
by the individual and the
individual's lived experiences.
We cannot impose, Mr. Chair, our
definitions
of what identity is. So I
appreciate, uh, that you also
are tapping into Latinos in
Action because their model is
absolutely wonderful and it has
proven success record. So
also they treat identity as an
asset.
and um so when our children come
in that's why I dislike very
much the language you use about
at risk.
and I always try to
remind everybody that our
children are not at risk. They
are assets in the classroom.
They come and bring to other
students who do not have those
same lived experiences, the
beauty of their contribution as
an asset to that classroom, so I
just felt a need to thank you
for elevating that for us. So,
um, Mr. Chair,
I do have a, um
question for Ms. Rosa Julia,
Julia. Um, how are you ensuring
um that Hispanic students and
families are being heard in the
statewide education planning,
and how does that feedback shape
policy and funding priorities.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
thank you so much for that
question
So, um
previously we were collecting
data through only our
programming.
The parents that um have
students in our programming
through surveys and school
visits and sometimes when the
parents were there, we would do
informal interviews with them.
Now that we have the biannual
summit in Law through the recent
passage that you supported of
House Bill 487 that we're gonna
use the summits for exactly
that. We're gonna use parent
voice, student voice, and
educator and community voice to
drive the
work of the Hispanic Education
Act and hopefully to inform the
advisements of the HIAC as well
as inform the work within the
department and other state
agencies as well.
Thank you very much. I look
forward to the result of all of
that and how it's going to shape
our future.
Excuse me, and I appreciate very
much Ms. Orle's uh
participation, and I do have
excuse me, a couple of
questions.
Excuse me
on page 8 or slide 8, Miss
Olgin, um
the council notes that Spanish
as a heritage language.
and the multiple Spanishes that
you noted of New Mexico. So
how are the districts being
guided to implement culturally,
linguistically relevant
instruction that reflects this
diversity
and what measures are used to
assess success in biliteracy. As
you know, we spend a lot of time
distinguishing, uh, making the
distinction and the importance
of biliteracy. Uh, in these last
few sessions. Thank you.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Representative for the question.
Um, this is one of our latest
advisements, and I was not on
that, uh, committee for so we
form um amongst the committee we
formed teams and uh we work on
that advisement, um, that is not
one that I was working on. I'm
not sure I could defer that
question to Ms. Valtirez, and
she has her actual results of
that coming in 3 weeks, he said.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, Royal Caballero. So we, um
currently are working with a few
districts, particularly up
north, um, who are interested in
piloting a Spanish heritage
language, um, program which
would begin with Spanish
acquisition and then transition
into Spanish language arts. I'm
just really honoring the fact
that we're speaking about
multi-generational heritage
learners, uh, and we've been
working closely with uh NMSU and
UNM to learn about their work,
uh, so yeah, we hope to be able
to have some takers in that, uh,
for, for the northern districts.
Thank you very much. That's
really important, so, and that
helps to distinguish and
create avenues for not just our
Hispanic heritage but also
addresses the ethnic
relationships as migration, um
moves into our stay or continues
to bless our state. Thank you.
So I have another question
perhaps um for you, Ms. Holin,
the, the, um, multilingual,
multicultural, um, act
identifies family and community
partnerships as a core function,
as you've noted in your
presentation. So what models of
engagement are proving
effective?
for our Hispanic and bilingual
families particularly where
parents may face socioeconomic
or language barriers to be able
to participate, and that can be
a shared question, uh, whomever
would like to step up and answer
that. It's really important
because that's part of the
assessment and evaluation that
we will use to measure success.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I could
speak from it from my, from the
work that we do in our district.
So I'm from um Hatch Valley
Public Schools small district,
but we do have a lot of, uh, the
majority of our, um, population
is um Hispanic, um, we work very
closely and it's a very small
community, so we are very much,
uh, very close to our families
and we have a lot of engagement
through our social workers
through our principals, and
through, um, you know, being
able to speak their language is
very um
gives them a lot of comfort in
being able to have that door
open whenever they need it. Um,
I'm not sure.
Do you have anything to add
That's OK. That's a good
example.
And that's why it's important
because that can be used as an
example. Small communities are
blessed by being small and
everyone knowing each other, but
that model can be taken and
placed into our smaller
neighborhoods within larger
communities. So thank you for
that. I, um, just have two more
questions, um, actually, maybe 3
because I, I did add one for
Natasha at the very end. So for
Doctor um Amados.
um, in your dual role as chair
and a school leader, what
systemic barriers do you see
to fully implementing the
bilingual multicultural
education across charter and our
traditional public schools, and
you just might want to highlight
a few, not necessarily. I know
that we have the entire system
is problematic, but what are
some uh highlights of the
systemic barriers that you see.
I think it's an understanding of
what that bilingual education
does, right? Um, and, and
there's a saying el quesae
dosiiomas valleordos personas
right? um he or they who speak
two languages is worth two
people and um we celebrate it
when it's the bilingual seal
time, but we don't really figure
it out at the, uh, so I've been
a, a, a leader, um, uh preschool
director, elementary principal,
middle school principal, high
school principal, right? So the
whole pipeline
So understanding its value just
as important at the elementary
levels and middle school because
the middle school's really where
we're losing the kids, right?
And, and the data's there so how
do we strengthen these pro these
the these programmatic issues at
the middle school to keep it a
pipeline through the high
school, right? And then into
college and career. So it's
really creating relationships,
sustainable relationships, uh,
ECED all the way through 20
through the universities, right?
um and giving that, uh,
value of education and so
remember in our communities, uh,
and I will tell you this, I was
getting my doctor and my dad
said porquesta mortificando. Why
are you doing this to yourself?
You could just stay working and
not have to deal with this. And
that's, that's a, a deficit
thinking, but my parents weren't
highly educated. My dad got his
degree years later, however, he
understood the process in doing
that. And, and one of the things
is, do I belong here?
right? Do I see either do I see
and the research is there to
support what I'm saying. Do I
see Hispanic educators? Do I see
black educators? Do I see Native
American educators in the
pipeline at the university? No.
Do we see black, Native
American, Hispanic, uh, uh,
educators as school leaders?
Absolutely not. They're not
there. We're not producing them.
right? And so it's, it's
systemic and institutional, and
if you look at uh Doctor Silva's
work Racism Without Racists.
it's there. The institutions are
built there, um, very, very
difficult for Hispanic Mexican
students, Spanish speaking
students to be successful unless
you have someone that's gonna
tow the line as a leader, right?
So we're looking at teacher
prep, right? Underst
understanding of, of the
programming. We're looking at
leadership. Nothing of what we
do here talks about preparing
leaders to do these programs and
that right there, whether it's
leaders, superintendents, school
boards, advisory councils, or
even legislators.
how, uh, do we have effective
leadership to tow line for the
ax and for the students, our,
our first, uh right, our main
priority so I know that's a lot,
but it is what it is, right? It
is what it is and that's kind of
what's there, but for those of
us that are doing the work,
we're coalescing and saying,
look, let's get rid of the
barriers, right? Most of these
things are policy decisions that
we can just
we don't practice and that would
be restorative and social
justice in and of itself.
Thank you and Mr. Chair, I just
have two more questions. Excuse
me, um, so that was a perfect
segue for my next question for
Ms. Valtierrez. Uh, so how is
PED actually planning to expand
the bilingual education,
recruitment and retention
pipelines statewide, especially
in rural and high poverty areas.
Mr. Chair Representative, can I
skip until that next month? Is
it October, November, um, there
is actually a lot of work
happening in collaboration with
the educator equity Team
division, um, where I would need
to make sure I can answer that
and give you the hard data, but
they have a lot of programs
around that, particularly with
Grow Your Own, and then we're
looking at how do we leverage
the bilingual seal to make sure
that students that have achieved
that credential as part of their
diploma of excellence can be
maybe supported into that uh
role, particularly in um
districts and charter schools
where we have communities with
very unique, um, ways of, of
languaging, um, particularly up
north and in some of our areas
outside of the I-25 and I-40
corridor, um, but I will say
that one thing that we see works
with retention is treating our
teachers well and not just with
money making
sure that they have supports
that they have, uh,
instructional materials, um, and
that their leadership
understands at least the very
basics of how to support
bilingual education.
Thank you. And um
final question for Natasha.
As I was looking through your um
your report, your brief.
I um had a
observation, so in a question,
so from a legislator's
perspective, what gaps have you
identified in the implementation
of the bilingual, multicultural
Education Act and how might the
legislature help strengthen
oversight and alignment with
Yazi, Martinez, not necessarily
Yazi versus Martinez, but
alignment, Yasi Martinez.
Mister Chair, I'm Representative
Roy Ball Club ghetto, um, thank
you for that question. It's
actually a part of my research
that I will be presenting in
October as well. And, um, I will
say that I've been finding um a
lot with teacher preparation
programs when it comes to the
bilingual education, um, just
being bilingual endorsed, what
that actually looks like, um,
but I would love to provide
more, but that is definitely a
question that I could provide a
lot more information on
in October.
Thank you. So it looks, Mr.
Chair, that October's um gonna
be some good reporting, so I
look forward to it all and thank
you again from the bottom of our
heart and all of our communities
for all the work that you're
doing. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Pope
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the presentation, um,
it's been good to see you again,
Doctor Amador, uh, Miss Emsley,
and had the opportunity to go to
some of the summits, uh, last
couple of years and just see.
how the students are motivated
and with what you've talked
about, actually seeing people
that look like them and taking
pride in who they are, their
culture, their history, um, it's
been awesome. I had the
opportunity, uh, with a few
representatives here to go to
go do the technology leadership
high school I know Latinos In
Action is over there.
um, and so much so that I think
they usually have more people,
more students applying than even
the slots, right? So it's been
really positive and I loved what
they were doing there because it
was.
a community school model but
really learning STEM and
technical uh
physics, science, physics,
chemistry, biology, but also
being dual language and actually
providing that dual language
seal as well. It was just
awesome to see these students
and some of these students are
the ones that would leave Van
Buren, head over to Highland in
some cases and just
um not get that support or just
not make it and they're getting
that support there. So I'll try
to be quick. I don't want to
delay us, uh, too long. Um, so I
have two quick questions that we
meet quick, uh, what can we do
to maybe increase um
Latinos in action across the
state in the schools, so more
students have that opportunity
and the second question would
be, um, working within the
advisory councils, um, what type
of collaboration do you have
with the councils within the
Indian Education Act, Black
Education Act, and I asked that
because in a lot of ways I think
there is some intersectionality,
um, even separate from the fact
that someone might be
Afro-Latino and from, you know,
both parts, so, um, if you can
answer those thank you Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thank you
for the, for the questions, um,
funding
So the Latinos in Action
programming started.
with 3 schools, Pecos High
School, Pecos Middle School, and
Albuquerque Technology and those
schools have stayed on. We
unfortunately this year had to
turn away applications because
we were not
so the Hispanic education uh Act
programming is growing, but the
money has not grown, so yeah,
funding would, would be helpful,
um
it seems to be a very, very
popular program as you've
mentioned, the kids love it and
a lot of kids that come to the
summits are in other programs
and then they see the Latinos in
Action kids, and they're like,
can we have that?
So that's the funny thing about
like biography-driven work. The
kids are asking for different
programming. The kids are
designing their own experiences
and Latinos in Action is just
part of like a menu that I'm
trying to, that we are trying to
offer at the state level, a menu
that they can choose from. With
the arts and music, they really
come up with their own stuff. We
have middle school kids that do,
um, corridos. They write their
own music, they compose their
own music
we have other we have mariachis,
we have folklorico which are
very common, but we're starting
to see kids that are doing rap
music, that are doing
Mexican pop that are doing all
kinds of music from all over the
world. So funding would be, I
got off track there but funding
would be great.
to answer your, your next
question, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Pope, um, so we have had
collaboration with um
Black Education Act with uh.
yeah, yeah, we have, and so they
actually participated in one of
our summits in Las Cruces and um
Kimberly, yeah, Kimberly was,
was there and so to your point,
uh, in Las Cruces that one of
the Yazi Martinez, she came in
South me and she says, how do we
collaborate? How do we grow it,
um, COVID kind of gotten a
little bit of that way and then,
you know, people kind of stayed
away from each other for a
little bit, but our, uh, like
you said, there's a lot of
cross, uh, sectionality and
intersectionality in race and I
always tell people, my kids are
white and Hispanic, right? Um,
so we have to figure that out,
but
this is another opportunity for
that to happen, right? Um, and I
will tell you, um, in, in terms
of that I have talked with with
Kimberly on uh bringing in, um,
call me mister.
and call me Mr. is a program,
um, uh, it's a Clemson
University and, and the reason
it happened I was a, uh
a keynote speaker in Atlanta and
the provost from Clemson pulled
me in and said, How do we do X,
Y, and Z in New Mexico. So it's
a program to get
African American black students
into the teaching pipeline,
right? So that was uh call me
mister that program's huge on
the east coast and, and this is
another thing that's how we're
gonna support that, right? I
just happened to, I don't know
why they chose me to speak in
Atlanta for black educators, but
they did, and, and this is one
of the opportunities that came
from it but another thing is,
is, um, do we understand what
it's gonna do for our kiddos,
right? and funding, right? Uh,
who's gonna imple what leaders
are gonna implement it and
that's, that's the challenge
again so funding is huge, but um
the cross collaboration is one
of my priorities this year for,
for the HIA.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the responses, and I
know we've had some
conversations and I really like
once again the fact of talking
about this being inclusive, even
if you aren't Hispanic, even if
you aren't black, being learning
about each other. At the end of
the day, we've talked about
this. We're all gente, right,
so, um, it's just so important.
um, thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
all I have
Thank you, Senator
Representative Gurola.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your presentation and for
being here today. I'm happy that
you take the day off. Gracias
Prestaraquio inda mucho gusto
tenerlosaqui um, uh, I wanna
invite all my colleagues here
to, if you ever wanna be part of
a bilingual seal portfolio
presentation, please attend.
It's a success story of our
students, things that we usually
don't see, um, just let me know.
I'll find a school close to you
where you can be part of the
presentation and, and it's
really, you see that cow
students are doing in reality.
Um, I have a couple of
questions.
When I hear the presentation of
the of the uh bilingual and
multicultural Education Act and
the Hispanic Education Act seems
like there there is different
approach, and I'm just following
up on repreductive Garrett
comment about something we don't
even hear about what is the work
that you are doing. And I'm
pretty involved in this. This is
my line of work. And I, I'm not
aware of some of the work that
you are doing. So, um, that was
my question, especially for the
bilingual education Act,
multicultural Education Act, if
I'm not
mistaken, that was the first one
in the country.
and
I, we don't get to see it as
much so is that because of
funding is structure what is
missing in, in the, in the act.
Thank you, uh, Chair, thank you,
Representative, um, I mean even
when you bring up the bilingual
seal that was
um, our council, our committee
that um
advised on that at the
beginning. I'm not sure I've
been, I'm not sure, um, what
would be missing, but I know
that maybe behind the scenes a
lot of the things like La Preva
was also part of this council.
The SIO was also part of this
council. The as a bilingual
teacher, I teach uh 50% of my
content in English has 50% of my
content in Spanish. Um, I, as a
teacher was missing that scope
and sequence that was of Spanish
language arts and this council,
uh, advised on that and now I
have that standard so that I
could deliver that education,
um, not just grab from every
which way, but have an actual
document, heart document that I
need to follow, that I know that
every 4th grader is getting the
same education all through the
state and my 4th graders are
not, uh, behind any other fourth
graders, so there's a lot of
things that as a teacher I see
um my
c er t ific ation uh, is a
bilingual certification, so I
myself took La Preva. There's a
lot of things that as a teacher
now I see that the council, um,
that I had never heard of until
I was approached to apply to be
part of it, um, have been
positively affected by it. I
hope that helps
Thank you. And, and thank you,
Mr. Shen. That was my point. I
mean, uh, the same story that
you have is mine, but I didn't
hear about specifically the
council until we get approached
to that. So, um, I don't know
if, if there is anything that we
can do to review it, to let me
know. Let us know. Thank you.
Um, I think that the rest of the
questions are being answered. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Torres Velasquez.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for all the great
questions from my colleagues and
thank you all for being here and
presenting your work to us
today. It gives us a better
understanding of what's
happening with the Hispanic
Education Act and with uh
bilingual multicultural
Education Act. Um, these are two
very important acts that um
for many years we're the only
ones in the country, the
bilingual ad was the very first
bilingual law passed in the
country 1973.
1973, right? 73. Historic
and same with the Hispanic E
Act. And so, once again, New
Mexico is leading the country.
Um, I just have a couple of
questions most of my questions
were answered, um, but I, I was
very interested in seeing, um
for purposes of decision making,
what your councils have
recommended in terms of the
advisory plan in terms of the
advisory that you provide. It,
it sounds like, and I could be
wrong, but it sounds like, um,
in many cases there were things
that stood out as a strong need,
and those were worked on
individually or in other cases,
there were funds that were
available and somehow you
were able to tap into through
the connections that you had
some really good funding, and I
would like for, for, um, for
both committees and, and I'm so,
so grateful that both committee
chairs can be here with us
today. Um, really good to have
you here.
But I'd like for you to think
about, um
how you would bring together the
existing research and what is
happening currently in 2025.
to help us in terms of knowing
what it is that you see is
needed because what I've heard
in years past in other councils
is that a lot of time is put
into that and then with other
secretaries, um, it may have
just sat on the wayside.
And I'm really glad to know that
whatever it took
to be heard, that you did that.
And I wanna thank you for that
because of the need. I'm really
glad also to know that in
October, we will have more
information about the bilingual
Education Act, and I don't
remember what other acts we're
going to hear about in October.
Um, but one question that I have
has to do with the funding for
bilingual education, so I'm
hoping that when we look at the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act.
that we get information about
where the funding comes from,
how it is distributed to
schools, how it is evaluated,
how it is monitored. Um, I
heard, um, monitoring of
specific grants in particular
for the Hispanic Education Act,
and I think that's very
important, a very important part
of the process, um, for the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act, I'd like to hear
about both bilingual and
multicultural. And so as um
Representative Roybal Ca
ba ll er o brought up a really
good question about what models
do we use for family engagement,
you all might be developing a
model at your school, um, Senora
Olgin, uh, and, and, and, you
know, we'd like for you to take
a look at what are the pieces
that you use to um
to implement the model at your
site with community because
that's one of the things that
keeps coming up with the
Martinez and Yazi action plan.
Uh, well, two things. One is
accountability, but another is
the community piece, very, very
important.
Um
I would like to say that I am
very grateful for the work the
Hispanic Education Act is doing,
in particular with Latinos in
Action because that's the one I
hear the most about. And I think
it's because it is something
that's funded at the school
level. And so, like Senator
Pope, I've heard great things
from teachers at um at schools
and so in particular, Latinos In
Action is not just for Hispanic
students, but
brings in diversity in um into
the project, including
high-risk students from CYFD.
The project has helped these
kids so much
that maybe they stop running off
from school, but want to
participate in these programs,
and that's huge.
And so, I thank you for that.
That's not something, you know,
that might be a number of one at
one school, but I imagine that
could be happening at other
schools too. So, so numerically,
we may not see the impact, but
in those stories that you talk
about, Doctor Amador, I'm
hearing
the success of what you're
doing. And so I wanna thank you
for that.
Um, so the questions had to do
with funding if we could look at
funding in October and also in
terms of recommendations, um, as
Representative Yanita asked, I
am curious too to know which are
the recommendations that have
not been heard.
that have just sat there in a
list that are needed, and do
they still apply in 2025 because
the Hispanic Education Act has
been making recommendations
since 2011.
and
it'd be nice to look
historically at what are the
ones that we were
that you
were able to pass. Um, the other
question I had
was around the teacher residency
program, and this might be
something for October as well.
Um, in the teacher residency
programs
that are in teacher preparation,
sorry, Teacher preparation of
bilingual teachers. So right
now, a model that we are using
that's very impactful is teacher
residencies, Mr. Chair.
And Mr. Chair, what I'm hearing
is that those teacher residency
programs are so tight that the
teachers do not have the
opportunity to take bilingual
classes.
So, the bilingual education
programs at
some universities
because as a result of whatever
curriculum is happening, those
programs are
are shrinking and shrinking and
shrinking and shrinking.
And the students aren't there
because they are taking other
classes and if we truly need
bilingual teachers in New
Mexico, that's something that
somehow we need to evaluate as
well. What are the classes that
teachers need to take and how
are they fitting
into the current teacher
preparation programs.
And how are they valued
Because sometimes what I'm
hearing is that teachers
experienced teachers are at a
school.
and a new teacher comes in
and they come to their mentor,
who is this experienced teacher
and they ask and they say, I
have a student who only speaks
Spanish. What should I do? And
the mentor says, well, aren't
you bilingual? And the teacher
says, well, yes, but I was told
I should only speak to them in
English.
And so those misconceptions are
very commonly passed down and
then when teachers hit the
public schools, we don't
understand why they're not
teaching bilingually.
And I'm not sure if everybody
caught that, but a bilingual
teacher
not knowing what to do with a
bilingual student
because of the preparation and
instruction they got.
That kind of goes against the
law.
If you look at, at existing laws
with bilingual multicultural
Education Act, and also with
I'll bring up again the
Constitution.
And so, somehow
we need to look at how to fit
all the pieces together and um
so I believe that was
my last question
And it's not really a question,
but so let me turn it into a
question. um
what are you hearing about white
teachers are not.
um, in bilingual education
anymore because they're leaving
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair and Representative
Torres Velasquez, thank you for
that question. Um, you are
right, that will be a part of
our October meeting, um, but
just to give you what I have
been hearing about teacher
preparation programs is that um
you are right that they are,
there's not enough time in the
teacher prep to become
bilingual, um certified is what
I'm hearing and there's also
talk about wanting um across
other um teacher leadership and
in higher educational
institutions where they want to
have something
that uh helps these teachers and
not only um to keep them or get
them endorsed or certified, but
also to help them, um, navigate
systems like that, especially
when they have just uh Spanish
speaking only students or um
other languages and so but I
will be providing a lot more
information on that, and I will
be looking into that a little
more, um, yeah, thank you. So
Mr. Chair, thank you very much.
I do have one last question. Um,
we have an
administration that is
supporting the Hispanic
Education Act. If we were to get
an administration that does not
support
the Hispanic Education Act. Are
there any protections
We have a law
but are there protections
that would keep this program in
place.
and functioning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative
So,
um
in terms of the programming, in
terms of the bureau, there are
no protections currently, we
have 3,
staffers in the bureau, myself
um, an education coordinator and
a business operations person.
The business operations person
is the only person who's a true
member of the agency, uh, my
position and the education
coordinator position depends
solely on the non-recurring
appropriations that you all
um, support or don't support.
And so, um
I mean theoretically this could
be the last time you see me. No,
um, theoretically it could go
away.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair
Thank you, Senator Figueroa
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am
looking at page 10 of Ms.
Holguin's presentation, uh, but
really the, the question is
broad and it's about the um 6
out of 15 vacancies on the beak,
which is huge and 4 of those 6
seemed to be tribal voices or
indigenous voices. So my
question, Mr. Chair, is how does
that hamper your work and how um
how can you
why do you think those vacancies
persist and what can the
structure be changed to draw
those voices in.
Uh, thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, yeah, it's
our senator, I apologize, um,
yes, it's a big problem in our
eyes because we wanna have a uh
very different um points of view
from all through the state, um,
the tribal has always been
difficult in the in the years
that I've been there. I know
that in my 3 years, 4 years, um,
we've had one
um, but I believe it's, um,
it's, we've
continuously tried in different
settings, um, but I think they
have to be appointed by their,
um, elders and that's where the
struggle has been, um, the
vacancies also, you know, the
parents, um, the, for example,
in my, in, in we've had a couple
teachers and this is in addition
to our job. This has nothing to
do with our job. So, um, it's
just something extra, so imagine
for a parent that has you know
multiple children, this is
something extra. We do have a
parent right now on
our council and she brings, um,
a different perspective and a
very valuable, um, higher ed, um
and then also we do have uh a
member from uh Mescalero, and
that's helped bring a different
perspective as well, um, we've,
we, we do try. I know that it is
a public notice. Anybody in the
state can um apply to be part of
the, uh, committee, um, and I'm
not sure, I, I'm not part of the
selection process, but, um, I
know that there has been uh
efforts done, especially in the
tribals.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and, and thank you for
the effort and maybe that's
something the committee can
we have connections, maybe we
can recommend folks to encourage
them, um, but one of the other
gaps
is really important and I don't
see it on either of the
committees or
advisory councils presenting
today, and that is a special ed.
because we have so many students
who are dual qualified in these
categories and in special ed,
and we have school systems that
because of how they structure
things sometimes students are
directed to one or the other
instead of ensuring that they
are provided with both sets of
services and opportunities that
they qualify for. So are you
making similar efforts to try
and get those voices on the
advisory councils.
Um, yes, I mean, there is a
vacancy for that that we could
add for that, uh, so as well is
if if anybody knows anyone, send
them our way.
and the, the last comment, Mr.
Terror is just to ask the
councils to put into your work
plan, if you will, um.
the new licensure levels for
administrators, making sure that
there is some training module
for them on bilingual and
multicultural education on the
Hispanic Education Act. I know
there's some broad ones, but
your voices need to be in how
those modules are created and
and ensure that that training is
happening, um, as well as school
board member training. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. I, I've just
kind of a, a quick question that
came up and it might be
rhetorical
uh
but the comment that you made
that this is non-recurring
funding each year for these
programs
those on the finance committee,
it seems like, you know, it's
only a couple million dollars
that that shouldn't be.
non-recurring, that ought to be
in base budget type of things.
They've been around a while.
They've proven their worth. Why
are we still funding it on a
year to year basis where the
whims of political changes could
jeopardize things. And so if
anybody would like to comment, I
think that's semi rhetorical for
people just to hear who have
influence on the, the overall
general budget. Mr. Chair, if
you don't mind, uh, members of
the committee, I think it, it
really comes down to revisit
what we value
right? And, and I will tell you
the last
um, I've been going up to Santa
Fe legislatively, um, probably
over the last 20 years my dad
was a Vietnam vet and, and from
Grant County and he did a lot of
work but it was in making those
connections and in 20 years of
making those connections, can
you imagine that the House Bill
487 passed with bipartisan
support.
right?
So that means it's, it's
important to everybody. So this
isn't a Republican or Democrat.
I think it's a New Mexico thing.
right? And we visit what we
value in 67% of our students are
Hispanic period whether they're
from Mexico or wherever we'll
just put the umbrella on and,
and that's how they identify. So
I think we visit what we value
and I will tell you it is not
fun to have to come up to Santa
Fe every legislative session and
knock on doors and, and we did
it from our own money like we
we're not reimbursed, right? And
so I think that's something
that's our commitment to the
students of New Mexico is
reaching out to senators,
representatives coming to
present here
um, and, and so I, I, I guess
the question would go back to
you guys. What do you guys
value, right? If if this is
something you value, it needs to
be funded
permanently and that would
protect everything we're talking
about. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other
quickly for a second time
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I
would like to go back to uh
Senator, sorry, she was my rep
and this still is in my head.
Senator Figueroa, uh, comments,
um, questions
um, about the advisory council
composition for the bilingual
multicultural Education Act, and
what I also saw was that the
existing council is all Spanish
English bilingual, participants.
And it's very important that we
recognize in New Mexico
bilingual does not necessarily
mean Spanish English. It could
be an Asian language, and in
fact, many of the students in
many, in particularly in APS
that are still looking at the
remnants
of the consent decree are Asian
students who are having
difficulty getting the services
they need for their children.
And so we need to look at Asian
representation. We need to look
at representation from some of
the other languages that you all
listed that you serve.
And I think that would be very
helpful. And I understand the
technicalities of having uh
Native American representation,
but you might wanna go rather
than to the
actual sites and, and, and
pueblos and tribal lands you
might want to go to the public
schools where a majority of our
students go to school and there
may be families or teacher
experts that might be willing or
very interested in serving in
the BMEA Council. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Any other
if not, thank you all, thank you
for taking time and coming all
the way out here to gallop to be
with us. That was very helpful
and very informative, and we
look forward to lots more
information when we're down in
Las Cruces and uh visiting some
of the, the details and
specifics.
Yes, or senator, uh
representative. I'm all lost
today. Thank you for the, um,
thank you for the presentation
really quick. So for October's,
we also, so I'm on has
appropriations. There's a couple
of us. We need data that says,
what is, is working right, where
there is success, so we can make
this recurring. So anything you
can bring in October with data
that proves that this is very
successful
Um, that's what we need
OK. Thank you
Thank you, and we'll now
transition, I think, uh, Izzy is
here to give us the consensus
budget
estimates and things as we know
at at this point.
I get to brag a little as Izzy
is coming up, I was his
elementary principal in Conley
back in Las Cruces back in the
past and so, uh, we have a very
successful person who now works
for us at the state level, so.
I wish I could take actual
credit for his success. I don't
think that had much to do with
it, but
but I knew him when.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, we are now on item 8
of your binder with the brief
title General find Consensus
revenue estimates, uh, my name
is Daniel and I cover public
school finance for the LESC.
My name is Ismael Torres. I'm
the chief economist for the
Legislative Finance Committee.
So, Mr. Chairman, we have a few
new members on the committee who
are both either new to LESC or
new to the body in general. And
so really quickly before Izzy
presents, I just want to mention
similar to how Chair Soul said
yesterday, we are now in the
beginning stages of the LASC
budgeting process. Traditionally
in the past, Izzy's been the
informal start to that process
and every meeting until from
now until the session, you'll
have a separate dedicated budget
presentation from me around your
priorities for FY 27. So that
process will begin in October in
Las Cruces with some preliminary
considerations for you all,
followed by a more comprehensive
overview of budget
considerations in November, a
more formalized final document
in December and the final
document in January. So I
he's here to kick off that
process for FY 27.
Awesome. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chair and uh members. I, I know
that this may be the 2nd or 3rd
time for some of you hearing
this presentation. So I'll try
to keep it fresh. I, I'll mix in
some new, um, statistics to see
if you can catch them, maybe,
maybe keep it interesting. Um,
I'll be speaking to the Money
matters. I hope you have a, a
printed version in front of you.
And, um, separate handout that
should look like a map of the US
that I'll speak to at the end as
well, um, and, and um, Mr.
Chair, I'm sure you can, I, I
absolutely learned a lot from
you at Conley and I'm sure you
can still school me in
statistics if, if, uh, if I, if
I ask you to.
So starting with page one. I
really have 3 takeaways for you
all for this presentation. One,
it's the amount of money
available to you all in the
coming budget year. That's $14.1
billion or maybe more in
directly to the point we're
estimating $484 million of total
new money. Now to put that into
context for you in terms of
previous years, it's about half
as much as it was last year.
Last year was about 892 million,
which was half as much as the
year before, about 1.6
billion, which was half as much
as the year before, about 3.2
billion. So you can see the
slowdown in in recurring
revenues, but also that's being
matched with growth and
appropriations and so that
shrinks the amount of available
revenue you have to expand total
spending each year.
And this is something we've been
predicting for many years now,
and we're seeing it come to
fruition. So that's number one,
the total revenue amount, some
context around that, um, and
then number 2 is the economic
forecast and what I have been
describing as mixed signals from
the economy. Um, when we
prepared this revenue forecast,
we actually started in July. And
at that time, the national
forecasters weren't fully baking
in the impacts of federal policy
changes. They were making
assumptions, but they have to
get out their forecasts ahead of
time. And so, um, you know, you
all know that it wasn't signed
until early July and so the
forecast that we built this
revenue estimate on don't
include the entirety of that. Um
and I can speak a little more to
that here in a second. But what
we've since seen since July are
mixed signals. What I call sort
of yellow flags, not red flags,
not green flags, just yellow
flags. And what I've heard some
national economists, which I
really liked, coined the term or
the phrase a nervous economy. So
what I'm, I'm hoping to convey
to you all is the nervousness
that we're seeing in the economy
today.
And then third, sort of, uh, the
third point I'm hoping to convey
sort of related to the
uncertainty in the economy, but
that's really federal policy
changes and how they are
affecting both our revenue
outlook and then maybe to a to a
certain extent, um, you know,
tax changes, um, tariff policy,
economic outlook as well. So
general uncertainty and federal
policy changes that are also
injecting uncertainty.
So staying on page one, the, the
top table here shows total
revenue growth, but I want to
draw your attention to the chart
at the bottom of page one. And
there's a little bit of a
confusing story to tell here
when it comes to revenues in the
previous fiscal year FY 25, you
can see that revenues were
higher than expected, 3% higher
than expected, 4.6% or our
growth was 3% higher than
expected. We were estimating
1.6%. It came in at 4.6%. But
what we're seeing in, in the
following years is less grow
th than we had originally
estimated last year. So we are
downgrading our growth
expectations from 2.6% to 0.4%,
3.5% to 2.9, and what you have
is some offsetting impacts that,
funny enough, actually bring us
to about where we thought we'd
be a year ago for the budget
year in FY 27. So if you look at
the top table, you see the beige
line there is what we're
estimating this time around is
your total revenues available,
FY 27 is the budget year, $14.1
billion but if you look at the
line above that, 17 million,
that's really the
change from last year. We're
only really estimating $17
million more this time around
for the budget year than we did
a year ago. And that's because
of that offsetting sort of
growth expectations.
Um, I, I want to add something
here that I'll get into more
later. Um, not only are
recurring appropriations
becoming an increasingly
important part of the budget, of
course that's always an
important part of the budget,
but non-recurring appropriations
have grown tremendously. Uh,
maybe 5 years ago, a good year
for non-recurring spending might
be around $200 million say. Now
we're pushing $3 billion a year
in non-recurring. It's over 33%.
It's over a third of total
spending in any given year is
now on the non-recurring site.
And this, this becomes
important when considering the
way that we do non-recurring.
Traditionally, maybe 5 years
ago, non-recurring spending was
in the current budget year. So
you'd come in during the
session, we're in FY 26 now, and
you would spend FY 26 money on
non-recurring uses. Usually it
was money that you got in the
last year over expectation. And
then the future year, the, the
one that we're estimating the
budget year was only purely for
recurring spending. That
paradigm has changed and the
non-recurring has become so
large that you're
spending on recurring into the
future year as well. So it used
to be the case that you would
estimate, we would estimate
revenues, and you would spend
some amount on recurring
appropriations below that
amount. You come in the next
year, and if there was a gap
left, you would use that on our
non-recurring spending. But now
that gap already preemptively in
the future is being spent on
non-recurring as well. So
there's not a lot of cushion.
You, you're actually spending
100% of your future paycheck
expected, which is sort of a new
phenomenon in the last um
several years. And I'll, and
I'll speak to that, um,
more on page two, if you will
turn to page 2, we have what we
call a general fund financial
summary. This is sort of a state
balance sheet. And this is an
abbreviated version of that in
the middle of the page here. And
you start with your revenues,
you know, I, I'm sure a lot of
you, um, with all kinds of
financial experience, know your
balance sheet starts with your
revenues, and then you spend
your revenues, and then you end
up with your bottom line. And
you can see that you already
spent last year almost 100% of
the revenues in this year. You
have about $80 million left of
GAP.
between your expected revenues
above total appropriations
recurring and non-recurring. So
that just speaks to that sort of
what what feels like a
treadmill, you're spending into
the future. If, um, you have to
keep spending into the future if
you want to maintain your
current levels of spending
because there isn't enough money
in the current year. So that's
something um new that we're
seeing, um, in the last couple
of years. Reserves, we are
estimating that we ended at
33.9% in FY 25. We have not
really closed the books on that
yet. New Mexico unfortunately is
one of the last states
to close our books on the
previous, um, fiscal year and
what we're seeing since this
revenue has come out, or this
revenue, um, estimate has come
out, is that reserves are likely
to be significantly lower than
that once the final true up and
audit happens, um, especially
with respect to emergency
orders. So as more of those
emergency orders go out, um,
that reserve level will continue
to drop. And in FY 26, we're
estimating before those changes
at 36.4% reserves. Um, that's
also before spending in the
upcoming session, so that
reserve amount will drop as
well.
in addition to any executive
orders that spend down reserve
balances.
OK, moving on to the economic
forecast. Uh, if you look at the
chart at the bottom of page 2,
these are our, um, expectations
for GDP gross domestic product.
This is a measure of economic
activity, nationally, and you
can see where we were last year
compared to this year. We have
much lower growth expectations
in the current year. We're
seeing, we actually had negative
GDP growth in the first quarter,
um, some large GDP growth in the
second quarter really advanced
purchasing as consumers, um, try
to get ahead of tariffs. We saw
it especially in um the auto
market, but we also see our
growth expectation to pick up a
little bit more than expected in
2026 and then slightly less or
about the same in 2027.
If you turn to page 3, you can
see how that translates into our
expectations for New Mexico's
employment forecast, and it's
downgraded. And this is where I
want to spend a little bit more
time on, on the yellow flags, on
the mixed signals, on the
nervous economy, um, concept,
and, um, this really starts with
the labor market. This is
something, of course, of, of,
um, um, strong focus for us as
your economists. Over the last
12 months, the US had pretty
stable, solid, what I would, I
would describe not as stellar
but solid, strong
job growth, averaging about
150,000 new jobs every month
nationally. In the last 3
months, that has kind of gone
off a cliff. And we've seen that
150,000 dropped to just 35,000
new jobs created each month on
average over the last 3 months.
And what we're seeing is
revisions to these estimates.
This is a typical practice. What
you might have from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics is a
collection of data nationally.
Maybe they get 50% response
rates in the first month, and
they'll report that job figure.
And then
in the next month, more will
trickle in and so they'll revise
the past month. And then
finally, 3 months later, they'll
complete the, the, the months
from 3 months ago. And what
we're seeing is those revisions
are going down. And that in and
of itself can be an indicator of
where the economy might be
headed. When the economy is
expanding and we get just 50% of
job respondents, we might assume
the other 50% are hiring at the
same rate. But when that extra
data comes in and we have to
revi revise it upwards, that
means the economy was doing
better than was expected, but
we're seeing the inverse
now, where we get the 1st 50%,
we, we assume everybody's hiring
at that same rate. We get more
data and we find out, oh no,
that's not the case. It's
actually less than we were
expecting. So those downward
revisions can be in and of
itself an indicator of an
economic direction, and we're
seeing those come down every
single month, which is of course
a worrying sign for us, um, as
well, and, and very exciting
we'll get new jobs figures
tomorrow, very exciting to me,
maybe not to everybody, but very
exciting to me tomorrow, new
jobs figures, and we'll see the
revisions to the last 3 months,
and we're so close to
0, we're going to be watching to
see if that goes negative, if
we've actually had job losses in
the previous 3 months. Um, pre
prelim preliminary employment
data that came out yesterday
suggests that we might have a,
um, just scraped by and, and
missed going negative, which is,
which is good news for the
economy, um, but maybe, maybe in
the ballpark of about 50,000
jobs, that's coming from ADP,
uh, uh, nation, a national
payroll service provider. So we,
we may not see negative job
figures just yet.
OK, moving on to to CPI or or to
inflation. This is also a, a
huge area of focus if you're
trying to look into the crystal
ball, inflation is an important
part of that, um, story. And
when we published this estimate,
we had already seen inflation
creeping up to about a 2.7%
annual rate. Um, the latest
figures show core PCE, which is
the Federal Reserve's preferred
indicator, approaching 3%. So to
give you some context, in April,
it was 2.4%. So we're seeing
inflation
going in the wrong direction.
We're seeing inflation pick back
up rather than continue to cool
down as it had been over the
last several years, 2 or 3
years, and, um, you know, that
the monthly rate is picking up
to about where it was in 2023.
So inflation heading in the
wrong direction. We expect
inflation to continue to rise as
tariffs trickle through to the
economy. We don't think that
that's fully been priced in yet.
So we, we are expecting
inflation to get slightly worse.
Um, some other new, uh, economic
statistics are the job openings
report, which just came out
yesterday. We had, we're seeing
for the first time since before
the pandemic, there are fewer
jobs open in the economy than
there are people looking for
work. So over the last several
years, ever since the pandemic,
there were more jobs available
than there were people looking
for work. That's flipped. There
are now less jobs available than
people looking for work. That's
not a good sign, um, for people
trying to, trying to get a job.
All right. Anything else here?
I'll, I'll get more into some of
the other risks shortly, but I
think, I think I'll wrap it up
on page 3 for now. I'm moving to
page 5, actually, you'll skip
over with me. The oil and gas
outlook is um significantly
changed in a couple of ways.
First, of course, is prices. We
ended FY 25 about where we
estimated a year ago at $69 per
barrel, but in the future year,
that's the, the current year and
the budget year, where $7.50
s lower or $10 lower than we
were a year ago. And that's
really significant, as I'll get
into shortly because of its
revenue impacts, um, for New
Mexico, but $10 lower in the
budget year, that's
significantly less revenue
coming into the state. And I'll,
I'll get into it a little more
shortly, but that also
translates into a, a changed
expectation for oil production
on the whole, over the next
several years. We expect that
flattening to occur much sooner
and the growth to be much more
muted in the near term because
of those low prices that put
pressure on, on oil and gas
producer
r s Something new that's maybe
more to the positive this time
around is the natural gas
forecast at the bottom of page
5.
as many of you all know, uh, a
lot of New Mexico's natural gas
is an associate product when you
drill an oil well, you get a lot
of oil, but you also get a lot
of natural gas with it almost as
a byproduct. And what we see
with an oil well is it peaks
very quickly within 3 to 6
months, and then it drops off
very quickly thereafter, but the
natural gas it is does not
decline as rapidly. It peaks,
and then it has a much slower
decline and it stays at
a a much higher, more elevated
level. And so we're expecting as
a lot of these oil wells mature
over the last really, uh, 67
years, natural gas production
will stay high, and so we
actually expect for the first
time, natural gas production
does not peak in this forecast
along with oil. So that's
something interesting if, if
you're a oil and gas wonk like I
am. Um, turning to page 6 now,
I'll move on to the grosser
receipts tax expectations.
Uh, a couple of notes here. The
pie chart at the top shows our
general 1/3, 1/3, 3, um, of GRT
activity, a third coming from
Bernalillo, a third coming from
Eddie and Lee, and a third from
the rest of New Mexico, more or
less Masoinos, and then, um,
where that growth is coming from
at the bottom, sort of table uh
at on page 6. It used to be
mining that led our gross
receipts tax growth over the
post-pandemic 3 years, maybe
2023, starting in 2024, that's
declined pretty significantly in
terms of its rank in, in, in
overall growth for New Mexico
we're now seeing construction
leading the pack as well as
professional scientific and
technical services. Those are
really, um, the source of our
GRT growth currently.
Um, turning to page 7
I want to touch a little bit on
the chart at the bottom here.
And this is part of the
insulating mechanisms that you
all have put into place with
respect to oil and natural gas
revenues. You heard me talk
about $10 and less, uh, uh,
expectations for price of oil
over the next several years.
Usually that would, uh, mean
significant general fund revenue
cuts or in terms of our
expectations, we'd be expecting
large decreases in general fund
revenue, but you all have put
into place these revenue
insulating mechanisms that say
basically
the first chunk goes to the
general fund, the next chunk on
top of that goes to the servants
tax permanent fund and then the
chunk on top of that either goes
to their early childhood trust
fund or the behavioral health or
Medicaid trust funds. And so
whenever you have a decrease in
oil and gas revenues, it hits
those funds before it hits the
general fund. So what it, what
you'll see in FY 23, we, we had
a peak year for oil and natural
gas revenues coming to the
state. And we've actually
experienced declines over the,
the subsequent 3 or 4 years now,
and we haven't seen a cut to the
general fund. Despite that,
because of these
insulating mechanisms. So
they're working as intended is,
is what I'm hoping to point out
there.
Um, turning to the next page,
briefly at the top of page 8,
this is the general fund revenue
growth by source. And what is
really incredible to see is
interest. It's labeled here as
interest, but it's also
investment income is powering
the general fund's growth into
the future. So all the
investments you all have made
into trust funds and the
permanent funds are now coming
back for spending, and they're
actually the fastest growing
part of the general fund, which
is good news because they're
also the most stable source of
revenue in the
general fund. So we won't expect
them to decline as quickly as or
as drastically. So, um, that
gives me comfort, um, when I'm
doing these estimates and seeing
where we're projecting the
growth to come from.
OK, uh, moving on to page 9, the
chart at the top of the page
here shows, um, recurring
personal income tax cuts over
the last 3 years only, almost
half a billion dollars there.
That comes, uh, that will be
important as I go go further
into this presentation, but it's
important to know that a lot of
the revenue has been returned to
New Mexicans. A lot of this
revenue strength has been
returned to New Mexicans through
through personal income tax
cuts, but also not shown here
gross receipts, tax cuts as
well. Um, at the
bottom of page 9, we have the
film tax credit forecast. This
is a source of volatility for
us.
The these credits are paid to
film companies for their
activities, oftentimes a check
is written and given to those
companies. And so they can, they
can vary greatly year to year.
And what you'll see is a a sharp
drop in FY 25 where we actually
had expected an increase, so we
had a lot of film companies in
the pipeline, they'd already had
their credits approved. We knew
they were coming and we expected
them to
claim it in this year. And then
they did. And so what that's
happening, what, what that has
translated to is more money this
year than we expected. So of the
$390 million of extra money we
collected in the last year,
about half of that was just
because film tax or film
companies didn't claim their tax
credit on the timeline we
expected. So that's not exactly
money in the bank because we
still have that liability
outstanding and we've shifted it
into the next year. That's that
spike you see in FY 26. So a
large source of volatility for
us here in the, in the cor
po rate income tax forecast
Moving on to page 10
um, really, the box on the left
here, the text box, this is the
greatest source of volatility,
um, for New Mexico's revenues,
oil and gas prices and volumes.
That's been the case. It's, it's
still the case. And what you can
see is a $1 change in the annual
price of oil has an almost $57
million impact for New Mexico.
So you can see how a $10
revision downwards could
translate to about $570 million
in less revenue expectation from
this year compared to last year.
So
a significant, um, decrease in
total revenues collections
expected and that still remains
our largest, um, um.
um
source of, of, of concern going
into the future of volatility
and, and potential risk. Moving
on to page 11, a couple of
interesting charts on the right
here. um
these are often called breakeven
prices at the top. This is what
price do you need as an oil
producer, as an owner of an oil
well to keep your well
operating. This is not a newL,
this is an existing well. And
the red bar is Permian Delaware,
$33 a barrel. That's good news.
That's, that means we have a
long way to go before people
start shutting in their wells
and immediately stopping
production. But maybe more
interesting and relevant to the
conversation today is the chart
at the bottom. This is what
price do you need as an oil
producer to drill a new well.
to get new production. If you
remember that steep drop off
curve, you have to keep drilling
more and more wells just to keep
growing production and the
survey respondents to this
Federal Reserve survey said on
average $62 a barrel, which
today I think we're sitting at
$63 a barrel. We're very close
to that, to that point. And of
course there are producers above
that amount that cannot
profitably drill a new well, um,
at $62 a barrel. And then there
are some folks who can still
drill property profitably in UL
below $62 a barrel. So we have
fewer and fewer people who can
profitably
drill a new well, which means
our growth expectations for, for
oil production are much smaller
than they were previously.
Moving on to uh page, I'll skip
over to page 13 here
A lot of this work was done for
the, um, federal revenue
Committee and this is how
federal tax changes trickle down
to New Mexico's tax structure.
So, um, you all may remember
that New Mexico's personal
income taxes and corporate
income taxes piggyback off of
the federal tax return. So you
do your federal tax return, we
take a, a line off of that, and
that's your starting point in
New Mexico and some of the
federal tax changes will shift,
will change what line
we grab from. And we're
estimating those impacts here on
this, on page 13 graphically,
um, with a low and a high or, or
a, a best case, worst case
baseline scenario. And then just
on average, an annual average
impact in the table at the
bottom, and we're estimating the
largest of those impacts to come
from the increased standard
deduction, no tax on car loan
interest, and then the increase
in the state and local tax cap
or the salt cap as it's
frequently called.
And then there are many, many,
many other changes to business,
um, taxes that we've kind of
accumulated here as all other
changes and that of course
changes to Medicaid and
state-directed payments, also
having a negative impact on our
revenue collection expectations.
I should clarify that this is a
revenue presentation. So these
are estimates to our revenues
and then of course separate in
in addition to this, there are
impacts expected to
appropriations, whether through
SNAP or Medicaid or what have
you. So these are just to our
general fund revenues.
And what we're estimating is an
annual average loss of about
$206 million a year, but we
certainly don't think we're,
we're finished with this
analysis. There's a lot more
work to do here. It could be
when we stress these, you know,
when we really push them, it
could be as high as $300 million
of losses a year, or maybe as
low as $125 million of losses a
year. So we're still working on
this, but this is our, our
current and, and first crack at
it.
OK, turning to page 14 and 15,
we do a stress test on, on the
revenues every year and try to
compare those to our current
spending levels. So the stress
test is on page 15, and as I
mentioned earlier at the
beginning of the presentation,
you're spending recurring and
non-recurring, um, into the
future now. So if you have a
revenue decline in the current
and the future year, you may
have less revenue than you've
already obligated. And so what
what amount might you need to
make up either through
appropriation reductions,
spending cuts, or cash on hand
to to keep paying your bills
that you've already promised to
pay. And we're, we've charted
that for you on page 14. We're
estimating that in this case,
which is a low oil price
scenario, a decline in oil price
and production, you could have
1.16 billion $1.16 billion of
appropriations above revenues in
FY 26 and 1.6 billion in
appropriations
above revenues in FY 27 for a
total of $2.7 billion. And
again, that can be made up with
either cash on hand to keep
paying the the bills that you've
promised to pay, or you might
have to do some combination of
that with spending cuts to get
to that $2.7 billion target.
And then uh moving on to page 16
just a couple of notes here, um,
we, we do something called a
trend analysis. This is also a
national best practice to see
how far we might be deviating
from the trend. We are very
close to trend, which um gives
us some sense of security and
certainty because if you're far
from the trend, of course, um,
you must revert back to it,
which often can result in a, in
a large loss in revenues if
you're far above the trend. But
what you can see is, we probably
are above the trend, except for,
uh, uh, the tax cuts that have
been provided
d back to New Mexicans. If you
look at the pit revenue, you can
see that the total personal
income tax collections, that's
Pit personal income tax
collections are far below the
trend, and that's really because
of those personal income tax
cuts. So the total general fund
revenue trend might be above,
above trend had those cuts not
not been put into place. And
then, um, here at the bottom of
page 16, you have your reserve
balances, um, you can see that
they were very high in 22 and 23
as revenues kept coming in much
stronger than we had
anticipated. They've since come
back down to 33
% and then, um, we're expecting
them to be below 34 and 36%. I
want to add here that there are
a couple of funds in the
reserves that are counted as
reserves that are not true
reserves in, in the sense that
they are not liquid, um, they
are, um, the Grow Fund, which is
actively being spent and the
behavioral Health Trust Fund,
which is invested aggressively
and not in liquid assets. And so
that makes up about $800 million
of reserves, or about 8%. So
when you see these reserves
percentages, you're thinking
34%, maybe um
26% of it is in liquid assets
and could be accessed quickly.
That's important to keep in
mind.
And then lastly, I want to
transition to the handout, the
map, um, that was provided to
you all as well. um
this is, um, hopefully to say
that
we're, we're not intentionally
being pessimistic, because this
is a Moody's analytics, uh,
estimate state by state analysis
of specifically revenue shocks
related to the uh recession
scenario. So this is not a low
oil price scenario which we're
estimating would be more severe
than a recession scenario for
New Mexico, and they're
estimating that New Mexico's
revenue losses would be worse
than 24%. We, we would lose more
than 24% in a recession
scenario. They don't say how
much. Um, we think that it's
much less than that, maybe 16
17% on a recession scenario. Um,
but they are also estimating
that we have enough cash on hand
to weather this and, and we
would agree with that, um, with
our current reserve scenarios,
but I just wanted to provide
that as context for what other
folks are, are stress testing
and seeing for our state
revenues and how we stack up
compared to the rest of the
country.
OK
I know I went fast through that,
but I, uh, uh, happy to take any
questions that you might have
now, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Izzy. Uh, and I've
got one person on the list now,
so let me ask, and you've heard
me ask these questions before,
um, I'm looking at, uh, towards
the back.
one of your, uh, sheets on the,
let me see if I can find the
right page number for everyone.
Uh, what is that? Page 28, which
is one of the things in the
back.
Over the last 25 years, the
general revenue estimate has
been underestimated 17 out of 20
years. That doesn't sound like
that's a good average. It ought
to be half times above and half
below. So on average, we are
underestimating from that group
by about 5%. Why should we as a
legislature, not just assume
that you are 5% wrong this time.
when we're making our things
most of the time, this ought to
be, like I said, half above,
half below so that we make the
determination how
uh, how conservative we want to
be, where it sounds like the
estimators are being
conservative on our behalf
before we get a chance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh I
appreciate the question. This is
something we actually think
about and argue about a lot in,
in the consensus revenue
estimating group. And um
I would say that opinions fall
on both sides to to your, to
your question. And, um,
ultimately it's the job of the
group to hash it out to what we
think the ultimately the most
likely figure is going to be
regardless of higher or lower,
just where we think it ought to
be. Um, I, I think that uh the
points well taken and we have
actively tried in the last
several years to
um, um, be maybe a little more
aggressive with our revenue
estimates. And, and it's paid
off for us to, to your point.
Um
over the last several years
states across the country have
experienced a revenue boom, um,
that was really unexpected. I, I
mentioned this to you in, in the
previous committee. Um, we
actually
were the
closest estimate in the country
for the last several years. We
really went out on a limb and,
and thought we were being very
aggressive by estimating 12%
revenue growth two years ago.
Uh, we were estimating the
highest in the country. It was
like 4 times what everybody else
was estimating and some states
were estimating revenue
declines. And we missed it. It
was 20%. We missed it by a lot,
but we were the closest in the
country and we actually beat the
federal Congressional Budget
Office on their, um, forecast
expectations as well. So we are,
we're always actively reviewing
our, our forecasting models,
trying to improve them.
and what that has meant lately
is, is bringing them up,
adjusting them higher, um, and
we, we're seeing that pay off in
the, in the most recent years,
22 to 3%, which is um a really
good error for us, but, um, to,
to your point, absolutely
there's asymmetric risk on
asymmetric risk on being to the
to the down side versus the
upside. There's certainly a lot
more to lose by being too high
than there is to being too low,
but that's your old's job as as
policy makers to appropriately
balance those risks.
Thank you. And again, my concern
is the estimators look like
they're taking the risk in what
they're telling us it's going to
be, which, and it looks like out
of the, since 2018, we have
underestimated every single
year. There's never been a year
where we have overestimated even
by a little bit during that
time, which makes me suspect
that each year the numbers we're
getting, we ought to upgrade
them by about 5% because that's
what historically has been there
based on the actual data. Um, so
just concerns about that. I may
have some other questions
towards the end. Uh,
Representative Garrett.
thank you so much, uh, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Uh, Izzy and
Daniel, um
year by year I'm getting
demystified on all this stuff.
So thank you for being
consistent. I, I have a question
though about this whole tariff
issue. So on page 3 it says
however these estimates
expected, uh, effective tariff
rates of about 10% which have
recently been surpassed and on
track to approach 15% higher
tariffs and higher inflation
remains significant risk.
We're already seeing in our uh
diversification of their
economy, the border has been
incredibly helpful, so already
two companies who planned to
locate there have not because of
tariffs on stuff coming from
East Asia, from Mexico, can you
just talk about that tariff
because and, and where, you
know, we'll hear from the feds
that we have $4 billion in
tariff.
Where, who is really paying for
the tariffs because we're
definitely paying for it in our
border business stuff.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
um, a a lot to unpack there. I
think, um, first, starting with,
with who pays the importer pays
the tariff. And so, um, that
will typically be passed on to
the final purchaser of the good,
whether that's a consumer,
consumer or business, and then
if it's a business, whatever
business there, um, um,
uh, operating and will likely
pass it on as well. Um, what we
we're seeing sort of at, at the
beginning of this, um, um,
tariff journey that we're on is
that uh there were businesses
who were choosing not to pass it
on. So there was, um, maybe some
hope that tariffs would be
temporary and that um they could
maintain business share by
simply taking lower profits in
the short term. Um, what we're
seeing in the longer term is
maybe that's not the case and
and more of that tariff will be
passed on over time.
and we're seeing the effective
tariff rate approach closer to
15%, and we don't think all of
that's been passed through yet
in terms of prices and
inflation, and we think that's
coming.
What I would add to the, um,
business investment or
environment conversation is, is
maybe perhaps more impactful
than the tariffs themselves or
the uncertainty around the
tariffs. What can be a major
inhibitor to business investment
is, is expectations that they
could change and whether or not
they do change. What we are
hearing is a lot of folks, um,
putting investment plans or
building a new factory on hold
because they don't know yet if
tariffs will be 10%, 15% on
which country, and, and that
uncertainty principle is a much
larger impact on, on investment
and employment, um, maybe then
the actual level of tariffs to
begin with.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
uh director was whispering to
me, um, Representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you both, and I get excited as
you do, so when we hear these
reports, but this is one of the
areas that, um
that I
I guess I studied and, and our
um
public financing and budgeting
it's close to me. So I have a, a
couple of questions um
we've been
they've been considerable
discussion about the trust funds
and um
securing trust funds for the
future of our population, which
has been very important for us
because when we have had
downturns, uh, we want to get
out of the, the cuts mentality
and be able to support the
growth
mentality for the future. So on
page
2 and on page 7.
of your, um
report
you show that excess oil and gas
revenues are being, well, we
know, are being redirected, um,
to early childhood, Medicaid,
Behavioral Health trust funds.
So how effectively are these
transfers
insulating
the general fund from volatility
and how could this reliance
create
potentially structural gaps in
the future. That's going to be a
question because it's come up in
the past in committees when
we've been addressing the trust
funds, and, um, the changes in
what you're demonstrating in
your report, and I'll get to the
next question reference to oil
and gas revenues and our
dependency. And so right now
though, we have to be able to
trust that what we've done,
uh, won't necessarily
create
more structural gaps. So how do
you address that?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative
Great questions. Um, if I could
ask you to turn to page 15
Here's an example of the way
that those mechanisms insulate
the general fund. In the table,
if you look at line 15
you can see how much of the
burden of the loss is
experienced by the trust funds
and not the general fund. So in
our worst case scenario, about
60% of the total loss, as you
can see in line 15, is borne by
the trust fund. So the general
fund is only taking experiencing
40% of the total losses. So
um, that's, that's a large, you
know, a large extent of the
total losses. We, we did an
analysis a year ago on revenue
volatility, and we found that
our volatility, um, decreased by
50% in the last few years, and
we're estimating going forward
it'll decrease by 300% because
of these measures. So that's
speaking to the volatility issue
and how much you're, you're
insulated, um, on that side
The other question, um, I, I
think of more as a long term,
um, um, consideration and, and
we do a long term revenue
estimate every year that comes
out next month.
And what we found last year was
that these investments were
sufficient to, um, overcome
losses in oil and gas revenues
into the future for the first
time. So we had been estimating
before that that oil and gas
declines in the future would be
a major strain on the state
budget. We'd have year over year
revenue declines, which would
mean even with inflation, you
might have less and less money
each year to budget. We're now
thinking that those investments
will, will overcome, over
po w er those losses and
actually lead to general fund
growth in the long run. So, um,
we, we think we're meeting that
goal today and, and we'll update
that estimate for you all next
month.
Thank you and that's important
because it's going to come up in
committee. It's gonna come up in
our on the floor. It's gonna
come up continuously, so I'm
glad we're prepared to answer
that. I have just, um, and, and,
and also I think this is a good
time for us to, um, also
continue to talk about the
value, the importance of
diversification in terms of our
revenue streams, and we really
need to continue to advance
forward in our
um, in planning and reliance on
just oil and gas and really uh
implement some really strong
um
generation discussion around
renewable energies and how we
can continue to invest in that
arena because we already know
it's not the future, it's the
present and the future right
now. So I just wanted to add
that plug because we've been
talking about diversifying our
revenue streams for a long, long
time. So I'm going back to your
and thank you for that going
back to your page, um, 16
um, the revenue forecasts
um show
the revenue collections falling
below the 10-year trend.
by fiscal year 2728, which is
then narrowing the window for
new commitments. Obviously, if
you look at it from that
perspective, um, we've heard
today, yesterday, education and
Medicaid are the largest drivers
of the recurring, excuse me,
spending, um, and both are core
to meeting constitutional and
humanitarian obligations, as you
know, under
both the Yazi Martinez and our
broader social needs because we
still have a great deal of,
we're still
high in poverty across the
board. We haven't gotten out of
that cycle. So as fiscal
experts, um.
how do, how do you recommend the
legislature way these what we
call equity-driven commitments
against the risks
of revenue volatility, and how
should we be prioritizing, um,
in the areas that we've been
discussing in terms of
recurring, um
uh
recurring or recurring
expenditures and revenues so
that it, it really is important
for you all to provide those
recommendations to us, uh,
because you are our experts, so
that's my next question. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. Um
we, we think about this a lot
and
you know, we, we have, I wish
I'd brought it for you all
today. We have, um, something of
a fiscal playbook at, at the LFC
and it's sort of what, what do
you do when revenues come in
less than expected, and it
speaks directly to your point,
the need to strategize how to
maintain, especially critical
social services it when when
times are lean. And um there's,
you know, maybe an order of
events to some extent, but, um,
ultimately, all, all our options
for you all. Um, you could
appropri
ate less than you can leave
yourself a gap like you used to.
You know, by budgeting up to
100% of your future paycheck,
you could be putting some, some
extra amount of risk on the
table in case revenues don't
meet that expectation. Um, that
might be sort of step one. Step
two are reserves, which you all
have, have, um, booked a healthy
balance of reserves in the event
that revenues, um, don't
materialize to continue paying
the bills, um, for potentially
up to 2 years in in a bad
in a really bad, um, fiscal
scenario. So those, that's
already in a very important, um,
uh
um
safeguard against volatility
and, and protecting those
services, but then, you know,
even on top of that, you have,
uh, hopefully an inventory of,
of evaluations from LFC that
could point to most effective,
least effective programs and
services, so you can make sure
to preserve the most affected
and most needed, um, um, um,
spending programs
to the very end if you have to
get there to cutting budgets,
and you prioritize the ones that
have the, the least effect or
the least demand or or least
impact. Um, so those are just a
few options, but, uh, I'd be
happy to, to get with you on, on
the fiscal playbook in the
future if you were ever
interested.
I think it's going to be very
important. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you for your response,
because as you know, we're going
to have to make greater
investments in, in expenditures
in the area of Medicaid. Uh, we
just talked about earlier
teacher pipelines, education and
Medicaid or by far, um, our
largest dri drivers as we've
mentioned and so those are gonna
be continued, uh, investments
and expenditures and recurring
and so we look to you to be able
to help us make the decisions
around do we hold back
um, focus on one-time
investments, um, and trust funds
or do we continue to build, uh,
on the trust funds, uh, in hope
that they will continue to, um,
um, grow and cre create what we
anticipated when we started with
our trust funds, a steady stream
of diversification in our
revenue and so that's really
um what I think would also help
project future volatility
against that, and so that helps
us make those decisions so I
have, I'm happy to look, I look
forward to you sharing that
playbook as we go along because
those are the tough decisions
we're going to have to be
making, um, this next, this year
and
in uh as we move forward and
then of course in our budget
year 30, 30 day as well as in,
um, trying to work around, um,
the, the policies and what we're
going to continue to invest in
in the future. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. That ends my question.
Mr. Chairman, Representative, if
I could, just from the LESC
perspective really quick. I
think as the point that you're
bringing up as revenues continue
to tighten. You all have
a variety of options to choose
from. A lot of opportunity costs
involved with those choices. Do
you invest more in the permanent
funds to create that stable
revenue in the future. Do you
invest now to improve student
outcomes to improve their
trajectory in life to
potentially improve the economic
stability of our state in the
future in that way. Our job as
your staff at the LESC
throughout the interim is to
bring up to you all
considerations for
programs or initiatives that
have the potential to really
improve outcomes, improve
students' lives in meaningful
ways.
in the short term. And so one of
those opportunity costs that I'm
sort of weighing right now is
one of your perf appropriations
that you made in FY 26 this last
session. Supports for students
who are unhoused, and you heard
about that from the secretary
yesterday. $500 per month for
each unhoused student in Las
Cruces. I think Albuquerque and
Santa Fe, as long as those
unhoused students go to school
for a certain number of days.
They go a certain number of
tutorings
es sion s they check in with
their social worker, a variety
of accountability.
approaches to that money.
So in that scenario, I want you
to weigh the opportunity cost of
taking, say, $10 million in
non-recurring revenue and
putting it into a permanent fund
and getting a 7% return on that
$10 million.
700K a year in stable revenue
for the next for for the for the
foreseeable future, versus
investing that money right now
directly in students to improve
their outcomes now to improve
the the outcomes of their
families and meaningful ways. I
want you to weigh those
opportunity costs as we really
approach and enter our budget
conversations here at LASE. Just
wanted to put that, I guess
thought into all of your minds
as we
approach our first budget
consideration conversation in
October in Las Cruces.
Thank you for that. And, and
just on that note, that's the,
that's the balancing act that we
have to make. So it would be
very helpful, Mr. Chair, that as
we're weighing that, that
we charted out
short term, what does short term
mean?
Short term for how many years?
Short term, you know, define
that for us and then on the
other chart
what are we looking at in terms
of future, um, our investments
for the future because we need
to see that visually in order to
be able to make those decisions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you very much for this.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Rometto.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
um, thank you, Izzy for that
overview. Um.
I think you had mentioned that
we're starting to use
non-recurring funding in future
years. Are you referencing grow
in that?
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Vice Chair. No, this is even
specials, um, appropriations
that had typically been made in
the current year. Those are also
now happening in the, in the
next, in the budget year.
in addition to grow
And, and so
um
as grow is a part of that. My
understanding with Grow,
particularly is that we make the
appropriation for a program, and
then it's that appropriation and
whatever fiscal year is for the
next 3 years.
but it's not coming out of
subsequent fiscal years,
budgets, is that correct?
That's right, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair,
grow may set aside money in FY
26, but the entire pot is set
aside and that pot is used over
3 years, but, uh, I, I guess.
oftentimes the appropriation for
the grow is made in the future
year rather than in the current
year as what might have
traditionally happened in in
previous times.
So, so the money for grow and
just to clarify, so it doesn't
come out of the subsequent
year's budgets. It's from that
year that it was appropriated,
but it's intended use is over
the next few years.
Thank you, Mr. Sher. Yeah, it,
I'm absolutely doing a, a
confusing job explaining it, but
the, the pot, there's a pot that
is set aside and that pot gets
used over 3 years, so it doesn't
come out of the general fund
over the next 3 years, but the
pot that is set aside is coming
out of the future year where it
would have maybe traditionally
come out of the current year.
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative Romero, so for
your Perfir appropriations, you
all transferred, let me see,
$63.8 million.
in non-recurring revenue this
year into the public education
reform Fund for expenditure over
the next 3 years if that right?
OK.
So I guess in in that in that
case, and what I'm trying to
straighten out, Mr. Chairman, is
that we're appropriating that
money, but it's not coming out
of the next
few years or fiscal years
budget. So we're not really
we're not really spending the
money of, we're not making
future appropriations from
future budgets. I guess that's
what I'm trying to reconcile
That's, um,
a mostly true, Mr. Chair.
You're, you're not obligating
general fund in future, um, uh,
years, future fiscal years,
except for the budget year, in
which case you are doing that,
but just for one year, the grow
is, is sort of not an obligation
to the general fund over future
years.
other than in the budget year.
Other than the budget year that
it was appropriated for.
OK. OK, good. Um, because I'm
looking over particularly like
the, the growth funds here and
we have a starting balance of
$522 million. Um, and then the
ending balance after the
appropriations
and the appropriation made into
the fund and then the
expenditures from the fund is
now 667 million
dollars, which is pretty
substantial, um, what are the
thoughts? What are your thoughts
on keeping that fund so large.
Um, Mr. Chair and Mr. Vice
Chair, thank you. That's a great
question. Um, the strategy
behind, I think the thinking
behind the grow when it was, um,
first created only a couple of
years ago was that this was a
medium term solution. So the
investments were a long-term
solution, um, current spending
is the current, so you know,
current term solution or
strategy and then there might be
some need to keep, um, um, you
know, revenues above spending or
or some pot of money to allow
spending to continue to grow in,
in the midterm.
And that was, that was the plan
with the grow and so the thought
is that the balance should be
enough that it can last us maybe
another 4 years. It spins off
about a quarter of its balance
each year. Um, and so whenever
these revenues continue to
tighten, eventually to a point
where there's no cushion, that
grobe will keep spinning off
more and more money, or only for
a few more years, um, um, to get
you through that medium term. So
that's the thinking on the
balanced additional investments
are, are, um, sort of a
calculation on how
much further you want to extend
the, the, the, the day before
you cannot any longer grow
budgets by very much.
And, and Mr. Chairman, and, and
thank you for that because I
mean, I think part of grow in
our consideration in Perth has
been that at what point do we
elevate some of the programs
that we utilize this funding
for, for recurring money, um.
and, and I just see, you know,
um, we have these various funds
with a huge, huge balance when
we keep talking about the need
for um
all sorts of different things in
public education, so I guess
I'm, I'm kind of weighing in on
the that argument on how much is
enough to keep in funds, but
also how much do we start? Where
do we start looking for some of
the funding that we need for
various programs in, in
education when we have these
very healthy funds already and
one that has grown in the past
fiscal year despite its
expenditures.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Thank you, Vice Chair. Uh,
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, um, for the presentation.
Really appreciate it, uh, the
data's the data, the facts are
the facts, and uh appreciate you
answering questions from
everyone to understand that, uh,
unfortunately nowadays sometimes
people don't like those. Some
people get fired for it, so
appreciate the work that you do.
um
I heard about the job reports
this morning.
you know, we still have tariffs.
um, I saw that ruling from the
appeals court. Could you touch
on it because I've been reading
that
that appeal has been granted
that the tariffs are illegal.
There's talks of the money would
have to go back to those
businesses or those countries
possibly, but I'm hearing that
some of the businesses are still
going along with it because
they're assuming it might go to
the Supreme Court.
and I preface this to say.
also that I think when you look
at the stock market in our
economy.
a lot of that was priced in with
the assumption that yes, there's
tariffs
that are being put on to the
businesses
and passed on to consumer, but
at the end of the day it becomes
revenue for the country and so
that
decision stays and you have to
return that money.
Um, I think that's probably
impacting the stock market and
so I'm wondering if you have any
sense of what's going on?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator. You know, as an
economist, uh, uh, trying to
intuit what the stock market's
doing. It's always a tough, uh,
a tough call. I think that there
are a lot of expectations being,
um, priced in right now,
including, um, interest rate
cuts that uh are contributing to
an elevated um public equities
market, uh
you know
the, the markets are highly
reactive to the news cycle as
well, from my perspective that,
uh, um
it, it, it can be difficult to,
to interpret because what I
might see is a, a negative
indicator or headline.
Oftentimes can be interpreted,
um, in the complete opposite way
or vice versa. So, I guess, um,
all this is to say that, um, tax
expectations, economic growth,
inflation expectations, interest
rate expectations are all priced
in at some level at, at the
equities market and the moment
that those begin to diverge in a
negative way from expectations,
um, is when you'll, you'll see a
correction. And so
um, does that look, is that come
in the form of a negative jobs
report or the Federal Reserve
delaying interest rate cuts. Um,
I think it could be any of those
things.
Thank you and thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um
and so, you know, we're still,
you, you presented, we're still
dealing with the increased
inflation. We got the
preliminary jobs report. We got
the updates from the prior
month, tariffs
uh
you know, companies aren't
hiring. You just mentioned these
have flipped where used to be
more jobs and people looking for
a job. Now there's less job,
more people looking for a job
and what's available.
um
folks are
starting to struggle out there
when Labor Day, you know, bought
a coup, bought a few steaks, if
I don't know if anyone's went
out and bought some steak
lately. It's, it's very high.
um.
hearing from folks in
agricultural farming and just
the workforce and what could
happen with our food supply and
things dying on the vine per se
and how that could increase.
um.
you mentioned before you saw
yellow signs and not really the
red.
And I want to be optimistic and
positive. Is there anything good
you're seeing that you could
talk about?
Um, Mr. Chen and Senator,
absolutely. I, I thank you for
the opportunity to be
optimistic. I, I actually do
think I'm an optimist. Um,
construction is, is holding up
well in New Mexico. I think
that's likely in large part
because of the previous federal
investments in infrastructure
but also state investments in
infrastructure. So that's a
bright spot in our economy. Um,
we are seeing some traction in
deep tech, professional
scientific Services, which is
good news, that's sort of
futureproof, kind of, um, um,
economic growth sectors. So
those are, those are
certainly positive, um.
maybe I'm struggling more than,
than usual to, to be optimistic,
but those are two off the top of
my head.
That's great, Mr. Chair, and,
and thank you for that, um
I know you mentioned you gave us
this, uh, last chart with, um,
revenue shocks and things that
could happen and I know it just
because I'm not a part of LFC,
um, do we have a
percentage or likelihood of us
possibly going to recession. I
know I've been to some
presentations and you talk about
what Moody's is looking at and
and my concern is when you
look at a lot of hedge fund
managers, you look at investors,
it seems like they're moving
around and, and having that
serious conversation and really
hedging their money for it
coming and so could you talk
about that or what you're
hearing from a lot of the
analysts on us possibly going
into a recession.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair. Um, if I
could ask you to turn to page
12, we have a Wall Street
Journal, um, survey of
economists and their recession
risk. Um, it's elevated, but
it's come down in, in, in the
summer months, um, it had been
around 40%. I'd heard, um, some
of the Moody's analytics
indicators close to 50%, not
quite 50%, um, our, our, our,
our process is as long as the
baseline expectation, as long as
there's a 50% or greater chance
or at least a 50% chance of a
baseline non-recession scenario.
That's what we go with. We don't
necessarily, um, price or, or,
or, or assess like a a risk per
uh at per the rag, we don't do
that, but we are maybe higher
than the historical average, but
still lower than the sort of
post pandemic uncertainty highs
that we were experiencing only a
couple of years ago.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and one
last question, I'm sorry I'm
doing that, um.
could you talk a little bit
about if we were to go into
recession
I, I see off the sheet we're in
the really, really dark red.
And so I have to assume that.
we are impacted even more than
most states, and I know from
past history.
even after COVID, it takes us
even longer to get out of it.
correct?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
we, we certainly saw that that
was the case after the Great
Recession. We call that the last
decade. It took us 10 years to
get back to just where we were
before the Great Recession,
where most of the states and
most of the country had already
recovered in, in a few years
We had a better story coming out
of the pandemic. New Mexico was
one of the faster growing and
and um quickest to recover,
which is great news, and we hope
that will be the case again in
the following recession. I think
the revenue shock component
here. So a couple things on how
New Mexico fares compared to the
rest of the country, um, higher
share of public employment than
the rest of the country that
tends to insulate us to a
certain degree, um, except now
federal, um, labor force is
shrinking, so that may be a less
of a of a of a uh insulating or
stabilizing factor than it was
previously.
Um.
but really the major indicator
here is that in a recession, you
have a decrease in demand for
oil. You have less road trips or
production, and that results in
lower oil prices, which hurts
our bottom line. And so that's
contributing to us being in the
deep red that you see here.
Thank you for the responses.
Thank you. That's all I have,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, um, again for this
information. I think sometimes a
few more times that we hear
this, it's kind of sinks in a
little bit better, Mr. Chair.
um, just a question, and I think
this is something that's um on
my mind and at a neighborhood
meeting I was at a couple nights
ago. It's a question that was
asked by some of my
constituents, um.
what is the scenario, um, and
I'm sure you all are looking at
it at the federal budget, um,
that they're currently working
on, Mr. Chair, because I also
think that has an effect as to
what um we're looking at as we
move forward, um, an impending
government shutdown we don't
know, but curiosity, um, what is
LFC looking at at this point?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Senator, um, this
is something where
' re thinking about a lot and,
and keeping a close eye on and
reaching out with our federal
delegation to learn more and um
it, it's serious. Uh, the risk
is very serious, especially if,
um, uh, Pago cannot be avoided,
you know, sequestration cuts.
Um, that could be a significant
loss to revenues in New Mexico,
um, with respect specifically to
federal mineral leasing. We
share in when oil is produced on
federal land, we share in the,
in the revenues with the federal
government and in the event
sequestration takes effect, they
can withhold those revenues, and
that would be losses of billions
for for New Mexico. So that's
something very seriously we're
keeping an eye on our current
expectation built into this
forecast is that those do not go
into effect, that those are
avoided.
And thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
and it's just something for us
to please keep in mind and I
know that the federal funding
stabilize it anyway the FFSS
committee, too many names, Mr.
Chair, which I know you are
serving as co-chair. um
as we look as to, um, the issues
on health care, you know, the,
the impacts also through
Medicaid and what it does to
help support our economy in the
state too is very important.
Also for jobs that are provided
and Mr. Chair, I mean, we've
heard it, but again, I wanted
just to voice it for this
committee also is that we also
potentially have some hurts
coming to rural hospitals, rural
New Mexico, which also has an
effect on jobs and you know
there's a snowball effect
Mr. Chair, that we know that
comes so I just wanted to
mention that's that's on, on our
radar on, I know at the LHHS on
the FFSS committee, um, I think
it's something that we're all
but just wanted to voice it for
those who are watching also, um,
that's something of concern.
and, um, I know Mr. Chair, you
know, economically, um, you
know, Sandia Labs is cutting. I
know Elannel, Los Alamos
National Labs had said they
wanted to hire, but I think
there's, I've heard some other
language about some potential
cuts against some of our MCOs
may be looking at some cuts
also, um, for employment. So I
think that's still something for
us to keep in mind as we move
forward. Um, it's not doom and
gloom, but it's still something
for us to keep in mind as the
next
few months. Thank you, Mr. Chair
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Brent.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman,
and, uh
yeah, I, I have a couple of
questions, uh, but I, I wanted
to thank Senator Pope for, for
asking for some positives, um,
because I think that was
actually a really good question
and, and
it is good to kind of see where
we are positively. I know like
in my community, we just had an
announcement of a company coming
in and that's going to bring a
lot of jobs. So I think that's a
positive, um, and very, very
good paying jobs. Uh, I wanted
to ask about, uh, governor's
executive orders and how that's
cutting into our reserve funds.
So an easy question. Mr. Chair,
just in general, um, how that
works or yeah, I mean, we're
hearing like over $80 million in
emergency funds and my
understanding was that she could
only do 750,000.
So how are we how are we getting
over 80 million?
Um
Mr. Chair and Senator, uh, yeah,
thank you for the question. Um,
we are digging into it right
now. I don't think we are, we
haven't
um, you know, gotten to the
point with solid numbers yet,
and we're working with DFA to
get to that point, I hope very
soon. Um, so I don't have an
exact number figure for you, but
it does come out of the
appropriation contingency fund,
which is a part of the reserves,
and to some extent also the
operating reserve, which is of
course in the reserves. So to
the extent that those executive
orders are spending much more
than what was expected. We would
see those reserve balances
decline, and, um, I, I believe
to the second part of your
question, the $750,000 limit is
per order and what we'll, what
we see is oftentimes many
executive orders that, um, you
know, have $750,000 each that
can add up to much more than
that.
So, uh
Mr. Chairman and
Ishmael is, so it's, it's, um,
they're stacking them
So, so, I mean, I don't think
that was the intention of the
law, right?
But she's just basically
as soon as the 750 spent, she
just puts out another executive
order for the same thing.
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes,
this, this is not a new
practice. This is, uh, a common
across administrations, although
there is LFC, there has been LFC
sponsored legislation to make
changes, to change the cap, to
change the uh you know,
allowance for stacking and that
and those kinds of things, but
um
um they have not passed yet
Thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you
Other questions not, I've got
several and, and Izzy, uh
my, my aggressive questions are
not aimed at you, but you're the
person sitting there with the
answers. So, uh,
you had indicated that the
concern about
oil dropping from $69 to $60 and
that that was gonna be about 420
million, I think is what you had
indicated was the decrease right
below that it talks about gas
going up, where it's 10 cents
per thing is worth 25, that
would be a revenue increase of
375. Doesn't that come close to
offsetting the loss in oil, and
we don't talk about that to
where, you know, it's only 100
million rather than 400 million,
which is nearly as scary.
Am I missing that or is that
correct? Mr. Chair, you're,
yeah, intuitions spot on, the,
the price decrease was $10
lower, $500 million but, but
absolutely the offset each other
with the increase in the natural
gas price and, and also, um, I
didn't mention slightly higher
expectations for volumes, which
also offsets the price. There's
a lot, um, that, you know,
offset, um, I think, uh, even
with the, the decrease in
prices, those losses would not
be experienced by the general
fund because of those insulating
measures. So
the offsets, the negatives and
the positives are actually
experienced by the early
childhood Trust Fund, the
Behavioral Health, Medicaid, and
the severance tax. Um, so, so to
a certain extent
we don't see the negatives or
the positives.
Thank you. Uh, what is the
current amount in the, the
permanent fund and how much is
that grown over the last year
and let me couple that and same
for the other trust funds, how
much have they grown over the
last couple of years? How much
money have we been moving into
those as opposed to using that
as part of our general
uh budget
Um, Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question. Do my resource here.
A couple, a couple of things to,
to talk through here. Um, you
know, some of these, uh,
additional investments are, are
by choice for you all and some
are, um, constitutionally
protected. So the amounts in the
land grant permanent fund and
some of the amounts in the
severance tax permanent fund are
constitutional, and, um, um,
those have, of course, grown
significantly. Severance tax
permanent fund, I think last I'd
seen was around $11 billion. And
then the land grant permanent
fund is
certainly north of 32 billion.
Um, the early childhood Trust
Fund is, uh, a legislative, not
constitutional, just statutory
decision. And that is, um,
approaching 10. I, it's not
quite at 10 yet. It might be at
8 currently approaching 9. but
on its way to $10 billion and,
um, um, there are some other
trust funds to, to much smaller
amounts, 350 million in the
conservation legacy, um, a
couple 100 million in water
trust, um, I hope I, I hope I
nailed
the, the main ones
Yes, and that, that was kind of
what I need him, you know, over
the last couple of years, we've
made all kinds of other smaller
ones. We've stuffed mattresses
full of the extra cash various
places um
we talk about that these are
providing the, the stability
long term, the
what is the goal? How much do
we, do we want to put into all
of these when we think it's
enough? How much is enough to
where we then say that's enough,
we can now start spending the
money towards a different future
for New Mexico.
What's the goal, Mr. Chair,
thank you for the question. This
is something I'm, I'm thinking a
lot about and speaks to your um
earlier point, um, Daniel.
The, the hope is, or, or the
thought was the strategy was
when when conceived
um, was that it would offset oil
and gas declines after 2030.
2030 was sort of the peak
expectation year, and then the
general fund could begin to
experience revenue losses. And
so the hope was how, how much
investment do you need to make
so that the general fund doesn't
start shrinking and budgets have
to get cut year after year in
perpetuity in the future. And
the good news is we think that
with the current policies in
place, which is not, um not
current balances, but the
current expectations for how
much distributions as well under
the current statutes is that
it's sufficient, that you
' ve you've reached the point of
revenue, um, um, stability and
growth despite oil and gas
declines in the long term. So I
would say the mission was sort
of accomplished as intended.
under current statute. Um, and,
and then so then the question
becomes, you know, do you make
new trust funds? I think that
was um part of Representative
Caballero's question earlier,
and I think the, the, the
differentiation I would make and
that I've been thinking about is
you have a revenue strategy, and
then you have an economic growth
and uh, you know, educational
outcome
a quality of life strategy, and
those can be, um, different. And
it could be the case that you've
already achieved your revenue
strategy and, and now you
might be more interested and
maybe there is not as much need
to, to invest in your revenue
strategy and you can use that
revenue strategy to now power
your other strategies. And
that's one way I've been
thinking about it. Um
and, and I also want to add that
the power of compound interest
and, and the way that these
investments spin off money.
magnitude is absolutely key.
Having a small fund.
will not grow as quickly as a
large fund. And so to the extent
you create new funds, um, to the
ability that they can be in, in
the billions and not in the
millions, um, is much more
important for the trade-off
conversation than than creating
small funds that might have a
better investment return.
somewhere else other than, than
as a revenue strategy which may
have already been accomplished.
Thank you,
uh, because I think that's a
How much is enough before we
start using the money to make
investments now in children and
things rather than keep putting
it up. I, I characterize it,
it's a, you know, the father is
saying, no, we're having ramen
noodle again cause I'm saving
for your college education that,
you know, and the kids are like,
but we're hungry. Uh, I think in
education we're sort of feeling
all of that. um
you had indicated, you know, I'm
gonna get back onto the cash
reserves. The picture here says,
you know, we ought to have
somewhere around 24% based on
the the oil or the
the energy producer type of
things. Yet the estimates are
currently 35%. What is the
probability that these are based
on as far as the low oil prices,
and I think it was, it's on one
of your charts.
Mr. Chair, I think it's 10%
and, um, I, I believe Moody's
has the same probability
assigned to this map on theirs,
um, and, uh, I, I, I just wanna
reiterate that, um
you know, 34% will not be the
final number it's certain, it
will certainly come down, um,
with the executive orders and,
and spending in the current
year. And on top of that, about
8% of that is not cash reserves,
it's, um, other types of
funding, fund, um, um,
obligations.
OK, and so similar to my
comments when we were down in
Las Cruces, we're basing this on
a 10% probability
and using your words you just
said, the cash on hand is enough
to weather this over 2 years.
Well, that's 10% times 10% is a
1 in 100 probability if they
were independent. I realize
they're not, so it's, you know,
like 1 in 60 year probability of
that occurring.
and we have enough that with
just cash without going in and
changing a thing when we see the
downturn.
Does that seem realistic? I
mean, I think back to when COVID
hit, which was very unexpected,
which is why you have cash
reserves.
The cash reserves covered it
easily and within a month we
called ourselves in and changed
the budget. Why are we keeping
cash reserves to handle 2 years
of sitting on our hands when we
see the economy declining in a 1
in 60 year scenario.
Um, Mr. Chair, hopefully to
change the paradigm of of action
and, and that's, um, so that you
don't have to come in within a
month and start making cuts. The
hope is that you buy yourself
time to strategically analyze
and think about what you might
want to cut, if at all, and the
hope is also that maybe you have
some cash on hand to provide
some stimulus as well. So the,
the, the cash is definitely not,
um,
in, in lieu of, of your
legislative prerogative or, or,
or ability to take action, but
hopefully just supports or
expands your your options, you
know, when that time comes.
Thank you. Yeah, I've, I've been
around long enough to see when
we've had the downturns, we
don't sit around and just kind
of see what's gonna happen. We
start looking at where to make
those changes to shore up
immediately, um, you know,
through calling ourselves into
special session and things
rather than just kind of sitting
and let it ride for two years,
and, you know, and hope all, all
turns out well that that isn't
what typically happens. Um, I
worry very much that we use that
so we then can move more
into these other funds instead
of spending it for a different
outcome. Uh, as the kind of our
state economist with the, the
finance.
Do you ever get into the process
of what we should be doing as
far as investments to change the
future. Let me give an example.
Uh, I don't know if you're
familiar with the work of, uh,
Doctor James Heckman, who got a
Nobel Prize for investments in
early childhood education in
determining the ROI, which is 12
to 13% for investments
in the earliest ones are we
talking about that through the
Finance Committee about how to
get that huge ROI, which is
better than putting money in
Wall Street as far as the
long-range economics.
Um, Mr.
Chair.
thank you. The hope, the hope
is, yes, we are a small but
mighty team. There used to just
be me and one other person.
We've got a second now and I'm
very grateful for that. Um, and
we have with that second person,
um, taking on a new analysis of
tax expenditures, what their
return is on investment, what
their economic impact is, and
our hope is to keep expanding
that, um, with, you know, uh,
hopefully time and and resources
to, to other social programs as
well. Um, we're not there yet,
and I don't think we can get
there very soon, but that is,
that is the hope and we try to
collaborate with um our program
evaluated evaluation staff when
they do those kinds of analysis
as well, um, but that is, that
is our goal, um, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I just kind of my
concerns is it feels like we are
being awfully conservative in
not making investments towards a
different future but more making
sure that we're, we're writing
the trust fund of oil and gas
well into the future instead of
having a different future that,
that gives us prosperity in
areas outside of the extractive
industries, uh, and I think
we've got opportunities that are
missed because money that's kept
in cash reserves and other
things is not money that'
s working towards different
futures
So thank you. Any other
questions? And again, thank you
always. I mean, you're often in
the hot seat. You do a wonderful
job. Uh, you're very clear and,
and concise, and I appreciate
that. So thank you, Yi. Anything
else, Daniel?
Before we go off to lunch, I
think we've got everybody here.
If we can take care of the
business, aren't we at
lunchtime? that we can take care
of the business portions and so
first, uh, need a motion for
approval of the minutes from the
last meeting.
moved by Senator Stewart,
seconded by Representative
Serana. Is there any opposition
to the approval of the minutes
from the last meeting, and the
opposition.
seeing no opposition
The minutes are approved. Um,
approval of the agenda of which
we're about halfway through.
I have a motion to approve the
agenda by Representative
Garrett.
Thank
Seconded by, uh, vice chair. Is
there any opposition to the
agenda.
Seeing no opposition, the agenda
is approved.
and
as our director has an
announcement about a dinner and
then we'll break for lunch.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
it's actually pretty
bittersweet. I, I'll mention
this a little bit more tomorrow,
um, our long time analyst Tim
Bado is leaving our team for
greener pastures and uh
different pastures, that's
right, um, and so we wanted to
invite members to a small
gathering this evening, uh, at
Ed Rancho at
5:30. So, um, but we would like
if you are able to make it to
let us know because we want to
forward some numbers up to the
restaurant and make sure that we
can, we can figure all that out.
So I'll talk a little bit more
about that tomorrow and
hopefully not cry.
It's tonight, yes, thank you,
John.
Uh,
11 of the really great things
about the staff with the LESC is
they do get trained up. They
moved to other things. That's a
real, uh, feather for the
leadership and all here that,
uh, increase the ability of them
to grow in their professional
growth, though it's sad for us
when we lose them to other
areas.
And with that, I believe we are
adjourned for lunch. How are we
doing on time today? We are
almost perfectly on time today.
Well, no, we're supposed to be
done at 11:30,
uh, but
so
if I can get back after lunch,
guys, we're supposed to start at
12:30 or so.
but we're not far behind. Plate
at lunch back, same place back,
follow the, the maze to the
