get started hopefully people
will
filter back in so well come and
go ahead.
We thank you madame chairman and
members of the commercial
appreciate you're taking the
time to learn a little bit about
some of the dental things that
are going on I am in a focus
somewhat on our special need
study but i'll put that kind of
in the middle and we'll talk
about a number of other things
that are somewhat related to
that so uhm starting off I
there's a pile of information
that's here I won't go through
all of it I promise i'm just
going to highlight a few things
that are are here the record can
you introduce yourself sorry yes
manager uh my name is tom script
summer I am the executive
director of new mexico dental
association I was AAA amadentist
in albuquerque but um our
primarily working for the
association now at this point
and
still see if you patience but
not very many any more so
so to start off with that the
first pages that are in their
relate to a dental strategic
plan that we've had for at the
state called power twenty thirty
and i'll let you read about that
a little bit a lot of the things
that we're going to talk about
are actually
um objectives that have have
come from that report
prior to this that's a ten year
plan for twenty thirty prior to
that we had a ten year plan for
twenty twenty and
I i'm sorry to say that some of
the things from twenty twenty
how to get help held over twenty
thirty but you'll read some of
those those things and we're
making progress and on many
areas that are there and
highlighted but we wanted to
share that with you and there's
more information about uh power
twenty thirtieth if you're
interested in that.
So I wonder start out and talk
just a little bit about the the
work force issues with related
to to denise in the state we're
really losing dennis account and
alarming rate at this point and
you can see on that first page
kind of the last eight years how
the trend has been and it it's
it we we've had some peaking we
actually had some growth prior
to that but over the last twenty
years we've been been losing so
that's an important issue I
think and and i'll talk a little
bit about why and what are some
of the the drivers for that as
we go forward but
you know we're not a very big
state so losing only a few
people can make a pretty big
difference but that has an
impact on those communities for
sure and as we see this trend
trending down these are
significant numbers that were
concerned about for sure.
So and their next page is sure
to shows how how changes in uh
the denise per population have
been affecting other states as
well as us and you'll see that
we're i'm very near to the
bottom we've highlighted some of
the the regional states they are
so you can get a comparison
the reasons are not all the same
here so for example you taught
has had a lot of change but in
their case it's because they're
growing five times faster than
what we are and so they're
having a harder time keeping up
whereas we've had pretty
stagnant growth and are actually
losing dennis from the state
but that it's a significant
problem and I it it has long
term impact and so that's why we
we really feel we need to begin
addressing that uhm you know and
more proactive ways.
Whenever the most concerning
trends is the fact that people
are are leaving migrating away
to other states uhm we have one
of the highest rates in the
country you can see their that
for all them as we were the
second to last in among new
denis where the fourth the last
and um that map shows the the
new denisituation but you'll see
that we're kind of a a dark red
state in the midst of a lot of
states that are actually growing
and again and indicator of some
of the problems that we're
having uhm
when the reasons why young
device are able to leave is that
they're not invested in the same
way they were and i'll talk a
little bit about that you know
mean how changing practice
trends are leading to this there
is more more mobility
but clearly that ability to move
is not
allowing people coming into the
state it's allowing people to
leave the state and that's a
that's a problem at this point
for us
we also have a a fairly large
number of people that are over
fifty five
this is not a negative number I
guess at thirty percent that's
actually probably a pretty good
balance in a way so if you'll
compare it with other states in
some ways that's that's not a
bad place for us to be because
that means that we have some
stable practices that are here
as well and well you know the
concern is that things could
change within the next twenty
five years or twenty years for
sure
at least we have that stability
and so some communities have
been served by people that have
been there for a long time but
unless we do something where
we're starting to turn the
surround and attracting some new
people into the state we're
going to have a problem and you
can kind of see the the age
range act actually the the lower
graph there shows new mexico in
the
kind of the burgendy line
whereas the gray area is that
the national average in terms of
um age distributions so.
We we do skew younger in a way
where attracting some new
dentists to come into the state
but we need to be able to keep
on if they're not staying here
then they're not really serving
us for the the long term and
that that is the problem.
Uhm
so me just some information
about rural practice this map
that you know shows the
distribution and the needs from
different counties it's pretty
old i'm sure you're aware of the
data breach and why we're not we
haven't collected more recent
data but
we think that a lot of those
same trends are there and so are
our areas of most concern are
out in the west central part of
the state and especially down in
the the lower southwest our
southeast area of the state
we kind of call that the premium
based in area because there's a
similar situation on the other
side of the the texas new mexico
line and so and can be
significant and then some
information just that they're
about the economic several
practice
real practices are facing kind
of a double wammy in terms of
expenses increasing and that's
leading to
in income reductions
again that's a a concerning
trend it's not a driving trend
yet at this point but
you know as we have more
difficulty in attracting people
to rural areas we need to keep
that in mind and then that other
side of that page talks a little
bit about how the community
impact that dental practices
have that economic thing and a
lot of times we you know dental
practices are often pretty much
micro businesses they're not
they don't involve that many
people but they do have a pretty
large impact in terms of the
number of people that are
employed through supporting
supporting things
and in the tax base that that
provides for us as well so.
So taking a little bit about
general education
you know we know that to attract
people to underserved areas the
best way as to actually you know
take people from those areas and
get them training and try to get
them back to those areas.
We don't have that in
intentional situations here in
new mexico at all all the
dentists in the state were
trained somewhere else there's
nobody what was trained here and
so uhm
we are
continued to be looking at that
educational pipeline we've had
ways that we've compensated for
that in some ways by through the
witchy program through contracts
with dental schools and some
other states.
That hasn't served us poorly
we've been able to you know send
people to those areas but it
doesn't it it doesn't really
address our our core problems
which is getting people into
those underserved areas in
particularly
more diverse group so there's a
there's a certain selection that
goes on in only attracting
dennis you know people that want
to be denised who are willing to
go to some word fairly far out
of state and then get him to
come back again so that that's
doing some filtering that
probably is not appropriate and
not what we need in terms of
addressing our problem.
Uhm
we we do have a a couple of
closer and newer opportunities
and I just have a little bit of
information there about the the
with the hundred school and uh
texas tech and l capacity that's
a school that we have
fostered a relationship with
they are eager to to recruit
from new mexico
we've got a financial
arrangement where new mexico
students can attend there
for with in state tuition which
is a great thing because texas
to wishing at all of the texas
schools of some of the lowest in
the country and so that that
works well for our students in
many ways.
The big limitation with texas
tack is um that only ten percent
of their class can come from
outside texas and so
you know they're they may be
attracting from lots of
different states but
they're the most that they can
have in a class is going to be
six and so we've done very well
we have ah they are just about
to graduate their very first
class and we are um
I think we only have one student
in that class but we have a
number of students and some of
the subsequent classes and so
that i'm that has been a good
relationship and like I say
they're very eager to to recruit
here in new mexico from students
and they are helpful I guess in
getting them to come back to
their communities here.
Uhm.
Toral college of dental medicine
is the the new kid on the block
and they opened a clinic in alba
tricky in may um and they
started seeing their first class
here so that's a class of a
little under a hundred students
they are they were trained in
new york prior to coming here so
they're only coming here for
their third and fourth you're
classes and most of that time is
going to be spent in the clinic
so
it's not it's not a school in in
the sense that they're taking
lots of new mexico students in
fact I they may have there may
be a new mexican student that's
in the group that's coming to
new mexico but that's probably
just a coincidence not the fact
that they were really recruiting
to do that I think they're
hoping that in the future they
would be able to recruit much
students
and we certainly hope that to
the
issue
for them is that they are not a
great fit beyond some of the
other contract schools that we
have um they're probably further
away than most and they're prime
more expensive than most but the
fact that they can come back to
new mexico as a plus and so
we're you know how happy to see
that
and we'll see how how things
develop like incident that's
brand new they won't have their
second class here until next
summer and then the clinic will
be at full capacity which will
be about two hundred students at
that point.
So then what you know whether
the kinds of things that we can
do to attract more dentists to
some of these rural areas and
and get them back here to the
state one of the things that
we've talked about for a while
already as a b a d d s program
the um that would piggy back on
the bam de program that UNM has
had
that tense to nurture students
right out of school taken
through the undergraduate
classes help them you know
do the aptitude tests and and
get the skills they need in
order to get into donald school
are getting to medical school
and then and then they attend
UNM school as long as they're
they're qualified to do that
the problem for doing that in a
lot of weights a b a d d s
program would be identical the
undergraduate portion of that
it's not really going to be very
different premium and predent or
identical for all practical
purposes
but the big barrier there is
that we don't have a demo school
so we don't have a place to send
them we've talked with various
schools about what the options
might be there there was some
openness and talking about that
at texas tack that again the
class size limitation is is a
major problem for that uhm
toro we haven't had that
discussion with them but again
the fact that students would
have to go to new york is going
to be a big
barrier at least to a lot of the
students that we would want to
track to that so we can do
continue to talk about other
schools there are other schools
in the region and in their zone
and so on where that would be a
possibility
one of the things that we we
have talked about in in maybe an
opportunity with torrow would be
i'm having some pre clinical
education here in the state so I
know that when when I went to
dell school which is a really
long time ago um at creating and
in omaha there were students
coming from utah that actually
did their first year dental
school in utah and then came to
crete into.
Finish so they would cut them do
when you're in in utah and then
spend three years in almahad to
finish up their own education
one of the possibilities that we
could have
a school where the first two
years like what they're doing in
new york was happening here in
new mexico and then would be
able to use toro clinical
facilities to do the training so
they would be able to spend
their full time here
that has some opportunities we
think for us in in that we
wouldn't necessarily have to
start with a huge investment in
a clinical facility
a lot of those classes are
already pretty similar to what's
being taught and the medical
school I mean there there would
be additions and obviously there
would be a faculty and other
kinds of things that would have
to be a part of that but we have
started talk having some of
those discussions with UNM
I I can't tell you that we're
have traction anywhere at this
point but that's one of the kind
kind of ideas that we're looking
at that we think will be a wait
for us to get get there
one of the nice parts of that
option is that we start building
a faculty base by doing
something like that and that's
really a problem this dental
fact that these are problems for
schools everywhere
um and since we would be
starting from scratch in new
mexico having a way to get into
it without having to go to a
full blown school would be a way
to to get going there
as I said we can continue to
look at increase cooperation
with the regional schools
you know I mean any any
rules can be changed and so the
problem with texas tech that
we're not able to track and we
not able to have as many
students there if we could get
the state of texas to relax
their rules for that school and
include us
that that would be a a great way
for us to partner and have that
as a regional school that would
be closed by and um and serve a
lot of our needs that would
require some investment and so
you know at in the level at
which those talks take place is
way above my paygrade.
We need state officials to start
having those kinds of
discussions so we'll see and
then the other thing I think
that we can consider are there
is a tuition subsidy you know
mean a lot of the lot of the
problems for students are going
going to further distances and
someone is the affordability of
it which was pretty functional
for us at the time when I went
to dull school
that that subsidy it didn't
reduce the cost for me but the
overall cost was enough to to
bring it to a reasonable level
so I my indeadness was probably
taking care of within ten to
fifteen years after getting out
school that's not the case for
students now they are ended for
thirty plus years typically to
to be able to do that so looking
at some kind of twish in subsidy
with would be a be a helpful
thing for a lot of those
schools.
Okay moving along to talk a
little bit about changing
practice things some of this you
may be somewhat aware of but
there's a lot of consolidation
that's going on with regard to
dental practices as well as any
kind of healthcare practice a
lot of that is being driven
by the market place and how
managed care works at that and.
There are a lot of positive
things to talk about with regard
to managed care in terms of
savings and finding efficient
season all those kinds of things
but uhm it also tends to you
know push us into more
consolidated kinds of efforts in
order to find those efficiencies
you have to find the economies
of scale and while efficiency is
really a good thing it can have
a negative impact on health care
sometimes because it reduces the
amount of diversity and and
personal ice care so we have
lots of people that are out in
private practices so not
practices that makes for a lot
of variety of possible natures
but if you go to a a place that
has you know ten dennis all
working in the same place that
culture is established and they
pretty much have to treat
everybody the same what is the
ds
that's a dental service
organization I mean so those are
they kind of run the game at
their whole different scale and
they can rent anywhere from on
the one side it could be
something almost like a
franchise where um you going to
buy into it and they provide
lots and lots of services other
times it may just be a fairly
private practice usually a group
practice of some kind where
they're providing certain
services but it's under contract
nature so
so yeah and then and their next
page it talks a little bit about
solar practice becoming less
less frequent and you can see
that we're one of the lower her
ones in the in the region and
and even in the country that way
i'm in terms of solo practice
and that.
The the the negative part of
that yeah I guess is that there
are a lot of rural communities
where a solo denise would be
able to provide the care but
they could never support more
than one have been so when the
market pressures are pushing you
away from one that means that
some of those rural areas are
going to have more difficulty in
in terms of attracting somebody.
Uhm
and we talked about the that
dennis have less of an
investment in the community and
a lot of that is coming because
there's less ownership from
young down there so i'm twenty
years ago one out of four dennis
would have on their practice by
the time they were thirty now we
have less than one in ten that
do that and that just means that
they don't have the same routes
some of that's a good thing I
mean what generally we favorable
bility and the ability for
families to move and be able to
find places but it's a problem
for us if that net migration is
always out we need to have some
migration in amend attract them
to be able to stay so
you know some of these things
are things that we're not going
to change through policy that's
just the way the market is is
leading us but we also have to
recognize you know how it's
going to affect us and what
impact that's going to have
forces we go forward and you can
see how that practice ownership
rate
also breaks down in terms of
meal and female dennis
that's that the main thing I
guess to take from that is that
the female group is rising
rapidly um as of right now fifty
percent of the class and in
dental school or female and we
actually see that swinging even
higher before before that trend
is done but that also means less
ownership and you know less
investment in the community that
way.
Alright well that gives a little
bit of a background and where we
are in terms of work force and
other kinds of things I want to
shift yours a little bit to the
special smile special care i'm
studying that we did
the new mexico down association
foundation got a grant from
carequest foundation i'm in
order to to study this and come
up with some recommendations and
was looking at
the the way the grant was
written was for us to look at
the entire state um and and come
up with some recommendations and
and so on about what could be
done with that
that that full report is in the
um the published book that you
got and i'd increase to look at
that I think there's a lot
there's a lot more information
in there than what i'm going to
share with you but i'll try to
highlight a few kinds of things
they're actually twenty three um
recommendations summarize those
a little bit and in fact since
the report came out the new
mexico association adopted two
more recommendations to to add
to that um so you know with that
we're continuing to find things
and we're starting to make some
progress on some of those
recommendations as well they're
not they're not all policy
things but they're things that
that a lot of different people
need to work on
uhm.
So
the way that the the study was
done is that we had a a task
force that looked at some
research questions
and I identified the things that
we wanted to look at we
determined that we were going to
look at both
congenital and acquired
disabilities of that included
everything from
dd kinds of things at up to
seniors with the mention and
people that may have have
acquired physical disabilities
as well
that scope let us into a lot of
different areas and so the way
the research went with it is
that we
we looked at both the the
resources the dental practices
in the state and what they had
to offer as well as looking at
patience and care givers about
you know what their experience
was and where they you know what
they were finding with it.
Uhm so just going down some of
these findings
we found that the need exceeds
the current resources that's not
a surprise we probably wouldn't
have started if we didn't know
that that was a problem but you
know we we were able to confirm
that in a more quantitative way
as to where some of those
problems are.
Um we also found that the the
resources for adults are much
more limited than they are for
children so
the pediatric practices for the
most part have some of the are
are equipped to handle children
with special needs that doesn't
mean that all of those needs are
being taken care of it just
means that there are a lot more
resources out there to be able
to take care of them
but there's a real drop off that
happens when those windows kids
are not able to see a pediatric
dentist anymore finding another
place for them and they're just
aren't those resources in the
community and a lot of that has
to do with educational things we
will talk about that just a
little bit more as we go and we
also found that there is a real
lack of data there's not much
surveillance that's going on and
so
that allows the problem to get
bad before we realize that in a
lot of ways
and that was a problem to us in
terms of studying it when we
went looking for these numbers
and trying to find where it is
most of the agencies that that
would collect and didn't have
them or they had them in a form
that was not very useful to us
you know it's hard to pull out
the data that we need to do so
that's an area I think that's
going to take a while to make a
change but I think out that
we're aware of that we can start
looking at what you know where
where are the ways to to manage
them and do something with it
we found that that there are a
lot of providers who are very
willing to do it but they feel
proof poorly supported they
don't feel like the resources
are there for them they don't
feel that they've had the
training to do it or that they
don't have access to the
information that they need to
and to do something with it but
the good thing is that their
interested in finding out more
about it and so if those
resources are available there
they're willing and able to to
do that.
We found that most of the the
coverage for those with
disabilities comes from medicaid
but the dispunctions and
medicator
barrier to you know there
ability to get the the treatment
that they need.
That becomes especially a
problem for adults again so
there's kind of a double when I
meet not only are there fewer
resources for them to be able to
tap into to get care but then
the disfunction of medicaid
makes it harder for them to get
care at the places where they
might be able to get care so
i'll focus in on medicaid a
little bit more after after a
few minutes but.
Uhm
we found out that both patients
and providers lacked information
they're just are not good
information resources out there
to find out what what is
available where to go if they
need it uhm there is a lack of
specialty care so
a lot of the special needs care
that is being provided as is
being provided by either special
or by general practitioners or
by pediatric denise
and those are both primary care
they're not specialty care so
there's there's a difficulty
with that
there are there's a major
problem with regard to access to
operating rooms so in the
hospitals not only
not only did the the hospital
kind of discriminate in terms of
being able to get operating time
for it but then the the
resources to be able to do that
are not there so
that that is a problem I think
for those with the most secure
acute problems I mean they they
need to have a operating sweet
in order to do that
none of the the ambulatory
surgical sweets are really
available for dental at this
point there is one there is a a
sweet like that at UNM but it
isn't staffed and so there's not
really a a place for that to
work so
that's just that that's a
difficult problem that's a
technical problem from a dental
standpoint is how how do we you
know make some of those kind of
changes but it is a big problem
for a certain group of people
it's not a huge group of people
but it's a significant number
and they have no other access to
to it that way so.
And then finally there's a a
lack of standardized records and
so as people have to move from
one place to another weather is
to a different practitioner to a
specialty and so on there's not
really a standardization and so
we find you know there's a
duplication or an inability to
adapt to it and that's a a that
makes it inefficient for for
them to take advantage of what
resources there are so
I won't spend too much time
talking about the next couple of
graphs they just can outline I
think some interesting
information about what are the
problems for patience that are
trying to seek down the three
men and then also what um is you
know what kinds of things are
keeping them from getting an
appointment or being able to see
that so i'll let you look at
that in the explanations are in
in the in the booklet as well
so looking at some of the
recommendations i've kind of
boiled them down to eight other
the twenty three here but they
they summarize a number of
things.
So first of all it's fixing
medicaid i'll talk in the little
bit more detail about what the
problems with medicaid are but
when you have that when they're
so reliant on medicaid as being
their source of funding for for
treatment when it's not working
properly and it doesn't serve
their needs it's not really
helping and so we we need to
make a difference so if
medically were to be fixed that
would take care of a lot of
other problems that are going on
so it's a good place to start
in freight improving provider
education both pre and post
doctoral so we don't have a
dental school so predept
doctoral education is something
that we have to influence and we
we're we're dedicated I think
they're talking to the each of
the schools that serve us in
terms of adding whatever
research they can and improving
that training or having
rotations or options where
people can get that
but also we need to you know
after somebody's graduated there
needs to be sources of advanced
education for that whether that
be through our residency program
at UNM or whether it would come
in the form of continuing
education kinds of things
we do have a.
Are continuing education
forum scheduled for it this fall
so that would be that will
probably train about twenty five
people not necessarily twenty
five dentures but truck twenty
twenty five people from
different officers to be able to
do some of the more advanced
kinds of treatments for that.
And that will get them there
certification with medicaid so
there's a special there's a
special certification with
medicaid for some um extra
reimbursement and so hopefully
that will bring some new new
people into the into the
pipeline we haven't we we had
that several years ago but we
have not had them in the
consistent basis for probably
well well before the pandemic
and so
this will start I think we're
hoping that we're going to be
able to do this at least once a
year and maybe twice a year and
start bringing some more people
that way
uhm
creating new information
resources we've started a
website that will have
information both for
practitioners and for patience
and care givers
helping them to find what the
resources are
it's not public yet I mean it's
not sat super private that we
just haven't publicized it yet I
guess at this point there's
still a few little glitches I
think in terms of making it
useful and making it
inapplicable but uhm uhm we
think that's a really big need
the data has had the website
like that and we're kind of
patterning our offer there is
that something we learned about
and I think that's gonna be a
good positive thing
standardizing records
we're going to be talking more
about that I think in terms of
this advanced training that we
have if you look in the in the
report i'm towards the back
there's a there's a page that
shows a a form that we got from
kansas i'm state of kansas that
they've used in a more
standardized way and we're
hoping we can get that to be
adopted by all of those who are
providing special needs care in
the state and they'll just make
that a little bit more
interoperable in terms of doing
that it's still not a a
sophisticated electronic record
like we'd like but it starts
simple and that was an easy way
to to get going so you can look
in the book about that just a
little bit if you want to.
Uhm we're talking more and more
about improving surveillance I
think we found some some
openness to that from the
healthcare authority in terms of
how they may be able to I
do some better surveillance I
think there's a general lack of
surveillance when it comes to
dental need in the state the the
department of health
department of oral health in the
department of health is a little
bit weak on the surveillance
side some states have very
sophisticated surveillance that
goes on so I I think that's one
of those things that we're gonna
have to work on is probably a
long term project in terms of
being able to do better
surveyless but that would that
would be a that would be a
positive not just for the
special needs group but for all
of new mexico's health if we
have good survey what's going on
and and can pinpoint trends and
and things that are problematic.
Uhm expanding existing
subsidized resources right now
the there's just two ham
subsidized resources in the
state one of them is the special
needs clinic that hca runs in
and in albuquerque and then
there's the clinic at UNM
the clinic at unanimous been
understaffed and there are some
issues that are are an issue are
a problem with that they they
are working out at pretty
diligently and they're hoping
that they will have the staff
that they need to in order to be
able to go forward hopefully
that will be not only a research
for the community but also an
educational resource to to do
that but I think expanding those
resources so that the the clinic
that is in albuquerque would
love to be able to add staff and
even add satellites and so that
makes sense from the standpoint
of not only
you know their ability to
develop staff who's specially
trained in other kinds of things
but also the the management of
you know how how people interact
they they have that experience
to be able to do that and that's
it's a it's unique somewhat and
in special needs care from what
it is with patience who don't
have the special needs knowing
which codes to use and how to do
that and so if we can expilled
upon the resources that we have
and expand those to different
locations and other things that
would be would be good so while
we want to expand the those that
are not part of subsidized um
areas in in different locations
taking advantage of what we do
have I think would be be helpful
for that
just
in terms of resources that it's
not hard to name where they are
so I taught talk about the two
substitutes resources that are
now but turkey there's a a
couple practices in rise well
that are doing some special
needs care private practices and
then a practice in los crucials
that's doing some of that.
But those are limited resources
again by medicaid and other
kinds of things um and so we
need to be able to expand that
obviously the pediatric
practices are offering some
significant care and then
there's a lot of private
practices that are doing the
higher level of that don't
require lots of special
accommodation but are still
seeing some special needs
patients so
you know we need we need to
expand that base and we need to
be able to have people to plug
in at all of those different
levels what whatever that need
is going to be.
Uhm we are working at improving
the provider networking so you
can understand that when there
is just these few places that
are doing it there's not a lot
of communication between them in
terms of what other resources
are there and so
they all told us that they often
don't know where to refer people
to they don't know um you know
what what other researches are
there where when somebody calls
them that i'm doesn't need
advanced services where can they
send them to do that and so
we're trying to build the
network so that there's more
communication within providers
in terms of referrals and you
know where things can go that
way.
And then finally improving some
case management resources
there's a lot that can be done
by that I mean that's an area of
efficiency when it comes to care
so if we can you know manage
those those issues so that
people can find find where they
need to go they can get the care
that they need in and in a
reasonable way without
duplication of services and and
someone so
there are the community dental
health care coordinators that
are being trained at santa fe
community college would be very
well suited to that right now
there's not a good there's not a
good practice mechanism for them
they there's not that we don't
have in dental insurance away to
pay them and that's that's an
issue but that's beyond again
that's not just us that's the
profession as a whole but there
are that's one of those things I
think that we need to find ways
to to be able to incorporate
that and and make for better
care that way so
again happy to answer more
questions about the the special
needs things and I would
encourage you to look at the
more detailed recommendations
that are in the report because I
think they really shed a lot
more light on it than what I
have here.
Uhm switching over to medicaid
just to talk a little bit about
that on the map there you'll see
that actually medicaid providers
okay
i'll go through this part of it
very quickly since I know I met
time sorry easy to keep talking
to some
but the
medicate providers we actually
have a high percentage of
providers in new mexico and that
shouldn't be completely
surprising I mean we have such a
large rural population that
people have to kind of be able
to see medicaid all over the
place but the problem is when
the system is this functional
they're not seeing very many
patience there's not very much
incentive for them to take very
many people so they see the odd
patient but they're not seeing
very many so in spite of the
fact that we have a hot high
degree of participation we are
still getting a low degree in
terms of people providing
regular care for it.
Uhm
so I covered a few of the things
that are an issue with medicaid
here I don't need to go through
all of them but we talked about
the fact that pediatric coverage
is a lot better than what adult
coverage is and so even though
new mexico's adult coverage is
better than a lot of states
there still are huge holes and
it and it's not
there are reasons why adults
have a hard time accessing it it
doesn't doesn't work very well
for that and it's classing us on
the on the backside so we we've
talked somewhat about
um how overall health is
impacted by lack of dental care
so when when these medicate
adult patients are not getting
seen and not have having access
to
you know some of the routine and
preventive care there that's
complicating their diabetes as
complicating their heart disease
and other kinds of things which
we pay for big time because it's
our expensive problems to take
care of over the long haul uhm.
Talking a little bit about
structure.
People don't always understand
because they might be familiar
with how health insurance works
and how medicaid uhm health
insurance works but demo
insurance is not really built on
an insurance model it's in it's
a it's a reimbursement type
model and and it works
differently so a lot of the
rules that are
part of that a lot of the the
claim rules of the kinds of
things are meant to discourage
utilization they they encourage
people to
spend their own money for that
rather than their own and so
when you build a medicated
system off about a structure
that's meant for people who have
their own money it doesn't work
very well and it's it's
the patient side it
disincentivises their coming
regularly on the provider side
at punishes them for providing
regular care because they're
they're not getting paid for
things are doing and so I think
we need to look at that in the
in a broader way in terms of
what what we could do with
medicaid it's the model itself
that somewhat the problem.
Uh reimbursement you hear from
us a lot about
you know the main problem here
is that we haven't had any
meaningful increase in about
thirty years
things have changed a lot in
that time
and
it's just making it really
difficult to to go ahead one of
the problems and this is not
just true new mexico are every
state does this is when they
evaluate whether they should
raise their fees they look at
the surrounding states to decide
if this is where we ought to be
raising you are are we up to
snuff the problem is the fall of
those other states are way below
all it does is perpetuate the
you know it's it's a rush to the
bottom when it comes to where we
need to be and
there it's not that there's not
other data that's out there if
you compare I mean we we can
understand by what commercial
rates are in how dentist
participate in those other rates
what it would take to get people
to work at a certain level and
so it the data is out there we
just need to make sure that
we're looking at that and not
this idea that as long as we're
better than texas where better
but which we're not better than
texas so if you look at the the
uhm the next map you'll see how
we're we're really the worst
that in the region when it comes
to where reimbursements are in
in someone so i'm definitely
something that needs to be work
looked at more carefully uhm we
need some we need some major
increases if we're actually
going to fix the problem and
start to attract more providers
but we need some modest
increases just to keep the
people that we have on board so
we are we are in the verge of
losing quite a number of
essential medicaid providers
because they just can can't make
it anymore
you know that does reimbursement
rates are below what it costs to
provide so you have to be able
to
to cautious to another to
another revenue source and so
we just don't have that in the
state we have so many people
that are on medicare we don't
have a good base on which to to
car shift
and then finally credentially
has been a major problem for
medicaid.
We just passed a bill during the
last legislative session that
requires timely credentialing
for commercial insurance that's
great I think we're really
looking forward to having that
implemented and I think it'll be
a great thing for us but
unfortunately it doesn't apply
to medicaid and with medicated
it's a really serious problem
because if that delay lasts for
very long that you know there
are so few providers that if
that provider can't provide care
because of a credentialing issue
that's going to be a a problem
so
hopefully that's something that
we can address that that could
be addressed
administratively the the
medicaid when they're making
their contracting and other
kinds of things could require
that to be timely but that's
something that just really
absolutely needs to be changed
sooner rather than later.
Okay looking at a couple of
other things
with licensing
I wish I could say this was just
a new problem but it's not
really we're just really having
problems with the lace and terms
of
getting licenses in a timely way
and and someone I hear from
people almost every week that
for one reason another
there they're the processing of
their license has been delayed
that's especially true I would
say of the more simple permits
and other kinds of things for
assistance and hygernast
in it get becomes a really
critical factor I mean some if
if you're in a rural location
you don't have a very big pull
the draw from your almost always
having to bring somebody in from
somewhere else to to do that and
if they're having to wait until
license they're not going to do
that for very long if you have
you've got him to come into the
state
another issue is that those
delays are actually causing
credentials to expire so we had
we we had instituted a a new
course and tasked for a dental
assistance to get certified for
rate radio graphs
the course that we ran in
february
you know probably within thirty
days of that they have all the
materials they needed to submit
in order to get certified by the
board i'm hearing from them
right now i've probably heard
from three this week that they
got there application was turned
down so it took six months
before they heard about what was
going to happen and now the
credentials that they had need
to be you know they have to
retake a test or do other kinds
of things to do that so
these are problems I mean I it
needs to be addressed I don't
know if it's a legislative issue
where just a administration
issue but it's something that it
is really impacting communities
and it's it's maybe a small
thing but it it really hurts
these practices when they're not
able to get what they need to
so again i'll let you look at
that.
I'll put a plug in for the
dell dental high generous
compact I know that compacts
headed by hard time appreciate
senator pubs being sponsor of
that during the legislative
session
but it's not gonna solve our
problems in terms of bringing
people in and and and and in
fact people might move out as a
result of it but if we had
better mobility and we didn't
have that barrier I think we'd
be able to address the problem
and more more places and it just
makes a new mexico done license
much more valuable so we'd
really appreciate um your
continued consideration of that.
Gross receipts tax you always
hear quite a bit about that but
we are unique situation in new
mexico there are not very many
states that tax health care
and that is a real problem to
to are buying dollar enter its
patience because especially in
denistry they are paying more
out of pocket rather than having
managed care paying for it and
so that means that they're not
worth as much as what a dollar
in texas is and we know that
that's true that patients from
border areas go across the
border because they can buy more
with their with their same
dollar somewhere else
and then finally liability
reform i'm not going to dwell on
this one very much but denise
are not part of the minical
malpractice act.
There are I guess there's a
number of issues that are
related to that that that can be
a problem and we're i'm really
hearing about it and and this is
relates to the special needs
clinic is that those providers
who are providing general and
seizure having hard time getting
insurance now in new mexico just
because of what's happening with
that so
you know again in crigita to do
something with liability reform
and hopefully we can be included
in that when that comes so
since I overspent my time i'm
going to give you an opportunity
to ask some questions at this
point that thank you very much
thank you so who doesn't have
questions.
Okay we will start with senator
pope.
Let's go with four minutes.
I'll be russia madam chair
just want to
echo kind of what you were
talking about and it will
continue to work on here we've
talked about it before and just
my used to be in a a dental
assistant in the air force and
just understanding what you're
doing so I appreciate you being
here no questions thank you.
Representative thank you madame
chair and thank you for your
presentation if you you talked
about a lot of things today and
if you were to name the top
three that you like this
legislature to take care of just
tell us what those would be.
Medicaid medicaid medicaid no I
medicaid
gricity tax I think would be a a
huge thing
and then the education stuff you
know I mean.
That that's not an easy it's not
like there's a bill that's going
to sover education problem but
we need to start taking steps to
to address that so those would
be the three things that I think
are the most appropriate.
Ex matter
mister president do you have a
plan then you would like us to
consider on the education things
or does it have one been put
together that you'd like us to
consider because we need to move
on some of these things they
they've been talked about for a
long time I think we need a plan
manager and represent the
I think the thing that would be
closest and easiest to implement
would be
some kind of b a d d s program I
mean I think the infrastructures
are ready and place we've had
some discussions with unam about
it already and there seems to be
some interest
you know I mean there's a
there's a bureaucracy here and
that again is above my k trade
but um I I think we we need them
we need them to make the
commitment and make the ask for
the money part of it
I mean we've been at the point
where it was determined you know
what kind of initial investment
would be needed it would need to
start by having somebody that's
kind of working on curriculum
and other kinds of things for
that but um you know I would say
pushing you in m in the
influence you can you know give
to that that group I I think
there's interest there but it
needs to be institutional
interest and.
Last question has to do with the
number of dental high denners to
come and what they said is that
they want to go into the schools
and they want to uh start
helping children at an early
aids in terms of their dental
care but doesn't do they have to
operate under the aspects of a
dentist to go in that part was
unclear to me if they just
wanted to provide the care
madam chair representative.
There are avenues for them to be
able to do that without
extensive supervision I mean
generally speaking
they need to operate with some
collaboration so there's a lot
of things that can be done in
the school that don't require
very much in terms of education
and even some of the public
health type measures and someone
that don't require a lot of that
some of the
things for example placing
sealants and someone do require
a little more diagnosis but
there are ways to there's waste
to work with that and in fact
we've been talking with the
department of health right now
about their program and
you know trying to find ways
that they may be able to do some
of that through teleductory
where they would be able to have
a consulting dentist that would
be would be a part of it a lot
of that has to do with how you
know what when you find
something what do you do with it
and you know I mean you have to
have a place for for those
patients to be able to go and so
that's why we've encouraged that
collaboration but the short
answer question there are some
things that can be done that way
not necessarily everything.
All right madam chair so then I
can ask the dental hygiene is to
move forward with the plan that
they have and it has to be just
tell me president to home to
make sure that if something is
where that oversight needs to
come because I want to help them
move forward with the plan for
the children
manager representative um.
I think a lot of those
discussions can probably take
place at the word of down health
care
we we've been having some
discussions with them so i'm not
I i'm not sure if we're talking
about the same thing and the way
we've been in couraging them
that way but we feel like
they're probably
in terms of the plan that they
brought us there were some
discussions about
using what we have in place
which is the clarity of practice
model and doing something
different we've been encouraging
them to work on the
collaborative practice more
because we think there's more
flexibility there to be able to
do that without having the
necessarily pass additional
legislation and other kinds of
things
were not necessarily opposed to
some of the legislative things
that might be part of that but
we think we can do that we think
we can do it with some of the
stuff that we have in place so
um but I would I guess I would
increase those discussions to
take place out the board of dell
health care but also we're
having some ongoing discussions
with them too about what they're
interested in all right thank
you thank you madame chair thank
you and in the dental hydrant
did
a reach out to me and ask if
they could be presented they
could present here and it we had
already said our agenda etc so
so
that didn't happen but I will go
to represent a roadball couple
year
thinking madam to I think you so
much good to see you I have
several questions i'm trying to
figure out the priority how can
it do this but I think i'm gonna
start with the special smiles
special needs report.
Um
and so I saw that
this sum.
Report highlights obviously the
patience are with disabilities
facing widespread difficulty in
getting timely dental care which
will talked about compounded by
poor medicaid reimbursement
inadequate training and lack of
hospital access this was all in
your executive summary so my
question is and if you could I
have a couple of questions so if
you could just give us some
concise short quick questions I
mean answers how do you see your
role the associations role in
expanding the provider training
and resources in order to
address the gap that you
describe in this summary
manager representative when is
what I was mentioning in terms
of offering these courses post
graduate courses being able to
do that that's something that we
do and are able to do pretty
easily I think we're also
kind of trying to take the lead
in terms of talking to the
institutions and and the
residency program in terms of
what what they may be able to
offer for that
thing thank you madame train
that is very important and thank
you for reempersising that
because obviously our special
needs are population is
very important to us so
then
my next question is that.
I think it was in
your other report summary.
With I think you identified I
think it was on page or maybe it
was in this one I don't know
page twenty you describe only
forty dentists certified to use
the medicaid spent on its in
this one special needs a code
and pure them fifteen that are
actually providing care
regularly so what incentives or
reforms would increase this
capacity steak wide.
I'm adam chair representative
we've talked about that quite a
bit
some of it I think would be in
terms of
having better reimbursement for
certain codes so some of the
specific ones that special needs
care uses that that would be one
avenue that we might look at for
that
we did also find out that there
is a
this only applies to one segment
which is the dd population but
medicaid has a
combat tracking code that that
individuals that are on the dd
waiver
have and so it may be possible
to supplement you know have
supplemental kinds of payments
that would allow people that are
indicated by that code to
receive
have their care reimbursed at a
little bit higher rate or or
have have a have an additional
payment that would go along with
it so which is kind of the model
that the the current
certification code house but if
we could expand that a little
bit to apply more than then that
might have some opportunity they
advantage of using that second
method is that you actually
could increase all of the
different codes a little bit
using that that co co indicator
because that that would be more
in line with the idea that it
it's reimbursing additional time
and material you know that the
different things that actually
add costs providing that care.
Thank you and i'm sorry if you
did address for my step down for
just a little bit so thank you I
have one last question so in
your this presentation you
describe it at the very end um
dentists currently not covered
under the state's medicate
medical malpractice which makes
it really difficult to get
insurance and then you describe
turning become of deep pockets
so how is this liability
environment affecting
equipment and retention and I
you described it briefly but
what specific reforms would we
need specifically to recommend
and I think we're in the
recommendation state of our
reporting so whatever you can
give us and detail that would be
great.
Madame chair representative.
I think just being included
would go a long ways in terms of
um you know kind of managing the
overall situation right now I I
can't honestly say that I think
denisor in the same boat is
where the physicians are they
have they have a really they
have a figure problem that what
we have we have specific groups
of denise that I think are
having bigger problems along the
same lights and that has to do
with the general station other
kinds of things so.
Being included I think would
make a big difference and I
think it would
you know that deep pocket ideas
that you know because we're not
under that act a lot of times
the
the cases will settle with with
those who are under the practice
act under one.
You know one aspect and then
then they go after the those who
are not with it with a different
with a different level of
aggression something like that
at that point so I think just be
included would make the most
difference to begin with I don't
know that we need a lot of
we don't need different
standards other kinds of things
I think just having that neck
into some in place you know help
helps quite a bit in terms of
saturday thank you and i've
heard that over and over again
thank you madam chair that thank
you representative block thank
you madame chair thank you
doctor scripts martin I think so
that right you did the thing
thank you so I guess i'm i'm
wondering
you said last time that we did
the reimbursement increase
significant increase to medicaid
I think you said thirty years
ago and so I guess i'm wondering
i'll ask a multipart question to
make it super hard for you but
i'm wondering can we sustain the
current amount of clinics and
providers that we have in the
state with the current medicaid
rates.
Because I do see that people are
leaving obviously but i'm also
wondering when it comes to the
coverage of the health care
plans when it comes to like met
life or whatever for dental.
Is that driving up the cost of
coverage for everybody because I
believe you said the medicaid
even medicare people are paying
somewhat.
Some kind of copay right or some
larger amount of the actual
service so i'm just wondering
two part question.
First is it.
Sustainable currently ish and
then is that also a problem when
it comes to reimbursements and
the cost of just the actual
service
madam chair representative first
the correction of I they're not
really paying a copay it's just
that the system is sort of built
on the idea that they would pay
a copy and the fact that they're
not paying it makes it harder
actually model to get in and and
someone because normally that
would be where it is so it's
mostly just the
avenue that keeps them from
being able to utilise it.
Um is that it sustainable where
it's at I would say.
No with one caveat and that is
that a lot of curious being of
medicaid care is taking place in
february qualified health
clinics and other subsidies
areas and so
they
I I think they would benefit by
improving medicaid coverage they
that the futures just as much as
anybody else need that in order
to to stay viable.
But they have an extra bit that
keeps them from failing i'm in a
way in that in the the
supplemental payments that
they're receiving federally.
Uhm the private practitioners
who were out there which do are
still a significant portion of
it are telling me that they are
on their last legs and I mean
six months to a year if they are
talking about no longer taking
that occasion as a result of
that because they just can't
afford to do it anymore I I hope
that was responsive to all parts
of the question thank you it is
and thank you for for clearing
that up for me because it's like
when it comes to insurance and
medicaid it's all very confusing
right and so madam chair I guess
in my own district like my own
doctor she has clinic that she
is the provider at all mcgordo
and then a few days of the week
she's down in san matersa so I
know our doctors are working
very hard to try to get coverage
around the state and so I guess
my like for me I have private
insurance.
And honestly they're they the
people who work at the clinic or
like thank god you know what I
mean like they it's hard enough
to get reimbursed from medicaid
but then also when you have
these impediments with
reimbursement rates I think
that's a huge problem so madam
chair and doctor scripts a month
I guess I would just.
Ask for maybe a very specific
ask when it comes to what the
medicaid reimbursement should be
state why because I know it may
be different across the board
but we do have to kind of
average it so I guess my last
question if I have any time
would be what would that
significant bump actually be.
Mountain cherry representative
thank you for the question it's
a sometimes a harder one to
answer I guess.
I would say that we would have
to probably be looking in the
forty to fifty percent range for
a lot of the procedures in order
to get them up to a level where
um
half of the providers in the
state would say I can I can do
that I can make that in in the
business thing so.
I'm that's probably a specific
as I can be I think there are
ways to do this that don't
necessarily mean across the
board increases so the last time
again that we have a significant
increase was there was targeted
like the top twenty five
procedures that were out there
and and those were given a
significant increase at one time
and and so on the problem is
that that was about thirty years
ago and so since then you know I
mean there have been.
You know two three four percent
increases but there's also been
two three four percent decreases
i'm over time to leave us kind
of where we're out.
Uhm
I I don't I hope that was
specific enough I mean I I think
we could get into the niddy
gridy and certain procedures on
what would have taken to do that
I mean we have there are um
there are information sources
out there that kind of test the
this is kind of weather typical
fears they'll they'll run the
gammit and terms of you know.
This is a fee that seventy
percent of dennis would take or
this is the fee that fifty
percent would take and and so on
and I think our target would be
that we can get to the point
where we would have fifty
percent whatever that would be
but I think that would probably
be about a forty to fifty
percent increase of where we are
right now.
Thank you madame
questions but I wish I had
joined a claim
representative and thank you
very much for him chair and
thank you again for your
presentation you are so
knowledgeable just to clarify
and please forgive me so when
the legislature went to the hunt
and we passed the hundred and
fifty percent medicaid rate
which was implemented in july of
twenty twenty four are you
saying that
it did not cover a demonstrate.
Manager representative yes that
is what i'm saying the problem
is that there is not a dental
benefit in medicate made a care
and that when it's indexed to
medicare fees and so therefore
we don't have an index that
would allow it to increase on
the devil fees and so we haven't
seen so we need a special piece
of legislature that is specific
to dental and dental hygienes
correct
manager representative that is
correct yeah i'm far with our
rest of our medical great thank
you and then
it looks like we need another
piece of legislative managed
care companies I know how much
my chair and I love those mc
so often rely on secondary
dental administration so we're
talking about maybe a different
rfp are different administrative
requirement that would help
mitigate this issue is that
correct
manager representative.
Yes I think that's the
easiest way to answer that would
just be to say yes that they the
department negotiates with the
matched care company but the
managed care company doesn't
always have a dental
administrator and so del
somebody else
I don't want to why they when
they're application then and so
okay so I hear another one slide
I don't know the number
so is it typical and other
states that you could not begin
your licensing until you do both
the state and the insurance
company is this the typical.
Cause any medical provider has
to have a service license and
then they have to either have a
medicaid application or become a
preferred provider would deliven
to or whatever so that is a
typical is that the typical
protocol that you're seeing
slows down but yet it is not at
normal to the state of new
mexico is that a fair assessment
of madam chair present yes that
thank you so much I just wanted
to be for a run out of time
you're you ask any medical
malpractice this is the same as
the patient safety compensation
act so you're asking that denise
street is put in that because
when you can't find a private
sector.
Medical malpractice insurance
you need to be able to have the
option to have the government
subsidised medical malpractice
is that correct is that what
you're asking manager
representative.
Now
what the what
what the medical malpractice
does is allow for
I can a particular mechanism in
terms of settling the lawsuits
and making sure that patients
are current for if they need
ongoing care and other kinds of
things so i'll i'll all that is
part of that.
That can reduce premiums
because there is a smechanism
that that reduces the liability
that would face with that it
pays the first seven hundred and
fifty thousand dollars something
like this so that's great it's
that's wonderful and we think
you should be a part of that
let's see if we can do that I
think that happened
lose my time madam chair no how
how do we change the code for
reimbursement rate for waiver
and dd do we need to is that a
waiver application or is it
is it an mco what how are we
changing the
the reimbursement rate on that
uh madam chairman
representative.
Um.
I'm i'm not sure that that's a
that's a code which just the
state of new mexico uses it to
unique code that we have with it
and I think that they've
determined
the amount on it themselves and
that how that was calculated i'm
not sure but it's definitely a
welcome supplement thank you so
I can see so thank you madame
chair and thank you very
answered let's find out thanks
representing
thank you madame chair man
doctor scripture i've got some
sad news for you
so
you know I just listen to what
you said about the medical mall
practice act and most people
want to be in the middle of mad
malax because of the caps
that's typically the reason so I
thought it was really
interesting that you want to be
in the pcs because of the
saddle what you're calling the
settlement mechanism
I was telling I was telling this
committee that I had a
conversation with the offer of
the osi the office of the
superintendent of insurance and
the actuary and they actually
sent over a chart of the amount
of time that it takes the pcf to
sattle cases and in new mexico
or i'm sorry the national
average is like a couple of
years and in new mexico seventy
percent of the.
Medical not practice that cases
that we have take over five
years to settle we have some
upwards of fifteen years.
That we're waiting to settle
and so if you're looking for a
quick way to do that I don't
necessarily think it's the
patient compensation fund and
it's actually driving up the
cost of medical malpractice
insurance because the defense
fees take so long over so many
years and so I just want to put
that out there like as folk as
you're thinking about whether or
not you want to do that my
understanding is that there are
even a couple of practices who
weren't to
independent clinics who want to
get out of the patient
compensation find because it is
cheaper outside of the pcf the
medical practice insurance is
and so it one of the things were
trying to do is like finally you
get some data i'm really
grateful to that was I just for
sending this so we can actually
figure out is like what are the
benefits of the pcf exactly
versus you know without the pcf
you're just kind of left on the
private insurance market
and clearly it's catherine
across the country.
Most of the reforms that were
seeing quote reforms are within
the patient compensation fund
when really it's kind of cut
road we got to figure out how to
regulate the insurance industry
right throw it out there in
so it's really interesting to me
that you would like to be in the
pcf in particular
I was wondering I was looking at
um.
Your
bullet number two it's making it
hard for dentists to get
insurance under some
circumstances you talked about
in estate and in particular I
don't know much about the
identity profession but do
dentist themselves do the
necessary.
Manager representative some do I
mean there's a different
different levels but yeah that
definitely
sump some due the surgeons and
some of the special care okay
thank you I just that I wasn't
too clear on.
Because I am imagining that you
know when we're talking about
dental malpractice do you know
like what it typical
either settlement involves or
like what are the typical
damages for a.
For a dental case.
Madam chair representative
I can't give you authoritaries
of numbers and so i'm just you
know I mean there's a pretty
wide range because an awful lot
of dental cases are are fairly
simply solved it's taking care
when specific problem and and
those kinds of things you know
doing that I think the bigger
concerns are more more long term
health damages and things like
that you know that that might
arise from an end and it's these
just situation or other kinds of
things where.
You know me i'd think
settlements there can end up
being comparable to a similar
case in a health care setting in
another healthcare setting so it
most dental claims are not are
not big and that's the reason
why we weren't included in the
medical malpractice act in the
first place was there wasn't
there wasn't a need it wasn't a
particular issue is just
becoming a bigger need at this
point again because of certain
people who are having difficulty
getting insurance great thank
you madame chair representative
from thank you madame chair and
thank you to doctors groups.
And we appreciate the
electric to the precious but we
get
I think we ever get a chance to
thank you but it's always nice
to keep bars miles going um but
my
great dentists here in last
process he was approached to buy
a private equity investors to
you know join their group and
they would take care of
everything in all these
different things but he realized
you know what he would have to
forego where his practice is
doing really well
my concern his two was you know
how is that
it's probably very attractive
for new young dentists to join
something like this because of
the big investment it takes
but then they have to give up
you know a lot of that control
things that they're doing um
is
is that something that.
Is a detriment to our you know
new dentists you know coming in
or are you seeing that you know
across the state or is that just
something that they tried to do
here.
Ah madam chair representative um
I would.
Yeah.
I would say it's not not as
simple as being a detriment I
guess I so I wouldn't I would
not say that necessarily
I have members that have
benefited greatly by having some
outside
of investment it allows them to
have technologies available that
they wouldn't have and and
someone.
But I think there's others where
it really hurts them you know I
mean it and so.
Um it it can depend in terms of
how how it helps or hurts
patience there's no doubt that a
larger group has certain
efficiencies and economies that
a smaller a small group doesn't
have I mean there's purchasing
power there there's the ability
to negotiate insurance rates and
other kinds of things that you
would get and so.
Again the same way some patience
might benefit quite a bit by
having that available that may
suit their the insurance that
they have another kinds of
things where as some communities
might be hurt by the fact that
now you have this kind of limit
to scope that's been created
because of what what's there so.
The short answer I guess is that
there's nothing there isn't a
short answer it's it it it can
be really complicated and really
specific to what that particular
need is um
you know I mean
how to describe I I think there
are things market things that go
on that kind of drive people
into that that don't really want
to go into it and I think that's
that is a problem that is a
detriment is having people being
kind of forced into having to
practice a certain way or do
certain things.
Because of the way that it that
it is um.
Overall it's probably neutral
you know I mean I think there's
some positives and there's some
negatives and it's hard to way
those until you look at the
specific situation.
I guess that's fair have they've
been doing it for very long in
our state.
Amended representative.
I think we first started seeing
this probably in the nineteen
nineties and in one former
another you started to see what
we sometimes call corporate
practices which are really not
necessarily corporate but are
more like a franchise you can
get franchise brand and things
like that.
Um it's just really grown a lot
in the last ten years I would
say that that were really seeing
a lot of people needing to do
that and I think one of the
recent while it's coming in so
much is that denise specially in
some others well really all over
but especially in some of the
rural areas are finding that
they can't sell their practice
there's nobody out there that
wants to to buy it except a
group like this who's willing to
investigate and then they plug
in younger than us and things
like that so for them it's a
real benefit it's not
necessarily benefit to the
community.
The.
Thank you very much first your
locus
and thank you madame chairman I
appreciate
this information as always and
then thank you for that for the
book I call it the book the
magazine i'm with regards to
some of the other services.
And concerns that I was as I was
flipping through it with regards
to persons that.
You know
who have a disability and it
needs services.
And.
I have a couple of questions
madam chair and one of them
deals with licensing and un on
the pay just to have a page
number but it says that there
are delays that are impacting
new licenses and renewals so
prefer uhm who what entity in
the state of new mexico is
responsible.
For.
Granting new license.
Madam chair senator
the board of dental health care
is the agency that's responsible
and they're a part of the
regulation and licensing
department who was actually
doing most of the administration
when it comes to that.
And madam chair so what are some
of the delays.
Manager center.
I I guess the main delay is
stuff is just setting that
they're the nobody's getting to
it there is not you know the um
it takes a little it takes a
little while often to um get all
the contents of an application
together.
But once all of that is together
then it's taking pretty long
time to actually act on it um
and take the next step that's
there so most most licenses that
are completed and and um and
straight forward is just
administrative checking off this
is there this is there this is
there and that's not happening
and so it they're occasionally
our question mark things were
that you know does the satisfier
doesn't the satisfying that's
what ends up going to the board
so that kind of a delay has
always been a part of the
process it happens on a very
limited basis but the delays
that we're seeing right now it's
just not getting acted upon for
extended periods of time that
can be
you know.
Several months I guess i'd
probably be the best way to
describe that.
So out of chair if it's taking.
Ah.
So I guess what i'm hearing out
of chairs at it could take maybe
just so a month or so in normal
time but it's extended maybe
for.
A nine months or longer.
For.
Approval manager center yes
basically I mean it's just it
it's not it's not consistent you
know I mean there certainly are
some things that go through a
little faster within that
probably two month range I would
say but there's other things
that seem relatively simple
check off kinds of things that
are taking six months plus at
this point.
Interesting managers I wonder if
it's a staffing issue.
Within
the.
The persons who were there so
many cheers under I speculate
that's what looks like to me but
I don't know for sure what what
they're what their challenges
are with regard to that thank
you manager would be interesting
to find out a little bit more
about what that particular
entity is doing and
how
what their staffing ratios are
whatever else on out too
because membership
that is under the correct
danger okay yeah we need to if
anyone's listening
rld um we want to know.
Thank you.
And and I guess madam chair also
the other when you talk about
people having it to be taken
tasks because the credentially
credentials expire due to the
delays and processing.
So.
And then they don't receive
feedback unfailed applications
so to me that sounds like a
an hr issue staffing so.
Doubles on what if anybody is
living listening from rld.
And then
the just a couple other quick
questions madam chair what is
like an average salary.
You know that a dentist.
Can earn.
Amount your center.
I would say there can be quite
arranged there too so somebody
who
owns their own practice and as a
specially practices probably.
Um.
Between two hundred and two
hundred fifty thousand maybe as
a average I don't know some
somewhere in there but I would
say that employee general
practitioners might be in the
between a hundred and hundred
and fifty thousand probably
typically.
So it it I mean it's certainly
depends on insurance it depends
on specialty it depends on other
kinds of things that are there
so it's probably quite a range
but it can be.
Fairly high.
Somewhere in between that is
okay
and then there is a way asked
that to matter because it goes
back to the again that
information page called
liability reform.
And
ah.
I I guess matter of chair for me
is still comes back to those
questions that we keep asking
so as the dentist are providing
services
that is also have to then
purchase I called risk
management rate insurance in
case something goes wrong
so.
Is there any information that
you have in that you have access
to that would give us an idea as
to what i'm cost is I was if
you're a private business owner
of course you have to do that
but if you work for an entity
then that may be part of what
they cover when they talk about
your risk coverage so is there.
Some idea of information that
you could share with us about as
I mean is the business cost cost
of business.
Mountain senator.
I can answer from my own
perspective since I have to buy
insurance that way I just I buy
a very part time plan cause I
only see people from the number
two hours a week off and time so
for me annually it probably cost
twenty five hundred or something
like that so it's not that is an
a huge problem to me and so that
that does not not an issue
particularly I think that the
oral surgeons and other
specialists it's considerably
higher but I would just be
guessing if I gave you a number
on you know I mean it's in the
tens of thousands but I
I don't I really don't know the
answer to them honestly so I
think typically general
practitioner who wasn't full
time practice with their own
practice and someone it's
probably in the fight to six
thousand dollar range.
So
I made insurance not it it is
i'm sorry it's is not the same
issue that the physicians are
having with and I don't want to
water that down that that is not
our issue particularly.
Okay yeah and i'm just asking
manager because as we have been
talking about this this issue on
medical mail practice and
I mean even if the state we have
our own costs where we have in
our risk management division
department to our call division
there's there's always certain
cost associated so i'm just
curious
and is there any data that that
would give us some information.
Um with regards to the cost and
it's a part of cost of doing
business
manager senator i'm sure that
there's data and i'm happy to
see if we can find that I don't
I don't have it but i'm happy to
see if we can get some for you
madam chair if you could please
set it to mister dust and if you
do have something because I
think that would also help us.
In in learning more about when
we talk about the cost of doing
business so I think you manage
I have a few questions
do just this is more curiosity
what what do you what do pre
dentals students major me what
what are they do what are their
undergrad degrees here.
Madam chair.
I would say most are a biology
or chemistry degree but people
are in optins things but I I
would say there's probably
increasing number that are in a
social science of some kind of
psychology or other kinds of
things interesting and then in
terms of the toro I i'd like to
wait you're thinking about
outside the box because that's
all that's going to work
where new mexico and how does
there to wish in compare to
texas tech I believe you set the
nape the neighboring counties
are in state texas tech so do
you have a sense of how they're
too we shouldn't
stacks up against both in state
tuition for new mexicans and out
of state tuitions for new
mexicans
so right now new mexicans that
texas tech only pay in state so
that that's the the same I would
I had that number in the
presentation but I don't have it
now but I I would say it's
probably about double I mean the
the difference I I don't always
know what the private school
tuition is either with that but
it's it's probably about double
and then yeah again the ads is
really a
what what are where is that is
that just an idea of your head
has they've been discussions and
is I mean and we're how can we
help to move that along
manager.
I hope it's more than the night
the my head but we certainly
have had discussions and it's
been on the table for quite some
time I would say the first time
that I had a discussion with the
met you and them about it.
Was probably fifteen years ago
so it's your longterm discussion
at that point we were really at
that point unamounts actually
had it on their their scoring
list at a at the reasonable
level and we were looking for
schools to partner with so near
where we would be able to
actually have a have a way to go
for whether there are planned to
go forward with it.
Uhm we had some discussions
again with UNM and the folks
from texas tack about whether
that was a possibility again the
citation there was that uhm they
were limited by by their state
and this is all that we can go
so
in terms of pushing it for it I
think.
The main thing that you could do
I guess is incurred unable how
much you make how much you might
like it if they if they would go
forward with it um I mean that I
don't think anything's a sure
thing and I think they for step
on it as you you have to
continue get somebody in there
and look at the practicality
look at how how it could work
and we've certainly had interest
from you and am it's not that
there aren't people at u and m
that are interested in talking
more about it
we just need to make sure it's
talking about it at the level
where somebody's actually
putting it on their scoring
sheet at the level where it
might actually get funded and
and someone and like you say I
think it starts modestly it it's
going to cost more in later
years but it starts with just
getting it.
You getting somebody on board to
work on a curriculum and I am
meeting with doctor richards
later this month so that is on
my list of things too.
Approach him regarding and I
have to set doctor broke is that
the the the special needs
dentists that you brought in for
that conference yeah manager
yeah
yeah it's just just for so I
where I have heard there was a
special needs dental conference
and I thought you know that are
meeting I thought there'd be
like five of us you know me and
that usual complainers and I
went and it was a room full of
dentists and dental hygienes and
they brought in this woman from
she's from idaho idaho and she
was fabulous I mean she took us
through the entire what it felt
like they have a disability she
had these horrible noises going
and she was stealing people's
purses and trying to get their
heart rates up and it was it was
fabulous and I would love to to
see more of that I wanted to
thank you for doing that and I
am I have and work in the
process of having a bill drafted
to I sit on the synchronous
board and probably all of you
remember it synchronous is the
health information exchange that
medical though I electronic
medical record and I had a bill
last year we are supposed to
have an official electronic
medical record for the state and
we don't I had a bill this year
it didn't it didn't pass but
since then i've thought
one of the things that we hear
about from providers
particularly more medical
providers but I I wonder if this
would work with dentists to is
to have the synchronous b are
official state medical record
and have the state pay for
everyone to be a member because
right now folks have to buy in
and it would be a great savings
for new mexico because you would
know you know if if you get in a
car accident in coming down to
last crucials and you have a
cardiac issue
that the physicians in the eat
ed here could look at the
electronic medical record or you
know if if you get second you go
somewhere and they think it may
be called platter you think.
Go back and see while you're
called platter was removed so I
think it's a savings but my
question is if I
I am going to do that bill I
don't know if i'll get the money
but I am going to do the bill
would it be.
Advantageous to include dentists
in the in the electronic medical
record.
I met him cherry.
Maybe I guess it's the best
thing I would say is that
we do not we I mean we are way
behind in terms of the
standardized electronic record
compared to matters and that and
there's reasons for that I mean
it's just the way that that is
um I
I think we'd love to be able to
be a part of that we'd love to
see some progress that was made
on that
but I don't i'm i'm hesitant to
go full throated to because I
don't know what capabilities it
would have I would hate for it
to be a step back from what we
have because it's not well
developed so but I think
registered and looking at it and
talking about it so kind of.
More that over and think of it
it's it's still sender I think
i've asked you to open a file
have I
don't
like that well.
So yeah just just something to
keep in mind and to think about
I think the more information we
have a providers have at their
finger tips the better off we
all are in an even in terms of
medical mail practice if you if
you know what's going on and and
then I did have a question about
rld but but that the
the voice chair asked that so I
I think that's something we need
to follow up on is that a long
standing issue in terms of the
delays in getting I mean I think
about when I took my board exam
I mean that we studied that and
to have to take it again is I
would guess folks can't pass it
because you specialize you you
don't have that broad and so do
you know of a dentist we have
lost because they were not able
to pass the boards the second
time.
Amount of I don't I mean mostly
when I was talking about our
assistance when it comes to
having to retake tests to do
that usually the dental the
dental test credential is good
for five years or something like
that's that generally doesn't
end up being worth it's there I
do know about dentists that
we've lost because of the delays
that you know if they were they
were taking too long to get
whether it's the license or
whether the it's the
credentialing side of it both of
those two things where
I I know clinic in gallop had
somebody lined up to come in and
because of the delay
you know that they had to find a
job somewhere else they just
couldn't be doing nothing for a
couple of months and and so on
so it does impact it in terms of
people not coming but
but unspecifically the test
credentials and stuff that
doesn't generally play to demos
cause they have a longer longer
taking boards
a nightmare scenario
and then I know and this is some
maybe somewhat dated but I know
that some of the professional
boards the licensing boards have
had a hard time keeping full
membership how how is the the
dental board um in terms of
keeping their members are are
they usually fall are they
usually have vacancies
on a manager
they're full now and they've had
a full contingent for a little
while
I would say there was only a
short time when there was maybe
one missing member for six
months or something like that so
are our board has been pretty
stable
if there was a big delay in
terms of appointments we've had
no appointments for about four
years or something like that but
the people that were on
continued to serve until and and
that was fine I mean that those
kinds of things we can deal with
pretty easily okay that's that's
good to hear and I think that's
it senator pope i'll go back to
you.
Thank you matter and I apologize
for trumpet back in
I know we kind of brought this
up earlier with borrell do you
see additional impact to this
issue with making sure that we
have dentists here in new mexico
and that is the fact of what was
passed in h r one as far as the
student loan caps and things
like that just especially on the
private end of.
Going to a private dental school
in those casts do you see that
is eliminated factor where folks
are might possibly have to now
go to banks or other private
lenders to pay for their school
when you're living costs.
Senator
yeah that the dust hasn't
settled down all of that yet for
us to know exactly what's gonna
happen with it there certainly
are some some limits and
restrictions with that that
are scary I guess i've been the
the limits that are on that are
well below what a lot of people
are having in terms of that and
it it would be great to
and he is great to keep him out
of that but if they can't get
the educational if they're gonna
have to go elsewhere to find it
I think it's going to be it
could be a problem
I I don't mean we haven't seen
the there certainly hasn't been
an impact yet for us to see
where what's going to happen
with it.
Are we concerned about it yes.
Thank you madame chair it's just
something we really have to look
out for I mean this is a
situation to wear.
I think it's already hard enough
to get folks to go into those
fields and the cost and just the
dedication and and the academic
rigor and so.
We've.
Basically in some cases put in a
situation that if you don't have
the wealth it means.
You may be cannot even go into
these curfields so we really
need to look into that thank you
madame shirt and I will just
make you off all the members
know this might my son has
severe optimism and needs dental
work in the or he had to take in
february of twenty twenties five
the first available appointment
to get him in the or is
september twenty twenty sixth.
So we need to keep better mind
that people with disabilities we
are treating as.
The.
Non humans I mean we wouldn't
make our dogs wait that long for
an appointment so I can all
motion about that but
but he's hanging in there thank
you
thank you
I just add you may be interested
the doctor put welcome is going
to be speaking at our meeting in
february and read ourselves so
we we enjoyed her to and I think
she'll be great
if it's after the session I
might be there thank you very
much
okay thank you so much and with
our final presentation notice
how we were ahead and now we're
behind so that we we that that's
how we roll around here so we
have a harry romal from the ph
doctor romel from um
lfc on hospital finance and no
whenever you're ready drama.
Thank you so good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is harry romel
i'm one of your health and human
services analysts with the lfc
and today i'll be giving you an
overview of hospital finances in
new mexico
health care delivery in access
act update uhm and a little bit
of looking forward on budget
reco- soliation how that's going
affect state hospital finances
so on page two that kind of
shows you the outline of what
we're gonna look at today a
little bit about hospital cost
reports the hda and then will
move into buck a budget
reconciliation or her one and
then
quick look at the timeline
because that's very important as
we look forward to how these are
changes at the federal level are
gonna affect our hospital
finances turning to slight three
and this for the key points
and I I want to emphasize that
we that new mexico is already
made great strides and helping
our hospitals fiscal health
we've gone from eighteen
hospitals operating a net loss
and fy twenty three seven and f
by twenty four that's sixty one
percent decrease
what you want to see in the
slides today except for some
projections are the revenues
from the hda
those when that be recognized in
our hospital cost reports until
five twenty five so we'll see
those in about a year
we are being quite congressive
of the changes the nature one as
those are enacted over time is
they're phased in what that's
going to look like in terms of
evaluating hospital fiscal
health medicare is a percentage
of revenue for example and then
also show you a model towards
the end of how we're trying to
recognize how those changes in h
r y are going to affect the hda
and hospital fiscal health and
general
am slight for it's sort of
informational accounting one or
one on hospital sources and
uses.
This is very straight forward
the main revenue of course for
hospitals is patient delivery a
delivery patient care they do
have other types of revenue
especially you and them for
example you know parking capture
gift shop
there can be non operating
revenue investment income
foundation dollars you know
donations you know but
benefactor purchases a wing I
mean of course we have
government appropriations
there's not listed in order of
scaler size but there's some of
the main categories and then you
know for mechanic perspective
expenditures
personnel services and employee
benefits that's the most
expensive peace of operating a
hospital
you've got supplies in
pharmaceuticals coming in after
that you've got some non capital
costs and then those are things
like utilities insurance
contract labor and then you have
your capital costs to appreciate
an americanization there's tend
to be very small and then other
interest and other non operating
expenses but I think take away
from this is that you know
personnel services and supplies
are the bulk of what a hospital
spends to keep the doors open
and operating
turning the slide five and
giving you a little bit of sort
of the fiscal history of the
system and I need to caution
that this is a two scale graph
we have a two yaxies here we
have the revenue is an operating
expenses on the left hand side
which would you know suggest
that there's a a big a big
profit but there's not
necessarily always a big profit
because it's a system wide and
then you also can have to
consider certain ratios you can
see here where the arpa phone
sort of kicked in and then
dropped off over to twenty
twenty two and twenty twenty
three and then you see sort of a
steep increase going into twenty
twenty four that slope is maybe
a little bit misleading because
the that increases a lot of that
increases from senate bill one
sixty one that was sort of a
jump start or a sort of a patch
before the hca kicks and there
was fifty million dollars.
To the hospitals to maintain a
certain level of cash on hand
you may see that slow decrease
the reason that's rick III I put
that caveat in is the cash was
recognized in twenty four this
clear twenty four one eight hca
issued the money but the
expenditures were recognized in
twenty twenty five and twenty
twenty six
but it is a good rejectory we
hope that keep that rejected so
what are some of the key metrics
trying to slide six that we
could look at for hospital
physical health and these are
sort of
national sort of best practices
of the types of things that we
can look at
your operating margin or the
ebid's earnings before income
and taxes obviously that's you
know your profitability we need
to look at that a critical
metric is average days operating
cash on hand how long can you
know you keep the doors open to
fall over seven you know all of
your revenues vanished
the average daily senses which
is refilled nice and speds
we also want to look at things
like the number of local teams
physicians contract physicians
you have versus your full time
physicians same with nurses
while that because you know the
local teenagers those
contractors as they tend to be
more expensive
especially the traveling nurses
so we want to look at those
ratios
and then the percentage of the
medi- the medicaid pair ratio is
a critical one as well and i'll
describe that a little more
detail on a chart down the road
we also have some informational
things that aren't really fiscal
mattress but we want to keep
track of those of course what
type of hospital is it rural
urban frontier hospital that
also plays into part of the how
the funds in the hard
distributed course is that a
four profit nonprofiter
government hospital and then one
thing we want to also look at is
you know are those hospitals
offering obgin services as we
know you know for example out to
vista hospital uh closer about
you I and wing.
And now that people in the last
biggest more area after travel
to santa fe
those types of services
moving to slide number seven I
want to give some thanks to try
and his and our friends at
mexico hospital association for
helping provide us some of this
data not everything is available
from the hospital cost reports
the cms cost reports things like
the low continuous positions um
the payer ratio we want to
double check that against we
will we see in the cost reports
if you want to dive into the
date I know the charter has very
small print we can just go over
to the biology building and use
their microscope later but this
is sort of that the the raw data
that we're getting from from the
hospital associated in very
helpful again when I thank them
very much for that
it's not complete there's not a
hundred percent things for
example we don't necessarily
know all the day's cash on hand
for some of these hospitals
because you know quite frankly
they all have different
reporting systems uhm the
privately on hospitals me roll
up there counting into a system
and so they may not be able to
track exact days cashed on here
so we have that for some of the
uh hospitals but not all of
we turn
to slide number eight I have
just kind of distilled that last
chart for you a little bit and
gave sort of a bit of a heat map
view
don't take the red yellow green
as everything's good watch out
but simply sort of scaling
across the system to see what
what the system looks like for
example you see some hospitals
have a a low operating ratio
here some are quite healthy
days cash on hand we don't
necessarily have all of that
data so this is really just
comparing these different
hospitals to each other
it's not it's not like your
typical lfc report card of red
yellow creek by any buying
means
where do we get some of this
data of course.
The hospital association again
thank you we can also look at
the cost reports the ordered
financial statements and you can
also look at form nine ninety
which is not quite as helpful
but the reason again why we
don't see all of those days cash
on hand data points is because
of some of that aggregate roll
up of revenues that some of the
hospital systems will do.
Turning to slide nine that's
just a little bit of extra
detail on the key point that I
gave you earlier I have to
apologize on that first bullet I
fat fingered that
that should be that hospitals
operating at the lost decrease
from eighteen to seven that
fifteen to seven as I mentioned
earlier and there is a sixty one
percent decrease that's that's a
real that's you know that is a
great statistic
again I want to emphasize that
we're not seeing the hda
revenues yet
those will be recognized in the
cost reports we do have some
estimates from which i'm going
to share with you and just a
couple of minutes
and then when you see some of
these net losses it doesn't
necessarily mean that the
hospital itself is operating in
a loss sometimes there's a
contractual transfer to the to
the the
parent firm the private equity
firm the hospital system and
that's recognized as a net loss
again there's a lot of
variations sort of this hospital
counting there can cause some of
this variety
turning to slide ten I want to
talk about this key fiscal
metric a little bit more
we have twenty four hospitals
that have medicaid revenues
greater than fifteen percent of
their neighbor that patient
revenue are this chart simply
shows that distribution
you can see we have several that
have no medicaid or plus or mine
is two point five percent eleven
at about twenty five percent and
so we got a look at what you
know what are these hospitals
look like in terms of your
fiscal health fifteen percent is
an arbitrary number it's not
it's not a necessary like a
national benchmark but I think
you know when you think about
you know over half your
hospitals are getting more than
fifteen percent of the medicaid
revenue then that's something we
want to track very carefully
especially as the hta rolls out
and the changes from the budget
reconciliation bill start to
take effect in in FY twenty
eight.
I'm gonna talk now a little bit
more about the h d a the health
care delivery in access act that
you passed in two thousand
twenty four
this is basically a provider tax
as you know they're based on an
american medicare in patient
outpatient billings i'm eighty
eight calculates a fixed percent
so that we can bring the total
reimbursement for medicaid
patience equal but average
commercial rate plus the cost of
managing the program there is a
ten percent administrative
straight of a fee that the
hcaken using that in that
assessment
I don't wanted to get too deep
in the weeds on the next couple
of bullets but there is a
different differences between
different types of hospitals and
what that assessment looks like
for different hospitals large
urban hospitals are going to get
assisted a higher rate and small
rural hospitals sort of the take
away from that and then you and
m our state specialty hospitals
such as the behavioral health
institute last vegas they're not
going to participate and provide
assessments however you and and
minor school facts they are of
course medicaid hospitals they
do
um do an intergovernment
transfer to hca which is then
matched with the federal three
and a half multiplier the f map
so they do get some additional
revenues that way
and then as changes happen at
the federal level has authorized
to make those percentages that's
just part of the statutory
language in the senate bill
seventeen
so i'm slight twelve cause it
can be a little bit confusing I
tried to construct sort of a
funding flow for you for the
committee
and over the far left you see
that there's hospital patient
revenues what is subject to the
assessment under the hda
he is going to collect that
provider assessment which is
currently sent six percent talk
about how that's going to ramp
down in a a couple more slides
that goes in the health care
delivery in access to act.
Fund
that fund is then calculated for
sixty percent by volume per
capita you know capital payments
and then forty percent medicaid
performance those also very by
that the quality metrics will
differ by the type of hospital
where they're secute uh care
rural long term in patient rehab
those types of things so it's a
little bit different for those
in the in terms of uh the
medicare so hta calculate sort
of redistribution of that
provider tax.
Then
our the the second from the from
the right that's where the fit
the f map the federal match
comes in at that point that it's
a fund is fed fine by both the
provider tax and federal
medicaid match dollars and then
it is redistributed to the
hospitals and seventy five
percent per the for the law is
restricted funds they have to be
used for direct patient care in
state twenty five percent is
unrestricted.
So and slide thirteen months
year
we've sort of developed a proxy
of revenue estimates and show
you sort of what the effects are
going to be for FY twenty five
these are I wouldn't call a
quantitative by any stretch but
some sort of proxy numbers and
what what we did here manager is
we just looked at the fy twenty
four net income
so that's the most recent data
we have from the hospital cost
reports and then we added in the
estimated fy twenty five ha
revenue and looked at the
difference and you'll see we've
now gone from seven hospitals
that are operating a net loss to
one and I should caution that
that one is the relative in your
hospital still standing up
expenses so that is probably
just sort of an outlier and not
representative of what you see
in the future but you can see
now basically all of the
hospitals are now in the black
with you know to at least some
extent
again we won't see these actuals
for foy twenty five until the
twenty twenty five hospital cost
reports and again I do want to
think the hospital association
for providing his estimates so
you sort of look at a proxy and
see where we're at as a system
and and and see how the is going
to kick in and assist all of our
hospitals.
So mad i'm sure now i'm gonna
talk a little bit about the
budget reconciliation act hr one
and how that's going to affect
revenues in to the hda fat
there's two different components
of the budget reconciliation
bill they're gonna affect the
fund on the first is how state
directed payments are are
affected right now we're paying
a sort of a composite medicare
rate higher than hundred and
fifty percent but the bill
reduces over time how we can do
these state directed payments
and reduces it by ten percent a
year until those rates reach a
hundred percent of medicare
direct payments are supposed to
reach about one point one
billion and fy twenty six which
should then be reduced by ten
percent annually until they
reach a hundred percent of
medicare now I should also
caution mountain chair members
that c m s is still rolling out
rules they're so we don't know
all of the details of what are
they mean by a ten percent
reduction at what point door are
we starting a hundred fifty
percent or if we have other
rates that are higher how long
is that going to be phased out
will it take ten years to get
down to the one hundred percent
rate or will it be fifteen years
we don't know exactly all of
those details just yet but we're
keeping a close I am there.
Um and then second is the
provider tax rate which I
mentioned is about six percent
this in fi twenty eight is going
to reduce that six percent
provider tax from six percent
down to three and a half so
that's a fairly substantial
reduction
that's gonna you know reduce our
provider tax revenue into the h
t a now I should also add ma'am
sure that these are kind of two
sides of the same coin
these are not necessarily
humility of deductions to the
revenue but it's going to be
more of a matter of which one
kicks in first and which one is
the larger and um so with that I
would like to turn to slide
fifteen and sort of explain
their little bit more so chair
lse is built a model
where we're trying to map out
for the next ten years how these
effects of the budget
reconciliation act are gonna
affect peace and road and we
have several parameters I walk
through them for you we have of
course our net patient revenues
and that does influence the
provider tax arm and then we are
in a medical inflation factor so
we know the costs are going to
go up those will increase
revenues
but going down to the third row
we also know that as people drop
off the medicaid rules as it's
predicted we're going to see a
growth in uncompensated care and
these all sort of play into each
other you know if uncompensated
care grows then there's going to
probably be more medical
inflation in order to balance
the books so these are sort of
adjustable parameters this is a
rudimentary model matter of
chair but we're going to be
updating it and making it more
refined as we get additional
data moving through the fiscal
years but right now the
uncompensated cares about three
percent we're anticipating you
know one half percent growth in
on compensating care starting if
why twenty eight so that's gonna
affect at the end of the day the
debt patient revenues across the
system
and then you can see in the
second set of rose you've got
the hta pool provider tax.
And you'll notice that it rams
up from one hundred and fifty
five or so up to a little higher
three twenty seven million five
twenty six it'll grow until if I
twenty eight when the provisions
of the budget reconciliation act
start to kick in and then you're
going to start seeing an erosion
of that pool provider tax
so at the end of the day if we
go down you can see that there's
both a provider tax reduction
and a directed payment reduction
but really the deduction to the
net patient revenue is going to
be the greater of the two and
that's where we get to the
adjusted patient revenue at the
very bottom line which seize as
we go up there for I twenty
seven an increase through the h
d a a and then as the budgets
reconciliation act kicks in and
those provider tax step downs
and
the medicaid rate reduction
kicks in we're gonna see a
gradual erosion of those
revenues are to where it's great
you know it drops through the
next ten years so the parameters
madam chair again we're looking
at we we start with baseline
data this will get updated every
year what are not patient
revenues what are the revenues
from medicaid you know and what
are hga rev and then as we just
parameters we look at the
inflation rate what happens to
on compensated care and that of
course the the federally
mandated provider tax reduction
and directed payment reduction
and III didn't want to make this
too complicated and go go by
quarters
but basically there's about a
one quarter delay if you'll
notice and i'll talk about this
more a little bit directed
payments actually start the ramp
down starts in the
second quarter of fy twenty
eight and the third quarter of
fy twenty eight for the
reduction and provider taxes
so i'm sure this this light is a
composite view of the system.
But we also need to know what
individual hospitals are
and so we've started building
out that model madam chair and I
have a couple examples for you
here I have not finished all of
the hospitals yet but I sort of
wanted to give a couple of
sailing examples if you look on
slide number sixty we're going
to take a small hospital will
leave mononomists with a high
proportion of medicaid payments
and what is this looking at the
red
red is the netperiod revenue and
I apologize it looks like I got
my labels wrong and the bottom I
think it's okay on the next
slide but the red is your net
patient revenue you can see the
upper red line increases as the
hda
revenues come in and there's
course medical inflation factor
that also raises revenues and
then it starts to taper off and
go down from about sixty million
down about fifty four nine for
this particular hospital but
what does that look at in terms
of the revenue reductions and
again I apologize I missed miss
these labels here but you're
seeing a net reduction in of
thirteen point five million by
FY thirty four so what's the
difference there that's you know
fifty five minute fifty four
minutes the fourteen that's
about a forty million dollars
difference between the two
so that's what it looks like you
know that's there is a
substantial reduction in
revenues for those small
hospitals in in in the hda.
If we turn to slide number
seventeen
just for comparison sake
we take a large urban hospital
with a low proportion of
medicaid air mex and what does
that do
okay and I got the labels right
this time the red line is your
net pacif revenue and you can
see they do get some revenue
from the h d a.
But because there's not a whole
lot of medicare payers it's
really driven by just medical
inflation
and then what happens to the net
patient revenue at the revenue
reductions well they're looking
at about a thirty five point
thirty five million dollars
revenue reduction
and this is for a very large
hospital compared to the
thirteen and half million for a
small hospital so you can see
that the effect on on this this
larger hospital is gonna be much
smaller from the the changes to
the in budget reconsiler this is
the simple mechanics of how many
medicaid payers they have and
and and and the scale.
So man i'm sure to wrap up today
I have just a couple more slides
as you know
in the budget reconciliation act
congress was somewhat cognisant
of the fact that there is going
to be some impact real health
hospitals
and so there is a fifty billion
dollars over five year federal
program it's called real health
transformation program
and I think we should emphasize
that we're transformation I
think congress really wants to
see transformative changes to
how rural health care is
delivered in not just patching
patching hospital revenues with
fifty billion dollars
so of course the
cms is updated things and say I
drafted these slides on the
first bullet we should probably
say that decisions will be made
by december thirty first twenty
twenty five cms just notified
that the application will be
open mid september and do early
november and that at hca will of
course be the entity the
executive energy that applies
for the real transformation
it's ten billion dollars per
year a federal fiscal year if
you look at the the graph to the
left fifty percent of that is
supposed to be distributed
equally among all states with
approved applications
and then the other half to be
distributed within broad what
they call within broad
requirements so you know
important words in these
approved applications and broad
requirements what a cms mean by
approved what is the ms my
brought so we're we're keeping a
close eye on that
states will submit a rural
health transformation plan as
part of the notice of funding
opportunity or no again that'll
be out
of te- tentatively mids
september
hta I have to give props to the
healthcare authority because
they are way ahead of the game.
In terms of where states are in
preparing for this rural health
transformation funding
weird that one of two states
that has already had RFP issued
for technical consultation to
find technical expertise to help
us
drop a really strong application
about half the state's manager
haven't taken any action yet at
least as the end of the end of
august according the the data I
was looking at how much money
we're going to get from this
rule health transformation
program or the real health fund
we don't know you were still
waiting for to see the details
from c m s one of those broad
requirements look like but we
estimate a floor of a hundred
million dollars a year at this
time then again we'll have more
details about that in the next
few weeks before be happy to
update you as as these updates
come from see him
finally matter shared just to
finish I wouldn't remind you
that
you know we're not at the we're
not at the point where these
things have started to kick in
yet we still have time to plan I
believe action year has a shared
this a timeline with youi
created lc to he created lc so
sort of helpless wrap around her
heads uh rapper heads around
when all these changes are
taking place because they start
a different dates they kind of
kick in at different you know um
however in general what i've
shown you today basically kicks
in at some point within FY
twenty eight so that's why
surges distilled downs and fy
twenty eight so you know a
quarter off here couple quarters
off there are this also shows
the other things I did not
discuss today such as when the
work requirements for medicaid
will be enacted those come in
earlier during you know mid with
your state fiscal you're twenty
seven you can see that
when costs sharing comes in
where you know medicaid patients
may have to provide a cost
so we found this a really useful
timeline to get a reminders of
when these types of things come
so.
But again what I showed you
today for all intensive purposes
started uh starts in nfy twenty
eight in terms of how the hda
and the bedroom reconciliation
are going to interplay with each
other.
And and with that man i'm sure I
I thank you for your time i'm
trying to keep us on time and
with time for questions so I
will stand for questions
thank you so much I let's see
let's start with representative
robot cover yet and will do
format
thank you madame chair hopefully
it can get this without
chattering too much money and
freezing them this room i've had
to step out a few times to warm
up anyway thank you very much
for your presentation I do have
a few questions let's hope I can
get this through this
so i'm gonna go back to h
three at pages three and nine at
the beginning
so on page three the report your
report shows that hospitals are
offered in
operating at a net last drop
from eighteen to seven
from
from fiscal year twenty three to
fiscal you're twenty four but on
page nine you also make
reference to
the fact that private equity
owned hospitals are transferring
revenues out of the state if I
read that correctly so how much
of the
improvement in hospital finances
is actually something we can
determine as being real and
sustainable rather than being or
versus being masked by ownership
structures
thank you for the question of
madam chair representative
rugbal coverage so pursuant to
the hda seventy five percent of
those revenues have to stay in
state and the revenues from
senate by one through the jump
start the fifty million dollars
that was a provided hospitals
before hda a revenues began to
flow in.
Are staying with in state and
are intended to keep cash on
here so so madame share the
representative
the private equity hospitals
still have to keep that revenue
seventy five percent at revenue
within the state twenty five
percent could go out of state
however that doesn't mean the
twenty five percent revenue is
flowing out of state where that
comes in is that the the the
fact that private equity
hospitals have different
accounting structures different
reporting structures we can't
necessarily track manager
represent a cash on hit and so
days cash on hand being a a
fiscal metric you know you want
to have ideally ninety to a
hundred days probably if cash on
hand
so that's that's that's what we
can't necessarily know with not
only the private equity
hospitals madame share represent
but also even though the private
nonprofit systems because of
their accounting structures
thank you madame chair but we
also can
know from previous experiences
and just experiences public
versus private that private
does a lot better job of holding
higher cash on hand
just because of the very nature
of the being right vs public
that's in a constant issue and
discussion appointing discussion
across the port not just in
health care and hospitals but so
there are certain assumptions
that we can make and so I just
look forward to tracking this as
we move along my other questions
how to do with pages
fourteen pages fourteen and
fifteen so on page fourteen hr
one cap's medicaid
direct payments
see
medicare rates starting in
twenty twenty.
Eight and reduces provider tax
limits well uncompensated care
and i'm playing our two page
fifteen is protected projected
to rise so when this is mean for
rural hospitals with high
medicaid
parmics and then what policy
levers do you recommend for us
can new mexico we use and how to
be able to reduce the impact
so at madame chair represented
rubber cover
you are correct in that there
will be different between the
rural and urban hospitals in
terms of what that uncompensated
care rate is going to look like
are because of the medicaid
period what we don't know and
why I sort of caution that this
was just an arbitrary parameter
to start with is that we know
that the uncommon city care rate
is is about three percent across
the system we do have that
uncompensated care rate for
individual hospitals from the
hospital cost reports and that
that will be backed into the
models uh for the example the
models that I showed you on
slide sixteen seventeen by
individual hospitals so yes a
higher proportion of medicaid
payer backs will probably mean
that there'll be a
more per cap a larger ratio of
medicaid
patience that then come off the
roles because the work
requirements are or you know
paperwork requirements those
types of things that will affect
the uncompensated care show
and then so we will adjust that
as we're modeling out individual
hospitals what that's gonna look
like across the system not only
across the system but by
individual hospitals
madam sure I have one more but
if we do a second round and last
my third question thank you very
much said it block
thinking madam chair thank you
so much doctor ramall appreciate
it so.
Question regarding that
twenty five percent
I am i'm wondering can it be
used to keep in reserves to
build
days cash on hand i'm just
trying to figure that out when
it comes to the expenses because
I believe that is correct rate
madame chair representative
block that is absolutely correct
and you know individual cfose
are going to make decisions
about what's best for the health
of their hospital it does not
mean that twenty five percent of
that rolls out of the state to a
private equity firm if it's a
private equity hospital they in
those hospitals are probably
going to be doing some strategic
planning of what do we need to
do while we have this additional
revenue before it's eroded do
need to make capital investments
do we need to upgrade equipment
which is I guess is a capital
investment they're going to make
those types of decisions on what
what's best for their hospital
in their community i'm sure my
friend troy could add some
additional detailed event but
that's what they're that's what
they're going to be doing is
there's there gonna be looking
at you know what is that
unrestricted twenty five percent
that they can use beyond the the
the patient care constraints
with them hda to do and I think
madam share represent that's
exactly what they'll be doing is
they're going to be looking at
the type of investments that the
hospitals will need to best
whether these changes as they're
as the day and the budget
reconciliation interplay with
each other and the revenue is
changed
okay thank you so much miss
madame chairman doctor almost so
then I guess question about this
graph on page five when it talks
about the cost
says total revenue total
operating net income and then
met male expenses and I think
the graph is
can it's it's kind of confusing
I draw a line where it started.
From like twenty twenty two to
now it looks like it used to be
about hundred thousand and then
it's over to two hundred
thousand but I I mean is this an
average of all hospitals because
I know some hospitals their ping
millions a year in medical
mark practice insurance so i'm
just wondering with that it's
yes manager represent a block
that is a composite of all of
the hospitals from the cost
okay thank you madame chair okay
cause it it's just looks so
confusing based upon
I mean for me sorry I I mean
it's a great graph it just is a
lot of things going on so I
really appreciate that answer
though that it's a composite so
we can average so to speak okay
next question talking about each
c
r one the or hr one the big one
bigger for bill act i'm
wondering when it comes to these
reimbursements changing and the
work requirements I see on
page fifteen under the
uncompensated car growth it goes
from FY twenty seven by twenty
eight into the negatives is this
assuming that
every individual
is going to be continuing to go
to the hospital to get coverage
or assuming that those people
are now working in her own
private insurance what is the
assumption on those numbers that
were adding there
so madam chair representative
lock I think the key word there
is assumption because we don't
really know how those first of
all manager how the cms rules
are going to exactly play out
what exactly is that going to do
in terms of work requirement
what type of what type of
reduction in medicaid will we
see and will they go on on
private insurance madame chair
representative some will we we
don't know what that number is
we can pry work with osi as
these things change to see what
the trends in private insurance
look like as well.
Um but we we we do suspect adam
chair representative that some
some patience who come off the
medicaid rules will not
necessarily get private
insurance and so there may be an
increase because they will still
need care and so they will go to
the emergency room and then that
would increase the uncompensated
care
okay thank you madame chair and
then what about hanging out of
pocket because you don't have to
be necessarily indigent to go
get care and then not pay for it
I mean you could pay for it in
person so I just I just don't
know what kind of model you guys
are looking at when it comes to
getting care not having
insurance not paying out a
pocket versus paying out of
pocket and getting that care if
that makes sense yes manager so
if I may ask a clarifying
question representative are you
talking about the uhm
the
contribution that a patience can
have to make beginning and
the cost sharing beginning of
twenty twenty eight yes I
believe so so the individuals
who are not on medicate anymore
but now are on other options oh
okay so so many chair
represent luck the costuring
that I that I referenced on
slight nineteen that's for
patients who are still on
medicare so that not necessarily
ones have come off the road okay
thank you manager I don't know
how much time I have but i'm
gonna stop right there thank you
my phone sometimes rings loud
and sometimes soft I don't know
just to keep me confused
representative case thank you
managed chair and and thank you
very much for this very detailed
presentation
on slide thirteen you have
presbyterian hospital is that
all the presbyterian hospitals
that include ras that includes
downtown includes all the
hospitals.
All locations the press with
hospital madame share give me
just a minute of full time
did you break out the lovelesses
but I don't see breaking out the
presbyter so yes madam chair
represented cates in this case
presbyterian hospital is rolling
up a rust in terms into the top
line of predatory
and that would also include uh
the hospital in santa fe the
other so that's that's how they
are reported in the cost report
III should add a madame share of
reserve case that's a bit of a
moving target because one year a
hospitals will roll things up
into one cost report for example
you and m did that this year for
for fy twenty four whereas the
prior year they reported a rear
answer separately so that that
that makes it a bit confusing I
understand but if if we need
additional detail for particular
hospitals manager we can always
turn union thank you madam chair
and unm said of our regional
medical had its own
board of directors until january
twenty twenty four and that's
why
there was a change there correct
and I love when troy agrees with
me that doesn't happen to thank
you
and so
thank you can you tell me if
so this is very impressive I
know that we are asking you to
provide us with a lot of
variables a lot of so in your
uncompensated care
you were working closely I know
you work with a hospital
association are you working
closely with unam as they are
the biggest provider for
uncompensated care and as this
goes away we would assume that
they will continue to be the
biggest care and one of the
concerns that they have
mentioned is that as the
medicate goes away.
Individuals will not seek care
as it cost money when they do
end up with care it'll be a more
progressive disorder that needs
to be addressed and their
foremore expensive
to be addressed and so your
uncompensated projections I just
want to make sure that that is
something that we also
try to
variable into this statistic so
manager represent kate yes
absolutely you know that that
the the the the broader table I
show you again that's composite
that's across the system we have
those uncompensated care rates
for every hospital and you're
absolutely correct that you and
m just to the love large number
so the drives drive the
calculation so yes we'll be
keeping an eye on there and
thank you manager interest to
clarify for me I talked about
the work requirements you talked
about the tax going away have
you talked about is is there
night supposed to be a medicaid
parity to medicare and that all
the work our state is done to
get a hundred and fifty percent
working on getting higher
medicaid rate is that not going
away as well and where is that
reflected here so manager that
is part of the calculation again
that sort of two sides at the
same coin with the provider tax
or the reduction in the medicare
reimbursement rate down to one
hundred percent i'm in and one
of those is going to drop her to
drive the the most reductions in
the hda revenue so yeah we are
looking at that thank you very
much and think you madam chair
I write thank you madam chair
all right I am starting on page
five for your daughter or more I
always really appreciate
when you present because you're
really specific about
differentiating
different types of data that you
bring forward so thank you page
five I know we talked about the
medical mall practice expenses I
won't spend too much time on
this but.
My conversation with the o s I
which was like I said was lovely
really broke out
the deficit surcharge that
hospitals are paying right now
to the patient compensation fund
from the actual
insurance rate it increases and
I think that's really important
to talk about when we're talking
about you know where approach
with all my daughter insurance
rates have increased thirty five
percent that's not true in in
some case actually many cases I
think it's really important for
us to say this is what the
deficit surcharges the back
payer that hospitals owe to the
basic compensation find versus
the
actual percentage increase for
medical more practice insurance
so it's just a note on that one
let's see here on page
ten I just want to say I was
shocked to see that there are
eleven hospitals that have zero
percent of their revenue coming
from medicaid I didn't even know
that existed in the state
but what I really want to focus
on is page thirteen
madam chair I just
quick googles on those hospitals
who are in the red advance care
hospital southern new mexico who
would be in the red for fiscal
you're twenty five revenue
estimates they are owned by
earns talk which is a private
equity firm that is owned by jp
morgan and chase worth twelve
billion dollars
the next one was coming health
who is owned by providence
health which is a twenty seven
point three billion dollar
entity same thing live less
medical center ardents they're
owned by arden private equity
firms more worth at least five
billion dollars I couldn't add
their other private equity state
holders
and so I just wanted to note
that because I know he saw this
with the rural health care
delivery fund where a lot of
that money was actually going to
the larger hospitals because it
was per b.
And I may be some people
surprised I really want to work
on the smaller hospitals
which I don't think are
receiving their share but when
we talk about smaller hospitals
when we talk about rural
hospitals I think we also have
to be careful about the way in
which we're allocating funding
because some of these small
hospitals are actually owned by
private equity companies it's a
little bit hard to feel bad for
them when they have these
gigantic overheads in these huge
profits at their national level
and so I think when we start
seeing data like this one of the
things that I want to know is
who is owned by who what is that
overhead nationally
and how is it that we can
actually focus on some of our
smaller local hospitals I know
when I did some stats years
previous
it was actually some of our like
county owned places that really
needed the most help and so I
just want to make sure matter
chair
that when we are
looking at these pieces of data
we take that into consideration
and I don't think I have any
questions mister but I am so so
appreciative of this every time
you bring it forward thank you
thank you senator hope do you
have questions no good manager
representative hearing thank you
madame chiera
mr presenter I just am asking
for clarification if I look at
the hospitals on eight nine says
hospital net income and you talk
about losses at private equity
own hospitals
only are all of these hospitals
private own equity hospitals
madame chair representative
heard and no this is this is all
of our hospitals nonprofits
public hospitals you and m
soup to that's everyone not how
many chair mister president how
would I know which one is the
private equity on hospital
looking at that where do you
where were that sign.
Madam chair representative heard
in I don't have that table
within my slide deck however I
can provide you a list of the
seventy private equity of madam
chair thank you mister president
and also if i'm looking at if we
because that becomes important
if we're looking at in two years
if hr one comes into being and
they're going to be these huge
cuts and medicaid that will be
coming into place private equity
hospitals don't have to take
individuals and that pay that's
not their responsibility so I
want to know how many hospitals
are we going to have in the
state of new mexico that don't
have to that will have to take
people who cannot pay so you
need to will you please provide
that to us because that will
become important and madame
chair mister president the
reason that will become
important because they're going
to be people as we have been
talking about who can't afford
health care and how many people
in new mexico we need to know
the percentage of people who
going to be without
without medical assistance
period and then I can i'll be
able to go to you in him
so managed to represent her
heard and I can certainly work
with the hospital association to
give to give you some of that
projection as well and at madame
chair and mister president thank
you that's going to be important
because maybe is the state we
need to think about maybe taking
over those private equity
hospitals too some sort of
process because we need to make
sure we take care of the people
in the mexican thank you manager
in mister
sorry i'm losing my voice
vice chair lopez thank you
matter turn
again thank you for the
continued information that you
bring to us so thank you very
much
and some of this matter share I
think is just it's
I think we have any specific
answers to this particular
statement.
Our question because I did our
secretary army hope
when we were meeting at santa
anna
with the fss federally funding
whatever the committee is but
dealing with the the many stuff
on the federal hr when
but
when we're looking at the monies
again that are supposed to come
from this rural health
transformation program
the secretary did say there is
an estimate of about a hundred
million a year which I know is
going to disappear quickly quite
frankly I think it's not much
by but with the question that I
had asked and i'll just state it
here again too is
there that it's a as we know
it's a mixed not just the
hospitals that drive that the
health care
delivery system not just in rome
in mexico especially so we have
the fcs
great i'm so and then we also
have a few we have facilities
nursing centers that also
provide care to the population
and those are limited but we do
have them so without rules being
promotated at this point to
really know how these moneys are
to be utilised etc it's just I
would ask that we keep in mind
and looking and asking the
course secretary of army home
course out of sea in the mixes
we move forward as to how can
these moneys be utilized also to
make sure that we are sustaining
our fhc's around a mexico
and also some of the
again the few that there are but
nursing centers in rural new
mexico because that's also
another health care delivery
another part of the system that
we have so it's not just
hospitals and if this money i'm
hoping that it can be utilized
to help sustain
because I I
when the grounds were shut down
earlier this year.
I know I got a phone call from
my own future see which is first
choice in the south valley but
they also provide care in
torrents county invillance you
county and bernalio they were
unable to access monies to the
tune of six hundred and fifty
thousand dollars a month
from risa which is where they
have their grandson right
so not all of our fd reach
seasonable chairs large of the
service provider as first
choices but you have laugh for
million other places around the
state too which also have a
larger population similar to
first choice but if those monies
are dwindling are to be cut we
don't know still this budget new
reconciliation whatever house is
still coming out of the budget I
still have concerns as to what
that other
back up other source of entry
for persons to receive health
care
with what that money factor is
going to be so I just want to
just delay it on this table
again for us to keep in mind to
see where what we can do what
opportunities are with regards
to this hundred million dollars
a year and how that can sustain
much more of just just the
hospitals and ruin a mexico
chairman response thank you
manager center look as most your
loopholes of a again we don't
know exactly what that no phone
notice of funding opportunities
can look like we should have
some more details for hoping
within the next two weeks from c
m s if they stay with on their
current proposed timely I I
would comment I think we are all
hoping that it's not just
hospitals in that we can boost
because if it's a rural health
transformation prior you're
absolutely gonna have to look at
those face and those small
clinics in the small clinics and
that ends up also being and that
savings the hospitals if those
uh.
If those entities are supported
because then you have fewer
patients going to the emergency
room and you have less on
compensated care but I don't
have the details free at this
time now there's a secretary
we're all watching very closely
for that offer
and I appreciate that so i'll
just keep seeing that and then
just a question
on page seven and the chair and
I were making a comment there's
no identification
on the hospitals it just has a
abcd is a purpose fully done
from the hospital association
that there's no identifier
on the fiscal health is just
interesting how who how do we
know either we can many
speculate as to which hospitals
is maybe that is do you know why
there's no specific
identification so so madam chair
because some of this can be
considered proprietary
information by some of the
hospitals it was a request at
the hospital association that we
another
think you madam chair that's all
thank you and once it
i'm gonna beat the same drum
it's heart really hard for us to
help folks when they won't share
data with this when it's
proprietary then we are
basically we are told trust us
and i'm of the opinion of trust
but bear by and if we can't get
an in nothing that i'm just
saying putting it out to the
universe that that
it's really hard to target our
our help and I believe we made
the mistake with that with the
last big bill we did targeting
rural hospitals that we ended up
giving money to hospitals that
didn't need it because we were
not given the right data and I
have said this before that as
this committee chair and chair
of the house helping human
services committee we're going
to be a lot.
More
picky about providing funding
when when we can't get the data
to justify it so just throwing
that and I just have one
question free drama and so on
page seventeen eight your
example two is a large urban
hospital with the low proportion
of medicaid payer mix I didn't
know we had in the hospitals
with the maybe lost alamos I
don't but they have surrounding
counties i'm just wondering is
that is that kind of a
an amalgam or do we really have
a large urban hospital with low
medicare and and I guess my
first question is what is low
and and is that reality so madam
chair we do and hospital the low
medicaid payer mix
I think I will keep it anonymous
at the moment if you don't mind
my adults since manager we can
maybe take that offline
so what is a low proportion and
I guess i'm going to go back to
represent having I have comment
I should make another data
caveat you know I love data
caveat those eleven hospitals
that are on the zero bar that's
a histogram so it's plus or
minus two and a half percent so
there may be a hospital in there
that has like two point four two
point five percent medicaid
payer issue as mainly getting a
lot of private
a lot of private people
that are surprised at so I think
that's that's all the questions
we have as always thank you for
your probably as we
take time to digest this we may
have further end of course
individuals are free to contact
you but thank you so much for
this information it's helpful
and with that we will go to
public comment so we don't have
much audience is there anyone if
you are on zoom and would like
to make public comment please
raise your hand.
And will come back to you anyone
in the room who would like to
make public comment
i'm not seeing anyone here is
there anyone on zoom
one person okay.
Name it like to put a personal
face to the data you viewed I
realized i'm like cameras
offered all turned on my
apologies we which register so
few is birth we are forced to
admit the accident monk accent
work on her name for her
birthday if I get to accent ya
it's a small accident with huge
part of our channel culture
identity in the absent of this
market leads to
mispronounciation then a solid
real diminishment of her name as
the documents have circulated
explain new mexico's current
rule about that critic marks is
an administrative one and in
department health not a
statutory one so this is an
administrator problem with the
legislative solution other
states could be alaska huawei
illinois kansas north carolina
we're going to texas have
already found a way to solve
this they proven that allowing
critical marks is both
technically feasible and legally
sound the biggest counter
argument in compatibility with
federal systems think of so
security and passports is a
management interoperability
issue not in instrumental
bearing as you may know the us
pat for passport system already
has a blueprint for this it used
to standardize transitoration
with community king of federal
databases but it correctly
displays the name of the past
for itself I feel the new mexico
can adapt the same door for
format approach that is worth
the other states I feel this is
a three years overdual form for
a state with the so rich in the
cultural hair to chinese mexico
I feel like.
Sorry.
This I feel this is a lot of
meaningful form for a status
written mexico it's a way to
honor cultural diversity ensure
that our official documents
accurately reflect we are I urge
any of you to take action and
support a legislative that
allows you to our critical marks
and bite of records thank you
i'm happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you john and I have just
asked her darson who is our
staff attorney to write a letter
to the appropriate agency and
and request that they do this
and if they can't to reply to us
then we will move forward from
that thank you for bringing it
to our attention
now
i've already asked the agency
for the rationale give you the
information to try to save a
step
I I think perhaps a letter from
us may be a little more
convincing then than from just
an individual so so I believe
you use spoke you
referenced it in your email to
us yes yes yes so we have that
information and that's going to
be our first step
and and what in hopefully we
will we will request a response
and if they have a negative
response then we will
figure out what the next step
from there is
okay in just apologies I can't
see very close you miss this
chair thompson speaking it is
i'm sorry yeah okay thank you in
if I should I wait two weeks and
i'm sorry I didn't turn off my
timer could you say that again
if I is in a porpoo man a time
to wait before I follow posinger
to see if there's been any
movement
state agencies are not known for
moving quickly and i'd say give
it a month
your spin okay thank you
bye bye.
And I think with that we are
done for the day just to
reminder that the chair and vice
chair
will not be here tomorrow we
will be at the governor's
mention and representative for
our eat will be
acting as chair
and so with that we are in
recess and tell tomorrow morning
at
nine o'clock have a good evening
o o i'm supposed to there is a
dinner tonight
at la poster
the poster at five o'clock and I
was asked to get a head count if
you wonder if you're going to
please raise your hand
I guess we can end that the zoo
I mean that the webcast and will
