Good morning the health in
legislative health and human
services will come to order for
our third day and welcome
everyone
our first present well let's
have introductions of people who
haven't been here
good morning madam chair good
morning fellow committee members
audience presenters it's good to
be here i'm jennifer jones and I
just came from down the road and
damning I represent district
thirty two which is hidal county
that's the boot heel luna which
is right next door and part of
done yanna.
Thank you for joining us
representative consoles
thank you madame chair my name
is any thickens alice and I
represent house district seventy
though coming from north
majority semigo county majority
of torrents counties so thank
you thinking about
glad to have you join it so we
appreciate it okay our first
presenters look like you're
ready to go
is on early childhood
accountability report
and if you will introduce
yourself and forgot from there
thank you
good morning madame chair
members of the committee i'm
doctor like our none that's I
one of your suffers at the sea
for helping human services into
my colleague garrett mosley and
I will be discussing that early
childhood accountability report
which I pass out to you and
looks like this
and then additionally eccentive
as well
do you want her to introduce
herself now representative
button hi my name is healy
highest I am the director of the
policy research and quality
initiatives division at easy cd
good morning
thank you
that early childhood account
ability report is completed by
lc staff every two years and it
aims to understand how young
children in the cedar doing with
their focus on front end systems
that are intended to improve
outcomes for children and
families the main finding of
this report is that funding
levels remain sufficient and the
implementation remains an issue
in every topic area so i'm just
briefly going to go through how
to read this report because it's
a little bit funky compared to
our other reports and so the
first page the first two pages
your find a systematic overview
of the system and then if you
skept to the fourth page you'll
find key indicators are for
healthy children's safe
children.
Whether or not children are
ready to learn by kindergarten
and how well educated they are
by third grade and you'll see
that at the bottom of each
measure there is a comparison to
when the previous report was
written and you'll see that
almost every measure is worse
than it wise two to three years
ago in the report was last
written and then every page
following that will have a
banner at the top and addle
indicate which system area were
discussing as well as key
indicators for that system area
and then it it'll tell deeply in
two the issue area and what's
happening
so if you return back to page
one with me as you can see in
chart one you can see that you
are must legislature have made
huge investments in early
childhood programs particularly
child care assistance and pre
kindergarten and fiscal year two
thousand twelve funding for
early childhood programs was
less than two hundred million in
fiscal year twenty twenty six
early childhood funding amounted
to nine hundred and eighteen
million dollars
turning to page three
you will see an overview of
early childhood programs that
offered by the state that began
prenatally and continue pass the
age of five this report will
focus on child care assistance
pre kindergarten for three and
four year olds family infinite
toddlers which is also known as
idea part b and c or fit
early intervention and early
intervention is another name
perfect and in we will also
cover home visiting and child's
welfare
so if you flip to page five
sorry I know there's a lot of
flipping right now I you will
find that child care assistance
provides a subsidy for families
working or going to school for
children.
From six weeks at thirteen years
of age as you can see in chart
too since fiscal year twenty
twenty three families have up to
four hundred percent of the
federal poverty level are
eligible for the child care
assistant subsidy in today's
earnings that means that a
family of three can make a
hundred and six point six
thousand dollars and still be
eligible for free child care
however previous lfc reports
have found positive benefits of
child care assistance including
increasing families earnings
despite this both this report in
previous reports found the chat
children emrolled in child's car
assistance are not necessarily
better prepared to academically
for school
of cease staff conducted
analysis which confirmed
previous analysis showing that
those enrolled in child care
assistance were less
academically prepared for
kindergarten when compared to
students attending pre
kindergarten regardless of the
quality reading
moreover if you continue to the
issues section of the child's
care assistance page you will
see the despite significant
investments and child care
assistance over the past five
years the new mexico childcare
system has less capacity both
generally and for low income
families turning to table one on
page six
allergy staff analysis found
that state why they're thirty
two child car slats for every
hundred children under the age
of two additionally if you look
at chart for according to the
cradle to career policy
institute at the university of
new mexico between file twenty
nineteen in spring twenty twenty
three child care system capacity
declined by three percent mostly
through the last in registered
child care homes which soft
fifty one percent reduction in
the four year period and which
once again have in the last two
years and now sits at three
thousand versus twelve thousand
in twenty nineteen.
The.
More over if you look at the
last column data provided by eco
i'm sorry I registered homes
child's registered child care
homes are predominantly used by
families of color and as the
ccpi report points out home
based providers are more likely
than centers to offer flexible
non traditional care hours and
may offer families a closer
match to their cultural and
linguistic preferences
focusing on low income families
the ccpi report also found a two
point nine percent reduction
since twenty nineteen and the
number of child care assistant
sides being used by families
with low incomes at our below a
hundred percent of the federal
poverty level
while branding the eligibility
pull to four hundred percent of
the federal poverty level means
that more families have access
to child's care to since then
ever before the additional
capacity disproportionately
serves higher income families
meaning that love act that low
income families are accessing
child carrier since last then
they did four years ago this
indicates that the legislature
may want to focus policies
towards low income high risk
families finally new mexico
child care teacher wages remain
below administrator wages in us
since the state at administrator
rages are ring to second in the
country while child's care
workers wages are ranked fifteen
importantly teacher pay has
improved since the twenty
nineteen early childhood
accountability report thank you
I will now turn it over to mr
mosley to further discuss early
childhood programs
thank you doctor hernandez madam
chair members of the committee
good morning my name is gerry
mosley i'm a program evaluator
lfc
if you will turn with me to page
seven we will take a look at the
pre kindergarten program
pre kindergarten in new mexico
was created in two thousand five
and serves three and four year
olds.
Pre kindergarten is offered
through local public schools and
community based organizations
including home based child care
child care centers and head
starts in the twenty twenty four
to twenty twenty five school
year almost fifteen thousand
children were enrolled in state
funded pre kindergarten about
ten times as many children as
enrolled in the inaugural
classprevious lfc research has
found that students who enrolled
in state funded pre kindergarten
had better assessment scores
higher high school graduation
rates were held back from early
grades less frequently were less
likely to be referred to special
education services and had fewer
displanary issues in their peers
who did not attend pre
kindergarten as you can see and
chart five on the right hand
side funding for pre
kindergarten group by four
hundred eighteen percent since
fy eighteen going from fifty two
point three million dollars to
two hundred seventy two million
dollars in fy twenty six
increases in funding and have
resulted in more children being
enrolled throughout the state
with nearly three thousand more
children enrolled in FY twenty
five then fy nineteen the twenty
twenty five lc progress support
pre kindergarten quality and
educational outcomes found pre
kindergarten in new mexico
continues to produce positive
outcomes including higher ice
station rates for participants
especially for low income
students who qualify for free
and reduced meals and leads to
higher high school graduation
rates.
Twenty eight percent of pre
kindergarten students were
professional in the beginning of
your eyestation test whereas
twenty four percent of students
who did not participate in pre
kindergarten were professional.
Looking at charts six you will
see that lfc staff estimates
that if five thousand more low
income students participated in
one of the highest performing
pre kindergartens approximately
ten percent more students would
enter kindergarten proficient
and reading representative two
thousand more students
if you turn to page eight you
will see that new mexico pre
kindergarten faces large
disparities in teacher
preparation between school based
in community base providers and
the twenty twenty two to twenty
twenty three school year ninety
six percent of school based pre
kindergarten teachers held the
bash lose degree or higher while
only thirty one percent of
community based teachers did
peer reviewed studies and prior
lfc research indicate teach your
education level matters when it
comes to early child to
educational outcomes
as pre kindergarten continues to
expand strategic implementation
is needed if you turn to page
nine you will see a map of each
school district in the state
noting the number of pre
kindergarten slots available to
four year olds school districts
in green have high saturation
levels whereas the orange and
yellow districts have low
saturation levels while about
eighty percent of the states
eighty nine school districts
serve more than half of the four
year olds within that district
roughly twenty percent mostly
rural districts served less than
fifty percent in fy twenty four
to address this eccd plans to
allocate grant funding to knew
an existing programs which will
factor in saturation however
further monitor trained by the
legislative by the legislature
is required
you'll turn with me to page ten
we will review the family and
find toddler program
the family infant told their
program or fit provides early
intervention services for
children from birth to age three
who have or maybe at risk for
development told the ways
disabilities in serious medical
conditions the program works to
limit future intervention
required based on a child's
delays and is projected to serve
newly seventeen thousand
children during fiscal year.
Twenty six for fiscal year
twenty six the state appropriate
seventy six million dollars for
fit and increase of twenty two
percent from fiscal year twenty
five fit operates at no cost to
families in new mexico
regardless of income level
between july twenty twenty four
in may twenty twenty five
seventy percent of participants
received medicaid however the
state may be slightly under
billing for medicaid meaning the
state is losing out on crucial
federal dollars
underfit states also have the
option of adding an eligibility
category for children at risk
for developmental delays due to
low birth way prenatal drug
exposure other biological
factors a history of abuse of
neglect or other environmental
factors looking at table three
you can see that new mexico is
the second largest state for
enrollment for at risk of the
seven participating states and
territories behind only
california the percentage of new
mexico children age zero three
three enrolled in fair group
from seven point nine percent in
twenty twenty two to eleven
point two percent in twenty
twenty three the increase in the
roman may indicate new mexicans
under three population is
becoming more at risk of or
having developmental delays or
that eccd isn't rolling eligible
children who had not been
previously enrolled further
mongering is needed to better
understand the increase in
enrollment and fit within the
state
if you will now turn with me to
page eleven we will review with
the home visiting program
home visiting is an educational
program for expecting families
and families with children under
five is table four demonstrates
ecd offers seven different home
visiting program types each with
a different completion timeline
depending on family need an
interest.
Depending on the program the
benefits include improving
maternal and child health school
readiness economic self
sufficiency positive parents in
practices and a reduction in
child mail treatment and fy
twenty five the state spent
fifty one million dollars on
home visiting and in fiscal year
twenty four seven thousand seven
hundred and seventy five slots
were funded
new mexico's rates of home
visiting completion are
significantly lower than the
national rates while though
completion induration rates are
problem nationwide national
research shows that when family
stay in home visiting for the
expected length they're more
likely to get greater benefits
examining chart nine you can see
that only thirteen percent of
families who left a home
visiting program had completed
the program.
Completion rates are doubled in
fiscal year twenty four compared
to fiscal you're twenty three
however child now treatment
rates for families and rolled in
home visiting increase from
point six two percent in fiscal
your twenty one to one percent
in fiscal year twenty four
although there are several
factors that may contribute to
this increase is important the
state continues to monitor how
providers deliver home visiting
to ensure it is delivered as
intended thank you I will turn
it back to doctor hernandez to
conclude with the discussion on
child welfare
thank you turning to page twelve
new mexico consistently rings
worse than the national average
and keys child's safety to
statistics excuse me in some
cases by significant margins in
fitneigh treatment in the state
is forty seven percent higher
than the national average and
their child's mount treatment
rate is seventy percent higher
than the national average
additionally looking at chart
ten you will see that repeat
military bett rates hover around
fifteen percent these findings
are wise lfc staff frequently
recommends evidence based
programs looking at bigger tool
within children our treatment
prevention secondary
intersharing prevention
strategies are aimed at families
with great risk factors these
programs include safe care plans
targeted home visiting programs
and intensive family
preservation and behavior of
health services during the
twenty twenty five legislative
session you all made significant
reforms to the child's welfare
system to encourage preventative
strategies by passing senate
bill forty two implementation
about their family service a
family first prevention services
act or fps plan and multi level
response would help to address
repeat mail treatment new mexico
does not have an approved fpsa
plan despite cyfd initially
submitting a plan in september
twenty twenty two
absence of an approved plan by
the federal government makes new
mexico in eligible to res.
See federal funding to implement
avon and space programs
identified in the federal title
for e clearing house and
approved plan what allow new
mexico to dry down federal title
for effunding at the states and
medicaid naturally which is
roughly seventy five percent
al of sea analysis suggests the
state may experience car savings
ranging from four point nine
million dollars to ten point
eight million because of
implementing a multi level
response system if implemented
with fidelity to even in space
models national data
demonstrates that fourteen
percent of cases screen by child
protective service insagencies
use differential response and
twenty twenty two cyt accepted
twenty thousand reported cases
of abuser neglect if new mexico
were to refer fourteen percent
of twenty thousand to
alternative response instead of
an investigation roughly two
thousand eight hundred cases
would receive an alternative
response through the passage of
sp forty two you all has the
legislature required both and
ffpsa plan and multi level
response implementation
statewide
now if you return to page two
you will see the key findings of
this report outlined in the left
hand column
ultimately i'll have the
analysis indicates that funding
levels remain sufficient and the
implementation remains in issue
in every topic area discussed
today thank you very much.
Thank you go ahead
thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for making time on the
agenda for me to address you
today on behalf of the early
childhood education and care
apartment again i'm doctor haley
hines I am the director of the
policy research and quality
initiatives division at the ccd
and as you all may know you see
is having sort of an exciting
week but in case you missed it
we have been really thrilled as
a department under the vision
and direction of governor lou
hungership and secretary
gregansky to be proposing a set
of rule changes that aim to
establish a universal model of
child care assistance in new
mexico so this is a model in
which families will be eligible
for childcare assistance
regardless of their income and
so you'll maybe see us out
talking a lot about child care
this week probably next week
also
but we know and you know that we
are doing a lot more than child
care
and you make ecd also
administers our pre k programs
and community based in school
they settings are home visiting
and family support programs that
support our families with our
expecting and new children and
our early intervention programs
for children with or with our
risk for developmental delays
and disabilities and
collectively through those
programs are mission envision as
the department is really to
build a universal family
centered high quality and
community based early childhood
system and part of that vision
is for that system to deliver to
improve school readiness to
enhance the health and economic
while being of communities and
to strengthen families and the
department has made tremendous
progress toward that vision at
the same time our early child
said system is still a work in
progress we have gaps to fill we
have work to do as you just
heard from dr hernandez and mr
mosely.
The t m ccd appreciates the
accountability report and I
would like to say personally as
an early childhood researcher
before I was this that I
appreciate the role that the lfc
evaluation unit has plead for
many years and continuously
examining the effectiveness of
early childhood systems and in
challenging them to live up to
their very high potential for
children and families as a
report points out and as we also
believe strategic planning and
attention to data are essential
in all areas of governance in
public policy and especially for
a department like eccd which has
been engaged since its inception
in swift and purposeful
expansion of the system and of
the services we offer and
because we value strategic
planning are proposed changes to
child care assistance policy
that we've announced this week
have not been announced as a
stand alone changed eligibility
we have paired them with
strategic data informed
initiatives to grow the supply
of care available to families
and the skilled work force
needed to sit to provide this
care these initiatives include a
revolving loan fund to support
capital expansions and
renovations for providers who
want to build more space for
families we will also fund
targeted care slats specifically
for infants and towers from low
income families or who have
special needs and other
vulnerabilities this is part of
our commitment to ensuring that
these families always have a
dedicated place in new mexico's
care supply we're also focused
on building new mexico supply of
home base care we know from
research and from listening to
our communities that home based
care is an essential part of a
healthy child care sector home
based providers often offer care
during the flexible hours that
families need and they can
operate in remote areas where
larger scale care is often
difficult to sustain we share
the concerns of the lfc and of
researchers nationwide who have
noted a decline in the supply of
home base care in new mexico and
across the country as part of a
national trend for this reason
the set of rule changes
currently out for public comment
from me ccd contained provisions
expressly aimed at rebuilding
the supply of registered child
care homes and new m.
Axico these proposed regulations
reduce the paperwork and
compliance burdens for a
registered home providers and
include a substantial increase
in the reimbursement rate these
providers can receive through
childcare assistance our
intention with these changes is
to make it less burdensome to be
a registered home and means
while maintaining high standards
of safety and oversight and a
compensate this important work
at levels that may bring our
home base care providers back
into the fields or encourage new
providers to to enter for all of
our providers whether they work
in homes or centers or schools
or in our community agencies
that deliver home visiting an
early intervention we know that
work force development and just
adequate compensation are
essential and we know that our
efforts as a department in this
area are beginning to make a
difference data from the bureau
of labor statistics show that
the median annual wages for the
child care occupation in new
mexico grew at the fastest rate
in the country between twenty
nineteen and twenty twenty four
we also saw the size of the
child care occupation in new
mexico increased sharply during
that time while the sector
shrank and contracted nationally
so we know that new mexico's
trends for child care wages are
absolutely moving in a different
direction then they then the
nation as a department is ccd is
committed to the ongoing work of
building and improving a world
class system of early childhood
education and care we thank the
committee and the legislature
broadly both for your commitment
envisioned in creating ccd and
supporting innovative and
sustaining funding sources for
the work and also in holding us
accountable for continuing to do
the work excellently thank you.
Okay will go to committee
of does is there anyone who
doesn't have questions
okay so we'll start at this side
and go around no not ready okay
we'll come back represent block
thank you good morning madam
chair thank you for the
presentation I appreciate it so
a few questions I guess this is
for the early childhood
department is easily a little
easier to say uh
I saw the rule that you proposed
and it claims to be universal
child care
but in the rule
it does exclude certain sectors
of people for example if you
have a million dollars worth of
assets you cannot qualify and so
when we're when we're branding
this as universal don't you
think we should find another
word for it because it's not
universal if some people will
not have access to it correct.
You are correct that there are
certain exclusions yes
okay well maybe talk to the
marketing department I know it
sounds good right thank you
and and then I think earlier to
we heard a little bit about
evidence based practices from
LFC and I did want to touch on
that I think it was mister
mosley we talked about the
efficacy of these programs and I
know the in june well I think it
was in july but there was a june
report from lfc that talked
about the efficacy of early
childhood that it it does have a
benefit for the first few years
so I think it's from
kindergarten through
second grade but by third grade
their peers who did not go to
pre k do catch up to them so i'm
wondering when it comes to
evidence based practices how are
we tracking that in new mexico's
system this might be a question
for both lfc and for ecd but how
are we tracking that to ensure
that we are getting a good
benefit from our investment.
Yeah
madam chair representative block
thank you for the question so
one of the ways that we track is
through the eye station and
class scores so if noted in the
report you will see children
that attended pre kindergarten
when they enter kindergarten
they have a higher
isage and test scores and that's
going to be in reading and
literacy and I believe you're
referring to the third grade
catch up effect that it is true
that we see in the research but
one of the things that the catch
up effect does not
consider is the
social readiness of
going in to school.
And cheer representative block I
just wanted to add we also have
tracked uh looking at pre key
students and how they were their
high school graduation looks
like and we've seen that that
has remained a positive impact
so while there may be catch up
effects there are still other
positive effects that seem to
last at least through the end of
high school could you introduce
yourself to sure I apologize I
i'm a doctor certain system a
principle program value of see
thank you
okay thank you so much manager
and thank you thank you for that
answer so I actually did see
that portion of the report but I
believe the lfc did say it was
not significant when I came to
graduation rates
from what I read in the and
that's not in this report that's
in the june report that was
given to the LESC and I would
i'd have to find that report I
did see that somewhere but I did
just want to make sure that when
we're talking about evidence
based practices that were we are
tracking those kids and we do
want to make sure that whatever
we're investing does indeed have
some kind of.
Long term benefit when it comes
to either getting up to speed
with their peers or just
graduation rates because in new
mexico honestly our graduation
rates are like seventy five
percent but I know so many
people who graduated high school
who can't even read still and
that's.
Really bad first day to continue
to do that so I just think when
it comes to edge case and as a
as a whole we need to be a
little more holistic when it
comes to ensuring that those
dollars that were investing are
indeed an investment and not
just a sunken cost where people
graduate pushed forward and then
just cannot have the skills to
be in the work for so I know
it's kind of like a little
soapbox issue but I do think
that when we're talking about
this it's number one not not
universal
early or it's not universal
child care number one and then
number two the investment if we
are going to brand it as this
big beautiful amazing promise
that we actually suit for fill
that promise so yeah I don't
know if you have any any
thoughts on that but that's
pretty much all they had
madam chair I represented a
block if I may if you turn to
page seven
in the first paragraph in the
very last sentence or you'll see
that pre this site specifically
the pre kindergarten report and
you'll see that it was
statistically significant for
having better assessment scores
higher high school graduation
rates being less likely to held
back less likely to be referred
to special education services
and had fewer disciplinary
issues than their peers
i'll also state that data
collection is something that
we're working on in that it's
very difficult to get data
collection from executive
agencies but the ecd is working
on
a new data system and I
hopefully that should alleviate
some of the issues that we've
experienced in the past thank
you madam chair and think you
thank you for that doctor and I
did talk to secretary great
kinsky I don't know if you wanna
add to that as well a madam
chair representative I did just
want to know
i'm getting some incoming
information and I do want to
correct that actually folks with
million dollar assets can still
be eligible they just have to
report them so we're keeping
track of assets and trying to
understand who is getting these
and there's benefit but they're
actually not excluded.
So I just wanted to clarify that
thank you madam chair and thank
you for that and I I did read
the rule and it did have pretty
stringent requirements though
you would give your irrest tax
return which is more burdened
something I don't I think any
program in the state to have to
give your irish tax return and
then all your asset valuations
which
seems to me I hinderance to
certain people because it's an
added barrier and if it's going
to be equal across the board for
people if you're low income you
don't have to give any of that
information however if you do
may have assessed let's just say
you're your dad bequeathed upon
you a new property that that you
have to pay taxes on by the way
it doesn't factor in that as
well so I just think it's very
important when we are talking
about universality it needs to
be universal for every single
person and it shouldn't be
burdensome for one group of
people and then not burden some
for another so I I really do
appreciate that and so another
thing really quickly I signed
the olympic report sorry the
previous eligible report I kind
of saved it is that of c staff
compared kindergarten assessment
outcomes for students who
attended various programs of pre
k from twenty twenty to present
but found varied and largely
insignificant results and that's
what the lfc report said and
then it also said when it came
to graduation reads
people who had nine pre correct
kindergarten versus pre k it was
like seventy five point seven
percent in the twenty twenty
three cohort versus seventy
seven point eight percent so I
mean it's like it's a it's two
points so for saying that's
significant I want to really
know
is that really that's
significant in order so I mean
we say significant but it's two
percent so that's all thank you
thank you and
calculating how many of us there
are in the time i'm going to
have to time everyone in five
minutes
representative kits.
Thank you matter chair and thank
you very much for your
presentation
yeah i'm gonna skip all over the
place so I personally want to
start off work as i'm gonna make
sure that we get into
lsc reported that
and I am so sorry didn't write
down your final what settings
you said but it sounded to me
like
everything.
Or all start all day to show the
the we are not improving on
anything and that's not what i'm
reading here so
i'd like to bring to your
attention on page ten let's talk
about the fit program.
So it seems to me that the fifth
program.
Although it is maybe one of the
smallest programs and early
children education it at least
statistically looks to be one of
the more successful is I see
that.
The.
That there is
it did due not agree with that
in this six that you're showing
me here.
Madam chair representative cates
when we're looking at family
infant toddler program so it's a
little bit of a double edge
sword because if we look at the
program efficacy we do see
positive results but it depends
on the way you want to look at
the program because you can also
look at this program and say
well we're we're in rolling a
lot more infants and toddlers
into the program so this is also
one of those programs that you
would ideally want to see a
decrease and enrollment at over
a time because that would
indicate that your zero three
three population is uh having
less development or believes in
is it less at risk thank you
manager I strongly disagree I
would say that our family in
photographer program in the
state in new mexico has one and
national recognition is being
the top program and identifying
individuals would developmental
delay at twenty five percent up
to twenty five percent so this
would be an indication of an
exceptional services and making
sure that we are identifying
especially when you go to your
table three where it says number
of children enrolled in fit at
risk for delays under three so
just for those who may not know
these are individual these are
children under the age of three
who have night qualified for
being twenty five percent
development was a layer more but
are considered at risk in the
state of florida there's twenty
five of them.
In the state of florida three
thirty five million people I
don't think that's a reflection
that there is not any children
with developmental delay in
there so I once again strongly
questioned the analysis of that
the I I would like to skip
around if you don't mind the uh
uh
forgive me I want to just bring
this up for constituent for for
the deputy director my right
deputy director division
director are you thank you so
much
eh I have already talked to
secretary of guarantee about
rolling out the new
executive function
as assessment for
in your child care centers and
in an all fairness to early
child education we've just had
this conversation in less than
two weeks ago so I don't expect
but I want you and have an
opportunity if you are having
discussions or plans because
what I have asked the the the
secretary is that I need to see
an excessibility plan since this
assessment tool is going to be
put on tablets and there are
some families who don't do not
believe in access of tablets
there are two year olds who have
never heard english they've only
heard their native language
there are individuals who cannot
because of their physical
disabilities can I operate a
tablet and so I wanted to be
able to see what work are you
working on for an accessibility
plan or options to this
assessment tool that is
currently you piloted already
successfully in gallop someone
park
and wear startish i'm gonna say
artisa
and so we want to make sure that
we are working towards that
accessibility plan before we
launch it thank you manager.
A manhum chair representative
thank you and I I appreciate it
our earlier conversation about
an accessibility plan and I
would say that still in progress
so I don't have an update from
that conversation but that's
something that we're taking very
seriously as a department and
thank you for your ongoing
partnership on it thank you and
and I understand that it's it's
unfair to say while it's been
ten days what have you done but
I wanted to make sure that my
constituents know that those
conversations are occurring that
we do want to make sure that
that is and thank you madame
chair for my five minutes
perfect timing representative
johns
thank you madame chair
thank you you went right to fit
which was you've got some
good points there your
questioning but I I have some
big picture questions I guess
and i'm i'm looking it up right
now i'm curious about we talk
about mail treatment and I was
curious about what is the
definition of maltreatment and
it's lengthy
and the children's code um
so I looked at it myself I guess
I don't I I don't need you to
read that to me but I also know
that it's really difficult to.
Gather statistics
about no treatment based on this
broad definition of maltreatment
show man of chair representative
johns arm maltreatment re is
basically um the rate that CYFD
determines maltreatment at and
so there substantiated reported
cases of maltreatment and in the
repeat mail treatment rate which
is the rate that the state has
the ability to impact is whether
or not within twelve months of
an initial incident there is
repeat out treatment and so that
is a child's went back to their
home and then you had another
substantiated case and that rate
is fourteen point seven percent
which is the rate that is
potentially more impactful and
the state has an ability to
fact.
Thank you doctor hernandez so I
I can't miss the opportunity to
say
not that it's going to change
your stats or anything but
that in this this definition of
abuse uh the key definitions of
their new mexico law on the
children's code the definition
of abuses
the child has suffered or is at
risk of suffering serious harm
because of the of the action or
inaction of child's parent
guardian or custodian and I look
over here on page ten the fit at
risk program
will box you have here is a
seven states.
Participated our participated in
mexico is the highest
identification rate per capita.
Of um i've at risk for deliver
development on delays low birth
way prenatal drug exposure other
biological factors and history
of abuse or neglect and and
wouldn't we include because fit
includes infants are infants
drug exposed at birth well drug
exposed prior to birth during
pregnancy that fits the
definition of abuse and I think
that we I don't know why we
argue about that I have to say
that right here and right now
why do we debate that that's not
abusive to get at an infant
prenataly addicted to drugs
that doesn't
it doesn't mean that i'm not
compassion for mothers who were
drug addicted it just means that
those children are being abused
according to her own definitions
so that I do have any anything
to respond to that so other all
same adam channel representative
johns is that I can get you the
exact program after this it's
written down on my computer but
one of the home visiting
programs is actually really
great it has I think it's about
an eight percent reduction in
child's abuse of neglect and so
one of the ways that the seat
can help reduce that is by
continuing to invest in these
home visiting programs which
have a really high success rate
depending on the program of
actually reducing their
instances of child abuse and
neglect in the state
thank you appreciate that and I
did have a a zoom meeting with
secretary group kaginsky and I
think weren't you in that
meeting
I don't remember they were like
three or four of you guys and it
was a great meeting I did really
appreciate the work that's being
done with fit with eccd and home
visiting and the care plan it's
and I I hope that a lot of
communication continues with
that because I think we do have
the opportunity to help marms
before these babies are
severely.
And developmentally delayed and
uh and move right into this
program and have problems all
their life full of problems but
the other thing is if I have any
more time it's not like thirty
seconds while it's not like me
to take up that much time but if
if I can
ask you I know that this
universal child care and our
child care program in general
has been celebrated by other
states what is different why are
they saying that what is
different about other states
that have congratulated us on
our progress and child care
madam share representative thank
you for the question I think of
huge difference has been the
confidence and investments that
this legislature and the people
of new mexico have made so we
have been able to resource our
child care assistance system in
a really different way than
other states a lot of states
rely exclusively on a very
limited federal block grant to
fund their support for their
child care system which has long
been identified as inadequate to
really fund a child care system
that is high quality and broadly
used and works for families and
so the fact that new mexico has
chosen to add state dollars to
the federal dollars and two
really
invest in our child care system
is really one of the things that
makes our systems stand out
because it's just a a lot of
resource scarcity and so sort of
limiting only a very small
number of families can have it
we pay a very small rate in
other states and new mexico just
looks very different because
there's a commitment across the
board from our leaders
thank you very much thank you
manager thank you we'll go to
the senator poke.
Thank you matter chairman thank
you for the presentation my my
questions would go to ecd
and so I guess I want to think
you for all the work you're
doing and where we're headed
towards child care in the excess
I understand there are some some
barriers to make sure that the
right folks are getting this but
my question is and in relation
to folks being able to have
access and making sure so the
infrastructure but also the
workforce and so if you could
talk a little bit about how
we're going to increase that and
increase access to our families
can utilize the service
thank you madame chair senator
thank you this is a huge
emphasis for us right now so I
appreciate the opportunity to
talk about it because we know
that
we need to make sure we have the
supply to meet the need and
demand that families have for
our system and so we're thinking
about this a bunch of different
ways when is we are standing up
a revolving loan fund for a
child care providers because we
know that capital and space to
put more child care slats is a
real issue and so we want to
make it easier for our child
care providers to build new
facilities renovate build new
infant top of the rooms in
particular because we know
that's an area where there's a a
significant shortage so we'll be
working on that another way that
we think about building supply
is through a universal income
eligibility and through
making it easier for people to
receive trial care assistance
and paying a strong rate through
childcare assistance that we're
providing more resources to
child care providers and
reliable months a month
resources so we're trying to
give them essentially a
predictable adequate revenue
stream that allows them to plan
that allows them to say child
care doesn't have to be
completely on the margins as a
business we can have strong
predictable revenues coming in
and we can plan you know what we
do have the revenues we need to
open a new infant room and so.
There's a sort of holistic
strategy around the universal
income eligibility and the
increased rates to sort of a
infuse resources into the sector
on the work force there is a lot
of work being done around making
sure that attending
our higher red pathways for
early childhood is free and easy
and has as few barriers as
possible so I really child to
professionals or people
considering becoming early
childhood professionals can go
to school they can get
credentials and then we're
trying to really reward those
credentials and so we have a
number of programs and please to
provide additional compensation
to our child care work for us
depending on their credentials
and sort of the expertise and
child development that they're
bringing to these experiences
and so we are thinking about
this a lot of different ways we
also have you know we think
making it easier for people to
enter the sector to get their
credentials and then to be
rewarded with strong
compensation for their
credentials and are important
piece of that and we also have
things like our um developing
futures awareness campaign which
you may have seen around which
is really about ensuring that
respect for the important work
that the work forces are doing
and that there's an
understanding that this is a a
great career in a career that
folks should consider and that a
new mexico it is a career that
you can do for a long time and
raise a family on.
Thank you and thank you for all
those points i'll try to be real
quick if the responsibility
could because I got two more
questions
we mentioned what was brought up
earlier I think the million
dollar assets and it sounds like
they still do qualify and so are
we.
Are we kind of pro rating this
sir making this kind of needs
mad were of people people paying
partial if they do meet a
certain income threshold.
Madam chair senator at this time
all co payments are waived so
there is no copayment for anyone
at any income level of the
reporting of assets is a federal
requirement and so we are
required to collect that
information but it is available
to everyone regardless of income
thank you and thank you for
clarify clarifying with that I
know for might be concerns about
it being burden but we also have
to follow the rules so I
appreciate that lastly is there
going to be any work done with
our military installations I
know those are funded different
and happening on military
installations but
will there be any type of
collaboration with a lot of our
military children coming in or
is any work done there we had
any conversations thank you
manager
manager senator I know there are
of partnerships in our community
coalitions in our parts of the
state but for the particulars of
that I will need to get back to
you.
Thank you so I have made i'm
sure thank you.
Thank you next representative
goods
thank you madame chair one of my
questions senator pop or a yes
majority of it was when you're
talking about increasing
capacity it was mentioned by a
couple of you all you know with
the situation especially now
with this increase of funds but
I would like to drill a little
bit deeper specifically on the
work force components that was
reported to me by some child
care providers in my district
that although they're very
excited for this influx of funds
more access that also means more
of a burden on employees that
they frankly don't have or you
know meeting the current
thresholds of the minimum
salaries and so you talked about
revolving loans for capital or
for projects and just you know
saying helping with the work
force but is there any grants or
loans or types of assistance for
these providers to at least help
them get over that especially to
me if there's minimum thresholds
that a minimum salaries that
they have to pay to be eligible
for these programs to help some
of these smaller you know help
help smaller child care
facilities thinking manager.
Madam chair representative thank
you this is going to be a
slightly wonky answer but there
are a couple of ways that we are
infusing resources into our a
child care providers one of
which is the way we now
reimburse care so the way we are
sort of the monthly rate we pay
to a provider for a child in
their care who receives
childcare assistance
historically across the country
and in new mexico those rates
were really lower than the true
cost of providing care and
that's part of why we saw wages
where we were for so long and
what we are doing now in new
mexico is we are basing that
reimbursement rate on a cost
model of what it would actually
cost to provide the care at an
extremely high quality level and
pay people a good wage to do it
and so the reimbursement rates
have increased really
substantially and so the
intention with that is that we
are infusing out revenue into
these businesses and community
organizations so that they have
the revenue from those reads to
pay people at the minimum levels
that were going to be requiring
in these proposed regulations
and that is part of the
universal income eligibility
piece rate is because we have
historically heard people say
that's great I get that rate for
half the children in my car but
the other half a private pay and
I don't get that high rate for
them so I can't pay the rate
you're asking now folks can get
that high predictable re based
on the actual cost of paying
people with their worth and
providing high quality care for
all the children in their care
essentially and so that is one
way in which we think we're
supporting providers in meeting
these wage requirements is
through the increased rate and
then
we also in addition to that work
we have a number of parody and
wage supplement programs that
are based on educational
attendment advancement where we
even put a little bit of
additional compensation on top
of that to bring people up to
where those wages are
competitive with the public
schools because we know that
people don't want to feel like
they're losing all of their most
credentialed workers to the
public school system so does
that help.
Madam chair yes they think you
that that does help to clear up
you know
some of those questions my next
question kind of ticking a a to
a turn you know within this
committee there's been different
presentations with the wife dean
in this report you do you do
pinpoint child welfare so just
kind of talking some of on page
thirteen the first paragraph
they're relating the issues
there
new mexico does not have an
approved family first prevention
service is act plan you know
that was just there's kind of
just some discrepancies up there
just maybe wanting to just since
it's in the report and since it
was presented here I have not
heard anything in any of the
presentations as to is there a
time line maybe for an approved
plan because we are not
receiving federal funds that
were mentioned in this report
specifically because of the we
just don't have one in there and
I don't know if this is the
place to ask that or maybe a
later conversation but just
there were quite a few
issues that were brought up here
just in this first paragraph
that kind of classed over but
are included in the report
specifically like with reporting
and specifically that plan if
anyone can add any highlights to
that thank you manager
madam chair representative i'll
i'll just say that that sits
with these crafty and so I do
not have the expertise on it all
the week partner very closely
with CYFD supporting families
does anyone from your son yes I
madam chair representative of
themselves it is currently under
review
with the federal government
this would be I believe the
third plan submitted by cyfd
because the previous two were
rejected
okay thank you for that just
looking to see future outlook
and then just last question is
again looking through the report
having some time looking at some
of your graphs you like it just
like the big new mexico pictures
on pages say nine and fifteen
when you're talking about the
percentage of slats for pre k
you know where there's vacancies
are whitnight you know my
districts tend to be in those
fifty percent as well as a lot
of you know the state.
Um so like plans for increasing
some of those precate pre case
spites through your report
you've mentioned capacity issues
you've talked about you know
capital funds is your hope with
you know this influx of these
funds to get all of these
counties you know more in that
that green end you know more to
the hundred percent capacity or
how do you plan us to get there
manager representative I
I would say that so are goal is
to make sure that there is
adequate slots at all age groups
in all regions of the state for
everyone and that is through a
combination of the programs we
offer so new mexico pre k but
also high quality child care and
had start there's a presentation
about and start coming up next
so when we think about whether
there's enough care in a
community for all the three and
four year olds we really think
about that whole listingly in
terms of what's there we want to
make sure all those programs are
in conversation with each other
but we do want to make sure you
absolutely in every region of
the state there's enough care
for everyone and that families
have choices about what kind of
care works for their family.
Thank you.
Represent every day thank you
madame chair and thank you
presenters I would like to focus
your attention to the child care
protective a provisions of the
report and hopefully you can
answer these it talks about
there being an increase in front
and march twenty twenty five to
buy six point five percent and
then with their also talks about
there being insufficient foster
care homes described gives me in
this report but if I look at the
report further it also talks
about thirty two point nine
percent of the kids and fos the
care are abused so my question
to you is what are we doing
number one to make sure that
individuals who are foster
postering these two children are
not going to be abusing them
what kind of training are you
going through and presenting for
them so that we can stop that
madam chair representative heard
an I apologize can you point me
to the paragraph.
So i'm looking at among page
thirteen and i'm looking at
paragraph one two three under
the issues if you'd read that
paragraph and then if you turn
back over to page twelve and
you'd start looking at the
statistics about a safe under
five year olds and it talks
about the percentage of kids and
faster care who are harmed if
i'm reading your report
correctly and if you don't have
the answer now that's fine we
can talk off line but i'm just
bringing that to your attention
if I am reading this report
correctly that we need to
address that are you referring
to chart ten I am report I am
it's the one above that it
doesn't have a number on it is
some blue oh okay and said the
rate of a different number of
victims under five that's right
so that'll be all
children within the state not
within foster care
but it'll be all children under
the age of five
who
have been
abused or neglected and then the
next I indicator the person of
kids and foster care younger
than five that'll be
the percent of children in new
mexico that are in foster care
under the age of five totally
thirty two points nine percent
of the kids in the mexico owned
plastic under the age of five
yes me that's that's a lot of
kids i'm not sure where you're
reading that right either but
that's okay i'm going to move on
to something now some will come
back and talk about talk about
that the other thing that i'm
i'm looking at is with respect
to that for family first
prevention services act and that
that plan that needs to be
approved by the federal
government so it looks like the
last plane was submitted in
twenty twenty two this is twenty
twenty five going into twenty
twenty six is there any
explanation of why in three
years we could not improve that
plan to have it approved.
So that we are getting the money
and services that we need from
the federal government in terms
of the fpsa plan on madame chair
and representative heard and
that would be a question for
cyfd lfc has been unable to
receive a copy of the plan and
so we do not know what the plan
contains or on why it has nine
why it's under review and has
not been approved
ok madam chair and present as I
have just one other question for
you with respect to the uh the
new plan that we have available
for the universal care of three
care what I would like to know
was a I know that people are
putting their children in child
care facilities and the cost
varies can you please tell me is
what is the limit upper limit on
the amount that we are willing
to pay.
For for in home care as well as
in that other care facilities
madam chair representative thank
you for the question and I
appreciate the ability to chance
to answer it so we will not the
state will not reimburse and
providers based on their price
we reimburse a sep rate and
those rates are in the proposed
are rule changes that are
outraged now and we are
increasing them um but they we
pay of specific rate for
children depending on their age
and depending on the setting and
quality of the setting that
they're in so it you can't set
your price really high and then
we pay it we have done this cost
model that I was describing
about what um the modeling shows
it costs to provide high quality
care at different ages and
quality levels and then we pay
that rate.
It's a madam tear and and madam
presented just for a
clarification you said that
there is an anna a rate
mentioned in the plan but you
increasing them it we're
commending on the plan how will
we know what the rate actually
is they are manager
representative I have a copy of
the proposed rates here and I
can share it with you afterwards
and there's a a table that shows
and and quite a bit of detail
what the rate is at each quality
level and for each age group and
what it was previously and what
we're proposing to increase it
to thank you madame chair and
thank you
and if you could um
director pings share that with
sanders so he can uh share that
with the whole committee
absolutely matter thank you and
representative robot heavy era
thinking madam chair and thank
you very much for your
presentation I have several
questions.
And as you know we're on a time
can strengthen i'll try to be a
succinct and if you could do the
same in your answers so
um reference to page eight and
have my first two questions on
that um
so reference to the pre
kindergarten expansion statement
twenty percent of districts
mostly rural um sir fewer than
half of eligible four year olds
so i'm interested in knowing how
the department
ececded.
Um is insuring ease areas or
prioritised before universal
precade expansion continues
obviously we need to do
something about that so do you
have any idea how we can address
that thank you
manager representative I would
just see briefly that a focus of
the department for many years
has been to build local
community capacity so that um
there are the teachers in the
facilities in the place is there
to receive the pre came money so
that we can ensure that we're
providing services and this also
goes to our capacity building
work to try to get loans in the
hands of providers and to try to
get the the capital into
communities i'm so there is a
really strategic push so madam
chair i'm assuming this will be
considered a priority for the
department that correct very
much the representative of madam
chair thank you thank you.
Still next question seeing page
with only it there's reference
to only thirty one percent of
community base pre k teachers
hold a bachelor's degree
compared to ninety six percent
in school based programs.
So
the question is how do you plan
to strengthen teacher quality
and community programs that are
obviously expanding the fastest
can you address that
yes madam chair representative
we share the priority expressed
in the accountability report
around growing that credentials
of our community based pre k
teachers and this is where we
are working with our provider
community around scholarships
around making using the burdens
of pathways into higher
education for our early
childhood providers and really
trying to support as much as
possible those pathways to
credential madam chair and also
we've heard several
presentations previously in
other committees that the
community collectors in the
universities are working and
collaboration with you as well
are you pulling them in to be
able to arm create those
pathways but
towards certification that's the
most important thing is our
moving towards certification and
continuing uh these providers on
a pass of being strong small
businesses as well so I just
wanted to add that so going on
to
that to pages i'm gonna refer to
pages for and twelve
concerning the um now treatment
so a new mexico's.
Mel treatment rate as noted is
seventy percent higher than the
national average and the infant
maltreatment forty seven percent
higher
but at the same time the state
lacks and approved family first
prevention services at plan
leaving federal funding on the
table we've noted that it's been
asked and previous questions so
what immediate steps will be
taken to close
these gaps and insurer
prevention and intervention
services reach families most at
risk I know some parts of that
question have been aspected I
really want to dive in just a
little bit more into it
so madam chair representative
robert coming at all i'm I would
like to correct something that I
said are two weeks ago i'll see
did receive the newest copy of
the fps plan and de federal
government see wife do you just
submitted a new plan on to the
federal government again that
will hopefully be accepted this
time and an inner what i'll say
to inter your question is that
really one of the biggest things
that you can do is implement
multi level response system so
you all ask the legislature
passed speed fifty two forty two
last year
and we are unclear as to how cyc
has employment multi level
response up to this point but
what multi level response does
is it takes families
and a it takes approximately
fourteen percent of key says
and it implements a different
response which provides family's
services that they need instead
of removing a child's from care
from the family's care and in
most cases it's very successful
for preventing a child to be
removed from care and so that is
actually one of the best ways
that we can p.
Prevent child's mouth treatment
some out of chair of madam chair
and and
I recognize that but it handed
hand also just as a follow up
with and maybe see why
is the appropriate body to
answer this and I will continue
um having the conversation with
cyfd but we also have had a
systemic failure in medicaid
funding and leaving lots of
medicaid funding on the table
such as in home visiting which
is a big concern up and you
already address representative
hernes question about the plan
when that plan
what the expectations are of
that plan but I just want to say
that you know we we really
need to insure a number
reference in your page thirteen
in particular also insure that
um we remain in compliance that
we address the system at
failures and correcting those
systemic failures and insure
that not just the funding but
ultimately the funding madam
chair does affect the quality of
care and the the quantity of
care and the experience here of
care which is why I see why of d
really needs to be responsive in
terms of this plan so I I thank
you very much madame chair that
i'll continue my discussions
will see way of do you think
thank you did you want to add
something
yes please yet one of other
point that we wanted to add is
that the new plan that was
submitted to the third at
family's first plan it included
a couple of evidence based
models one being safe care and
the other being motivational
interviewing and though those
would be able to be reimbursed
if the plan is approved but it
also continued to keep a non
evidence based model according
to that title for clearing house
as the key and home services
model so rather than using safe
care which is that home visiting
model that it like had mentioned
earlier that reduces children
treatment around eight percent.
There is still trying to use it
different model and so one of
the things that see where you
could do is use strong evidence
based home visiting models that
could help with these families
in reducing their mail treatment
thank you for that important
information um I
everyone is covered everything
really well
there's i've heard criticism
and this is directed to a
director on hinds that
ececd
has had this focus more on the
child care and not so much the
quality
do you want to you know.
Respond to that or tell us why
that probably is incorrect.
I thank you madam sure and just
so I can clarify are you
concerned about an emphasis on
child care versus the other
programs we administer or an
emphasis on quantity not quality
I just want to make sure i'm
answering what you're asking
kind of a combination of both
okay i'll take the money
I think in terms of I think it
is
we administer four core programs
and we think of them all as part
of a continuous system from
prenatal all the way through
kindergarten entry and child's
care as you can sort of see in
the report and other places is
it takes up a lot of our budget
and it serves a lot of our
families it's where a lot of the
investment goes and it touches a
period of larger quantity of
families than some of our other
programs in that may be way it
seems sometimes like it takes up
a lot of the oxygen in the room
and I do think it's important
especially when we're speaking
to a committee like this with
this kind of emphasis that we
are talking about our early
intervention programs as
representative kids was talking
about that we are talking about
home visiting because those
programs are also deeply
important to us and we have hold
divisions that are really
dedicated to ensuring that those
programs are getting the
attention that they need so
that's when dimension of your
question
on the other question I think we
appreciate the emphasis on
quality of the services that we
provide this was raised in the
report and it's something that
we think about all this time the
division that I oversee it one
of the things that we are in
charge of is thinking about
quality and ensuring that
quality is there and that we're
always improving it one of the
things we're doing on the child
care side is we are redesigning
our focus to rise program so
this is the system by which we
determine the quality of
childcare programs and help them
to approve their quality it also
determines the rates that they
receive through our childcare
assistant system and we're
really working on redesigning
that to focus on the elements of
quality that we think matter
that most particularly
ratios of adults to children.
And and the credentialing of the
work force as well as the
equality of the interactions
between adults and children and
so we are introducing a measure
called the classes and evident
evidence based measure of the
quality of the interactions
between the caregiver and a
child and we're going to be
introducing that in our child
care sector and we really think
that's going to help us have
some deeper insights into the
quality of the care were
providing answer opportunities
to really support our providers
in using the classes a quality
improvement to all so that we
are making sure that the system
were delivering is not only
broadly accessible but also an a
very high quality because that's
a the promise of the of the
system is really only as good as
the quality of what we're
providing.
Great thank you and also are you
still using the stars system for
evaluation.
Madam sure yes our madam chair
he has the program still receive
a star rating and that will
likely be the case after the
redesign but we are redesigning
the criteria for what those
stars mean and where that's a
working process
with that include
you know the
educational achievements of the
different people in the
certifications.
That is an aspect of the
redesign of focus that we're
looking at very closely and that
is still in development but yes
we think that the credentialing
training and expertise of the
work force the evidence shows
that that's a really important
element of quality and it's one
will be looking at.
Okay and can you also tell us a
little bit more about the first
born program is that you know
one of the first early
interventions
um yes madam chair I could tell
you a lot about first morning
actually was in evaluator and
research partner with them for a
long time what would you like to
know
is it being expanded is a
continuing it's success yes
thank you first part is seen a
lot of expansion this year and
number of existing home visiting
programs have actually adopted
first morning as their model so
as a model first born is
actually I think in more parts
of the state than ever before
and they are engaged a sort of
should do a sort of slight
conflict of interest thing here
I was a researcher before I was
this and I was working then that
you and amazor on a research
study so we're still very i'm
here now but there is a research
study under way you and m to
help first born further deep in
their base of evidence and their
research base and show that they
are getting outcomes for
families and so I think that is
the thing that's happening in
terms of their success and in
terms of their spread across the
state there there are more first
programs right now than there
have ever been I think terrific
thank you and I also as we were
talking about a cyfd's plan and
not using the evidence based on
program can you tell us the name
of that program that they should
be using
I guess on madam church safe
care plans safe care thank you I
didn't catch it and also how
much have we been losing
it from the federal dollars I
think you mentioned four point
nine to ten point eight
so that is how many chair that
is how much the state could save
if we were to implement a multi
level response system i'll have
to get back to you on how much
we're losing on because i.
Do you know no i'll have to get
back to you on that question
okay thank you appreciate that
we have a couple more minutes as
anyone have a burning question
representative of johns.
Thank you madame chair III just
I need to understand this you've
talked about safe care plan is
at the same as the plan of safe
care in sp forty two yes mim
that is yes madam chair
representative projects thank
you and and so I heard you say
that family's first I think I
heard you say family's first is
not using the safe care plan
correct or or did I hear that
so madam chair representative
jones
cyf is currently using a nine
evidence based program which I
don't remember the name of the
family connections I apologize
an and so
what al recommends is swapping
that with safe care plans safe
care excuse me
so that we can and take title
four e funding and
pull down that seventy five
percent match from the federal
government
thank you
and that links to another
question
so did I hear you say that the
the plan of sake care that we
passed in forty two for instance
has to be federally approved no
it does not have to be federally
proved what has to be federally
approved as the ffpsa and that
outlines what cyft is planning
to do it so plan implement at
their implementation plan
basically and in it while they
mention it they prioritise
family connects which is not in
the title four e clearing house
okay thank you very much thank
you madame chair.
Can you reclarify its families
it's family connections I
apologize family can access home
visiting family connections is
cyfts.
Plant okay great thank you I
apologize for that it's alright
representative royal bell kevier
thank you madame chair I did
have one when burning question
that I wasn't even asked
previously so does looking
throughout the entire report
despite the investment
that we've made capacity for
infants under two um remains far
short of demand on me thirty two
slots per one hundred children
statewide was even lower ratios
and bernalio and santa fe
counties so I the interested in
knowing what is being done to
address the shortage and which
are the legislature priorities
that's really important for
these discussions during the
entrance we need to be planning
I had thank you.
A manager representative thank
you
we are very very focused on
building capacity for infinite
and toddler slots across the
state and in areas of greatest
need we have had conducted a
supply and demand study to give
us a really good eye of like
what parts of the state the
shortage is the most acute and
for what age groups and this is
where our supply building
efforts around our revolving
loan fund for providers to have
capital is a key part of this
initiative another part of this
initiative is our targeted
infant and top their slots for
our lowest income families and
so that is another part of this
strategy is trying to really
build this is like work directly
with providers to ensure that
those slots are there for the
families that need the most in
the places where their most
needed so this is something
that's a great concern to the
department and that we are very
focused on is one of our highest
priorities is building the care
capacity
thinking madam chair and this
sales going to be you
a
concern a consideration in a
major question that's going to
be asked and the next upcoming
year I mean months and we did
hear it uh finance authority
earlier this week about the
revolving long fund it was
detailed quite well by market a
russell and that's exciting use
because the terms are very
easy for lack of a better word
they're smooth the process is
small so i'm hoping that that
would also incentivise so I
appreciate your answer thank you
madame.
I just like to thank you very
much for this in balti valuation
analysis for melopsy and also
good luck direct your heads for
you know this expansion were
anxious to hear
you know after well next year
how this success has been so
successful in getting our kids
even better prepared and into
that those programs that you
already have so thank you very
much thank you madame church.
Her head start people were here
okay
okay we're just a couple minutes
ahead
of start and just a couple
minutes with the headstart
programs in southern new mexico.
If the presenters would like to
come up you get settled in.
Committee members if you'll come
back will get started.
Yeah.
Okay.
Summer getting coffee but they
can listen if you'd like to go
ahead and please introduce
yourselves this is a head start
programs in southern new mexico.
Good morning madam chair members
of the of the committee thank
you very much for the
opportunity to be here in less
cruces and you are my name is
casey laughing and I serve as
new mexico's head start
collaboration office director as
well as a deputy division
director at the early children
education and care department
and with you.
Good morning my name is alex and
dollars and I serve as the
coalition court needed down here
and dynamic county.
Good morning i'm patricia
good morning after choose to
grow the even something
executive director and founder
of childhood family services ink
and harbs new mexico and also
service the president of the
head start association of new
mexico.
The.
Welcome okay you'd like to go
ahead and start.
Thank you.
We are really happy to be here
today and and we're here today
because we share a commitment to
ensuring to mexico's children
and families have access to the
supports that they need to
thrave and so today you're going
to hear about the local impact
of head start here in los cruces
and from patricia who will frame
the statewide picture i'm gonna
start by offering some context
on headstart and how we at you
ccd partner to strengthen this
work
today's conversation as as you
guys have a discussed previously
and have heard is happening at a
historic moment
as new mexico has become the
first state in the nation to
offer no cost universal child
care and so today we're gonna
highlight how head start
contributes to that system
knowing that universal access
only works if we have enough
high quality options for
families and had started as a
very critical part of building
that supply so looking at a
slight two and our deck with the
header had start one or one oh
one had start is a federally
funded program it is operated
locally by community based grant
recipients here in new mexico
our head start programs are in
community action agencies and
child care centers school
systems and without our public
tribes and nations across new
mexico these grant recipients
serve children from birth
through h five and their
families focusing on child
development health and family
well being.
Together had started an early
head start programs in our state
serve thousands of children
every year and the model is
unique because it addresses the
whole child and the whole family
which is an important component
to keep in mind as we think
about early childhood systems
and new mexico headstart is not
a small footprint
we had start offers
comprehensive early learning and
family supports that other child
cares settings may not provide
to thirty one grant recipients
across thirty counties in new
mexico and serving nearly seven
thousand children at a hundred
and ninety six sites so with a
thirty one grant he is operating
in nearly every county had
started actively demonstrates a
supply of infant toddler
prescore slides that touch urban
suburban rural frontier and
tribal communities are like
so moving to slide three every
state has what is called a
collaboration office a head
start collaboration office and
this is a role that is supported
by the office of head start
and.
It is really designed to
be a bridge between head start
programs and state early
childhood systems so the purpose
is to make sure that head start
has a voice in state policy and
to align federal resources with
state investments so that
families are not navigating to
disconnected systems
in many states the claboration
office director sits alone in an
office or in a different agency
that separated or a part and it
really limits their ability to
influence state decision making
but here in new mexico it's
different
the collaboration office is
embedded directly at ecc
and I serve as both the head
start collaboration office
director and a deputy division
director so in and
level of leadership at ecd which
really helps insure that had
start has a direct line into
senior leadership in a a seat at
the table to be a voice and part
of the conversation when we're
doing things like universal
child care when we're looking at
you know work force and
recruitment and raising wages
and things like that so this
alignment really helps us move
priorities and supply expansion
it is a model and I would say
now a relationship that my
national colleagues point to as
really valuable and unique
because it ensures that had
start is not silo but it's
really fully integrated into the
broader early chatted system
here in new mexico.
Um the the next thing that i'll
just mention briefly is
that last year in collaboration
with the association and
ecosted the first ever had start
summit here in new mexico so had
start has been around for sixty
years and has been in new mexico
for about that long as well but
this was the first time that we
had brought everyone together
and in that effort every single
one of our heads start and early
had start brand recipients as
well as tribal heads start and
early had start grant recipients
participated in this effort so
it was it was
bringing into together
not just to
network but to really
provide a unified vision and and
we also worked with our local
early children coalitions which
will hear a little bit about the
coalitions help connect families
and the work force with
resources and the community and
this the summit really helped
strengthen relationships and
spark new collaborations and we
feel that this is really how we
build a system where family had
start as part of the universal
landscape and we look forward to
continuing these summits.
I will also looking at slide
five the needs assessment
this is a required piece for my
role as the collaboration office
director we gather information.
On like I add a period of time
it's not every single year but
we gather information from
our head start grant recipients
and we based on that information
create a strange a strategic
plan for the collaboration
office with those results in the
assessment is designed to
identify where he'd start grant
recipients need support where
families might be facing
barriers and where c e c d can
help remove obstacles and so
you know with.
Nearly seven thousand children
being funded for heads started
new mexico it is it's clear that
that families here really want
heads start to remain an option
as one of their child here
choices and there's a map here
that shows uh where our head
start programs are across new
mexico and it's easy to see here
where our child your deserts
might be and just how important
access is.
Completing a needs assessment
isn't just a compliance exercise
we really use it as a roadmap to
tell us where alignment with
state systems is strong and
where we still have work to do
and the end sites from that
process inform my work as the
collaboration office director.
And moving to slide.
Next one.
Supports for a head start staff
this was addressed a little bit
by my director doctor heinz
our work is not just about
systems we also need to support
the dedicated work force who
make it possible
and we know that uh some of the
changes that are being made are
really going to in.
Require more early childhood
professionals and so ensuring
that our head start and early
had start staff have access to
scholarships and wage incentives
mannership networks and
bilingual incentives where we're
not helping just to retain the
existing work force but helping
head start expand their supply
to meet any new and incoming
demand in twenty twenty four
ececd launched pay party
specific to had start this pay
incentives are designed to help
head start teachers and staff
and the early chartered work for
set large continue their
education and stay in the
profession these supports are
designed to bring early
educators closer to pay equity
with their k twelve peers
because the work they do is
justice fighter.
And
just a close out my section and
and move on to my colleague we
believe that new mexico is
stronger because had start is
integrated into the broader
early childhood system it's
supported at the state level and
it's connected through our our
local coalitions
so access is a very important
piece of the work we do and had
start really strengthens that by
reaching children and families
who might otherwise fall through
the cracks and we believe that
together we can insure equity
and quality
and supply go handed hand so
that brings us to our our local
story i'll turn to my colleague
all hundred and
who is going to
talk about how a program here
the coalition here that's funded
by easy c d as are really
powerful example of how state
investment federal funding and
local leadership come together
for a children.
Absolutely good morning everyone
a manager representatives again
my name is alexander is and I
have the pleasure of serving as
the lead coordinator for hour
done and I county early
childhood education coalition
which is one of two coalitions
within our success partnership
pre needle to career initiative
it's a very.
Innovative coalition and that we
employ a collective impact
framework and so unslide I
believe it's like six seven.
That's where you can see a
little bit around our framework
and so the way that it works is
that we share staff across board
organizations so I am employed
by like we need that if I mean
media under the family services
department alongside the early
head start program and
our coalition is primarily
funded by easy cd and so the way
that we structure our work is
that we developed a strategic
plan with our community partners
that was directly aligned with
the states early challenged in
education early childhood
education and care department
strategic plan which has blood I
said
we partner very closely with
community action agency they
actually fund our communications
team and then out of the initial
partnership between engaged new
mexico which is our primary
backbone organization
and the coalition where we
sort of birth the center for
community analysis here it and
msew and so they collect and
analyze all of the data that we
use the way that we structure
the are working target our work
is through three action networks
which are collected by myself
the back phone team as well as
two lead ambassadors each and
those lead ambassadors are
community partners leaders and
champions and our community who
help bring the power and.
Education and awareness from
their organizations and their
involvement in the community.
To really collaborate those
three action networks are
children being born into healthy
homes children being ready for
school and the early children
work force is supported some of
the pictures you can see in the
slide are the practical projects
that have come about from those
action networks and so down here
and donate an accounty southern
new mexico all together you know
that we
sometimes have to travel up
north to get resources right and
so a big push for our coalition
has been for a wind bringing
some of those major trainings
down here in the last year we
brought down the car seat
technician training francy for
new mexico to donate a county
and certified sixteen year car
seat technicians in our
community and the way that we
utilize them is by hosting carc
clinics throughout the rural
areas of the community where we
gather families and we educate
them around carc safety we
invest in car seats to
distribute those two families I
need who cannot otherwise make
it to the more
will call it urban areas of
donate the county
we also have a baby bag
distribution where community
partners come together we
assemble based off donations and
funding we assemble these diper
bags and so this third round
that we did was we had community
partners distribute them and
target families who are not
currently enrolled in early
children education services as a
means of outreach and education
around those services and hoping
to increase that engagement and
awareness around the services
something that's really neat
that toes into our state white
funding and initiatives is the.
The scholarships that are
available that went from one
tabling event where we were
connecting with providers who
were interested in actually phd
level education and so
partnering with the eccd we were
able to launch our first cohort
phd cover and early childhood
education they just finished
their.
The the course work and so
they're off to their
dissertation but that was a very
need and took a lot of
partnership along with a the
early challenge in an education
education and care department
it's hard to see in the little
slide but you guys are probably
heard about almost ninotes which
is our mobile children's museum
that is about a ten year long
project
that is taken a lot of support
from our partner's statewide and
locally and the whole goal
around that was to make this
museum accessible to families
who could not not otherwise
access
early childhood education
services like this and so that
has actually leads lead to some
really neat regional
partnerships our mobile museum
has made it out to grad county
as well as a federal county and
the last year and so
that has been just it has been
just such a fruitful experience
for kidos to really learn how to
play and how fine um and just to
access such an amazing resource
we also have our toileting
library out in anthony which is
modeled after the UNM toy
lending library here in last
crucials and so again making
those resources accessible to
the families in underserved and
brural areas.
Um.
I think I can go ahead and move
on to the next slide which is a
little bit more about how we
measure the success of our
collaboration and partnerships
and that is done directly
through the center for community
analysis we utilize our depths
of relationship survey and so
it's a survey that goes out to
our community partners and it
measures the depths of our
relationships and you can see
here how from twenty fourteen to
twenty
twenty three we increase from a
hundred and nine partnerships up
to three hundred and fifty three
partnerships just here and
donate a county that includes
local regional and statewide
partners that have been
activated and engaged in the
work that we do.
And then onto the next slide is
a little bit about our family
support specialist this is this
is my pride enjoy my baby it's a
project under the funding the
the grant that funds my role
with them like lenica if I mean
the early heads start and so we
have two family support
specialists who serve sort of
as.
Community health workers one is
stationed that are women's
clinic the other is stationed at
our pediatrics clinic and the
way that it works as any time a
mama is confirmed pregnant at
our women's clinic she is
referred to our northern family
support specialist who meets
with her bills report tiser to
any services that she may need
introduces her to early
childhood education and then our
second family support specialist
that referral is triggered when
a new born as scheduled at our
pediatrics clinic and so she
does the same but for a baby
she is also a certified car seat
technician and so it's direct
access to that whether they need
it at the hospital or later on
they both are certified
and credential to
do rounds at our local hospital
mountain view and sell every day
they spent they go through the
labor and delivery department
and so that's how we're able to
actually get them they are not
required to come back to like
lany government if the if they
would like to my family support
specialists are also trained in
the electronic health records is
done with them like cleaning
castle right then and there they
can tie them directly to the
medical and other services that
we offer within like leaning up
and the way that this work flow
structured has been very
intentional in that the first
referral for mama can remain
open
early on in as long as she needs
so she doesn't get lost in that
post part of journey once baby
is born so both of these family
support specialists can be
serving the family at the same
time at any given time as as
necessary for that family.
Um
and I think that's all I have.
Yeah.
Good morning again and I just
will like to thank you for the
opportunity to speak today on
behalf of head start state of
new mexico and am going to just
share a little bit about my
agency as well that I feel like
can be a model for new mexico
programs especially in the error
of universal child care my name
is patricia grovie evans and i'm
the executive directory number
the founder of child and family
service to seek and we began
serving children in lee county
in nineteen eighty four in today
we saw five hundred children in
their families ranging from
infense as young is six weeks
old all the way to school each
children the age of twelve and I
also had the honor of serving as
the president of the head start
association of new mexico in its
own role I previously held
twenty years ago and now and
back there but with forty years
and early childhood leadership
i've seen first hand the power
of head start to transform
children's lives not only
children's lives but entire
families and communities so why
does this even matter what is
hit start matter because it is a
true to generational program we
don't just prepare children for
kindergarten we prefer them for
life success as well but we
lived families as a whole
children received very high
quality early learning but we're
tifferent we call a little bit
extra beyond maybe what child
care and some other programs do
we provide those comprehensive
health services from screenings
to exams I guess what we will
just provide them we insure that
if a child has needs in health
whatever the diagnosis is we
ensure they treatment is
received and we also ensure they
children and families have
medical homes niches mobile
units.
But metal call homes within
their community because they
deserve that higher standard of
quality
we also have very nice nutrition
programs if you ask children
especially from my program what
they remember most about hit
start so many that we're going
to say the food they're going to
say the food I remember now
never forgetting when I was just
a young at start direct during
oh we're so you know involved
with the curriculum in all of
this and we were practicing for
AAA christmas program in wing
ran a little over and um we
didn't have time to really get
them their million so we were
just you know at what will extra
snack and I just remember the
little boy coming up to mini
said miss grovin ain't we gonna
eat aint we're gonna eat you
know and I stopped right there
as i'm nab for ever forget about
the basics in how important this
is in that same mother came
later in the year and she was
thanking me for something that
had happened and she thought she
think to me with it can have
been to her food was of such a
value in it was like she had
given me a million dollars so
just keeping everything in
prospective that basic needs of
our most honourable children and
that are children from low
income populations and that is
who we serve children who were
had or below the poverty
guidelines and then we go even
further we've expended our reach
to now in recent years to do
mental health services.
So many of our children and not
just from low income populations
are born with so many challenges
in some of them they are in
homes that are not the
healthiest mothers in fathers
who do not know really how to
provide the best most nurturing
environment for their children
and so they need metal health
interventions we have an r and c
on mental health department and
we partner with people in mental
health professionals all it
start programs in new mexico and
make sure that children receive
those interventions so they can
have self regulation so they can
learn to be resell yet so that
they can um just really handle
their emotions in that is just
key for children to be success
and to be pleasant stupid world.
Soul has the children are
receiving these wonderful child
book services parents are given
the tools in opportunity to grow
that's the differentiation
between start the same as child
care no but both are bought very
vital in each serves it's
purpose so our families are
provided with our workforce
packed ways leadership
developments in wellness
supports we provide wellness in
my program we have a very
special women's program are the
parent families mothers can come
and we we have social capital
fight them coming to work out
you'll get classes against
bitten is class is just i'm
sitting together in groups and
just you know learning and
parenting and growing together
and each family this is so
unique every family receives an
end of virtual family at the kit
and that family advocate serves
and works with their family on
helping them achieve their
personal and their professional
goals it helps them to become
their children's champion every
child deserves a champ being
right and we feel like we are
champions but what if every
child's champion was their
parent and that's what we do and
we have in our program I very
ambitious fatherhood programming
is caught aim actively involved
men and so we we let me know
that they are the leaders of
their families and and they are
so instrumental in the caring
development of their children if
it's healthy relationships right
and even if they are not with
the the mother at the child we
make sure that they are included
in they are being able to be a
part of the parent conference
the whole this is to find out
what is the learning plan it's a
hat input in it so we can neck
them as well so this dual
approach is what breaks cycles
of poverties and create
stronger.
Families and why is that
important especially in in the
southern communities and
especially like in lee county
because.
There's cuts and we all know
that his legislators and we
thank you for the investments
you have made but there are deep
cuts at the federal level that
threaten some of the stable
foundation that prevents
children from falling through
the cracks I want to let you
know to that in art community in
lee county that hit start is
an anchor for families and i'm
sure it's like that in other
programs across new mexico
beyond the classroom head starts
are deeply connected to
initiatives whatever is dear to
their heart within our program
we are sponsors of the summer
food program we've done that for
thirty years and that make sure
that children are no rished
outside of this of the school
maps were also the community
champion in the fiscal agent for
the dally part and library and
right there in the county we
provide two thousand high
quality works to children no
matter the ring come outside of
its start to children in our
community really i'm focusing on
that let receive initiative so
these efforts extend our reach
far beyond the children enrolled
done our classrooms we impact
entire communities
now want to get to head start
and why it's so critical for new
mexico head start has a proven
record of leadership and
adaptability.
For more than forty years as a
head start director we still
strong through changing
political in economic climates.
Programs throughout new mexico
we continue to enable whether by
strengthening health nutrition
wellness programs forming new
businesses in health care
partnerships or adapting to
family needs during times of
crisis from colves to also these
federal curts and also
threatening hooping is weather
and uhm under too many children
can and rolling at start we
continue to fight on behalf of
these children we are their
voice so head start is a stable
so rely on investment one that
you legislators in communities
can count on.
So with the announcement of the
universal preschooling new
mexico we celebrate.
That more families will gain
access to free child care and
this is good knows for children
and families.
But madam chair members of
committee it's very important to
ring member head start is not
just child here we brain this
comprehensive two generational
services that go far beyond
which out here are pre k
programs can typically offer the
opportunity a head is to work
together head start pre k and
child care to build a four menu
of options that sort of every
families unique needs every
family does he need four day for
your child care.
Were communicating and I know
some of you may be when mother's
cholestery at home head start
has a part day option it has a
four day option I feel like we
really need to make sure that
when we're investing in putting
those federal dollars that the
children who need for day child
care are the ones who receiving
it the ones who don't they're
going home but they still need
that comprehensive early
childhood right and that's why
we can all connect so it is a
real choice for families and so
if we diminish had start in any
way the consequences are
significant.
Shouldering are going to lose
their comprehensive services
approach they're going to lose
their child afficacy team that
works on their behalf they're
going to lose the connection
with the public schools where
the uhm speech language
therapists in all the answer
their reservices they come into
our programs and provide that
there peace services we work in
collaboration to make sure
children get the four services
that they need um we also lose
path waste leadership stability
and self sufficiency and
communities would see higher
cost in schools in health care
and social services in our
state.
Could risk losing millions and
federal investments that had
started brings into new mexico
every year universal child care
and and should complement head
start but can not replace it.
Had start as more than early
learning madam chair in members
of the committee it is a
comprehensive two generational
community rooted program that
has proven success for more than
six decades.
Is legislators your role is
critical we ask that your
insurer had start remains a
protected and a prioritised
option for the most honourable
children and families enough
state universal child care is a
wonderful step forward but it
must work a long side had start.
Night in place of it.
Are children and families
deserve the very best start and
had start has shonked i'm in
again it delivers just that that
is why hit start matters it is
not optional it is essential.
Thank you so much patricia i'm
just gonna wrap us up
with a quote from crystal penia
she is a true head start
champion who we lost suddenly in
july and her words that are
reported on that final side
reminders of the heart of this
work and the legacy that we
carry forward she said and I
think that's just what had
started about its empowering
families it's giving them
resources supporting them having
families be involved and then
watching them grow to become
advocates for their children and
other children and their
community
so thank you very much.
Thank you for that great
presentation and will go to the
committee representative
consults.
I think since there is a few of
us all of us went to ask
something
and we have another half an hour
six minutes
thank you madame chair I really
don't have any questions just
maybe more common says as the
parent who was able to get her
son in a head start spot and
you know it came up in
you know and in our areas based
on requirements and just a spot
just happened to be available
i'm very thankful for that
opportunity and I do wish that
opportunity for every student
that we able to provide that and
so just thank you for the work
that you're doing it was a great
presentation
and it's any questions but just
lots of support other way around
in and thank you for your policy
recommendations though I think
that's helpful i'm just really
laying out exactly what's needed
to continue these programs thank
you thinking about him
thank you okay we'll go to
represent a robot kept hero you
ready
think you madam chair and thank
you very much so this is one of
the most exciting programs that
i've been able to unfortunate to
follow center than inception i'm
dating myself
we have been a life long
advocate and activist for a
blifting are most voluntable in
population to my whole life has
been dedicated to the soul when
we envisioned how I had start
was going to fill an important
gap and and allow families to
seek on career paths of jobs but
couldn't because of the not
having child care
start was just a wonderful way
to direct all those families so
i'm very very proud of the
history that I have with him
start hand my
unfortunately it is such a
popular and effective fullistic
approach program.
That has long waiting this and I
think we need to mention that
because I have a three year old
that's been that was on a
waiting best grants and
and still could not get out and
so we have to their parents have
the secret alternative of pre
key program so that just tells
you and that's not something
that's just happening in all
possible it happens on this
cruise it happens throughout the
state if you mexico I was
referring to them outside that
it's such a popular program and
I really dislike how it has been
tossed around
and i'm afraid of that happening
now so I have a
begin with
what you addressed on page
fourteen in particular and i'm I
like head start is not optional
it is essential if I one hundred
percent agree so.
We know that headstart
priorities as families pattern
below the poverty level
including as you mentioned
immigrant and i'm documented
families which is critically
important for us as a border
state so as universal child care
is expanding
to include fair income families
i'd like to know your thoughts
on how we safeguard access for
these most vulnerable families
and what protections are needed
to avoid
the risks
if you are if hit start
diminishes such as a loss of
screenings trusted advocates
millions in federal funding etc
had store is in that for curious
situation so what are your
thoughts reference to those
questions.
My thoughts are that
we have to just ensure that we
differentiate and really tell
the story they impact in you
know and madam chair and end and
committee members I i'm just
really.
Thankful there you know first
hand especially representative
and consider listening and you
to representative cover yet all
that you have seen the words
everybody does it to know it in
so I think we have to do a
better job of marketing head
start in show where we
differentiate and why people
would choose us we know when we
have a free market that there's
lots of competition and in a
free market
the best as in always when.
So just because we fail we
really are better especially for
that population of children at
risk in immigrants because of
the comprehensive services
approach but they children in
the families need more than just
quality child care and learning
environments they need those
comprehensive services and
approaches so I think we have to
market better and i'm so excited
that we just recently hired a
head start association you make
sea coal state coordinator and
that's gloria low person was
sitting behind me she was just
recently higher two days ago
when i'm so thankful to the head
start collaboration office for
using its funds to help to help
find this the work is hard and
even as president I mean just
running an agency is hard it but
we have to really concentrate
and make sure we've got to have
conversations with with uhm
federal we have to continue
having conversations with you
all in january we have a parent
application leadership
conference instead to and it's
where we have developed parents
all through the years of how to
become strong leaders and
applicates and the voice for
their children and so the
combination of it is when we
come to the legislative session
we know it's a short legislative
session coming up but they will
go out and they will personally
talk to their legislators and
and help tell the story to make
sure that we stay a viable
option and we're doing this at
the federal level as well
think you madam chair and can
you turn your mike off thank you
I think it's it's not just
marketing on the part of head
start I think the year ececd
needs to look at heads start as
a model in fact they should be
taking the lead in
collaborating with you on how to
best institute a successful
program the other way around
just because.
We madam chair are in we cover
certain vulnerable
populations or because we've
taken the lead in the past or
for whatever reason that should
not diminish the importance of
noting the history of head start
I mean we need to talk about
sixty years plus there's a
reason why had started survived
sixty years plus and I think
it's incumbent on the on the
department to reach out.
More so and that you'll be ready
to do all of the things that you
just articulate it present this
as the leading um.
For lack of a better word
flagship bottle
nationwide that still in
existence and so that matters
because what you will have done
as head start means something
otherwise it would not have
still be in place sixty years
later and so III really
incourage the department to do
all that it can to collaborate
with you.
Are we sticking to a time or
should yes okay all right did it
bring i'm sorry okay I will come
back if I have time yeah I had
to just add one another
question not now but when it
when I come went yesterday to
let everybody else I just wasn't
sure if I heard correctly your.
Time thank you.
Yes madam share representative
of robot cariato I
definitely think that from the
department standpoint there is a
strong understanding that
universal child care is about
access and depth so really
highlighting that those federal
heads start dollars that hundred
and eight million that that I
shared on on my head start one
at one side those it comes with
the comprehensive services so
that depth of of health and
nutrition and mental health
parent leadership state dollars
are not going to cover that by
itself so universal access is
going to require both in order
to meet the goals and support
and there's a strong
understanding of that within the
department and we're very lucky
to have the collaboration office
within the department because
these conversations are already
happening for the collaboration
and and support of continuing
headstart.
The.
Great thank you representative
I thank you madame chair and and
thank all of you
thank you for
your presentation and for your
dedication and commitment to the
welfare and the opportunities of
our children in new mexico I too
on a big head start for
these questions for you but list
first for the
the division director
for early childhood so there are
four county is currently the do
not have a headstart program and
just for our listeners to
understand their catcher and
union harding and debarca hardin
only has six hundred and thirty
five individuals who live all
individuals not just children so
I guess my first question would
be to the
division director is do we have
child care facilities in those
four that may not be head start
programs do we have other kinds
of early childhood child care in
this for counties so catchment
union heartin debacle.
Division director
short of madame chair and and
representative cates thank you
i'm gonna ask the head start but
I wanted to ask this first so do
we have a child care in this
work
madam chair and representative
we would have to get back to you
with a up to date comprehensive
answered to that question but I
know in some of those counties
we have our home base providers
and they are often best equipped
to serve very small populations
like the ones you describe but
we can get you the particulars
of that I think you've very much
managed here and yes i'd be
interested in that and if it's
absolutely a hurting six hundred
thirty for these are twenty
twenty four stats a catcher and
union are like thirty seven
hundred and thirty nine hundred
departures sixteen hundred so
they are a small populations but
it's not like they're next to a
county with a lot of head start
programs either so so why is
your criteria
is there a population criteria
of like this is where a head
start programs although I
probably am in the belief of my
colleague representative robert
capital every place is the rate
place for a head start program
rate but
what is the criteria a
population or age or income that
you look for to try to recruit
and create head start program do
you have one at this point.
They're funded at you know
through the federal government
and so there is a grant
application process and so
like in my grand I am charged to
serve all a leak county and so I
don't have a hit star program in
a couple of cities but we do it
based upon a community needs
assessment we have to do a
comprehensive comp community
needs assessment and actually
target the children and families
that are in the most need you
know and just so that we can
really capitalize and utilize
our federal dollars to the
fullest you know I think I say
something we can look at because
some hit star programs now we
are not meeting the funded
because of the pre gay and all
of the other competing is just
i'm gonna be honest about it
it's it's a little bit of a
saturation happening in some
communities so I think we need
to look at how we might be but
it used our federal dollars and
going to some communities that
are on a not served thank you
manager and thank you for this
so so I if you can come back to
me later and say whether or not
it part of that application is
population age a population or
income or some of the criterias
so that we can see I don't want
to make the assumption of when a
county only has sixteen hundred
people in it it doesn't need a
head start program rate in my I
don't know but let's find out
what those basic needs are and
then just to share out to.
Two are
listeners and to future had
start or maybe expansion our
current head start owners is
that new mexico finance
authority has now just funded
for early childhood in child
care facilities so if a funding
for a bricks and mortar is
important for those expansion
they don't have to be head start
but they are child care
facilities had started great
that had start doesn't
disqualify them the only
qualifies them so know that
there is an other source of
funding as well as location for
it and and and thank you thank
you so much for your service to
new mexico thank you.
And in madam chair and
legislators I think there's an
opportunity for even with these.
Child care dollars that are
really flatting into the state
and because of the investments
in the smart investments that
have happened at the legislature
with the land grant and all of
that there are state funded head
start programs so it doesn't all
have to be federal so as we went
expand in the child care for
universal may be looking at some
of that money going towards a
state funded head start
especially in some of these
smaller communities are who are
underserved and really your
lacking some of these resources
that could be an option but no
weird the criteria for head
start it is income base and it's
not population it really is
based if I need and then of
course the ages of the children.
And madam chair and
representative case I also say
that we eccd is in the middle of
a a stateward needs assessment
that was closely aligned with
the head start needs assessment
requirements and that's going to
be coming out in december so a
lot of that information
will be captured in there and
then also
we have some county factuates
that collect a lot of that had
start information and prior to
to this session I ran a report
from our head start
database and that the three
counties that were currently not
serving I believe our hearting
union and los alamos so there is
I believe you said there
tobacco was covered by you
mentioned catching counties
covered by by the coalition that
is in grad county so so we will
definitely come back at and
review and and share those
those facts sheets with you and
and make sure we're all on the
same page about where he'd start
is and it's not in our counties.
At thank you marine chair I just
so i'm only going by your map.
Does not say that in I don't
know how they can happen because
grants county and debacle on the
other side of the states from
each other.
Catchment okay you said debacle
alright I thank you
thank you representative jones
thank you madame chair I don't
have any questions I just wanted
to say thank you for the
presentation and thank you for
your work with new mexico
children and thank you for
recognizing my friend crystal
where to lost for all of us and
she was such a a committed voice
for children and dimming and
just a tragic and unexpected
till to loose for a recently so
just appreciate that and I know
it's been a loss for all of you
too so thank you so much.
Thank you
years when I I think it was
probably twenty seventeen
three well few more of us as
representatives went to nebraska
to visit the warrant of it
pre not pre k but there early
childhood education and the
model was very much like what
you're describing that we're
doing for heads start and to
have the wrap around services
and to make sure that children
from birth to you know
kindergarten get the
education in the development and
for them to be trained in early
childhood development care
givers
and so
uh
speaker now speaker he was
wrecked down
as and cheer thompson too but
the three of us were about that
training and experienced their
example which I think new mexico
you know has been doing for a
long time but the I really
appreciating how ecect is
incorporating all the different
things that are families need
from prenatal all the way to.
Kindergarten or or you know pre
cake
to career birth career
but I also
am really proud of
the success partnership and what
engage has done um
for disclosure or bragging my
husbands on their own the
engaged board and works with
lorry martinez executive
director and the partnership
said have been built you know
especially like with like
clinica and all the other groups
like having the car seat program
that was one of my passions
forty years ago and we had the
first car seat program with
department of health and
diarrhea last cruises junior
women's club so that's how I got
started in traffic safety and so
i'm really glad that those are
still happening and with safer
new mexico and all the different
other programs moments ninos
the mobile museum for children's
message how that was developed
at it really
and i'm glad that other counties
can you know participate in that
having that come
up and the future for that is to
become a permanent museum and so
I don't know of ms
because you mentioned a repeat
about
brick and mortar but I didn't
know if that was just for you
know had started schools or
could be for other things like
this
okay well this
okay this is more amusing and
for ultimate and so maybe
something else
also uh
see where my other notes are
so thank you alex for a oliver
work to and
forty years experience of doing
this.
Miss groving it's amazing to
just all the ever and I know
when we started talking about.
Bringing in other child care
centers and things like that
people were worried that had
start would go away and i'm so
glad that it's not because it
has been kind of like the
flagship for what other child
care
center should be like in so and
we even have representatives
serving that have said you know
I went through head start and we
go yeah you know
we we know the impact and how
important that is on people's
wives even within our
legislature
also let's see.
I'm glad to hear about the
clinica and having the family
support specialist because that
so important that you know we
reach families where ever they
are and those early
interventions are really
important
and I think
the work that's being done is
just amazing and I know we can't
always measure right away and it
takes time to see and evaluate
and looking forward to seeing
more of you know how important
and how great and investment
that is this is in our state and
as improving the educational
capacity of our you know the
young people and I
is the
aim the activity involved men
actively involved men how is
that program going
growing i'm sorry
it's going great it's just
something locally that we
developed in hopefully now you
know when my capacity i'll be
able to share that in in maybe
make it a model for programs
throughout earning mexico when
most historic programs do have a
father program **** is just
called ham actively involved man
in is just wonderful other main
come together they learn about
healthy relationships how to be
good partners and communication
you know their children's
learning style
you know they we really focus on
reading in machines and for them
being involved in their
children's routines they also
sponsor activities like i'm
going to
basketball games we have had
starred at nights and so our
fathers are just really critical
in when we have our parent power
hours every month is just so
amazing to see those fathers
just involved in just learning
in it in at first there because
we're so hands on and we do
silly thanks so that they can
touch back into the child with
it.
First the kind of late back then
before you know they're doing
the breathing techniques and
they're doing super fine in in
it in issues and we just
strengthen our relationship and
we find them lately and we see
you know couples we do a lot of
I love you rituals in touching
in hurking and think they just
go back and the quotes that we
get from them of just the
experience we just had one for
first for the beginning of the
year and one of them fathers he
said i'm never been to anything
like this before when he said in
the positive it wasn't a bit and
you said a very positive way so
i'm not doing the tradition I
would just sit down boring a
presentations ruly having the
fathers in the parents really
hands on and involved and be
able to practice techniques
that sounds great
go
thank you manager I just kind of
wanted to give an odd to
headstar I missed a little
detail in our family support
specialist and now our family
support specialist is actually a
dual role and so what we did
there was brought over a family
service advocate from head start
in order and ordered to kind of
bring that prestige and
framework from head start and I
would absolutely say that that
is hands down the key to success
in in their work and really
engaging families not only in
our expected mums program but in
the other early childhood
education services throughout
the community
and representative broadband
kevier did you have one more
question.
Madam chair I did but I think it
was covered so i'll i'll just
buy a passenger it's covered in
the report I didn't I just
hadn't found it yet okay thank
you and think I and just
want to add to all of the
accolates that have been given
thank you so much to all my
colleagues for acknowledging on
the significance of head start
what they're doing thank you
represent a block did you have
any questions or comments thank
you manager I apologize I had to
step out through a phone call
but I think you actually covered
it with the aim program that
there was very good I think it's
important to get fathers
involved especially because when
it comes to the busy lives we
are live it's important to get
every single person involved so
thank you all so much for your
work and that's all I had and
thank you madame chair for
covering my question alright.
Thank you and and again
condolences to the pen your
family I know
crystal I met her somewhere
along the way and seen her our
community so.
Glass thank you is there
anything else you'd like to add
to just wanted to add that we do
have a scholarship in honor so
there is a going to be a head
start new mexico head start
graduate scholarship in honor of
crystal she not only served at
the state level but she was also
the acting reach and six had
started president so i'm just a
beautiful souling her work will
carry on to us.
That's very nice okay thank you
very much we appreciate great
information your great work and
keep going.
Okay next we have new mexico
health care expenditures data
needs
the data needs are the needs
with the data.
Are you ready
if you'll introduce yourself
absolutely a manner of chair
members that can make things for
having me my name is i'm with
europe center mexico state
university
nice to see so yeah so I just
few days ago and endeming
my colleague susan to be online
and I don't know if we can hear
her
I am online okay there may
perfect yeah we can hear you
great
today i'm gonna be talking about
a steady the uh I did jointly
with their susan at you and m
mexico's healthcare expenditure
data needs the purpose here was
to look in to the opportunity
may be created a healthcare
expenditures database which is
kind of an add on to an all bear
claims database and so i'll be
over behind the study we did
last january
if you flip the everybody should
have the power point if you just
look at over the top you can get
through there so you're working
out in january twenty twenty
five I believe that was attached
as well
if you'd like to review that
i'll go through the highlights
and some of our recommendations
moving on site to
the purpose of this study was
really to inform
lace the requires good
statistical tools to make policy
decisions and the healthcare
expenditure databases is
possibly a way to provide one of
those source
movie number flight three the
highlights of our report
new mexico does compare well to
other states in terms of the
components of healthcare
expensive database especially
with the public release of the
all pair claims database uh this
past for
the staff at department health
estimate that the initial claims
data might cover seventy percent
of the seventy five percent of
the market which is a typical
level for most stop bear claims
databases that we reviewed.
In our study we looked at all
bare claims databases and health
care expenditure databases in
fourteen other states
we receive surveys and we did
some interviews with them to to
learn about their process and
how the developed those
databases
what we learned was all peer
claims databases are the court
of most states health care
expenditure data basis
other states expenditure
databases were managed several
different ways some were managed
to state agencies somewhere
mentioned in our profits and
some works amends through
universities we also reviewed
the available
healthcare statistics from
public sources and had to see
what's available without great
in the database
i'm moving outside for this one
details where is
included in healthcare
expenditure database so you've
got claims data and non claims
data really you're looking at
costs is the goal there
the red portion of the table is
the
paid claims for new mexico
residents from commercial
private health insurance plans
and states medicaid program this
is collected already by the new
mexical parent claims database
and so it's about seventy five
percent of claims this is
actually the hardest part of the
health care expenditure database
the remaining piece is and these
are typical exclusions for all
air claims database just cause
the datas harder to get
health care plans less than five
hundred individuals some plans
for specific diesel diseases or
conditions resell plans other
programs serving american
indians and some of their
federal health insurance
programs and when those are
collected in a health
expenditure date of issues
they're aggregated so they don't
you know need quite the same
level of details all very claims
database so that's out that's
added on to get to the
healthcare expenditure database
the other part is the non claim
data.
A prescription drug spending
that cost of over health
insurance in the and the
provider payments
i'm an excellent slide
we have some of the data that is
publicly available in on total
health care expenditures
again the goal this is to
monitor those trends in terms of
costs for for health care
expenditures this is available
publicly the data set is takes
off years to come out so it's
not quite as actionable as a
healthcare expenditure database
would be but so as we can see in
this chart
and slide five since nineteen
eighty personal healthcare
expenditures have grown from
twenty seven million to over
seventeen billion and twenty
twenty annual growth rate of
seven point six percent which is
faster than inflation on a per
capita basis and so if we go to
the next slide like some rough
calculations show the
implications of this
inside six you can see the cpi
so the inflation measure group
three point one times over that
time period from nineteen eighty
twenty twenties that's two point
nine percent a year the total
new mexico personal healthcare
expenditures grew eighteen times
over that same period and
satisfy compounding effect
growing at seven and a half
seven point six percent a year
for you they're just that for
the the population to get to a a
per capita written health scare
expenditure
that grew eleven point five
times from nineteen eighty to
twenty twenty twenty
and so that's a six point three
percent increase so you could
see that up basing inflation
many obligations without if you
look at it relative to income
on the bottom line in nineteen
eighty personal health care
expenditures were eight point
two percent of personal income
on a per capita basis.
And by twenty twenty there are
almost nineteen percent so
that's some of the consequences
of having healthcare expenses
grow as fast as they they do it
as i'm sure many of you are
aware
of the next slide slight seven
and it just shows again the
importance of that healthcare
industry in new mexico it's
actually the largest employer by
it by category and for private
employment as of twenty twenty
three eighteen percent of
private employees worked in
health care and social systems
complaining over twenty three
thousand people
and the next light on slightly
are general recommendations
it is important to continue to
provide support for the claims
database that's that's through
the hardest part of the data
collection
in terms of actually collecting
it from bears large time of
money
according to the other states we
interviewed the better that is
quite a a big undertaking
and we also sign every other
state there's lots of growing
pains as those are developed and
so continued support is is
important for the upper claims
database we start several your
states you know there's some
estate oldest involved there's
just a lot of to overcome with
that
on the next slide slight nine
and I just want to highlight
some of the capabilities of
young m and
a mosu in terms of how we may be
able to assist with healthcare
expenditure database we can
assist with collection and
surveys for the non claims
based data
we can work with the air claims
database to help to report some
models and then we may be able
to provide some modeling for
healthcare costs where it were
data is difficult to collect
and so a slight turnout I think
I can wrap up there for
questions there I guess we could
hear susan pretty good susan do
you have a anything to add
thank you kramer for
being there i'm person to the a
and thank you for the
opportunity for me to attend
this virtually.
Um and I just want to to note
that this week i've been the
sand which generation in that
yesterday I took my mom to her
doctor and had a chest
experience she has some
information in the loans in this
morning I was able to take my
daughter in law whose pregnant
with my first grandchild to see
her period her gun a colleges
are in preparation for a new
baby so I feel like i'm totally
in the health care situation
right now
in that it is important that we
address the class and try to
keep them with whatever but
within range suited our seniors
can afford them but also there
are
our young families have access
to these things and so I find
that you know working on this
looking at the all players
claims database and all the
pieces the contribute to the
total cost of income or in
in health care in new mexico
being very relevant to my
personal life at the moment
in I would hope that we had we
had put together and we can
certainly talk about what sort
of services baber and error
headset can provide.
The difficulty I see that the
state has had is that they have
had a hard time collecting or
getting the all pairs claim
database up and running and
drink that price as I think they
had a lot of difficulty with
staffing
and I would like to be able to
support the effort that they're
doing and continue that but also
look at collecting stuff that
they can't or are able to do yet
so that's my two since if you
have any questions thank you.
Thank you anything else
right ready for your questions
okay thank you
or go to the committee does
everyone have a question
no
well
yes okay we'll start that way
go head representative goods
honest.
Thank you madame chair some some
of these acronyms are or need to
me with the inter up here claims
database according to the
presentation is is it's just a
recent release of prior to the
recent release that is mentioned
here in the in the report you
know what was the database
collection system before that
think madam chair.
I believe the year and susan may
be allowed to discuss madame
chairman members of the
committee I think susan maybe
answer the sold my detail but
it's been in the works for
several years and there was a
public release last last four of
the old airclaims database and
that's not something that we did
that was something that's out of
the department of health
susan do you have anything to
add on it
yeah that's correct I think they
initially put their their first
look at the database online in
october of last year.
So it's just recently that we've
been able to take a look at the
data that they are collecting.
Um thinking managernike is a
ball up question with that is
the the statistics that you
quoted here in the report about
how the expenditures have grown
is that information from the
database or is there a separate
supplement of report to actually
see what the results are from
what the database has been
collecting especially with the
public lunch you enter
the upper matter of chair
members of the committee the up
air claims database
tracks very detailed claims data
so you you can track things like
you know cass produce ease or
cost per area and things like
that as it is it's difficult to
aggregate to get to a total
expenditures and so that's kind
of a gap to get the health care
expenditure database the the
date I showed there is a federal
source that's that's put out and
I believe our report is on the
website so that's more the
sources there we did review the
existing public sources that you
can get some health care
expensive database
data
the issue with the one that I
presented there is it's it's
generally a few results so it's
not quite as actionable so many
other states are able to get a
very recent data on total
healthcare expenditure so
without wanting particulars a
federal source
thank you they give any chair
for that
no I do think
relevance and you know current
data is extremely important
especially as we're evaluating a
lot of
you know more recent health care
decisions you know things going
forward but also with so much
data how do you
process it down and then um yeah
such as something new so just
thank you for that information
is to just had I just as a
little bit better but that's all
I have thank you.
Madame chairman members
committee one thing I would just
add on the health care
expenditure database.
The the public available data
also is not very recent but i'll
see you can't divide it up in as
much detail as you could but the
health care expenditure database
and how they're used in some
other states this identify what
are the drivers like where is it
participant prescription costs
that are driving things or is it
a certain area or is it labor in
one one place or specific
disease or conditions so that's
how they use another states to
kind of disaggregate what is
driving the raising healthcare
costs rather than just having
one total number or a lot of
very individual data.
There's more time if you wanted
to ask any other questions
you're fine okay or go to
representative jumps.
Thank you manager
well I would like to understand
better
what how we can use the
information and and maybe you
can give me a little history
cause I don't remember
everything believe it or not did
we ask do we ask for this report
at some point or is it something
that we regularly receive
national chair members of me we
we were asked to do the study
and last year
okay I I thought I remember that
so
you do have what you consider
recommendations here i'm i'm
trying to get a picture of
exactly what i'll pay your
claims database is it's all
about who's getting care what
services are being built um what
was paid
maybe you can just just help me
just give me an overview I mean
this is a lot of numbers that
how can we use it absolutely
yeah this is a definite
complicated study if you go to
slight for I think that probably
shows what the healthcare
expensive database is these are
common day bases that are some
other status more extensively
than others uh the fourteen that
we we looked at are the ones
that
all of those had all bear claims
databases and then some of them
had added on health care
expenditure database
and basically the states are
adding them to try to get more
information about healthcare and
some have been doing this firm
for over a decade and so they
have long longer trend data and
that allows them to to make
policy recommendations based on
specific data points in or
seeing a specific diseases is
causing the driving health care
costs or it's a certain area
maybe it's rule maybe it's urban
so gives you a more
granular look at what it what is
going on with in terms of
healthcare
the all parent claims database
is really focused on
the individual data and public
health researchers use that to
uh.
You know study certain trans and
things like that usually need
some transanalise that thing to
see how it changes over time so
it's good that it's been in
place but it may take a few
years before you have the trend
to do you know the analysis of
the changes
the health care expenditure
database you can look at that as
an extension of the all air
claims database so you can see
the bulk of it
does come from the ultra claims
database and you aggregate that
portion and then you collect the
remaining portions and then you
can get to a number of how much
total is fantastic health care
expenditures in the state and
then depending on how it's
collected you can divide it up a
location and by a provider
things like that and you might
see that one location of
provider is causing all of the
the growth and healthcare costs
so that's kind of vouchers in
other states.
Thank you that's a little bit
clear I appreciate that can you
put you on the spite can you
maybe give me an example of
policy changes that have
occurred maybe maybe in other
states if not new mexico as a
result of this kind of database
madame chair members of any some
other states use them to
implement global budgets as a
way to cap i'll help your costs
and try to tire to income growth
or inflation in some cases or
we were about one example and
maybe susan has had some more
here where
steep prescription costs were
the ones that were driving
the the the rising healthcare
cost once they had their data
point then they they created a
policy to try to reduce that
particular factor and help
control the overall and a costco
susan do you have any other
examples to out there.
Madam chair in a committee
members I think crammer is
actually covered the the big
ones sometimes it's you know
they're a bunch of different
attempts and other areas to do
like global budgets
where you you sort of force from
the top you'll get so much money
and then the
that has to be controlled for
I think the other thing that is
important to also think about
this is looking at a health care
equity in making sure that all
the population is receiving the
same quality so in some respects
I think help her expenditure
database can help us identify
not just where the rising costs
are but maybe we're the inequity
of
availability of funds for
different health care could be.
That's a it's it is what are
those pieces that you need the
data to help inform what ways
would be best to address the
health care situations we see
not just in albuquerque but also
in mackinly and in pick your
favorite rule county
hearting is one of my favorites
they have such a farm place to
go to receive health care i'd
like to identify how long does
it take for somebody who needs
help to and earning county to
drive to a local.
A local office doctors office to
receive that care so I think
that there's more.
A health care expenditure
database can help us from the
top of the the the pie so to
speak all the way to the bottom
did not only look at that cost
but the quality of health care
that's being received too.
Thank you thank you that very
helpful thank you madame chair.
Thank you
represent royal ball can be here
thank you madame chair
i'm having a high time day
justin all of this but thank you
representative jones for asking
about how well we can use this
simpler best to use this data so
addressing coverage gaps that
you are indicated the
I think I am habit during the
state it correctly the new all
payers claims data base
is estimated to capture about
seventy five percent of the
market but it also excludes a
risk employer sponsored plans
federal programs like indian
health service the va
try care
a self page charity cases as
they're referred to
so given these thing exclusions
and i'm referring to
specifically your page pages
three and eleven in this case
but eleven given the six
clusions how representative is
the
the database for understanding
our state wide health
expenditures and especially in
tribal and rural communities how
do we how do we do that thank
you
madam joe members committee it's
probably more result
representative in some areas
than others
seventy five percent still is a
large sample and a lot of times
away these are up air claims
because it does have exclusions
is usually not aggregated by
itself that's why you're out of
the pieces to try to get to the
total number
and so you still can study
individual areas providers
conditions with the claims data
but but you are missing some
because the those groups are not
required to report the data and
so where we sign other states is
that those exclusions were were
typical just based on the.
Requirements to report claims
data to the office claims
database.
Madam chair and in but looking
in other states we they don't
reflect the degree of tribal and
rule communities that we do so
that was what i'm having trouble
understanding how
how best can we represent within
what you've given us those
communities or is this
something that can be addressed
or not
made of chair members of many
suits and you may have a answer
this one you can see it some of
the federal data I think the
sense is data shows
anybody on indian health service
says uninsured
and so you see and I was in a
report they had a
new mexico is a higher
percentage of uh an insured and
I think it's about ninety
percent but the population is
eleven percent native american
you know so we're not getting
all of that that data there
susan do you remember any
examples of other states that
collected better tribal data
madam chair in members of the
committee thank you
in the states that we studied I
don't think any of them had the
amount of
rule population that we have or
the native american indian
population that we have however
there were some agreements where
they were able to work with the
I and received some of the
claims data and I would like to
explore that would be one of the
things that I would be very
interested in exploring to
seeing if if there is a way that
we can reach an agreement to
trade data with them or receive
data with them so that we could
fill in those missing pieces
because they do believe they are
critical for new mexico thank
you
thank you size and then and I
agree which is why it's
important for us to have that so
we can
best you always.
So I when other
and I don't know if I was multi
tasking a minute ago respect
to something I had time to I had
a time frame to respond to but
on the rising costs
of report your report shows it
since nineteen eighty
nine mexico
personal health care
expenditures rule from I think
you said I think it was nine
hundred and twenty seven million
dollars
to seven two point three billion
and twenty twenty
with an annual grocery of seven
point six percent which really
far out pieces both inflation
and income so what are the
primary cost drivers behind this
disproportionate growth and then
how do they
were you able to determine how
they different from neighboring
states are we box dear normally
similar we regional that
cleanesting yeah madame chair
members we need a very very good
question.
We looked at a couple studies on
the out the
the numbers on side six we just
calculate ourselves but i'm some
of the
big look at policy premiums in
it in other states and new
mexico I think is in the top
five or top twenty ten in terms
of rising healthcare costs every
state has seen an increase in
healthcare costs but
I remember
one of the studies were looked
out of lives common wealth
showed it at new mexico since on
the highest growth relative
income.
Madam chair I think at this
point I am still kind of
developing another question are
too bit for right now
thank you and it's really
interesting to go to the doh
website and buying the reports
and I was imagining it being you
know like this is the cost of a
hip replacement
where you give the different
places and how much they charge
I think colorado kind of does it
this way but this is still very
comprehensive about like the
emergency department that i'm
looking at but representative
catest did you have some
comments or questions.
Thinking madam chair and thank
you very much I just have a
quick so I appreciate in the in
was present here how
how the large lift it was to get
the repairs database into public
form and it was released in june
and I appreciate that you're
able to look up things like
that but how much does met form
and cost in these variety of
area in this area for
comparative consumer costing I
am wondering whether or not you
are madam chair and and and
president if you
are working to make a database
even more robust so I appreciate
my colleague representative for
a cabinet asking for like
information on indian health
services and being able to roll
that out I want a rule out
average costs for
a specialties as well such as
average costs for insurance
across the state average costs
for
kidney dayalisis so a categories
and I understand that that mean
not be something that the
typical consumer wants but I
will take this committee needs
that and one said to be able to
see if we are finding trends in
either health care or in
placements whether we can sort
by counting so we can see in
this county that's what it's
it's what the car costs or or in
certain procedures
one of the things that have been
presented to us in the past is
all the medicaid payments that
are going to be
these diabetic drugs for
weight loss
that the cheap ones that was a.
Excentre separatites but I see
but what are what we say and
ensuling met foreman ne
replacement dialysis or not
tracking that we're only
tracking what it costs not what
it's saving so if we could have
a if we could work towards a
more robust even if it's not
necessarily etc excessible to
the general public but
accessible for
a backdoor for our legislators
to be able to work out where the
health care costs are county and
by a procedure and by medication
I would very much appreciate
that I don't know if that should
do a bulket we have all that
data and I do know several
specialty data companies that
could know how to swart and
provide if if that's a
possibility and thank you
manager is that something that
worked at least in our name and
conversations about at this
point madame chairman members of
the community I think that was
the original attention of the
study
our work that
mine and susan was pretty much
the study we're not working on
the clinton statements that's in
a department help but I think
some of those data points are
looking for would be something
that would come out of a
healthcare expenditure database
in the report I point you to we
summarize several other states
and it so probably the the
forefront of this would be
connecticut and you can look at
some of the reports they've been
able to develop with their ultra
claims database to healthcare
expenditure database I don't
think all of it is public I
think some of that researchers
might need to sign up to get
access to and maybe primarily
for the legislature to the
policy and decision making and
things like that but I think
they were probably the furthest
at in terms of a model so if you
wanted to see what can be done
once these are implemented I I
think that be a good example
thank you very much manager and
thank you very much for this
stuff did you have anything come
up.
Okay all right might
this is great i'm so glad that
this you know his finally come
to through issue and you know
you all
are willing to continue working
on this and provide we just need
to make sure that we get the
funding to continue it and I
know cheer concern is very
committed to making sure that
happens and
you talk about the hardest part
is the collection the laws in
the time and the money to set up
according to other states that
you've interviewed so that seems
to be a challenge that you
pointed out and
getting clean and accurate data
i'm sure is difficult and when
you mentioned about collection
or survey for non claims based
data
what what are is that from like
hospitals or where do you go for
non claims
man of chair members of many
it's a couple different sources
we detailed some of them in the
in the report
when you're doing the health
care extension database you
don't need quite as much details
the all bear claims database
because in some cases you could
get aggregate data for a
specific group and that that
might be enough so that's why
the awkward claims database is
harder because there's so many
claims and it's very
individualized and so that and
it was a certain time of
research with the healthcare
expenditure database you can use
some aggregated data so you're
you're basically
reaching out to the the sources
of those information that the
twenty five percent of claims
data that's not required to be
reported to
the upper claim statements and
then the
other pieces and that yeah I
think we we detailed some
approaches.
You know for example you can get
for the prescription drug
spending that might be the
prescription benefit managers
that you'd survey for those the
net costs of private health
insurance sometimes you can get
those from
public financial statements for
publicly traded companies or
then the non profits sometimes
inform nine nineties and so we
found some sources that have the
techniques there
the provider payments if that's
not collected all bare claims
database you can come from
insurance court carriers manage
care organizations or provide a
group financial point so it's
kind of a a mix of different
methods
since this has been done before
there are some techniques to do
that and that's probably what
we'd lean on to the capture the
rest of the data
is that sounds like lots of fun
and good luck to you and see
and and part of continuing with
error ahead in unm
two is to get the expertise and
working with the current staff
so I think that's going to be
really important that we
continue you got
and looking at the
website you know they're there's
a lot of information already
there
sure you probably went to expand
so
I think this is a really great
start for something that are
states and you know needing and
if we want to
as part of the implementation of
the health security act this is
one of the key things
that
they are going to depend on and
get that information so there's
no other questions or comments
thank you so much we really
appreciate it and thank you
a susan for joining us.
Online I guess on the web
shift good luck
is there a let's see where we're
done a little early
rate but I was wondering if
there is anyone here
no one in person if they someone
online raised their hand okay
I was afraid they would be here
already who is it.
There's someone
okay
okay the person online feel if
you'd like to go ahead and
introduce yourself.
Can you hear me.
Yeah yeah but not
like a very interesting name
i'm mirror film with the house
security campaign and i'm also a
social scientist and I have to
really stress.
How important this health
expenditure database is it it it
uses where they can from an all
payer claims database which is
has limits to it and adds to
that information and
many states including maryland
and and connecticut and on the
with on the west california and
others have created these data
bases and as cramer said it is a
tool used to judge where like
raising pharmaceutical costs
ha- how is that how is that
increasing and you could do it
but to see where if it's by
region but
the solutions are very important
and this is part part of what
representative tom
certain representative travelers
have i've been pushing for which
is the was called this systemic
drivers of rising health care
costs and end it that is really
important
and this is the third report
that you've heard the first one
was smaller giving you a report
on how the state could lower
drug prices either joining a
consortium or setting up its own
drug purchasing board and that's
a decision you all need to make
with more information and the
second one was the incredible
report from the center for
social policy from unm which
looks at the complex
administrative system which is a
problem that we have throughout
the united states and in its
fact health experts state that
it's a main driver of rising
health care costs and there you
heard from physicians and nurses
and claims processors in new
mexico and rural and urban areas
about their frustrations about
the complexity of the system.
And
which and that is
extraordinarily important in
order to figure out a solution
on where solutions to this
problem and then finally there
is this one and then you will be
hearing from a doctor locuson
who is an expert on simplifying
payment and accountability
systems
and she's going to be giving you
a report of believe attention of
report in october and then
doctor gusmano is going to focus
in on a little bit more micro
level which is looking at the
medicaid manage care program and
there are ways to for our state
given the political situation
finding ourselves in with the
federal government to
reorganize
drug purchasing where they
program itself connecticut as
resume over ten years ago took
all took over their medicaid
managed care program so they're
directly doing it and doing
quite well and then there are
some states that have just
carved out there the
pharmaceutical drug programs and
are
evidently saving money so there
are lots of ways of looking at
this and then when you in do a
program once it's impact on
rising health care costs is it
is it slowing the rate of
increase and that's really what
you want want to knew no
I also wanna point out that the
term global budget was used by
kramer and he's using it in a
very very different way from
what mirror and is doing with
its hospitals that see cms
fields other states should
really look at and he's using it
as a sense that I way of.
Sort of saying it's a targeted
rate of increase of your budget
on it whether it's hospitals or
private practices or whatever
and and many and states like
working and and maryland
massachusetts have been using
this count sort of cap approach
of targeting rates of increase
and that they have not worked
unfortunately
and there's been a lot of
political
problems surfacing in
legislatures like nurses say
well where do you including in
this cap I mean are we we need a
salary increases we need more
nurses so you're going to cap
that so there are a lot of
questions with that strategy but
global budgets for hospitals
is a very very different
term used
for that is also needs to be
explored in this cost drivers
project so
and then I also want to say that
that there's a difference with a
cost with the all per claims
database
it's more than transparency
proceed by county or whatever it
you could see that let's say
it's certain surgeries hit
replacements are more expensive
in one county than another but
you'd have to really look at
and this is me the social site
is that you run a no who the
hospitals are how many
specialists there are houses
competition
what's how it are they are these
hospitals and services owned by
a private equity or other firms
there's a lot of
layers that one would would want
to look at in order to sign to
determine why one county may
have more expenses than another
transparency is important but
it's very different.
Issue then what this health
expenditure database does it
will really show you trams cost
trends and give you guidances to
where you want to attack the
problems systematically so
that's all i'm going to say
thank you thank you mary
appreciate all your hard work
and next we have a caring
cushing
customer i'm sorry
what still with this karen.
You unmute yourself.
Is she still online
i'm here they've finally just
gave me that ability okay great
my name is kerry cushnah and i'm
with the non profits find a bit
of a patient alliance and I just
wanted to come on and say after
listening for the last several
days
there is still a problem with
access to health care equal
access to health care for those
of us with
stabilitating conditions chronic
conditions as well as.
Disabilities and we are running
into in this community as well
as in our state and across the
nation where providers just
don't want to take us on because
they don't have time in their
schedules to fit someone in who
might be a little bit more
complicated because of the
pressures that they are
experiencing.
I also wanted to say while I had
the moment and informed some of
the legislators in the room that
even with access online to
participate in the meetings the
legislative meetings
the legislative session it is
very difficult to get the
accessibility help that we need
it whether it's smaller large
there is great push back
from those in the legislative
council services and the new
eighty eight coordinator.
I would be happy to speak to
anyone regarding the doj eighty
eight agreement that I have
because I have recently found
out that it has been discussed
with leaders in the legislature.
And it's been years in the
making and yet it's been
completely disregarded.
I would hope that our state
would be on the forefront of so
many things and that includes
equal access for those with
disabilities that want to
participate in the legislative
process lastly I just want to
say that it disability is not
just intellectual or develop
mental it is not just bly.
Or hearing.
It is.
It is many other things
including physical so I just
would hope that all of that
would be taken in the
consideration when we're talking
about accessibility and eighty
eight thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you karen for your
bringing up these issues and
concerns and we will try to
continue to follow through on
those
thank you.
Okay
did you want to make public
comment okay come on and if
you'll state your name.
The.
Hello madame chair members of
the committee my name is
christine dabin i'm from a rural
area outside of anthony new
mexico sent at the desire can
you do full of cartfields
connectors and i'm graduating
with my public health degree
from animals you this year and
i'll be here for us my life
working for the state I urge you
to support legislation that
protects our health against the
climate crisis extreme he is
killing our most vulnerable or
elders are far workers who put
food on our table and
threatening our livelihoods in
the last four days seventeen
people across the state were
treated in earth for extreme
heat stroke my little cousin at
a grandmother seizure on the
playground due to heat
dehydration and electronic in
balances he still asked me
almost every day if this will
happen to him again
unfortunately I think it might
we live in an analyst drought
perfected by unexpected flooding
for money soon run off there's
also polluted from the high
nitrogen in our soils that we're
using and I grew up with our
snick in my water I didn't have
clean water I don't want that
for my kids we live on
historically inactive fault line
but we're seeing a dramatic
increase in small scale
earthquakes from zero to over
two hundred every single year
now do extraction injection
wells in our region they also
admit extremely amount of
pollution and we repeatedly have
lead the nation and the amount
of air pollution in our county
now they're counting with the
building natural gas pipeline
through my backyard of my family
home for my witness home to
power a data center from outside
business do we not deserve
solder and geothermore with
economic opportunity like the
data centers of north and
elsewhere in the state.
Climate solutions I guess before
and others that you have passed
are essential for the health of
new mexico in the prosperity of
our state's economy thank you so
much.
Thank you we appreciate your
comments in that project to
better is considering a lot of
different issues and if we had a
green amendment than a
government it every level would
have to consider the
environmental impact on the
people of the area and so we'll
keep trying to get that through
thank you.
Okay thank you
to staff for coming down I know
we've hope
experience.
I was wondering
could you suit your name please
press the button the person on
the the little person if you're
pressed out your guarantee and
state your name please thank you
my name is kathy wooten I live
in last crucials i'm just here
as an individual citizen but I
am a part of a group of
individual citizens who are
working to
be a part of the solution for
the health care here and in our
state.
I think that we are living at a
point where we are in where the
can has been kicked down the
road over and over and over
because of that we have
very serious provider shortage
we face it over time everyone on
this panel your family my family
my friends when my husband's
doctor how to close I asked if
he could get into see my doctor
who
thankfully I was already with
and there was no way my doctor
could fit him in so we were out
on the streets looking for a
doctor we got it to happen but
not without a lot of effort and
that is a very small example of
what's happening with the
provider shortage that we have
in this state and why do we have
it is my opinion
that there are a number of
factors
one of them being reform of the
laws about the um malpractice
insurance none of us want to see
anyone hurt in the medical
system
but when our providers are
paying two to three times more
for there coverage than their
colleagues who went to practice
and dinver and the local gyan
can not even do the entire
spectrum of going and treatment
like her colleague is doing for
two or three times less
malpractice insurance at dinner
there's something wrong
our state has not supported our
doctors are people who are
graduating from the local ask
your path at college and union
the majority of him don't want
to stay in new mexico because
new mexico doesn't have anything
to offer them.
We're losing doctors from this
community to go fifty miles away
so they can cross a state line
and have a different set of
circumstances to work under so I
hear the concern with private
equity I share that concern
that's a big big thing to to
chew off but losing my own
personal doctor because he can
no longer operate in this system
that really really comes home
and he made a comment that when
his girls get out of college
it's something he's going to
have to look at he went to
school here you went to public
school here he came back and
worked in the clinica before he
ever went into private practice
he doesn't want to leave here so
let's address this situation
let's not keep kicking it down
the road and I think it is a
public benefit it doesn't matter
the party doesn't matter that
gender it doesn't matter the
quality of health it affects all
of us so i'm asking you all to
pass we put this on the agenda
for one of your interim meetings
and allow us to do at
presentation about this issue
and contact me if you'd like any
more information I am a
nonprofessional and a non expert
I am just an experience or of
their situation with a lot of
family members and friends so
thank you very much for letting
me speak and thank you for what
you're doing because of all the
legislators in the entire state
you were the ones that care the
most about what's happening in
health to the public no matter
the gender no matter the party
etc so I thank you for that
thank you miss wouldn't
just for your information of the
reason some of our members are
missing especially our chair is
because the governor is
um
having a conference with certain
providers in.
People about the spirit um
medmal practice and the issues
it's not is seem as it's not
what it seems to be always so
they are going in depth and also
our committee in october will be
having a presentation about it
so thank you.
Christianer yes.
Thank you committee for the
great two and a half days and
coming to las cruces those of
you came from out of town which
is everybody but me you even had
to come out of town and i'd also
like to think
are extra security for today
because of some of the things
going on around the nation and
even in our state
and then also any mess you for
providing such great uh
meals for us the chef i'm not
sure where it is but
and they have box lenters for us
to take one eight one yeah I
know we're very spoiled so thank
you and I mean you
claim now be to for being our
liaison and staff thank you very
much.
The.
Save travels.
