We're gonna go ahead and get
started so i'm gonna call this
meeting to order
so welcome and while i'm
thinking about it for those of
the on the committee and other
folks that the governor is
hosting her mouth medical mail
practice summit tomorrow at her
mention so several of us will
not be here tomorrow including
the chair the vice chair and
representative and they are
because we got to be in santa fe
tomorrow morning so so
representative ferrari has
agreed to to chair the meeting
but I just didn't want folks to
think that we had deserted you
we kind of have but not but for
good reason so with that i'd
like to welcome um.
The president of new mexico
state valley for me and go ahead
madam chair and members of the
committee good morning thank you
for having me and i'm trying to
get comfortable because it's all
over the place but
I guess so from my perspective
when I think about a committee
like this and what information
you might have I know that you
met yesterday with my dean of
the college of haste and some of
it there representatives so
you and you you already know
some of the things that we're
doing from my perspective the
the
the health of the university is
really important to especially
in this day and age and when we
talk about health we talk mostly
about the uh rap around services
that we provide students outside
of the classroom and in there
daily living so we're trying to
continue to grow that kind of
support and I do want to think
that legislature for having
given us additional funds to
continue to grow those there was
kind of supports via new
advisors via via
members of the psychological and
counseling services that we have
been able to hire so those
things to me or are a priority
and we've been working very hard
on that the one aspect of your
work that recently has come to
bear in my relationships
especially with them department
of a health services and and
secretary of meal has been the
snap at program for which
funding had been terminated so
we have agreed to extend the
employment of those individuals
for another three months so some
of it a bit via the college some
of it buy at my office we're
going to continue that in the
meantime the secretary has been
very generously a working on
this to make sure that in her
request for additional funding
this also gets included in the
special session.
Which I believe is one of the
topics that the governor wants
to want to address and then we
hope to continue to put an
additional request for next year
because it is a program that
obviously through our extension
officers hits our thirty three
counties and ensures that many
people who have in a sort of
either needs in in food services
or understanding of how to how
to eat better and prepare
themselves better with regards
to their food health are served
that way as a member as a one of
the things that I did the summer
is I went to our counties and I
did talk with a lot of the
members of the snape I can
program the
provided very good evidence of
the work that they're doing and
how useful they are exactly to
combat some of the issues that
especially in early childhood we
see with them with the kids who
have among nutrition and
challenges like that so with
that I really don't want to take
the time I prefer you asking
questions and then I can try to
answer any any questions that
you have at the best to the best
of my knowledge
thank you very much so do folks
have questions
representative and I
think you madame chair thank you
mister president for being with
us again I know you're here for
c got some questions answered
during that time but there was
one question that I I think that
news had just come out and I
wasn't too sure how to ask it
but
I know recently um if you know
you're no home and there was a
recent last suit a sexual
assault lawsuit um against the
university and I know once again
that was not necessarily
necessarily while you were here
but I just wanted to get your
thoughts like how is it that the
university is
taking sexual assault seriously
I was really proud of the
survivor for.
Not wanting to settle unless
there was some kind of training
which was great and it's a good
first step but it like is there
a culture change as there are
systems change how is it that
you're thinking about sexual
assaults on campus
and madam chair and
representative and I am I do
take it very seriously and I
hope people have been noticing
that when the department of
justice came out with thirty
five representative thirty five
recommendations for what the
university needs to do we
actively started we created a
task force and we started
working on them and I think at
this point we have about twenty
three or twenty four of those
those recommendations have been
implemented some of them are
ongoing and part of the ongoing
the ongoing reference to that is
precisely because the
the report was about hazing but
also about sexual assault sexual
misconduct so we have
implemented a number of
initiatives that in fact require
kind of what you saw in that
case where we have training now
for all students that needs to
be completed in in order for
them to be able to re register
for the spring so we don't stop
their registration at the front
and but doing the year we do we
can do something about it
because we don't want to
necessarily exclude students
from registering because they
don't pay attention that's
something that we need to do
because the way we communicate
sometimes doesn't come through
to students so we do that we've
done training for example with
our athletes I personally
attended a training on hazing
and sexual assault with all of
them a staff that works with our
athletes or athletes do the same
thing we do it for fraternities
so yes we are taking those
things circus seriously now one
of the questions that the
remains and I don't want to get
into that the details of some of
the some of that the idea do
know something about the case
but I don't know all the details
but you know one of the issues
that was made as like.
The safety of our dorms and we
have been upping the safety of
our dorms in terms of opening
and closing doors as you one of
the biggest challenges is
actually the student themselves
for sometimes they leave the
door propped open people can
come in because no one is there
to monitor those entrances but
we certainly need to up also the
responsibility of our resident
advisors to make sure that if
they see these kind of weird
things happening they need to
intervene at that point so
I think more education comes
constant education you can't
always prevent everything from
happening but we certainly can
put more
boundaries on what people are
doing in these environments yeah
I just I also want to address
the response time
I just there's one piece that is
like yes you know student
against student crime or maybe
at somebody off campus against
student crime but I think one of
the most disappointing pieces
that I heard in this particular
story was the fact that the
university had just delayed so
long in terms of investigating
and so I was just wondering like
from a systems perspective what
does that response time look
like now
madam chair representative than
I absolutely sorry I I didn't
realize you were going that
direction but that certainly was
a problem I mean the problem was
that it took so long in fact for
our office of institutional
equipment to investigate
and that was do I I to two
factors one is under staffing so
we have a address that and that
was one of the recommendations
that come out of the department
of justice document we at least
hired too higher at least two
new people in that office which
we did we have hired those two
people to sort of help
a
cut down on on the weight on
this the other one which is to
me more important is there was a
practice and I don't know who
started or initiated this
practice in app.
That office to go temporarily so
whatever the first one was a
second the third one the fourth
one which to me ignores the
difference differential in
importance that some of these
cases have so I mean if if some
of them have much
craver allegations those should
be taken on sooner rather than
later as opposed to smaller
allegations that are happening
and you know the unfortunate
issue is that sometimes many
people are grieving and because
of the system things just got
delayed in a way that was not
and is not the best way to
handle this and so we are
addressing that as well we have
a new
assist a social vice president
for a char is now in in talks
not a tox exactly directing the
office of institutional equity
to
figure out how we attribute
importance and response times to
cases that are more important
than others for the consequences
of those cases
thank you manager when the last
follow up question or maybe just
comment I would hope that a part
of this is also setting goals
for response times this way we
can also see like you know we
come so you're next year that
you're after like what have
those response times been like
in the past and are we getting
better at them so thank you
madame chair
thank you so I have
representative ferrari and then
representative keys.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you president for me
I yesterday we were speaking
with doctor doing and about the
substance use and of your
prevention
and we were surprised that the
previous administration was not
allowing to lock some to be
readily available and I might
think she said that there had
been one death um but we were
concerned or I was concerned
that you know is your
administration going to have a
different attitude about you
know having the lock zone you
know prevalent entrane
so madam chair and
representative ferrari I come
from a university for actually
the distribution of narcan or
knox alone was was readily
available
a lot of times in you know I
when I i'm happy and in fact I
detail
professor doing that
to give me information about the
cast the distribution and what
are the pros and cons
you know i've read up on these
things in the past and and the
there are the big issues or the
big concerns right is vandalism
that actually takes away the the
stations and takes material out
of the station the fact that
those stations aren't
replenished or change because
there is an expiration date also
on that d
well the use in abuse actually
the interestingly enough the
abuse is if you if you provide
the medication and the person is
not under a drug thing
theoretically if there is no
consequence but some people feel
that that is an act of something
that could happen and so there
is there's been a lot of a lot
of first you know uh different
opinions on those but.
From my understanding is that in
fact you can give it to someone
who has not having an open crazy
and they'll be okay so the
currently I know that our public
safety carries it with it and
they're trained to do that one
of the things that I certainly
would like to think about is if
we can expand that the number of
people who have access or who
are experts and know how to
assign that
whether we should make it
available in every dorm you know
it's a it's a good question
we know that a lot of times
these are these are all over
those has happened in a in
private places and and so the
question really is who can
access those private places in
time to provide the service so
certainly i'm i'm thinking about
how do we amplify this I would
like to get a uh
an idea of what the costs are
and then try to figure out also
a training that helps the
university as a whole get better
handle on this
that sounds great thank you
madame chier and president for
me also we talked a little bit
about um substance
while the environment of the
university I know because you
have young people under twenty
one and then a lot of returning
students who were here
what are your plans to you know
have an environment where
alcohol isn't so prevalent in
advertised in
and the different activities in
events
madam chair and representative
rate
this is I mean strategically and
structurally I think this is a
really great question because it
goes both to what are we
teaching our kids when they come
to campus how do we do you know
alert them to that the the
beauty of being independent but
also the challenges of being
independent and you know my my
it's.
Unfortunately there is an
initial culture right that you
come to campus and you do you do
the things that you weren't
allowed to do before especially
when them comes to two alcohol
so actually how do we train
students to understand that this
year we started a new leadership
initiative which we're hoping
that if actually was going to
expand to most freshmen in which
we teach them sort of some of
them standard values that lead
to leadership including the sort
of integrity and respect for
themselves and others that's
that's the broader you know
that's more like a theoretical
cultural desire to change the
way that students come to the
campus and start the envisioning
themselves not only in their
first year but across the four
years and then into a productive
life or so that's that's a
desire of mine but yours is much
more basic in terms of like
those ideas don't always stick
so what is the kind of
so you raise a good question I
think what we need to start
doing is how do you reach
students better because some of
the modes by which we
communicate with students
especially email are no longer
the things that they communicate
fire you know they they prefer
instagram ticked off whatever
accent and so figuring out a
company like that to get them to
become aware of it and then as
you said there are older
students and older students
obviously feel that that they
are more in power to do some of
these things and the younger
students
there is a fraternity culture
that is also works in that
direction so as part of the
awareness campaigns that we're
doing I mean we are meeting with
the leadership of all of these
groups and trying to tell them
this you know work work together
with us on these things but am
in a
if if if I could do things
differently in terms of I mean
other things I would but it is.
To we need to start creating a
better sense of personal
responsibility in the
individuals that we are growing
to move to the next level
I appreciate manager doctor for
make you know trying to do those
things but I think there might
be some environmental
that would make it so it was not
so easy to drink for under age
but you know those are things we
could talk about offline to I
appreciate it that thank you and
I was gonna ask the question
about the narcan and i'm going
to say that
the more the marrier I mean it
took to restrict it to certain
people you're going to have not
have the best outcomes it's not
it's not a recreational drug so
there's no
fear of you know somebody
stealing it selling it or
whatever it's pretty but so I
will I would encourage you to
have it as and I know there are
costs but have it as widely
available as possible because
one life saved is is worth
it's priceless so so I have
representative capes and
representative robot copyttal
and just to reminder that we
were let's be brief i'll just
say it that way so
representative caters
thank you madam chair just as a
pigyback on our chairs comment I
I believe she give you an
opening to understand that this
legislature would be
open to paying for a readily
available american on campus and
so I would find out what their
costs and what it would be and
what it would do so I think that
you would have some support here
I wanted to thank you mister
president for
being mindful of you know the
attacks on food and security
that we have coming down.
And I am a big fan of the I can
program in the snap program I
i've run early intervention
programs who use that for
and I know that that program was
originally intended for a young
families we have generations now
who don't know how to cook and
so understanding portions and
how is super important I would
win when our programs are
attacked we become more
inventive and so I would like
you to consider
working with snap and expanding
that for our disability
community when you are an
individual the disability
especially if you're in a and a
group home situation you're not
always allowed to use the stove
incident it means you're only
cooking you for yourself in a
microwave which means you're
eating process for so
understanding how to put
together food that rosemary on a
grocery store rotissery chicken
and maybe microwaving it I don't
know might has different I would
say that that's a population
that is not being
as targeted as as you're young
family population is for the I
can and I would like you to
consider expanding it then and
then I just want to do shout out
you know because new mexico stay
is
such a strong agricultural
school that there are other food
and security programs that maybe
are being funded through
research and innovations and
agriculture but they are also
helping our food banks and in my
district we have a program
called cease to need and where
the university leases land and
looks innovative agricultural
approaches to
reduce or not use pester sides
and things like that but all
that food is donated to food
banks and for and for anybody
wants to come volunteered
they're allowed to take it as
many of it.
And so I do think now as a time
to make sure that we're being in
that drum letting people know
where you can get food because
it may not be in our more
typical spites
in the next several months so
would you like to add any
information for the food and
security programs that I may
have missed mister president
madam chair and representative
of gates actually you've done a
great summary of of the
available what we do and and but
I I do take what you said
really too hard and that's
something that I will take back
that the
day so how do we help people
with this abilities because
you're absolutely right they
sometimes don't have the means
to advocate for themselves
that's the other problem as well
rate I mean advocacy is one of
the things that gets people are
attention and often times
they're restricted to do that so
I will I will certainly
communicate back to our
extension offices the
possibilities that we might have
to implement this program so I I
really thank you for that thank
you thank you mister president
thinking that manager
represented robot cover thinking
madame chair and think you are
president for your presentation
you may or may not know but i'm
very active on the unm campus
working with graduate students
and helped organize the graduate
student union and we're also
aligned with for graduate
students here at an msu
so there are a lot of reports
that I refer to and look at
madame chair one of them is the
teacher preparation
administration and leadership
unit report
that reports that graduate
assistance receive statements of
approximately fifteen thousand
eight hundred to sixteen
thousand two hundred for a nine
month period.
So for those graduate
assistance madam chair were also
carrying teaching load greeting
supervising field experiences
how does this particular stipend
align with custom living tuition
fees and health costs that's
when a part of the question
because this is a questions that
we're looking to these reports
madame chair to help us guide
the next steps and then what
adjustment has enemies you
considered in terms of a lining
these statements with what I
just mentioned thinking about a
chat a err chair thomson and
representative royal balcony
a lot of times these so I I will
for say claim my ignorance in
one sense because often it is
the colleges that make the
determination as to what they
are paying graduate students so
I don't control those kind of
differentials I mean and there
are differentials as you
probably know across all
universities depending on where
the student is enrolled so uhm
does it align with cost
delivering probably not I mean
so I mean and and do we have a
as you as you probably know our
graduate students did unionize
and there was a contract that
was signed last year and there
was an additional two percent
that was added to uh the general
funds for graduate students
so how do we do this I think
this is another area where we
need to figure out how to
support students in a way that
allows them to
in a a
live on this these funds are so
we do have a graduate housing
that probably is cheaper than
some of the housing that they
would find in surrounding
communities and that may help a
little bit because it lowers a
little bit the cost of living
but I don't know that that is
the answer to the answer really
is to examine across the board
how are students are doing.
Um my my initial understanding
was in fact that generally
speaking a graduate assistance
were higher than that level that
you are you just mentioned I
mean I think I remember we're
thinking something about twenty
twenty two thousand but maybe
that's a mistake of my so
how certainly look into this I I
think we
we want are you speaking of a
with the with the committee on
health we want to graduate
students to be able to be
healthy we have a revamped and
reviewed are
health benefits so those are
clear and now actually have more
cover a choice students and they
did before so that's a small
improvement I think it's going
to be a step by step improvement
that we need to look at and we
need to look at where the
funding comes from as always
when you look at a university or
at least when I look at the
university you have a sheet that
doesn't cover everything so you
try to figure out which one is
going to be the most important
but certainly graduate students
and their efforts and their
contributions to the university
of one that we want to take into
consideration
think amount of chair and thank
you for your response I just
would add that yes the union's
or negotiating right now um
but I understand
but we're still looking at a two
percent we're only looking at a
four percent at the UNM and so
if you
add
all of what I just mentioned and
then the man month period were
see we still have students that
are living far below the minimum
wage for below living wages and
they still have to pay madam
chair out of what they do earn
um and they carry the heavier
slow for our faculty actually
without the graduate students
without adjuncts literally I
believe our our ten your faculty
would be at a totally
disadvantage to the student
population as a whole so I just
would incourage.
That you do take a closer look
as you've mentioned your
commitment are to making certain
insurances but the assurances
are written into the detail and
the detail is worked we're being
a price of in terms of not being
fair or adequate it's far below
the minimum and we have these
individuals students that are
unable to resource other
public assistance and so on
because the may be very little
but they may be a dollar above
what is required for eligibility
so madam charges ask you that
you pay closer attention and and
help us work through this so
that are graduate students who
carry the highest lower than
adjust receive fair fairness
across the board thank you
manager.
Thank you I have a
representative hunting
and then torrespolascus thank
you madame chair and thank you
president for me it's a pleasure
to meet you today we also got to
meet members of your
swimming and diving team today
so that was really a great place
to so I just want to talk to you
about three little things but
big things on your plate so it's
absolutely wonderful about the
way in which in a missus looking
at mental health and one of the
things that I talked about to
director with a your directive
the the college of nursing and
your dean of the school of
health is a about making sure of
finding a way to rethink how
we're doing internships because
what we've been trying to do is
to put mental health rooms and
every single school in the state
of new mexico so so far we've
been able to find that uh
seventeen schools there were a
request for forty five so we
still have a a ways to go so
students who are studying
psychology sociology behavioral
health they all have to have an
internship but i'm asking you
to take the lead and making sure
that those students are going
into these mental health rooms
and when you meet with your
colleagues at other colleges
that you ask those presidents to
also say let's do this together
because we're going to tackle
mental health so your job should
you accept it is to accept that
that challenged some madam chair
representative I I actually
accept the challenge thoroughly
I mean there are two things that
that I have been speaking about
especially in this fall about
wanting to establish across the
university and that is what at
my former solution was called
cooperative education which
really is about our students
being able to do internships at
a times paid internships to get.
Experience in the fields that
they want to work in so that
when they graduate there's two
things that are happening one is
they've had the experience so
they know that they want to do
it too the people that they
worked for have already
established a relationship with
them so they want him to come in
and work with them and third is
what I call the feedback loop
which is if our students go and
work in certain areas or a
certain communities and the
people who are in those
communities discovered that are
some shortcomings in those
students they can actually tell
our leadership here and we can
make sure that the curriculum
adapts to the needs of the
community so that's something
that I certainly in favor and I
will tell you one thing and I
know this has been a very
controversial topic uh about the
endowments that have gone to the
college of hest well in my in my
recent conversations up that
i've had both with the dean but
also with
some members of even legislative
finance committees etcetera the
idea that instead of devoting I
mean certainly devoting money to
hiring faculty to be able to
teach these things but as the
endowments have been growing and
more money is actually coming
out in distribution that money
becomes part of this kind of
scholarship for participation so
that we can actually encourage
these students to go and do this
because they have the money to
be able to do it without having
to worry about where they're
going to find the other money so
certainly those are things that
we're working on well I love
that idea because it also fits
into the bigger picture of grow
our own because that's what we
want to do here in new mexico
and then one of their small item
i'm going to put in your plate
is that you know the yazi martin
this case has been around for a
long time and what we need our
colleges to do is to figure out
how do we work with our tribal
communities to get more students
to go into.
Teaching are in these tribal
communities and how do we make
it seem exciting and you look
like just the person who knows
how to do that so i'm just going
to ask you to
work on that as a part of what
you're doing here it in a mess
you
so madam chair and
representative on its up i'll I
love that that sort of push
shove whatever you want to call
it um one of my goals is in the
in the coming year is to start
meeting with the governors of
the different uh tribes and
pueblos in the state and listen
to what they need but certainly
I try to understand how we can
be better partners and this
seems to be right up that alley
in terms of what can we do again
I don't want to be the one that
says to people this is the way
you want to go I want to be the
one that listens to what they're
saying and figuring out how we
can actually serve them so
that's something I want to do
well thank you very much and
that it's a pleasure to meet you
representative tourists alaskas
thank you madame chair and wow
that's a hard one to follow
representative
at least to get to share an
office with her
I am I want to think you arm I I
got to meet you at the four age
um event over at the burning of
county extension office and that
was so impressive and so
wonderful I was wondering I have
so many questions i'm not sure
that's the first one I want to
ask but I was wondering how it
is that you are tieing
that program to what we're
talking about here at enemies
you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
tourist philaskis I I think it
goes to the mission of this
university as a langrant we have
that mission to in fact to
public service and this is where
the extension officers came out
of including the four age but
as you said I one of the the
most impressive features of
going through this tour was
meeting the four age students
and meeting the kind of things
that they're doing in fact i'm
telling my grandkids you need to
do for age but d the idea for me
is how do we continue to offer
these services in an ever
expanding way because I think
initially and you can see it
from where the extension
officers are currently located
right there in the college of
aces in the color of agriculture
and that was the initial time
but when we went around and we
were talking with these young
people and we were talking with
the people who are are are
officers there was a desire to
have an expansion at least in
the kind of information that
they get because now that for
access are not doing only things
that had pertained to
agriculture but they're doing
you know computer robotics that
things like that and so how do
we involve the other colleges
and that we brought our deans on
these trips and our deans were
very
ecstatic to be able to hear this
and so we already have
partnerships both in the college
of hester helping and you meant
services and with the
engineering with some of these
officers so that exchanges of
these kind can happen I think
it's up and it's vital for us to
continue this mission because it
is our mission and so to me it's
just a let's see how we connect
better or extension associate
dean now participates in our
enrollment management meetings
as well so we are looking at how
do we continue the pipeline.
Of students who are doing these
kind of leadership activities
and into our university and as I
said my eighteen eighty eight
leadership initiative for
freshman in some ways ties to
that because some of the same
values are part of what they're
doing so really create a long
pipeline for the investment into
the state of new mexico.
Thank you manager and just very
briefly I don't know if you have
a graduate student union but if
you don't I imagine rep robot
coming or would be very eager to
you do they do have an excellent
i'm so glad to hear that you
also have an incredible ethnic
studies program here and I am
hoping as a represent of hermes
and brought up the martinis and
yazi lawsuits I am hoping that
they are connected as well and
i'm hoping that you are
encouraging that and you also
have our stem um and i'm not
sure what it's not a satellite
but it's a hub for all school
activities and I know that as a
faculty member as I was
submitting research grounds in
the areas of stuff that center
was very very helpful with
workshops and I want to think
are you if you could relay
thanks to them as well because
they were top notch and just so
so informative and helpful and
then lastly the the request for
a bilingual ad is a very serious
one because we are highly
lacking by lingual teachers of
all languages native american
languages certainly but very
much so with the spanish
language and we're looking to
see why it is the bilingual
teachers are leaving there still
teaching but they are no longer
wanting to do the bilingual lead
aspects and so that's becoming
an issue and i'm hoping that you
can support the recruitment but
also the retention of bilingual
educators and that's not quite a
question on so that's more of a
comment
and I don't know that I have a
question around that for you
other than are there any
education initiatives that you
would want to share with us that
you have not already.
Thank you manager if it could be
brief were already almost twenty
minutes behind
madam chair and representative
of stories for last I I saw two
things one is I mean you you you
brought a a number of these
these uh
these topics but with regards to
the ethnic studies group I mean
I think the dean is working with
them to figure out how they can
participate better especially in
that the teaching area in
education and there might be
something there developing so
that we do look at integration
between what they're doing what
they do and what we can do in
education as well and that might
actually bring us to that to the
martin is yes it kind of
educational aspect because uhm
by integrating the two I think
we can be more dynamic and how
we suppose support those efforts
the the with regards to by
linguism as a as a fully
bilingual person I mean I was
brought up in a household where
we spoke to languages actually
three because my father actually
my father didn't speak spanish
in front of us because he
thought he could speak with his
sister and we wouldn't
understand but as italian
speakers were understood
everything he was saying so we
picked up spanish that way but
uhm and I i've i've tried to
actually extend that to my
grandkids who are living with us
so they in fact went to and
started a program
spanish was the main language
and it was challenging for them
but they they managed so I I
fully uh think that we need to
integrate this into the the
state as you as you commented
this state is seeing still now a
great influx of
you know spanish mother tongue
speakers and so we need to
figure out how we give them the
opportunity to integrate I don't
know I don't know the details so
I can't tell you more about that
but I will certainly relay that
back to our team and finally the
stem program.
You are right I went and visited
the the the center they have
incredible I wanted to stay
there and start doing some of
the stuff that they were doing
especially for young kids they
do wonderful things that are
that are
I think will help the stem
development in this in this
state
thank you manager thank you and
I want to thank you president
for me for your lovely
hospitality your new chef is a
hit um
we we could do a cheer up here
so please pass passonnate and
again thank you so much for your
hospitality it's a lovely place
and we always like to come here
so thank you for joining us
thank you madame chair thank you
members of the committee and I
if I may say this to
representative block i'm
becoming part time resident of
your county
I think that requires further
discussion off line yes madame
chair is always welcome
next we will go to barak college
john el hummer
and um just reminder to the
committee that we are starting
twenty minutes behind already so
so not not to rush anybody just
just to reminder that
that not to rush not to rush a
light but to rush a little so
whenever you already thank you.
The birthday at the person i'll
get there as madam chair members
of the legislative committee
thank you for having me and
first as i've always said uh
thank you for your service to
the state we appreciate what you
do you have a lot on your plate
lot of issues and I will assist
in trying to make up time for
you and I will I will learn
condense my comments
please fit do do what you had
planned to do will catch up at
lench or something I I just have
to keep reminding my members
that we don't have unlimited
time understanding I understand
well as you know it's good to
see family your faces we've
hosted you in the past and we've
given a annual update so the
purpose of my comments today is
first to offer a thank you
we're we just executed the
second year of our sole source
agreement with the atd
for programs that we have
throughout the state with our
medical students and also for
the development in assistance
with the developing new graduate
medical education programs as
well
the first year we had a one
point five million dollars
allocation and that was
increased to three million
thanks to you all and the entire
legislature for that and so will
be expanding those services and
this coming year
the area that were really
focused on kind of two areas of
focus on one is a program that
we've spoken about in the past
and it's part of the curriculum
and it's called mission medicine
and what we've done with the
curriculum
is to are students when they're
in their first year in
particular
is that we have them signed
throughout the entire county
here with what I call safety net
providers they go into the
school systems to shelters
homeless shelters are domestic
violence providers.
Behavioral health providers
the list goes on but the whole
concept is with medical students
that come to come to our school
obviously given that we're from
me as state that has a smart
population
the vast majority obviously of
our students come from all over
the country a large percentage
from the southwest but there's
not a medical school in the
country that doesn't receive the
most applicants from the states
of california new york florida
texas and and why is that
obviously it's population driven
on that so the best way that we
felt that we could really
contribute uh to nonly their
education about upstream health
care
as far as you know it's one
thing to to do a thirtieth
rotation the errancy a patient
come in with certain uh
conditions but it's another to
actually go out into a colonia
and see the absence of
electricity or refrigeration and
what may be causing some of
these things that have an
understanding of that but also
it it draws them into the
community and gives them a
better appreciation for the
fabric of our of our community
and our state as well and so we
really believe that that's going
to help in the long run with the
ultimate goal ever recruiting
or graduates to stay if they do
the residencies here in new
mexico but also to come back
that they that that they've been
immersed fully immersed in to
appreciate who we are as a
statements as a community so
that program is is going to be
expanded uh uh further north
east and west through this
funding
as well then then in the
graduate medical education just
to share with you are one
success story and we also
received additional funding from
the state and we worked with nor
lay
medical center in they launched
a new family practice our
residency in lovington new
mexico so we're excited about
that.
Um in you for these statistics
before we we mention these that
and although there's some head
winds which I can in my comments
on as far as on this on the
statistics because these are
what dated statistics
that I don't think they're going
to be as high in the future
in new mexico and i'll explain
why but in mexico and the only
history we have right now is UNM
because right now with graduate
is six classes only twenty
percent of our of our graduates
have are now starting to get out
of residency so they're not part
of this new data that's
nationally at track data that
historically if you if you went
to medical school in new mexico
at u and m and you did a
residency at UNM uh the
percentage was right at sixty
percent with stay
if you left the state after you
graduated from UNM and went to a
residency about thirty five
percent would come back to the
state it's all relative right
sixty percent better than zero
thirty five percent better than
zero other states that that
number if you look at texas at
eighty two percent of their
graduates if they went to
medical school in texas and it a
residency in texas eighty two
percent staying uh the numbers
in florida I rate at that eighty
percent number on that why do I
think those numbers are going to
decline and I think this is a
whole other topic and I know
that you've been briefed on this
and you've heard both sides of
the issues
but I truly believe and I have
i've been in the state twenty
five years III was former
hospital ceo and I was involved
in and the development of a new
hospital recruiting new
physicians in the state.
And I can tell you without
hesitation and i'm sure you've
heard it from your neighbors and
your friends that are at we are
in a crisis situation with our
with our healthcare delivery
system.
And the grand irony is the very
individuals that lead the effort
to change our amount practice
laws out i'll give them benefit
of the doubt that their
intention was to increase safety
for patient care but the grand
irony is it's created
significant unsafe environment
so there has to be a balance
there has to be some hard
discussions hard decisions made
in there's plenty of best
there's plenty of best practices
around the nation that actually
can show that you can still
provide in environment where
patience that are harmed are
truly
taken care of but at the same
time you are not basically
creating an environment that
this becomes a place that
recruiting agencies and I know
this for fact there's the
physician recruiting firms they
basically
they don't recommend new mexico
are we still able to recruit
physicians to the state yes
could we recruit more absolutely
and again I respect everybody's
perspective on this but the
status quo that away is right
now
is not going to solve the issue
in its multi factorials not all
malpractice reform it's
reimbursement it's high paying
jobs it's a better education
system so it's it's not it's a
it's a complex issue but to
ignore our current malpractice
laws and just say they're just
fine
that's not the answer on that
the reason I will advocate for
that is because our mission
in the reason we exist as to how
they healthy and holistic impact
on the communities that we serve
and I hear it from our graduates
I hear it from physicians in
town that
they are being recruited other
parts of the country and this is
what wedge issue that is being
used like a hammer against us
into recruiting and retaining
physicians in our state on that
so that aside
we do have positive stories to
tell.
We have sixty eight of our
graduates that are practicing in
the state of new mexico
um were very happy excited about
that i'll give you some examples
outside of the big cities of
alva curriculum lost crucials we
have physicians that have opened
practices in farmington uh
portallis
and raswell though we just had
one of our obgyn alumni who just
finished the robegin residency
moved back to the state and what
really helped with that is that
we have a supporting foundation
and the py foundation in
southeast new mexico are teacher
provides are funding to recruit
positions back to the state as
well so we partner with
foundations to do that
so will continue
to encourage our graduates to
stay in our region to come back
to our state and again the the
support that you give us I hopes
in that endeavor and
the last thing that I would like
to say is that we will pillar a
foctner or
government affairs
representative
obviously you all know her
she'll be talking to you all
we will be
requesting to maintain our soul
source contract we've had
discussions with others about
getting into the grow fund so
that it would be so we don't
have to go back every year
because what happens there's
about a three month delaying
every time we do it with the
contracting than all that so we
would respectfully ask you to
consider that as well in madam
share with that I will
stop and open it up to any
questions thank you so who has
questions representative tours
for last year okay what it would
just start on representative
robot coverage or do you have
anything
okay what will go to
representative block
and let's stick with three
minutes okay thank you madam
chair.
When I show up they'd give me
three minutes now just get it
about yesterday
so madame tear I guess I just
have a few questions how many
honesty paths are in the
pipeline currently for this next
graduation year and how many of
them are you begging to stand in
mexico because I hope all of
them in madam chair represented
block thinking for that question
let me start globally we've
graduated we've had eight
hundred and sixty two graduates
osteopathic position graduates
again twenty percent for eighty
percent are still in residencies
and will be coming out every
year thereafter for graduate for
those that are graduating this
coming year we have right at a
hundred and seventy
approximately that are slated to
graduate next may every year we
increase the number of of our
graduates that that match into
residencies at unm also given
our praximity to el paso
we are a
city we are you know we're
integrated in those sixty
percent numbers that I gave you
about retention that's you know
sixty five percent as a national
average it's a hundred mile
radius of where they with the
medical school so we have a
placed
physicians at texas tech and all
passo in lubbock as well
mountain view memorial here
as well or I also mention we
have a physician that's also in
alama border that just started
practice and element gordon as
well but
that answered your question
thank you madame chair and then
quick follow up on that when it
comes to these individuals and
new mexico is that something
that you hear from graduates as
a concern when it comes to the
medical malpractice insurance
laws is that something that
these potential graduates are
future graduates are telling you
directly not not any kind of
you know I I just want to make
sure that you're tracking that
in some way data wise because we
always talk about oh there's no
data.
Well I want to know what data
you have from your graduates and
the people in the pipeline madam
chair representative block thank
you for that question
I don't have mathematical data
on that but we can obviously we
can do a survey I can tell you
without hesitation that are
students do their third year
rotations in los crucials for
corners alva kirky southeast new
mexico and when they do their
clinical rotations they are with
a physician
they're also very active we have
a student government association
they go to santa fe with the
donate accounting medical
society with the new mexico
medical society so there this
last session when there is
physicians up at the round house
our medical students were there
so yes there are very a tune to
it
they hop on the buses with their
mentors their preceptors and
dial and they go try to tell the
story that
they're trying to find a
solution to improve the climate
to practice medicine in the
state in mexico thank you
manager and thank you for that
and so I guess I would just ask
you if you could just do a
survey maybe like an exit survey
when when they graduate just
that we have some hard numbers
to give the legislature so
there's no argument oh there is
no data anywhere you'll have the
data and I really person there's
my three minutes thank you
manager I will definitely do
that and just a reminder that we
are getting some feedback so one
mike on at a time so
representative kids
thank you manager and thank you
for presentation and yes I do a
support reps blocks.
Request for data III think that
that is so important we're I
know that i've been getting a
lot of data from unmh medical as
well and and I appreciate that I
would also like to know the
states that you feel or
are more powerful in their
recruitment of residents
madam chair representative
caters thank you the question
florida I will mention that
state texas I will mention that
as well arizona in colorado were
surrounded by states that
have been more attractive from a
lot of physicians perspectives
now practice
when they look at when they look
at that
thank you manager and thank you
for letting us know that because
there is so much data out there
so i'll look into these I know
that we just had a a
presentation from lfc that took
the american medical
associations data per county on
number of medical provider
vacancies and arizona and taxes
had higher vacancy rates than
new mexico color had a less.
Um
oklahoma had less you talk had
more but they're always in five
points of each other um
and so I I want to
I I think we need to look at you
know twenty different sources of
dated kind of figure out but
i'll look at these to see what
it is where is their medical
malpractice and what is their
safety and accountability cause
medical mail practices the
liability issue correct would
you not have a safety plan for
any liability issue
madam she represented cates yes
thank you for that
the vacancy rate you're right
but you also have to overlay
that with population growth
florida adds three hundred
thousand people a year so
they're they're pressure and
stresses how do they how do they
keep up with physicians applying
giving the robusts growth in
their population sing with texas
on that so you always have to
take those two things into
account as well but also
remember eighty two percent of
the graduates that leave
residencies that went to texas
medical school do stay in the
state
i'd be worried if it was fifty
percent then they really really
have a hard time filling the
vacancies to keep up with their
population growth there as well
on that you actually write to
liability issue that's why I
always say there's a balance
you know the the I think is a
debate I think we gate we have
to get to a point where
everybody look understands that
that patient needs to be looked
after but what's happening is
when you go to far and you
become
you having a malpractice claim
that is outside the norm of what
other states have done and i'm
not you know i'm not talking
about just those states I said
there you're actually you're
creating the problem yourself
you're making a more unsafe
by doing that by the very thing
you're trying to do you're
actually making it more insight
that it has to be a balance
there's a lot of accidents best
practices out there I just think
we have to get away from who's
looking out for the patient
more.
That's as let's all say we're
looking out what's best for the
patient and let's let's look at
some other some other models and
stuff digging
put our featness and on both
sides of the issue i'm not
saying you are but there are
some special just groups that
they tend to get to emotional on
it endless to say that's let's
just let's come to some common
ground here
yes patient safety is emotional
and um and so and I I will just
say I think you think you're
information when you do your
exit interview
I would like to also see what is
your exit is of multiple choice
of is the same medical not
practice as education is crime
is it pay and so
we'd like to see what that data
looks like I look forward to
that thank you manager.
Thank you we will go to
representative room or coming
room but yet all
thinking madam current think you
represent a block for bringing
that up where this the team
over here
beyond malpractice that nice to
see you and thank you for your
presentation.
Things beyond malpractice
i'm interested annoying in that
exit interview and whatever
survey instruments you use what
barriers such as dad housing or
pay scales push her graduates to
leave new mexico and then if you
could be prepared at some point
to answer how can the state
policy and I help you address
these barriers and perhaps keep
physicians here so it's
something that you can
contemplate and add to what the
previous representatives are
mentioned I don't know I know
you mentioned you had sixty
eight that remained in new
mexico which is a big progress
from previously
do you want it
at see something and just keep
in mind that I have one other
question and be brief please at
madame chair and represent robot
barrel thank you for that and
nice to see you again as well
what i'd like to do on the
survey when we draft it i'd like
to send it to the committee and
you distribute it and we'd like
to get your feedback on it
because we want to make sure
that
you have been put on it because
we want it to be you know an
accurate survey
think you appreciate that and
one of the question so i'm
interested in I been asking this
line of questioning for since
we've been addressing each other
so how are you working with
local hospitals
tribal health systems and
community clinics to expand the
residency
slides and ensure that our
graduates continue to stay in
your mexico that's very
important because we need to
look at growth and expansion
thank you
representative and chairman
thompson of representative robot
cabinet thank you the one
example that we've been
we've been working on in the
past and unfortunately it it
became a casualty of of the the
climate in gallop and i'm not
talking about this isn't heavy
into with not practice but just
with the health care delivery
system and gallop which I think
you all aware of with the
hospital is used there.
Um their new residency was
started there and one of our
factory members was the program
director was a family practice
residency and we had integration
of that residency we actually
had some of our graduates that
went there but that residency
stopped
our we were not giving up we
like to get it reengaged in
restarted on that so that's one
initiative the four corners
we have it's we have distinction
in rule medicine so our students
are go to the four corners and
go to
the southeast part of the state
and the rural areas
you know you would think that
they wouldn't be the most
popular rotations but that
they're actually the only sun
the most popular first our
students to to apply for I and
the four corners are going out
and with the naba hole into ihs
clinics as well so they're
getting
a lot of attention to those are
needs in the opportunities there
are also for public health you
know pay back forgiveness
programs as well to possibly
come back
my
personal story in my brother
he's nasty pathic physician is
close to retirement but early in
his crew he was in shiprock for
four years and as a
pommonologist and
when attracted him was his
emergency there and then he said
he wanted to go back for part of
his pay back in ship rock for
example so I don't know if that
institute question it doesn't I
just encourage you to keep
expanding and contacting thank
you I think you represented
baner
no questions further.
Representatives okay
senator polk.
Thank you madame chair just just
a few questions
what percentage of your students
are from new mexico right now
a small percentage again given
the population of the state
relative to the base I always
i've in previous
presentations I mention this
that before our first class
metriculated in two thousand and
sixteen i'm sorry madam chair
representative pope back over
that thank you for that question
the the first class the year
before we metricularly to the
first class
there is only eight
new mexico citizens that went
that left the state to go to an
australian medical school our
first class we had sixteen in
our first class
on that so the story there was
we created opportunity for
individuals and we give
preference uh in our rubber of
admissions if you're from the
from the state on that so an
average we we average about
twelve to fourteen per year
that that come to there to or
medical school we've got some
great stories individuals that
have gone to high school and
lost crucials with the inner
issue
came here did the residency at
memorial and are still here
today so and then we have ones
that have grown up here going to
UNM did the residency in are in
their state so
but as our population grows then
those numbers are invariably
going to grow as well but we do
work on pathway programs
pipeline programs as well
throughout the state and it's so
real quick my apologies so how
many total come in to a class he
said
that madam chair representative
approximately twelve a year we
matriculate approximately twelve
top total students ever everyone
is twelve twelve okay
how big is i'm asking for the
whole class oh so you're looking
at timing we're looking at
basically about seven percent
seven percent seven percent.
Seven
so what is that total twelve
eighty stoop like how many
students are a year so from
everywhere
two hundred we we patrick late
two hundred a year okay and we
we average within twelve to
fourteen on out thank you and
you know I what's funny is I
lived here I you know being an
albuquerque idea know about the
school here but I used to be
stationary patrick air force
base and in florida and I knew
about it the school in orlando
and so this is in a criticism
and I think what you're doing is
great and what i've heard today
about being involved in the
community and and and having
them understand in mexico but I
think it's important that in a
way you're your you're running a
different model than what you on
m is doing as a state school and
that's not a criticism is just
to say that.
Many of your students just
really have that goal to be.
A doctor and in a lot of cases
go back home right so
I would think yes there's
some medical malpractice there's
options for residencies but.
There's also probably part of
that goal to go back to their
community as well as that should
manager represent a pope yes and
that's a that's with any medical
school in the country I think
the then we we've talked about
this in the past the real
opportunity for our state and
we've actually demonstrated it
here in mars crucis now with nor
leaving the more residencies
that we can develop in the state
because when regardless because
if you look at the physicians in
our state right now in when I
was here from two thousand and
two thousand six recruiting
physicians I recruited about a
hundred and twenty five
positions ninety percent were
from outside of new mexico and
if you've looked at every doctor
new mexico today
the largest percentage is going
to be from outside of the state
and is because it's a population
issue it's it's a supply and
demand issue on that I dick at
unm and I knew you'll get their
data
they're seeing new mexico
citizens that go to u and m that
after the residency at you and
have their leave in the state as
well they can speak to that and
the reasons why for themselves
on that
so our goal is it is a different
model because we don't have
state subsidy in our tuition on
that which you know over half
the medical schools in the
country fifty two percent of the
medical schools are private the
mdo no state dollars no
substitutes which is that's
let's just that's fine and you
know whenever I have a meet
somebody in town and they say I
have the opportunity come to
brown I can go to to UNM and I
basically have it all paid for
on that versus our tuition I
don't blame them at recording to
you in them that just makes that
on that thank you for the
question yeah and once again not
a cruise is my I just think it's
a different model and that I
don't think you really have a
montremand eight two
really
recruit only from new mexico and
and bring it up whereas I think
there's things we can do it you
and.
To really push for that and go
wrong so
and and thank you you're right
there's a lot of these factors
and things going on and most are
private schools we rented this
issue
representative ahead
thank you madame chair and thank
you very much for being with
this again.
Understand what it's great and
i've had the opportunity to see
the meet some of those sixty
eight doctors who are now
practicing a who are graduates
and who are here this is the
issue that we're facing now so
recently we put in more desk
that there be a difficulty to
put in every single school in
new mexico because we're worried
about children who have an
diagnose
events that would require the
use of the definitely later so
what we are asking is that for
every child going in it
certainly to the first grade for
the first time that there is a
whale child check up to help
their child get ready and to
maybe help the parents
understand if there may be
something that they should be
aware of and so growing that
aspect of the medical
incidences for which as schools
need to use doctors then your
presence here is greatly
important so i'm just wondering
what you think of that idea as
we are looking at our students
because there were a hundred and
thirty thousand students in the
mexico who had a medical
incident during the twenty three
twenty fourth school year.
A madam chair reps and impertant
is the question we might my
perspective on having a doctor's
assigned to public schools right
that is of australia pathic
matters and if you wouldn't mind
helping them our directing them
also to be a part of that
program i'm asking
to advocate to be add to add the
indicate for that yes i'll
definitely take that back on the
that would be good that is
critically important and I worry
about our our students in that
aspect the only other thing I I
wonder about in looking at texas
particularly in their
recruitment for for
residents I mean texas is a huge
state with a big medical school
there and very
in several areas I tend to think
that they prioritize the
students who are already in
texas if i'm at mistaken and
maybe you can come in on that
and so that's why so many of
them stay in texas because they
are already living there madam
chair repson heard an absolutely
right texas mandated the state
schools ninety percent they have
to take ninety percent of their
class has to be with texas
residents I will say this class
coming in this year at an our
medical school we had the
highest number of texans
in matriculating
in that area from here so we had
forty two in our class
starting at this year I when
they like to to add in in in it
and with representative popes a
comment today and I agree I mean
senator sorry sender my
apologies
with
with the recruitment issues
I i'll give one example the
portalists is an example i'll
give a medical student that came
from connecticut
to last crucials I did the
medical school here went away to
the east coast for a family
practice residency.
But then came back to portallis
and why because she was part of
the rural track and she was
really enjoyed the people she
met the needs of the community
and she's a practicing at
lincoln at the hospital there as
well so our mission even though
our mission is we live or
motivate because we're here to
introduce our students to the to
the benefits of the state the
needs of our state into our
passion is to is too yeah
recruit them to want to stay
after residency if they did the
residency here or to come back
after that and so we have a big
map or stock put pins on the map
so that's you know where that's
that's our motivation because
there's numerous physicians we
all know and we probably all go
to one that isn't from new
mexico didn't go to medical
school new mexico but they're
here because they like it and so
what always
be doing our partner on that.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you for your response
representative tourists alaskas
thank you think you madam chair
ie continue to be a little bit
confused in and it is our
wonderful to meet you mister
doctor hummer um I
i'm wondering I I was writing
down some notes and i'm not sure
I got everything but the one
about sixty eight graduates
that number sixty eight
represents who in terms of who
graduated
madam chair representative
towards velascas that number are
graduates that graduated from
our campus here in new mexico
that went to a residency.
In new mexico
or went to a residency outside
in mexico and came back so
they're actively practicing in
new mexico and there's about
that number
thirty that are in their third
year of residency at unam
and here but they're seeing
patience or practicing on that
and those are lumn night too
that we are uh constantly
working with life for example
all the hospitals in south east
new mexico there is a instead of
grant and then we have the state
money that you all provide which
again thank you for increasing
that funding we continue least
in that tour at one nine the
incentives to come back to the
area as well on that so I don't
know if that answered your
question but that's all thank
you madame chair that partially
does um so sixty eight graduates
from campus from your campus
went off to residency either in
or out of new mexico and came
back rate sixty eight of your
graduate presently here in the
state and what was the number of
graduates total.
So that this is a rough madam
chair representative towards
velasca's this is a rough
estimate and I but I can get the
accurate number for that i'll
give you a rough estimate so
we've graduated at eight hundred
and sixty two graduates about
twenty percent have actually
come out of residency so twenty
percent of eight hundred hundred
sixty hundred and eighty
that so take sixty eight out of
a hundred and eighty whatever
percentage that is
forty five forty percent forty
forty five i'll get the math and
send it to you i'll send it to
madam chair that would be
greatly appreciated and then if
you could also tell us out of
the hundred eight hundred and
sixty two how many of the eight
hundred and sixty two were
originally from new mexico that
would be really helpful as well
and then last question I hope I
can fit it in i'll talk really
fast you and have has a program
the bamd that you were um
somewhat referring to earlier do
you have any programs such as
that and would funding from our
legislature be something that
might help support the
development of such a program
madam chair manager
representative towards last
thank you for that question
and I I did I failed to mention
in our present in my
presentation one of the
achievements that we achieve
this last year was but we
received a ten year
accreditation from the higher
learning commission the hlc
we've been a credited by our
programmatic creditor since our
first class was graduated but
now with hlc were able to
explore additional degree
offering programs one of the
programs with our affiliation
with in the mess you is that
that pathway program is seven
year program so three years
undergraduate the first year in
medical school they get credit
for the fourth year their
undergraduate so they can do
medical school in in seven years
so we needed hlc to do that so
that we can blend you know the
the the recognition from at a
creditation standpoint.
So we're in the process of
developing that
and yes funding would be helpful
think it just what is hilc stand
for
madam chair higher learning
commission it's one of six
institutional creditors in the
are credit all the schools and
hire edit higher education
institutions in new mexico thank
you vice chair locus.
Madam sure I have no questions
right now thank you okay thank
you thank you so much so I i'm
just curious and
you may or may not know how much
debt your students leave with
just an average madam chair it's
an excellent question we do
track it we're right at two
hundred and fifty fifty five
thousand is the average debt
for our students
and whole other topic but
something that all medical
schools
and nationwide that were
wrestling with the grad plus
loan issues
and with
the decision as part of the last
big beautiful bill but we're
hopeful for some adjustments as
it pretends to do medical
schools and how does that
compare is there like a national
average I know that medical debt
for positions is incredibly high
how how does that rank
nationally how does it mean is
it high as it lowes it
and i'm sure I think that the
question where we we will be
very for private schools we're
right in the average range on
that obviously state schools
you're gonna have lower debt
because of the tuition is less
on that but for all private
schools mdo
were I believe they're right and
I can get some data to the
committee as well so you can see
that thank you and my my brain
is having trouble with the
finding words right now I know
that my mom was an indian health
service nursing crown point and
they had a lot of docs who came
through
and I can't remember the name of
the program um
are you participating in those
kind of programs to have your
have your graduates work in
underserved
as it like student
it it's it's it used to be
called for nurses it used to be
called the cadet core I I can't
think think of them never i'll
get with you when I figure out
what the word is but thank you
so much for your.
Um for being with us and.
If you have any closing words we
we caught up on time thank you
madam chair thank you again I
think all of you for your
support and I would be following
up with the draft of the survey
and statistics on our graduates
and on the average on the debt
the national debt information as
well thank you so much.
We are a rate rate on time so we
will have um yet don't drinks
that that's right the up
settlement funds don't you on a
county jamie michael is nice to
see a jamie and whenever you
already go ahead
push to push the person.
Okay very good
thank you very much I am thank
you for the invitation nice to
see you on madam chair members
of the the committee the
presentation is being handed out
i'm pleased to be able to
present on our local governments
process for investing or update
settlement funds I think in
order for all of us to be
successful with these arm funds
that are coordination between
state and local government is
essential so we've had great
working relationships with
generate a place when she was
that the governor's office and
it to you age and nick book us
so this is all all of the
efforts that we're doing locally
are definitely connected to
state efforts as well and the
presentation today a minute over
the process we used to determine
how to invest our spending some
of the resources we have the
recommendations that we've made
and the county commission and
city council have both approved
talk about our funding and then
next steps I think the most
important thing um for us to to
know and really celebrate here
today as this has been a
collaborative process with the
city of las cruces and donate
accounting government so here
with me today as well smith who
is with the the city of last
crucials um and we together
created advisory council made up
of community members we tried
not to
poll only providers because we
know the providers are probably
going to be competing for some
of the funds so we really wanted
to look at advocates peer
support workers promote orders
we have members that are that
advisory council here today
including our partner at the
local public health office whose
services the epidemiologist
there so again a community
effort that plans both state and
local government and the city
and the county in addition to
the joint advisory council we
decided to put together similar
resolutions so both city council
and county commission have
recently passed similar
resolutions so we're
coordinating.
The investment of our local
dollars the work the request for
proposals are request for
applications that will go out to
the community will be a
coordinated so providers know
exactly what they are responding
to we won't duplicate efforts
and we can really look at entire
community through one lens
including joint evaluation and
reporting so we'll have one
evaluator contracted to look at
the investment of both city and
county government to create
those reports and give feedback
to local arm elected officials
and the community so i'm just
very pleased that we're able to
do that some of the guiding
principles that we followed we
were um connecting with the
national association of counties
and other national organizations
that provided technical
assistance including the john
hopkins school of public health
and a nonprofit organization
called vital strategies and the
advisory committee adopted their
five guiding principles really
looking at how do we spend money
to save lives kind of cut
through all of the the the cars
and the bottom line is we want
to save lives using evidence to
guide our spending investing in
young people and how do we and
look at primary prevention we
wanted to focus on racial equity
and we want to develop a fair
and transparent process so those
were the guiding principles and
the next slide shows the
planning process again this is
part of the technical assistance
provided by the opinion
solutions leadership network and
we have followed that process so
through vital strategies and a
contract with new mexico state
university we conducted a needs
assessment cause it's important
to know
how do we know what the problem
is in our community so the
universe stephen mexico and our
advisory council members helped
us collect both quantitative and
qualitative data we had some
folks on the advisory council
that went out into the community
and did street surveys we
collected about street surveys
with.
People who have current living
experience with them up your use
so we were gathering data across
the county from a variety of
folks created a picture of our
community need we also created
an asset maps so what do we have
here we are very lucky here in
donate county we have a lot of
providers that are provide and
will you do we have a other
behavioral health services and
recovery support services though
we brought together an asset map
looking at what we already have
in our community
and then the advisory council
used that to make decisions
about the core batement
strategies and this was a
combination of what the needs
are in our community and the
allowable expenditure so each of
the settlement agreements list
are nine core strategies that
are allowable for spending the
money and our community picked
four of those allowable
strategies and then from there
we determined what types of
activities are interventions
what we want to do to address
the need we are in the process
of creating some logic models
again because we want to build
an evaluation from the beginning
and this is the type of work
that will drive the request for
proposals or request for
applications so we wouldn't we
go out to the community and say
we're looking for someone to
provide this service we'll have
those activities and evaluate
should measures already built in
next step after we award those
contracts will be monitoring and
evaluating and then again
continuing that loop with the
needs assessment and keeping
that process going so that's the
planning process that we are
trying to stay true to
and again the next light talks
about the decision making
process using that needs
assessment looking at evidence
based practices vital strategies
provided technical assistance we
were able to learn from other
communities look at other model
programs that have already been
implemented so we are.
Investing our funds and
something that has the evidence
behind it again we had to look
at the settlement agreements and
a great tool that is available
to all of us as the opinion
settlement principles resources
and indicators so the folks at
john hopkins and vital
strategies created a wonderful
tool that we can go in there and
type in the community
are dns that we want to target
the setting on the continued we
want to do treatment do we want
to do a harm reduction
prevention it gives a list of
great activities and associated
i'm outcome measures so a lot of
that work was was done and
provided to us as a tool and
we've used that to help guide
our work the next slide
is the
four strategies that both the
county commission and city
council approved so our funding
will invest in increasing access
to medication assisted treatment
or mod we are going to focus on
warm hand off programs and
recovery services prevention
programs both primary prevention
interest prevention
promote people from dying of
overdose and prevent people from
developing substance use
disorders and then the fourth
one is data collection research
and reporting so that's part of
that transparency peace and the
evidence based peace the next
two slides list the goals that
we are going to focus on again
most of them are around
medication assisted treatment
doing screenings early
intervention so we identify
people early on who may need
medication to help with
opportunities disorders we want
to focus in rural communities we
also want to focus on spanish
speaking populations one of the
specific goals is to improve
access to a laxon for people
most vulnerable for overdose so
we are allocating some of our
funds to continue purchasing.
Then the locks on and nor can
and distributing to stributing
that out to first responders and
civilian first responders so
i've already connected with that
the folks hear it animals you I
appreciated that conversation
that you are brought up this
morning that's a perfect example
of a good use of these funds and
the education that we provide
out of our department to be able
to to give folks here at animals
you the narcan and the training
department of are the health
care authority behavioral house
services division has already
purchased three vending machines
and our community so we have one
at the detention center we have
one at the income support
division our office in anthony
new mexico and one of the
emergency department memorial
medical center so again it's
nice to have that coordination
with the state because we're all
trying to find some of the same
activities and we want to make
sure that we're not duplicating
so the lax own is definitely one
of the budget items and we want
to use our funding to it to help
spread that everywhere i'm
including the public schools
last cruises public schools
gadsted and hatch and sometimes
all of the school systems are
difficult to get into for a lot
of the reasons you all talked
about this morning i'm
additional goals include
focusing on harm reduction
looking at the capacity of our
behavioral health and healthcare
system if we start identifying
people earlier we're going to
overwhelmed the behavioral
health system because we're
going to be asking for services
for more people
um so we need to look at the the
capacity the continue of care
and also focusing on the
transitions of care one thing
that we identified as we may
have a lot of resources to offer
but sometimes people aren't
connected to all of those
resources and a very smooth are
very helpful way so how do we
really support those transitions
of of care.
Um and then obviously looking at
primary prevention with children
and young people looking at risk
factors like adverse childhood
experiences we know some of the
root causes of developing
operate use and other substance
youth.
Um disorders is childhood trauma
so how do we address those route
causes and that's ideal because
we wouldn't just be addressing
operate we could also impact
alcohol use disorders and other
are mental illnesses and and
then the last fall is making
sure that we have effectiveness
and transparency through our
data collection analysis and
reporting the next couple slides
describe the setting in the
population so this seems like a
lot of money but over a long
period of time um and with all
of the needs it's it's not
necessarily a lot of money so we
did have to narrow down where we
want to focus in order to
actually have some some
measurable impact so we looked
at recommended settings and
target populations obviously
emergency departments are a
great place to
provide an intervention so
people who present an emergency
department as a result of an
overdose or who were
experiencing with draw symptoms
at that moment instead of just
treating the overdose how do we
connect them to treatment and
connect them to recovery
services and there are some
model programs out there that
talk about how to to do that
community populations we are
still focused on the justice
involved population you all have
supported a lot of that work
through the rise grants from the
state and we have a wonderful
relationship with the people in
sight of the detention center
here but when they leave the
detention center we want to be
able to wrap them in recovery
support services and treatment
we also know that older adults
are at risk and some of the data
is showing that that's where
we're having an increase in in
overdoses and then we also want
to look in the community and
look at again young people who
are at risk of developing the up
you would use their other
substance use disorders
residential treatment facilities
primary care clinics and other
types of outpatient programs.
Where we may have treatment for
a substance use disorder but it
may not necessarily meet some of
the standards that includes
medication the use of of
medication so we want to make
sure that all of the the
facilities are using the gold
standard of treatment that
includes moud we want to make
sure that people with co
occurring disorders are able to
be treated in a comprehensive
way instead of today we're going
to work on your depression in an
anxiety and come back you know
to another organization tomorrow
will work on the substance use
disorder so how do we do a
better job of blending those i'm
and then all new patience anyone
that comes into a primary care
clinic including primary care of
traditional primary care but
pediatric and ob so those are
some of the other settings again
how do we identify people early
on with the family to provide
support services we also know
that first responders the ms
fire and police so so important
so how do we focus on that in
that setting especially for
people in rural communities or
people who are spanish speaking.
Upstate tricks pediatric labor
and delivery departments again
we want to focus on pregnant
post part and women infants and
their families for treatment for
the adults and prevention for
the young people this is I think
where we probably need the most
coordination with some of the
state agencies to understand
what is really needed for the
families in our communities how
do we do those screenings at
time of delivery um utilize pure
support and family support
workers at our local hospitals
to then connect people to
services at that moment and so
we're hoping the people that
respond to our request for
proposals will come up with some
very creative and effective ways
of doing this this work the next
line talks about the funding for
the county um the city funding
is slightly different they have
slightly less funding than
county government but we are on
its estimated there's still a
few settlement agreements that
are outstanding but at this
point we're looking to receive
almost fourteen point five
million dollars again that will
be coming in through twenty
thirty eight as of may of this
year we have received the five
point six million dollars so
that is what's currently sitting
in our bank account right now
ready to be invested in the
community again we're still
waiting for some of the
settlement agreements with the
distributors manufacturers and
retailers but so far with those
entities that's what we are
receiving again we know that the
funds are intended to focus on
the harms of operate overdose
then you can look at that very
broadly and the funds are for
both governments they're held
separately so we can report on
them and track them separately
if they do not become part of
our general fund or any other
funds within county government
the next light gets a little
more detail for the first two
years what the city and county
adopted is in the first two
funding cycles we want to spend
thirty percent.
Of our expected total so for the
county that is just over four
point three million dollars we
want to focus on a sixty forty
split sixty percent in treatment
forty percent in prevention and
then we also have some
administrative and evaluation
costs over the first two years
the future funding will be the
remaining one point two seven
that we currently have in the
bank account plus annual
distributions that we will be
receiving over time and then new
settlement agreements the next
slide shows the county and
cities investment for the first
two years so the city of us
cruises will add to our four
point three million they will
add the two point nine million
so in the first two years are
local governments will invest up
to seven point three million in
our community for this purpose
some of the next steps include
developing those rfps there are
fa's we're hoping to do that
very soon.
We are hosting a pre proposal
community workshop next week the
intent is to make sure that our
community providers understand
are intent with the spending we
don't want it to be a
traditional we put out an irp we
get a contract give you money we
really want are looking for more
collaboration we're looking for
more system changes we want to
use that opportunity to help
our local communities identify
resources that can help them
build very strong proposals we
are leaning very heavily on the
opportunity at you and them the
other services that are provided
at unm and other places so
trying to make sure that people
in our community providers and
our community know those
resources exist and can leverage
those resources so again a nice
partnership between
the state and local local
governments there are a lot of
opportunities with medicaid
funding and we have people from
health care authority talking
about different opportunities
within medicaid and requirements
for providers so get our local
agencies will put together some
outstanding proposals and then
that whole process will take
some a few months and we're
hoping that the final award of
those contracts will be in
january and will be actually
rolling out programs and
services at that time a lot of
this obviously is
connected to the funding for
medicaid we don't want to use
these funds to
fund something that is already
reimbursed under medicaid so
it's kind of a difficult time
cause of medicaid funding
changes than we may have to
rethink the investment of some
of these dollars so it it is so
interlinked with federal and
state policy as well but we're
going to to push forward with
our are planning and again just
appreciate the opportunity to.
Continue to get this information
out so we can improve our
coordination across governments
so thank you madam chair
thank you I just want to say wow
very impressive so we uhm and
and very quick with a lot of
information so we'll start with
senator polk and i'm gonna be
generous and give you five
minutes
no questions manager
maybe it went up to six
representative heard
think you made him tear i'd just
like a clarification on some
items when you talked about nor
can be and in the
detention facilities that they
were vending missing or does
that mean that that would money
into the machine to get them
sorry madam chair representative
let me let me clarify so there's
a couple ways that narcan is up
present in our county detention
center first the detention
center officers and medical
staff carry it so if they have
to respond to an overdoes they
have it we also provide it to
people who are leaving the
detention center who have been
identified as having an up or
possibly having an operators
disorder so they're actually
handed a box of the nar can when
they leave the vending machine
that was provided by the state
is in the lobby of the detention
center for the public for family
and friends and it does look
like a vending machine that you
would get coke or candy out of
you don't need to put money in
it and it's absolutely free you
just go
to the screen you have to
provide a little bit of
information they want to zip
code they're trying to get some
some demographic information but
if you put nothing in you push
please dispense and a box of
narcan comes out of the machine
and you can take it with you so
it is absolutely free but is it
as a vending machine that
dispenses in our can and that
one is intended for family and
friends who are there to visit
or anyone from the public that
wants to go with.
And get that bet that i'm not
can and the same vending
machines at the office in
anthony and that memorial
medical centers emergency
department
thank you for their
clarification and then what
another explanation if you don't
mind when you talked about the
technical assistance that johns
are skin hopkins provided and
bital strategies what does that
mean the technical assistance
what did they do um madam chair
representative they did a
variety of things they helped co
host a cohort of county health
folks so I was among twenty six
other counties and we met a
couple times over the years
we've done sight visits to
different locations so they
funded our ability to go and
learn from other communities
about model programs so i've
been to seattle and wisconsin
arm and other communities we've
created this kind of learning
network across county
governments so we can call on
each other to ask for
information they also helped
fund the needs assessment that
we did here so all of the work
that we've done so far has drawn
down zero dollars from our local
opinion funding they have funded
the needs assessment and that
the coordination so far and then
most importantly with the folks
from john's hopkins is they've
created some tools that are
online available for us if we're
trying to explore what type of
activities we want to do in a
scale they've already already
done the research so there is a
list of the evidence based
programs in the school setting
and they've done the research
for a valuation measured measure
so what kind of intended
outcomes are associated with
different activities so they
saved us a lot of lake work on
doing.
Research to identify evidence
based programs and then to
identify the evaluation
framework for the associated
programs and it's you know just
at our finger tips so those are
some examples of the technical
assistance thank you and when
madame chair once when I asked
question with respect to the
medicaid assistance treatment in
uh detention facilities I I want
to make sure that I understand
that there is tie trace and
treatment that is going on that
is really helping these
individuals there's been a lot
of discussion about it being
available but it really hasn't
been so would you comment on
that please yes I madam chair
and representative.
It for our detention center the
continuation of medication is
offered so if someone comes into
the detention center they're
already taking any of the
medications for substance use
disorder and the healthcare
providers can determine
invalidate that then they
continue to offer that
medication in the detention
center I think over the last
year we've really improved the
ability to continue the
medication while someone is in
the county jail there are are
working through the process to
initiate or to start people on
medication who are not on
medication when they are booked
into the detention center and
there are a lot of a lot of
issues with with that some of it
is still stigma so how do you
have the support of an
encouraging conversation with
someone because it's still up to
them to decide yes or know that
they want to participate in and
take the medication there are
still we have to make sure that
if someone is released from the
county detention center and
moves into state corrections
that the medication can continue
and state corrections so i'm i'm
pleased to see that the state is
making some changes there
because it is hard for us to
convince someone at the county
jail to start medication knowing
that in a month they may have to
stop there their treatment I am
pleased for most counties in new
mexico because the state
department of health has
increased their access to their
delivery of medication in
community that if someone is
released from a county detention
center and not going to
corrections but being released
into the community there are
more options for people to
continue their medication in
most communities i'm
indefinitely including ours so I
would say it's happening but not
as much as it should
thank you madame chair thank
you.
Representative chorus for
moscow.
Think thank you madame chair um
and so are you appreciate the
information about the john
hopkins technical assistance and
I was wondering are they also
helping you collect the data as
you go through or is there a
different data information
source that you are using
madame chair representative
they are we were in the process
of contracting with a local
evaluator that will lead the
local evaluation work and are
intent is that we will connect
them to vital strategies and
john hopkins to continue those
those opportunities luckily or
unlocking new mexico with among
seven states that were selected
to be part of the collaboration
between vital strategies john
hopkins and bloomberg foundation
they picked the seven states
that had some of the highest
rates so you know lucky and
unlucky but they will continue
working in new mexico and we
will continue to have them help
us with the valuation absolutely
thinking madam chair and then on
uhm slight town on page five um
you talked about older adults at
risk of overdoes and that the
the target population can you
give us a little more
information on their um what do
you mean by older adults manager
madam chair representative often
times in the data older adults
are people over the age of sixty
five when we look at that age
group we have to focus both
aren't intentional and
unintentional overdoses so we
know that there are still thank
you share a very good
share is one of the folks in our
department who is funded by
vital strategies they're opining
us with this work so in in
twenty twenty five dollars a
county the highest age
demographic for overdoses was
between sixty five and seventy
five so it is that population
and again it's intentional and
unintentional so we know that in
general suicide rates among
older.
Um people is increasing and
substance opinions are one mode
for a it in a suicide but we
also know that there is
accidental overdoses so if
people are taking medication
that has been prescribed by a
physician but they
forget and they take two instead
of one we want to make sure that
they have narcan in their home
to be able to prevent the death
we want to make sure that when
people of all ages but
especially older people receive
a prescription for pain medicine
or some other type of opinion
based on medication that they're
given the education and that
they're given the narcan at that
moment when we started
uh distributing narcan it's been
a probably six years ago we were
doing a really good job at the
beginning of getting reports
back from people in the
community who are viewed who
used the narcan and our first
two reports report back on um
nor can use in our community
really painted the picture
because the first one was a
forty year old male who had who
had used substances most of his
life and he was in a parking lot
using operates with a friend he
experienced an overdose the
friend had that in our canon was
able to to save his life the
very next one we got was a older
female at home she took her
medication twice that morning
forgot she had taken it taken it
again and her husband and other
you know in the home with her
was able to use narcan and save
her life so they were you really
showed the spectrum of people
older people but everyone who is
at risk for overdose thank you
manager
thank you representative for
about covered.
Thank you madame chair I have um
i'm still formulating they had
to take an emergency called it
but I have one question
and and if you don't mind you
let's let can I just let's
come back and if I forget remind
me representative I have no
questions at this time manager
representative case do you have
okay I should give them people
more time representative and
they don't get people more time
I have nothing mattered share
thank you wow I don't know what
we're going to do with ourselves
I can fill the time with going
to say it was a great
presentation so
ferrari
thank you madame chair and thank
you jamie for all your great
work in our community would
really appreciate it things go
forward and um your help also
with ceteria lost cruises
getting that through um so my
question when you were
mentioning about the settings
and populations
the pregnant post pardon women
and infants in their families
we've heard a lot of
problems with um cyfd having
cara parents you know take their
children home do you have a
program that works with cyfd or
kind of fills in a gap that you
know to make sure that
the monitoring and the help that
these families need when they go
home
they get that care
madame chair representative
ferrari this we've identified
this is one of the gaps in our
community
either because we're not we the
the county and our advisory
group weren't informed enough to
to really know all of the
resources or because there is
just a lack of those resources.
We've struggled with
receiving some of the carer data
either through cuit department
of health are human health care
authority kind of wear that data
lives and the the response so we
know the screenings are
happening we just don't know
what's happening after after
that so we have identified that
as a gap and we're hoping with
these funds we cannot we can
agencies in our community will
put together proposals to do
exactly what you were talking
about wrapping that family in
supportive services including
treatment including housing
including transportation
parenting skills we do have a
lot of early intervention
agencies in our community so I
think it's just a matter of
better aligning the services
that are available and again
those transitions of care we
also know that endoning
accounting in in probably all of
new mexico outside of alba kirky
we don't have a lot of access
for mod for pregnant women or
medication for babies after
after their board into to help
them if they were exposed pre
needly so we know those two
areas need to we need to build
our capacity to to provide the
treatment the medication
treatment for both pregnant
women and and newborns but the
the focus will be on those
recovery support services and
reducing the likelihood of
trauma or trying to reduce the
impact that that trauma has long
term on the child
thank you and I hope that that
is something that you know can
be worked on also amount of
chair and jamie um
how far
you mentioned about substance
use disorders also how far you
can you go with that away from
just with the settlement you
know guidelines are
a madam chair representative
from that's a fantastic question
because we know that in new
mexico including our county
alcohol you s.
Disorders are still the most
impact for in our community and
most people use more than one
substance so how do we address
it more universally the
settlement agreement is very
specific looking at the the
harms and the impact of opined
but again through some of the
technical assistant support when
we identify the type of
intervention we're looking at
interventions that can serve
more than one substance use a
type so this money is intended
for operate we will do most of
our evaluation around that but
the intervention will also treat
alcohol use disorders and other
types of use disorders including
other types of uh mental illness
so we are trying to make the
impact broader than just operate
knowing that that's still the
focus but if we have more
support services in our
community it's going to benefit
everyone not just someone with
an opinion use disorder great
thank you manager that's all
thank you to you thank you.
Thank you very much chair locus
oh i'm sorry I I knew i'd forget
i'm but I have brains with me
and representative about
copyright thank you madame chair
it was um and thank you for your
presentation very much i'm
learning a lot about a multitude
of modelities in the serena so
if you could just bear with me a
little bit first time page seven
slide thirteen
excuse me.
The you have treatment at sixty
percent in prevention at forty
percent how do the stats lead to
these percentage breakdowns
madam chair representative
this was a combination of things
we looked at how the state was
dividing their funding between
treatment and prevention we
looked at other counties
throughout the state and um the
country and just looking at that
area
and then listening to some of
our local elected officials they
were talking about we want to
save lives now for people who
are suffering from opportunities
disorders so that's why the
treatment is slightly more than
the the prevention we also know
that good prevention really
effective upstream prevention
cost less than treatment so
there was really no scientific
process behind that
delineation.
It was just the intent to make
sure that we were focused on
saving lives right now but also
looking at both prevention and
treatment.
So madam chair associated with
that
you do know though that
treatment is
critical or it crisis point and
why you have to address it that
way what is that based on are
you getting reports from.
Uh e r's are you getting reports
from the general community the
advocates I I like to know how
that transparent
madam chair representative
absolutely we are getting you
concrete data from emergency
departments we also
have built a nice relationship
with the local higher office and
they collect real time data two
weeks ago they sent out an alert
there had been two fatal
overdoses in donation accounting
in a twenty four hour period and
I think for um for overdoses in
that twenty four hour period two
of them feel that is unusual
activity for a county our size
so we know that you're right now
that this is happening we know
that looking at some of the
preliminary data for this year
that there is an increase in
deaths for our county operate
related death so we don't
we don't necessarily see the
number is taking a a big dive we
see them either staying steady
or increasing so that is going
to driving the urgency to get
the money out in treatment um
and overdose of death prevention
thinking madam chair and do you
a line your external
day to day experiences with what
the rest of the state is
reporting or how it do I guess
my my curiosity is how does this
correlate with what's happening
in the other state and if you
might not have that information
right now and that's okay I want
to move on to the next question
because it's a lot more
enquiring about
what I learned most recently in
a madam chair i'm losing track
of all our committees but I kind
of thought we had heard this and
las vegas but i'm not sure and I
think I may have asked this
question then but we're here so
with the ability availability as
you know we have lots of new
medications that come on to the
market
we know.
Um that there is one that is in
particular the sublocate I think
them pronouncing that which
tends to be long acting and it's
monthly injectable and that
seems to be much more cost
effective and can improve um
what we heard was
adherence for people with or
period addiction of course and
then a quarter we also heard and
is easier on tween offer which
is a big concern for many of us
so it's accounted using arm are
up your weight settlement funds
to expand access to this
particular modality and then if
you are how you mapping patience
are removing patience over to it
as part of your strategy to
support recovery and other med
status that I heard back in that
meeting and I was trying to
remember my note tonight just
looking them up and it's like
versus meds like methodon or so
box and so we're hearing that
sublocate seems to be are much
more what I just identified over
the ones that we've been
traditionally using method
owners at boxing thank you
madam chair representative so
i'm a public health professional
not a health care not a
physician not a prescriber
but what we are doing from the
county in the city when we're
putting together the scope of
work and
distributing money or funding
into the the community were
asking that the providers follow
the gold standard for for
treatment that they use your fda
approved medications
and that that we follow some of
the samsure guidelines so we
won't tell the provider what
medication to use we will tell
them they need to meet the
standard and most of the
providers I talk to their
the the decision making process
includes the individual so often
times the individual arm gets to
choose which type of medication
they would like.
To take based on
the education that the provider
is giving them about the the
options so we really stay away
from telling people you must use
this medication and just try to
make sure that everybody has the
best information are about the
medication
so as I follow up is sublicate
part of that discussion part of
that education part of that
option
madame share representative
absolutely the providers receive
education and information on all
types of medication that are out
there we have some wonderful
expert some wonderful physicians
at you and them and through the
operator herb and the echo
program they can give current
information to local providers
so the prescribers in our
community aren't relying on
information that might be even
five years old now might be too
old so they can get current and
updated information about the
types of medications that are
available thank you madame chair
and these are progressing much
faster than what we anticipate
they're doing a lot of the
results of the testing or what
is that called down the research
studies and all about coming out
with more um holistic approach
and then also with additional
medications that are easier as I
mentioned so I appreciate you
stained on top of it and thank
you for all the work you do
thank you
representative block did or do
never mind
vice chairman
thank you madame chair and I
appreciate the information that
you've shared with us today
and excuse me i've as members of
your
collaboration you're
collaborative or whatever the
title is are the house councils
with your health council is are
they also a member.
So a madam chair madam bice
chair yes absolutely we looked
across our community and looked
at existing committees so we
have a representative from the
health council we have a
representative from the local
collaborative we have a
representative from our southern
new mexico from a daughter
committee mcgall is here in the
audience today
the city of last cruise this
also has a group called
resilience leaders and a hundred
percent community so we asked a
representative from that group
to to join so we tried to
leverage the existing committees
bring everyone together and
that's how we try to communicate
back to larger numbers of people
but health counsels on local
clappings they are all part of
that community advisory group
yes.
Manager and going to hear the
promo thought us are still that
they're included also
they're also an essential part
of outreaching to our art of
communities to
and then
a
there there's madame chair of
course we passed over senate
bill through this last year to
send internal question asking
about the regional planning for
behavioral health are you a
member of that planning
committee here within this
judicial district madam chairman
based chair yes we are in the
third judicial district we are I
think we're lucky were one
judicial district in one county
so we were able to move forward
very quickly we have the
application ready I will be
submitting it to the
administrative after so the
court today i'm designed dating
don't you county government as
the accountable entity I think
is that the terminology and the
intent is prob is at this point
is to follow a similar type of
process look at the existing
committees in our community
cause most of our committees
touch behavioral health in some
way and then create that
planning council so county
government is ready to help
facility that work.
Thank you madame chair that
spearing encouraging and I know
that my colleague already
mentioned I was going to ask
about carrier and you're
involved with regards to that so
thank you representative
and then just a a question madam
cheer everything we do
and it's it's not just for state
government but local government
to about messaging how are you
within your group rate and the
collaborative how are you
getting the word out to
community and madam chair in
white about to how what is the
outreach for our young for you
are younger generations to
madam chair vice chair
we do have
part of the advisory committee
is someone that represents the
public schools so we're relying
on them to help us understand
the the challenges within the
public school system that's one
great way to get information out
to to young people
messaging is difficult and there
were a lot of conversations
about messaging and stigma so
everything we do how do we
underpin it with um
education around stigma so we're
not
limiting people's access because
of stigma and those kind of
universal marketing programs are
are pretty difficult it's hard
to find some evidence based
programs that show that they
work as the bill bored out on an
iten really going to impact but
we still want to do some type of
universal messaging are around
stigma in our community word of
mouth is still some of the best
are way to do it so again
relying on the promote to be out
there talking about substance
use disorders operated use
disorders to be very informed
about the resources that are
available so we do rely on a lot
on from peer support workers to
do a lot of our community
outreach.
Opportunities like this is a way
to get the the word out we've
not developed a a comprehensive
community outrage plan yet but
those are things that we have
thought about
and thank you madame chair and I
asked the question about
messaging because that also
breaks through
that
how to see the the stigma as you
mentioned and how we still don't
talk madam chair about mental
health issues and families
it's none of your business it's
mine and that's kind of I mean
it is in my own family we've had
those discussions over many many
years.
And I know it still exists and I
think madam chair that's also
part of this whole
conversation that we should and
continue to work on especially
so that people know that they're
not alone and how they can still
trust an entity who is there to
help and will need to listen to
them so I think that's also part
of that messaging as to how we
develop something and even us
his legislators how do we
message some of these important
opportunities that are in each
of our community such as the
operate settlement in all of our
different larger communities but
also in other smaller ones to
it's it's the communication
manager so I just appreciate you
sharing them thank you
madam chair based church just
real quick one of the very
simple ways that our advisory
council
decided to focus on messaging is
that initially there was an
agreement we would all do our
best to use person first
language we would be very
intentional about hearing the
voice of people with lived
experience and living experience
and compensating them for
sharing their experience with us
and contributing to this work so
sometimes that it is simple
things like that that can
improve our messaging and just
you know slowly reduced that
negative stick ma
thank you so much for a group
presentation so and
I was happy to hear that that
matter is available in your
county jail and i'm beyond
frustrated that that's not the
case in our corrections
department I mean it's it's
better committee has been
harping on this for years since
we passed it and and it what a
shame you know they someone
decides that they want to get
treatment they start treatment
hopefully they're doing well and
then they get sent to our
corrections department and they
go back to ground zero and it
it's it's disgusting as a state
that we are not we are not in.
Invest and we we have invested I
don't even know what the right
word is that we are not um
carrying forward trying to help
people it it makes no sense to
me and then the former chair
senator t c p now I mean that
was one of his
his hills to die on in in mind
too and I hope we don't die on
that hill but because but we are
very stubborn about it so i'm
just putting that out to the
university of whoever may be
listening that it's past time
that new mexico take a substance
use disorder seriously and
invest in in what we can to help
folks so
i'm just curious you did talk a
little bit about about that that
administrator office of the
courts and can you talk just
just briefly although we have
lots of time
about how you see that
impacting done your unaccounting
and the state and maybe maybe
some hints are tips about what
could make it better.
Umm madame chairman happy to
talk about that and I do think
i'm again very privileged in my
position and for our county
because I also serve on the the
competency and mental health
commission so i've become very
close and work very closely with
folks at the administrative
office of the court and judges
and and other judicial folks
from across the state I could
share that committee with a
judge shop judge neither from a
you're your judicial district
and yes it's wonderful working
with her so the I think stigma
are we can work with the
administrative office of the
court just a somora is been a
great champion and making sure
the judges have education around
mental illness so we reduced the
fear we improve the the
knowledge and then that
definitely reduces stick muscle
judges and other folks
understanding more about
substance use disorder and
mental illness and trying to
separate the criminal behavior
from the illness and the
symptoms of the illness so I
think administrative office of
the court has done a fantastic
job with that and we can
continue to do more I think
everything around diversion and
creating all of those pathways
for diversion out of the just a
system and into these treatment
systems is fantastic and we can
continue to do more work around
that big because it is kind of
the same thing like why do we
keep doing the the same thing
why are we putting people in
jail and expecting that to
current their their substance
use disorders so more more
around that i've also I feel
like through
three through the work of the
company in seen mental health
commission there has been a
more cross collaboration between
administrative office of the
court and behavior house
services division which has been
fantastic.
Because here's where the
resources of the services lie
and here's where some of the
policy changes and system
changes lie and if we can align
those then we're all i'll better
off so I do feel like there has
been a lot of progress with the
administrative office of the of
the court
and I think at this point what
we need to look at is capacity
building so with our opinion
settlement funds with all of the
diversion programs that the the
commission wants to set up with
I think everything that's going
to come out of sp three all of
these wonderful ideas moving
people into treatment programs
having those referral and warm
handoffs in places fountastic
but if we don't focus on work
force then we don't have the
people to receive that the
providers to receive folks right
now are limiting factor for our
aoti program for a precompetency
diversion program and our jail
reentry program the limiting
factor is the number of space
spaces available in our act
teams so with there are plenty
of people ready to be diverted
days public to benders judges
ready to to move them out of
that system but we can only
accept a limited number because
they need to move in to
treatment programs and the
community that are appropriate
for them which in most cases is
act a sort of community
treatment and if the act teams
aren't fully staffed and have
space available then where we
don't work we're not we're not
moving forward so work force is
is essential
thank you for that and an i've
been reading about car federal
and
also the the article about all
the overdoses in the last credit
are are those connected to have
have you seen the evidence of
car fit in all the I mean talk
about those things so when a.
You might learning I continue to
learn and again we've started
connecting more with hater
the folks here in our local
community and there's an after
though that i'm is working with
us and they also have a cdc
epidemiologist dedicated to our
local project our local
hide a region and so in real
time they are the ones who are
identifying these overdoses and
they're the one sending the
medications to be untested so we
don't have to wait two years
later to determine
where type of substances are in
our community and they are still
waiting it's still takes a
little bit of time to get that
data back but they are in a
forecasting that we're seeing an
increase in those types of of
substances or or drugs in our
community that is and could be
correlated with the increase in
overdose of deaths but it is
days that we're plugged in now
and can get that data in more
real time
that is very exciting then that
yeah
so thank you so much for your
presentation thank you to your
team for for being here for all
of your work and then
hopefully
everything will be be what we
want it to be what we and your
your program i'm guessing will
become a model for other other
parts of the state that maybe
aren't as far along so thank you
for all the work that you do and
thank you to your team thank you
and just one final comment
manager i'm in addition to
looking at medicaid and making
sure that we still have coverage
for folks in our community the
other really safety net in our
community is our fhs we have
three federally qualified health
centers and among all three of
them it creates a access points
from hatch all the way down to
shaprell in our community and we
need to make sure we protect
those of hc's across the state.
I mean it's really important in
tony and a county because people
are limited sometimes in how far
out of the county they can
travel for health care so thank
you more thing if you have
legislation ideas and
let us know okay I appreciate
that thank you all and enjoy
your time here in less cases and
so committee we are obviously
ahead of schedule
is there anyone here for public
comment if you are here for
public comment we could hear
from you now
and if there's anyone on zoom
who would like to do public
comment.
Please raise your hand
and i'm expensive.
Look and in our next presenter
is going to be available at
twelve thirty so yeah if you
want to come on up so we will
well just kind of play it by ear
if you haven't learned in the
legislature that time is merely
a concept
so go ahead
in the hospitals time as a
concept too
I wasn't going to do public
comment but since you invited
i'm like what the heck it'll
save me talking to all the views
individuals.
Um my name is adrian house i'm
the union rep for the real help
professionals of new mexico
american federation of teachers
i've been a nurse for thirty
plus years.
Primarily in the emergency
department and intensive care
units we have been in
negotiations with a united with
UNM h all regional medical
center since april and we have
repeatedly write forward our
concerns about staffing about
patient care patient quality of
care and been told repeatedly
that there was no money to
address these issues.
As you have all heard and I know
that you all very concerned
about the retention and
recruitment of healthcare staff
in the state.
Um what we have found is over
and over they have no interest
in partnering with us to work on
recruitment and retention
programs they say there's no
money there's the money does
some money.
So imagine our shock surprise in
my personal discussed when I
found out that they had given
ceo becker not only this year
but next year a twenty six
percent raise on top of her one
point two million dollars salary
co might check a relief is
kidding a sixteen percent raise.
The human the labor relations
directors getting a sixteen
percent
fourteen percent raise the
director of behavior health
twelve percent six percent to
the director of radiology up to
fifty one thousand dollars
bonuses to people who were
exiting managers who were
exiting because they didn't
renew their contracts and a
minimum of three percent raises
to the managers at send a what
regional medical center I don't
have all the doubter for you and
image cause it's not who it
represent so all this
information which i'm happy to
give you and i'll forward you
the actual contracts which most
of them were signed in april of
this year for fiscal year twenty
twenty six.
Those
they said what we didn't know
this was coming I don't you guys
were talking about it less
session we knew this was coming
we knew medicare cuts were
coming and they were signing a
contract with the twenty six
percent.
So I have the data what were
asking for is any imaginative
ideas you have to help motivate
them to take care recruit and
retain the health professionals
that actually deliver the care
to new mexicans but also to help
motivate them to move these
public institutions towards
having to improving the care to
improving access to care but
also when you're asking why
aren't people saying a new
mexico
I think this is a really good
indication people's budget is an
indication of their values their
budget is telling you what their
values are and their values are
not to take care of new mexicans
in the way they deserve in the
way their tax period dollars are
being spent and so my request to
you also as as they come forward
and they ask money and we know
they're going to come that that
starts getting tied to very very
specific
very specific outcomes
and we're asking you to start
part we're asking you like if
you don't know what that means
we're happy to tell you we'll
tell you about leap from scores
will tell you they have a one in
two thousand medicare reading.
That tells you a lot that talks
about the reimbursement they're
getting for medicare medicare I
know i'm telling you guys that
you know but for the record.
That tells people
what kind of care they're
delivering it tells what kind of
reimbursement they're getting at
tells what kind of reperson they
could be getting if they were
delivering the kind of care that
they are being asked to be
delivered by this federal
institutions and state
institutions so that was my
public home and they didn't
intend to do but since you gave
me a self box I just that i'm on
it
I have some documents that can
support it so that you don't
have to take my word for it you
can see for yourselves this was
an epro request that we made
itself
thank you for that thank you and
you can give those to one of the
staff members then they will
hand the amount anyone else for
public comment
anyone on zoom raise their hand
now okay a rate so then I guess
we will and break for now um
they don't believe the lunches
are ready yet so well we'll hang
around and tell they bring the
food out and then we'll eat and
hopefully reconvene that twelve
thirty
is there food in there
despite her mean food
