OK, so I'm going to call this
meeting to order.
So, um, let's get started.
We will start with um
analysis of the medical claims
and billing system in New
Mexico. And I will allow, um
I is Doctor Sanchez not here?
OK, OK. So, uh, just, just as a
kind of as an introduction,
Representative Chavis and I used
some of our grow dollars to
request this study because we
know we, we can't, uh, make good
decisions in healthcare unless
we know what's going on. So, so
please go ahead. Um, good
morning. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, for giving me the
opportunity to present our
analysis of the medical claims
and billing system in New
Mexico. Uh, my name is
Melanie Sontag, and I'm a
research assistant professor at
the Center for Social Policy
over at UNM's main campus, and I
will be presenting the results
of our study today that Dr.
Gabriel Sanchez and I conducted
back in June. Um, you should
have all received a handout with
a little clip. Um, you can see
that there are some handouts in
the back. One is a glossary of
terms, um, I imagine all of you
are very familiar with all the
terms, but just in case you need
to reference any, they should be
there. And there is also, um
the, a simplified version of the
medical revenue cycle that I
will talk about in a little bit,
but I will also just briefly
touch on, um, and I will get to
that in a second. Um, you should
also, sorry, have the slides,
um, and yeah, um, OK, so this
report and the findings were um,
produced by the Center for
Social Policy. We were
commissioned by the Legislative
council Service to conduct the
study. Any views expressed in
this presentation are based off
of the findings that Dr. San
che z and I made and do not
necessarily represent those of
the Center for Social Policy,
the University of New Mexico
collaborating organizations or
funders.
So just to give you a quick
introduction of our center, if
you do not know us or our work,
um, before I get into the
presentation, we specialize in
health and social policy work,
especially in the state of New
Mexico. Our work bridges
academic and applied research
with a mission to improve social
policy outcomes for more
marginalized overburdened and
underserved communities. Um,
Doctor Sanchez, who is a
professor of political science
and the director of the Center
for Social Policy and I think
many of you may already know him
and myself, um, conducted this
particular study
So moving on to, um, would it be
easier if I tell you which slide
I'm on too? OK, so we're on
slide 4 right now, the one that
says research aim.
and our research addressed 4
broad questions. The first one,
how much time is needed and
spent in each respective step
during the billing, coding, and
claims process. And this is kind
of like, this was the main
question, so I have a lot of
content on that and a little
less on the other three
questions. But the second
question was how much staffing
infrastructure, um, and
infrastructure currently exists
within different health
facilities and how much is
needed to effectively manage
patient loads. The third
question is, what differences do
staff and clinicians observe in
terms of
billing, coding, and claims by
different insurance companies,
plans and types. And finally,
what impact do the current
billing, coding and claim system
have on patient care and
clinician well-being.
So we're on slide 5 now. That's
the one with the map.
Um, we approached our study
through qualitative um research
in particular focus groups and
interviews. In total, we spoke
with 31 people, um, 21 week, um,
oh sorry, 28, we, um, spoke with
in focus groups and 3 in
interviews. Our criteria for
partic participation was that
the people we spoke with worked
in healthcare in the state of
New Mexico and did billing,
insurance, and claims related
work on a regular basis. We also
made an active effort to include
people in more rural counties in
the state.
Specifically, we spoke with
clinicians and billing and
claims professionals. We also
spoke with people in
administrative or leadership
positions in health facilities
as long as they have been
involved in billing insurance
and claims-related work. Um, so
the map kind of shows you the
counties where the health
facilities are located of the
workers that we spoke with, but
they include Bernalilo, Chavez,
uh, Dona Anna, Los Alamos,
Sandoval, San Juan, San Miguel,
and Santa Fe.
Um,
I will now move on to slide 6,
which has the 3 pie graphs on
it. Um, I just want to give you
a quick overview of the
demographics of the study
participants, um.
I'm not sure if you can read
them pretty well. Can you, uh,
is it pretty legible? OK,
perfect. Um, so the pygraph on
the left shows you the gender
distribution of the
participants. You can see that
most of the people we spoke with
were women, but we were not
particularly concerned with
that, since we all know that
healthcare professionals, uh, or
healthcare is a very female
dominant, um, dominated field.
Um, we also, um, asked the age
ranges of the participants that
ranged from 20% of participants
that were between the ages of 18
to
35 over half, so that was 51.6%.
We're between the ages of 36 and
49, and 29% were 50 or older.
Finally, the pie graph on the
right shows you the racial and
ethnic distribution of our
participants. A majority of our
participants identified as
Hispanic. That was 58%, um,
35.5% identified as non-Hispanic
white and 6.5% identified as
another race or ethnicity. I do
wanna flag there might be some
rounding errors here
so the percentages may not add
up to 100% or exceed it, but
that isn't, um, but the
percentages are still correct.
Um, so moving on to slide 7, a
little bit more on parti
participant overview. We also um
ask participants how long they
had worked in healthcare, um,
how often they interacted with
billing and insurance-related
tasks and um what kind of
setting they worked in. Uh, in
terms of interacting with
billing, 77.4% had some type of
billing interaction every day.
Um, 12.9% a few times a week and
9.7% a few times a month. Um, 65
5 % of the participants we spoke
with worked at hospitals either
as clinicians, billing or claims
professionals, or in some sort
of administrative capacity and
35.5% worked in other, um,
health facilities, which
included private practice or
smaller clinics.
Uh, 80.6% of participants have
worked in healthcare for over 10
years, 16.1% worked in
healthcare between 4 to 7 years
and 3.2% worked in healthcare
for 1 to 3 years.
So slide 8, which is probably
easier to just look at in the
handout because that's a full
page printout of that is kind of
a simplified version of um the
revenue cycle, which is every
administrative and clinical
process that is part of
collecting payment for patient
services provided.
Um
I want to emphasize again that
this is a simplified version of
this process. And you can see
it's incredibly convoluted. It's
very complex, and that's kind of
going to be um the larger theme
here today. But, um, one thing I
do want you to take a look at is
the item on the left side that
says prior authorization because
that will also be a huge theme
today. Prior authorization is
the process that requires, um,
providers to receive approval
from a patient's insurance
company before they can
administer a certain medication
or treatment or care.
to ensure that that is covered
by the insurance company. I will
discuss this more shortly, but I
just wanted to highlight, you
know, again the complexity of
this and just so that you know
this as I talk about the
substantive, um, findings that
Doctor Sanchez and I made.
So moving on to slide 9. How
much time is needed and spent in
each respective step during the
billing, coding, and claims
process. Um, in short, um, well,
first, there are time-consuming
processes at each point of
patient encounters, meaning
before clinicians even see a
patient while they're seeing a
patient and after. And second,
and I will talk about this in a
little bit too. Frequently
changing rules and updates
create delays and take more time
away from patient care as well.
So moving on to slide 10.
let me take a sip of water.
So to, to address this first
point
the clinicians we spoke with
mentioned they spend around 3 to
4 hours a week on billing and
insurance related tasks alone.
However, I want to emphasize
that this is likely an
underestimate because every
clinician we spoke to said that
it's really difficult to
disentangle all of the paperwork
they have to do and be really
explicit with saying, you know,
like, oh, this is just billing
and insurance-related task. So
that's, again, an underestimate
and they're likely actually
spend a lot more time.
A lot of the time is actually
spent on prior authorization
that I just mentioned earlier.
And especially the nurses we
spoke with mentioned that they
spend a lot of time on prior
authorization.
Some of the nurses that we spoke
with mentioned they spend around
2 hours a day alone on prior
authorization. Some said that
they have spent as much as 4
hours a day for 4 days straight,
just on trying to get prior
authorization. So you may be
wondering why does this process
take so long, right? And some of
this is because a lot of this
time is spent on the phone. So a
lot of insurance companies
require, um, providers and
clinicians to go through their
phone lines to do, um, to, to
talk to an agent
and, you know, figure out this
prior authorization stuff. And,
um, the problem is that a lot of
them also have automated phone
trees, making it really
difficult to even get to an
agent. And then when they get to
an agent, it's like, OK, you're
on hold now and have to wait.
And so it's just a lot of
waiting. And then even when they
get through to people, there's a
lot of arguing back and forth
and just trying to provide
patient care.
In terms of how long it can take
for prior authorization requests
to go through. It can take
between 7 to 14 business days,
although that assumes that no
modifications or fixes need to
be made to the request. Some
people we spoke with mentioned
that when it's all said and
done, this process can take
months. It's also important, uh,
important to note here that this
process is delayed and lengthier
for highly specialized and
costly care because uh a lot of
our participants mentioned that
especially for this highly
specialized and costly care.
There's a lot more of a fight
that
they have to put up
I want to know too that a lot of
this process, I just mentioned
happens before patients can even
be seen. Although that's not
necessarily the case because
sometimes also prior
authorization can happen when
just medications or treatments
change have already established
patients, but I do want to point
out that it's especially
problematic for patients that
haven't been seen yet,
considering the long wait times
we have to access highly
specialized care in our state.
So moving on to slide 11, the
problem of this excessive time
that is spent on billing an
insurance-related task continues
even while patients are being
seen. One of the clinicians we
spoke with mentioned that of a
thirty-minute patient encounter,
they spent between 15 to 20
minutes with the patient and
around 10 to 15 minutes on
documentation related work.
Another clinician working in,
working in emergency, um,
medicine mentioned that they use
none of the clinical time on
documentation, but that they use
their own private time or other
time that is allocated
technically for other work to do
documentation related work so
that they can see as many people
as as many patients as possible.
But however, as you can imagine,
that will lead to burnout down
the line, because that's just
not, not a sustainable way to do
work.
The issue with excessive
documentation requirements with
first with what's further
explained well by a clinician
who has worked in the field for
over 2 decades. This person
explained that 20 years ago
documentation requirements were
a lot less and that over the
past two decades, the, this is
really exponentially increased
and has added a lot more time
and taking a, um, taken away
time from patients. So one
example that came up a lot was
the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services requirement
such as
self attestation and self
attestation is where attendings
have to attest each of their
charts themselves and verify
that what they did right is
indeed true and correct. And as
you can imagine, that's just a
lot of added paperwork for,
like, no reason.
Other examples include, I'm
sorry, it says BIR in there.
What is Bing and insurance
related tasks. Yes, sorry, I had
um clarified that in an earlier
version of it. But any, anytime
I mention BIR, it's billing and
insurance related tasks. Thank
you for the question, manager.
Um,
but yes, uh, other, um, issues
that came up with CMS
requirements specifically were
um that they have to ask
patients a lot of seemingly
medically unrelated questions
such as, you know, they're
living conditions, and finally
clinicians working in behavioral
medicine in particular,
mentioned that they have to
draft treatment plans with
patients that, um, are on
Medicaid and according to them,
they those treatment plants
actually improve, um, do not
improve patient outcomes.
Another issue that arises even
during patient encounters, um,
is the issue of navigating in
and out of network issues with
patients. For example, trying to
get a prescription filled in,
uh, in an out of network
pharmacy or even trying to get
labs done and out of network
laboratory also cost clinicians
time.
So moving on to slide 12.
Sorry, I know I've been talking
a lot and very fast. Um
even after patient encounters,
there's still more billing and
insurance-related work that
further takes away time from
clinicians. One issue that was
raised here a lot are denials
which are claims that are
processed and denied based on a
patient's plan. The problem that
some flagged here is that
sometimes claims are denied even
when, um, after they have been
accepted.
Additionally, these claims can
date back 9 to 12 months, or as
one person noted, as far back as
2 years, which requires
clinicians and billing and
claims staff to backtrack to try
to rectify the denials to ensure
that health facilities get paid.
One clinician we spoke with
called this exercise to be
mental jiujitsu and noted that a
lot of brain power and time is
used to address this issue.
The problem with denials is
also, according to both
clinicians and billings and
claims, um, professionals that
they feel that insurance
companies default to denials.
One person noted so much time is
spent on arguing back and forth
with insurance companies.
Patients are just trying to get
care.
One clinician mentioned that
some insurance companies have
also used AI tools to
automatically deny certain
medication that was being
prescribed, even if this process
was not evidence-based.
Finally, as I will discuss more,
the variation of how to address
denials and rejections. Also,
um, differs a lot by insurance
companies. Some insurance
companies have streamlined this
process or made it a lot easier
than others, and depending on
how this process is put in
place, it can take a lot longer.
So moving on to slide 13, let me
also see where we're at.
Um, yes
So I know there are a lot of
acronyms on this one too. You
can uh reference the glossary
again on this.
But addressing my second point
of issues that end up being time
consuming, are the frequently
changing roles and updates from
multiple entities including
insurance companies, the World
Health Organization, the federal
government, and accredation
agencies that need to be
followed in billing and coding,
both clinicians and billing and
claims professionals have to
follow multiple different
handbooks, including the
International Classification of
Diseases, that's the ICD, um,
the healthcare common procedure
coding system that's the HCP
C S um, the current procedural
terminology, CPT and formulary.
So the first one is just a
standardized way to classify
diseases. The second two are
standardized ways to codify
medical procedures and services.
and formulary is a list of
preferred, uh, prescription
medicines covered by an
insurance plan and sorts drugs
into different tiers based on
how much they cost and which
ones a health insurance plan
covers. The problem is that
these get updated a lot. The ICD
only has large updates every
decade, but still has minor
updates more frequently. The
HCPCS and the CPT and formulary
get updated annually, although
according to some clinicians and
billing and coding staff we
spoke to, it may happen a lot
more. Sometimes they mentioned
even maybe
like once a month, which is kind
of insane.
So this means that everyone
involved in the revenue cycle
has to know about the updates
and be able to implement the
changes when they report any
type of patient encounter.
However, according to the
billers and coders we spoke to,
even if you are aware of all of
these updates and are using the
right codes and despite all of
these standardized resources
that are available, billing and
coding is not a straightforward
as you would think. as two
different people mentioned, and
I included these um this quotes
in the
on the slides but billing is not
black and white. If you're um
coding according to the book, it
won't work. Another one said, if
you follow the book, no one gets
paid.
So not only are there frequent
updates, but apparently you
can't even follow these rules as
they are mentioned because this
would mean that health
facilities do not get paid for
the care they provide.
Additionally, and this is
especially alarming within the
context of patient care is that
formula formulary changes impact
patient care and are
time-consuming. So this means,
for example, that after a
formulary update, suddenly a
patient that was on a certain
type of medication that was
working well can no longer use
this medication because the
insurance company no longer
covers this. Um, according to
the c clinicians I spoke with,
what happens is that patients
are given prescriptions that are
covered um by formulary and have
to prove adverse effects first,
and then submit a prior
authorization request in order
to get back on the medication
that they were on before that
was working well.
which is a lot, yes.
Um, so, let's move on to the
second question that I had. Um,
the, the second research
question we had, that's slide 14
right now.
So how much staffing and
infrastructure exists within
different health facilities and
how much is needed to
effectively manage patient
loads. The short answer is, as
you can imagine, um, and this is
pretty intuitive, staffing
really depends on the size of
the health facilities. So
obviously large hospitals have
larger billing and coding
departments and um smaller
facilities have smaller ones. In
terms of capacity, however,
almost all participants said
that they that they do not have
sufficient infrastructure within
their facility.
to manage patient loads
effectively.
One item that came up multiple
times here that exacerbates this
problem as high turnover in the
profession.
as one biller explained it well,
who's currently getting a
professional certification after
having worked as a biller for
many, many years, is that
professional training feels very
disconnected from the actual
work that billing and coding
entails. This person noted that
many key aspects such as how to
navigate denials or rejections,
um, of claims is not even
covered in the training, even
though it is such a crucial part
of the job. The problem with
high turnover, of course, is
that staff will have to be
trained, which takes a lot of
time away from existing
staff. And then people keep
leaving, meaning that this whole
process of training and
retraining people has to keep
happening over and over and over
again.
The issue of insufficient
infrastructure is addressed by
facilities in two major ways
according to our um study
participants, which is
outsourcing and artificial
intelligence.
Um, so outsourcing means in this
context, just that facilities
outsource billing and coding to
various degrees to other
companies. And almost all
participants I spoke with
mentioned that this usually
turned out very, very poorly.
Like I don't think a single
person mentioned a good
experience with that. And a
notable issue with this,
especially was, um, just that a
lot of the outsourced companies
do not have a heart in their
company, uh, in the health
facility that they're working
with and don't try
to make sure that these
facilities get reimbursed,
meaning that these facilities
end up losing a lot of money
because a lot of reimbursements
don't go through. Um, another,
um, solution that I mentioned
earlier, the artificial
intelligence or AI, um, was
actually received relatively
positively. A lot of the people
I spoke with that worked in
facilities that started
implementing AI. We're actually
really happy with it. But as one
clinician noted too, we do have
to be careful about overly
relying on AI
especially within the context of
healthcare and people's health,
um, and I can talk, I'm happy to
talk about that more if any of
you have more questions about
this.
um
but let's move on to slide 15.
Um, the third question, um, the
third research questions was,
which was, what differences do
staff and clinicians observe in
terms of billing, coding, and
claims by different insurance
companies, plans and types.
And as you can imagine, in
short, regardless of insurance
company plan or types,
clinicians and billing and
claims staff were really
frustrated with the current
system as it is. Many noted that
it feels like the processes
and rules, um
that insurance companies have
put in place to prevent or
obstruct patient care. As one
participant said, the medical
side has to adhere by a lot of
rules that the insurance
companies don't. Another
participant noted insurance
companies are dictating all of
the billing. It's not coming
from doctors or clinics.
There was some variability that
came up, um, with different
types of insurance. Um, as I've
mentioned earlier, the CMS
requirements
you know, like, uh, where one
thing, another issue that came
up a lot was the reimbursement
rates of Medicaid in particular,
um, I think some participants
mentioned that as little as 25%
of claims, meaning that if
there's a $40,000 claim, a
health facility only gets
$10,000 back from Medicaid is
really putting a dent into
health facilities and making it
really difficult for um
health facilities to continue
operating, especially if they're
located in communities where a
lot of people are on Medicaid.
Um, however, you know, there was
a lot of criticism about private
insurance companies as well, and
that they obstruct care, notably
on the issue of formulary that I
brought up earlier and how these
decisions don't really seem to
be driven by evidence-based care
or evidence-based medicine, but
rather that those are all
business and financial
decisions.
to address my final question and
please move on to slide 16. Um,
and that's perhaps the most
important question, which is
what impact do the current
billing, coding and claim system
have on patient
care and clinician well-being.
In short, the impact of the
current system are adverse on
patients' health and their
finances on health facilities
themselves and on clinicians.
On the impact of patient care,
one clinician I spoke with made
a really startling comment that
highlights how money um and not
evidence-based care drives
decision making at health
facilities, and that is
completely out of clinician's
control.
And I have this quote in the
slide as well, because I thought
it was very, very telling of
what's going on. This person
said, clinical decision making
is driven by insurance
formulary, not individualized
patient care. I always jokingly
tell residents in medical school
we learn evidence-based medicine
and residency we learn systems
and insurance-based medicine,
and often those two are very
different things.
The other issue aside from care
is of course the finances of
patients. I asked the
participants what happened to
unpaid medical debt, meaning,
you know, medical bills that
aren't paid by patients and some
mentioned that um.
their facility absorbs the cost.
This was especially the case for
the larger health facilities
that were able to get away with
that, but many noted that um
their bills that they usually
send unpaid bills to
collections, and I know that
there have been some changes in
terms of how that impacts
people's credit scores, you
know, as in like the rules have
been relaxed a little bit, but I
want to note too that people
don't usually don't pay their
medical bills, not because they
don't want to, but because they
simply can't. I mean, one
participant
made a recalled a really
interesting story of someone
whose bill they had to send to
collection. And this person sent
a $10 bill to their facility
with an apology note being like,
sorry, this is literally all I
can afford. and obviously the
bill was a lot bigger. And they
wanted to pay, but they just
couldn't, um.
in terms of health facility
impact and I alluded to this
multiple times in this
presentation is that
insufficient reimbursement
adversely impacts facilities'
ability to stay afloat in a
state that has a huge issue with
maintaining our healthcare
workforce. This is a huge
problem, especially rural
counties, which I will address
in my next slide, um, have.
with the participants I spoke
with, many noted that the issue
with dealing with insurance has
led many to move to private
practice and no longer accept
insurance because it is simply
not fiscally viable to accept
insurance anymore for them.
Excuse me
Finally, the overall consensus
was that the current system
negatively impacts clinician
well-being and even leads to
provider drain as well.
clinicians we spoke with
mentioned that many are really
frustrated with having to fight
over providing patients with
evidence-based care, and this
has made them disillusioned with
the work. Uh, the clinicians I
spoke with went into healthcare
because they want to help
people, and many felt that they
simply could not do so, because
there were so many obstacles in
the way.
What is more, and this is
probably a good time to
highlight that our state has the
largest share of private equity
controlled hospitals is, um,
according to one of the
clinicians I spoke with, you
know, time and time, private
equity controlled hospitals have
been proven, um, to really
adversely impact patient care,
you know, uh health outcomes and
clinician well-being. According
to this um clinician as well.
Um, they went to, um, they went
as far as to say that if their
hospital got bought out by
private equity, they'd leave. so
this is also
another provider grain
consideration.
So moving on to slide 17, and I
know this wasn't one of our
research questions, but I, um,
think this is a really important
thing to consider within our
state is how rural health
facilities are impacted by the
current billing system.
And
one issue that I've brought up
um multiple times here are the
issues of in and out of network,
um, and, um
for example, one facility person
I spoke with mentioned that that
they had had a patient that came
in to try to get a simple strep
test and they couldn't get one
in-network within their
community. The closest
laboratory that was in-network
was in Albuquerque, and at that
point between the travel because
this location was really far
from Albuquerque. They ended up
just paying out of pocket. Um,
and this kind of like feeds into
my second challenge, which
ultimately the whole billing and
insurance related issues
that are currently in existence
are just the tip of the iceberg
that rural health facilities are
facing as one person I spoke
with noted, rural medicine is
different. It is different in
terms of billing, staffing,
recruiting, working in, and this
person had worked in a larger
city in New Mexico was easy.
Here, citing their rural town
that they're currently working
in, not so much. This person
person mentioned, for example,
that it is really difficult to
retain workers in their town and
that the issue of Medicaid
reimbursement
s is exacerbated in their towns,
um, because almost all patients
are on Medicaid. Again, leading
to these facilities shutting
down in rural communities.
Hm.
All right
I'm coming to the end of my
presentation, the last slide.
Again, I want to really thank
you all for bearing with me
through this presentation. I
know this was a lot of
information, a lot of
specialized information but
ultimately I wanna boil down the
big takeaways, um, of the study
as follows clinicians are
spending a large amount of time
on billing and insurance-related
tasks that are interfering with
time spent with patients.
Insurance um level decisions
interfere with evidence-based
care consequently impacting the
quality of care that patients
can receive.
The administrative complexity of
the current system adversely
impacts patient care and
clinician well-being, e.g., you
know, prior authorization, and
these issues are exacerbated for
rural health facilities that are
already struggling to keep their
doors open.
Thank you for your time
Thank you and we will, let's
see, um,
we will start with
Representative Jones, and I
think, um, let's start with 3
minutes and we'll see how we do.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your presentation. A lot
of, um, good information in it
that I really appreciate. I was
starting to get PTSD because I
did have to do billing for a
while, coding and billing as a
nurse after 40 years of nursing,
where I was kind of separated
from that clinically. And then
suddenly in a, in an oncology
setting a busy oncology clinic
at the end of our day, we had to
go and, and charge for our
services, not for the
medication, but
for our services, which involved
ICD 9 at that time, which was
incredibly complex and so, um,
specific that you, you could
have a patient that, you know,
there were a million diagnoses
to choose from, but yours wasn't
there, you know,
and just the time it took was,
was, it was very time consuming.
I have to wonder how they
thought that was a good use of
their RN time because 11 of us
were having to do that a good
hour out of our day.
Anyway, that was my, that's
Thank you for listening.
It, it, it was, it was very
stressful. And I, and I, I have
to say too that, that, um,
watching patients not get what
they need, especially cancer
patients in a timely fashion
was, um, heartbreaking at times,
and that has changed over the
years dramatically, like you
said, um, so, so I, I think
that's a lot of really good
information that you've
provided. I'm a little concerned
that you, you, you spoke to only
3, 31 people.
and then the other thing that is
a bit bothersome is that you did
include a, a lot of opinion
statements from one individual,
which I don't know that we
should really consider that in
the same way that we consider
your study.
So
I like to just note that there
are, there are differences
between the opinion pieces and
the, the real numbers that you
did come up with because they're
valuable.
Um,
we need to make changes. Uh,
obviously, and we've, we've all
addressed that. I think most of
us can agree that, that we need
prior auth changes. But as, as
I've talked to everyone
concerned, we also need to,
sorry, I'm not asking, I'm not
asking questions right now. It's
my, the end of my statement.
But, um
I, I think we really need to
make sure that we're talking to
everyone, you know, insurance
companies finding out what's
behind this, you know, I mean,
we can assume, but, but for
instance, when you call an
insurance or when you have
someone evaluating in an
insurance agency evaluating your
request, your prior author
request. Who is that person?
What kind of background do they
have? You know, are they just
looking for certain words
because that's usually what I
found is they wanted a certain
word and if you didn't say that
word, then you didn't get
authorization.
So very complex. This is very
helpful. I appreciate it. I want
to look at the big picture.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And, and we would
have loved a deeper, larger
study, but as you know, our grow
dollars don't grow on trees, so.
so we had to, uh, we had to make
decisions on how much we could
actually invest in this. So it
would be great if LFC would say,
OK, you know, let's do a
quarter of a million dollar
study where we can get all of,
I, I can't remember what we put
in 75,000
I think it was
6, yeah, so it was, this was a
drop in the bucket study, but we
wanted to get started and, and I
will say that, uh, I know you've
done prior authorization bills.
I've done prior authorization
bills, um, and they're, they're
difficult to get through and,
um, we have gotten taken small
steps and things that I thought
we had done with bills I had
done, um, didn't turn out that
way, so, so, so I'm sure we all
know how that goes. So
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you, and I'd be remiss if
we didn't think Southeastern New
Mexico for all those grow
dollars.
uh with oil and gas. Praise the
Lord. So Madam Chair, Doctor
Sontag, I'm wondering when it
comes to
this study
how much of the burden is on the
federal government.
guidelines, like, I believe you
mentioned the Center for
Medicare and Medicaid
requirements for doctors versus
the guidelines that these
insurers are doing their very
best to align themselves with so
that they are not liable.
I'm just wondering if
what the, I, maybe what a
percentage of that would be or
could you speak a little more to
the people that you talk to
regarding those federal
requirements that the insurance
companies have to abide by when
it comes to, uh, ensuring that
they get the proper protocols in
place so they, they don't get
sued.
Madam, may I respond? Thank you,
uh, thank you, Representative
Block. Um, it's really hard to
give you like clear percentages
with a focus group because and I
want to address, um
Representative Jones, uh,
earlier comment, if that's OK as
well. Uh, just the, the goal of
the focus groups is ultimately
just to get a sense of people's
experiences. So a lot of it does
sound like opinion statements,
but it's really just trying to
paint a picture of the
experiences that people, um,
working in the field have.
And so, um, Representative
Block, to get back to your
question, ultimately, I can't
really give you an answer, um,
especially with the findings of
this study, um, but I do wanna
just, uh, reiterate a little bit
again, too, that it's just, it's
a lot, right? It's not just the
federal requirements. It is,
like you mentioned, insurance,
and then even the WHO with ICD,
you know, and there's just so
many moving components to it
that.
I personally am having a hard
time disentangling how much to,
you know, how much burden each
of those have, so I apologize
that this isn't a very clear
answer. Thank you. I, I
appreciate that, and it's a
good, it's good to at least get
a little background on it, but
I, I guess my next question
would just be, I'm probably
running out of time, but
Medicaid versus private
insurance, whenever I go to the
doctor, my doctor, I've spoken
to her and I've spoken to my
dentist and all these doctors,
and they say, like Medicaid is
really difficult and there's so
many more
requirements versus the private
insurance versus just going and
being a boutique doctor in your
own practice with no insurance.
So could you tell me the burdens
of the Medicaid versus just the
private insurance from these
folks that you spoke to, Madam
Chair. Yes, yes, Madam Chair,
may I respond? Thank you. Um,
yes, so one is that
self-attestation requirements.
So that's when an attending, so
when they're seeing a patient,
they have to write a chart and
then like attest themselves,
like, yes, what I wrote is
factually true and correct,
which everyone that
raised that was really
frustrated with it, right?
Another thing, were multiple
questions that came up, one that
comes to mind is just on the
living conditions. So, for
example, they, they have to ask
patients, like, do you live in a
2 or 3 story house, like
something like that, which is
fairly unrelated to patient
outcomes right in a medical
setting. um, so it's just
apparently, um, 4 people on
Medicaid, um, providers just
have to ask them all of these
like seemingly random questions.
I honestly don
' t know where they're coming
from. I can look into that
because I, I, I apologize. I
hadn't looked into like, why all
of these questions exist. The
only thing that I heard from the
clinicians that I spoke with was
that all of those questions seem
pretty unrelated to the patients
that they were treating them,
uh, that, that they were
treating. Yeah. And then the
final one
sorry, and now I'm totally
blanking. I apologize. 00, the
treatment plan, yes, the
treatment plan that they have to
set up, um, for, uh, patients
seeking behavioral care. So for
example, what one clinician was
telling me was that they have to
say like, oh, our treatment plan
is we are going to treat your
depression. It's like, yes, we
already know that. Why do we
have to set up a treatment plan?
So it's things like that where
it just feels like it's a lot of
excessive paperwork. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I just want to
clarify, I'm sorry, going over
time, but that's specifically
from
Medicare. I'm sorry, Medicaid.
I, yeah, uh, so what they all
mentioned was just CMSs
requirements. So these are CMS
requirements. OK, thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Thank you.
You're welcome. And, and I did
pause while she was answering,
uh, Representative Jones's
question. So trying to be fair
because I didn't let you answer
Representative Jones's question.
No, no, it was my fault, not
yours. Um, Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you for your presentation.
I have several things I wrote
down, um, but I just want to
point out that I think that
these standards are set with
regulatory framework, and
they're not just adjusted
arbitrarily. I know updates to
prior authorization rules
typically occur on an annual
basis, and they do shift sooner,
but for the patient, I think
usually when the medications
transition to generic, um, when
they're going off brand. Um, but
I think that all of this is
for stability of the patient, of
the provider, of the insurers,
and so there is certain respect
that you have to put in place,
but regarding CMS, just to
answer your question, CMS is the
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid. So it's both for
Medicare, reimbursement, and the
Medicaid reimbursement. And then
the living conditions, it
actually does relate back to the
patient, um, because you have to
ask them, do you feel safe where
you're living? And we do that a
lot of times, I think for um
member
s of families just to make sure
they're safe in their home. When
they ask, Do you live in a
two-story house? Sometimes it's
somebody with a walker or a
cane, and they want to make
sure, are they living in the
right environment, and so some
that does relate back to
healthcare. So some of those
questions are asked for reasons.
Um, out of network labs and
network inadequacies. I know
here at the state, especially
for our MCOs or for CMS, there's
requirements that health plans
put in place, you
have to have labs. You have to
have a certain number of doctors
and physicians within a certain
mileage, um, from where that
member lives, if not, then
things have to get paid in
network. I think the awful part
of that is we put the patient in
the middle and it's so
confusing, and they don't know
what to do a lot of times, and
it could be as simple as, um,
patients. I know even with my
family members, um, they don't
show, they think they have
Medicare, right? But they're on
a Medicare Advantage plan, so
that may be
Blue Cross Blue Shield or
Presbyterian that we see here,
and they're only showing a
Medicare card, but they don't
have that because they've
assigned their Medicare to a
Medicare Advantage, which is
Presbyterian or Blue Cross. So
the claims denying or the
pharmacies not putting the
information in. And so a lot of
times it's education and I think
we have to really get out there
and educate members and patients
on, on how to use their
healthcare, but how do we do
that? It's, it's been
so hard for so many years, um,
formulary updates I know are
updated on an annual basis, um,
and I think that it's really
hard when we look at
reimbursements because I know my
doctor has moved to a boutique
practice because she couldn't
keep the doors open with low
reimbursements for Medicaid and
Medicare, and I know as a state
we've done such a good job
raising those rates above what
CMS covers. And I think we
really need to look at and maybe
study, you know, factual
information on what are most of
the patients here in New Mexico
seeing providers for and what do
we need to raise reimbursement
for at a state level so that we
can help doctors keep their
doors open and operate.
But I would love maybe for a
next committee meeting, we
should bring the health plans
here and answer these questions
and these outcomes that she put
on her paper asking, how do you
really follow these guidelines?
What is your prior authorization
look like? What is in-network
and out of network, and they
should be able to answer that
for us.
Thank you. And just, just kind
of as an aside based on, um,
on the, uh, the meeting that we
had with the, with the hospital
association in terms of the, the
bill that's come, that has been
passed that
the, the rural
the, the, the provider tax that
we passed a few years ago that
allows the providers to pay a
tax so that they can, so that
the state can use those dollars
for Medicaid match, so we, we
use those dollars to grow more
money that is going to go from
about, I, I can't find the
numbers right here. I think um
it's
about 1.4 billion that we're
getting, it could go as low as
400 million. So we could be
losing a billion dollars just in
that, in that one from the, the
tax that we the provider tax
that we use to make the Medicaid
match. So, so it's great that we
raised the, the Medicaid rates.
Unfortunately, those may be
going away sooner rather than
later, and we need to do more
rather than decrease. But again,
we don't know a lot, so we have
to wait and see. A
Representative Martinez.
thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
um
Dr. Sontag, I really appreciate
the, the way you put this
together. It was easy to follow,
uh, but I do have a question on
the
commentary that one of your
subjects said
If my hospital got bought out by
a private equity, I'd leave.
Um
so what happens to
healthcare in New Mexico if we
force all these private equity
hospitals to leave the state.
How are we going to fill those
gaps?
What, how, how does my dad and
Espanola.
get healthcare
because
the Espanola Hospital when it
was a local hospital.
was going under
If it wasn't for the
investments,
that Presbyterian made in that
hospital.
they would be traveling to Santa
Fe or Albuquerque for
healthcare. My dad is 86 years
old. He's blind. He can't drive
himself.
so he requires somebody to drive
him. What happens to health, and
it's, I
I've been on this committee, uh,
for a couple of years now, and
it's a
uh, uh, very emotional.
issue.
um
my question is, what happens to
healthcare in the rural parts of
the state without this outside
investment.
Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, thank you for your
question and uh that's what I
was kind of um
I, I, I really appreciate your
input. Thank you for, for, for
sharing your, your experiences
as well. And I was trying to
highlight that in this study as
well. The, the rural challenges
you bring up. I, um,
I can't really answer your
question, what happens with,
when we remove private equity,
um, especially based off of the
study, because again, I, I was,
you know, all of this is a
collection of the experiences of
healthcare providers. And so I
feel like that may require an
additional study of how to
implement that. Maybe that
involves an economist who, you
know, which I, I don't have that
experience. So I can't, um, do
that, but I, I think, you know,
I think you're, you're correct
with obviously with your
experience and
with what you're noting with
that rural medicine really is
struggling. And what one person
I spoke with that worked in a
rural setting mentioned too is
that because they were not
private equity owned, but they
had relied a lot on
philanthropic money. But then
that had also been pulled. So I
think the issue is just overall
in rural health facilities, even
beyond the private equity stuff
that just, there isn't enough
money there. There's provider
drain and, you know, the
facilities are not getting
reimbursed enough. So I
apologize that I'm not directly
answering
your question. I'm happy to
start like looking into like how
to replace um private equity,
um, or, or like what to do when
we replace private equity
controlled, um, health
facilities, but I don't have a
clear answer for that right now.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
um
I've asked this question several
times.
and have never gotten an answer.
um
you know, I'm I'm just curious
with the move to getting rid of
outside money
where these investments are
gonna come.
Um
so that's, that's just one of
the many questions that roll
around and and uh.
I think I think we need to take
a very um
careful
um.
way of going about that. We
can't just
push out outside money
um
we need outside money coming
into the state.
But that's
um
I know it's a very emotional
issue.
but
you know, we really need to be
careful about
how we go about that, but I do
appreciate the information it
was.
it was very well put together,
um, and easy to follow.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. And just a
reminder, her, her task was
analysis of medical claims and
billing systems. We all know the
healthcare system is huge. We
had her look at one like
tiny, um, period of, of, of all
the words written. So, so she's
not gonna be able to answer some
of those big, and, and I don't
expect her to, and please don't
feel like you need to, because
this was a very targeted, um,
study, a very small targeted
study. So, Senator Charlie.
thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I
think what's clear to me is that
insurance reform will bring us
closer to the results that we
want to see for, uh, New Mexico
and we desperately need them.
It'll increase, um, the
retention and recruitment of
healthcare professionals. It'll
increased, uh, actual patient
care and ultimately better
health outcomes for New
Mexicans, and I'm always
interested in system fixes. So
my two questions are what
reforms can our our uh
legislature
um,
produce that will reduce
administrative chokehold. So
what can we actually do right
now? And then the second is,
what are other states doing in
terms of regulating algorithmic
denials. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And just a reminder that that
some of this is way outside of
what, what, what, what we, um,
paid them to do. And then I, I,
I, I think I'm safe in saying
this is not your day day job.
It's not looking at healthcare
systems. So, so the just a
reminder that some of these
questions are much bigger and,
uh, I'm sure you're not prepared
to answer. So do the best you
can. Well, yeah, thank you,
thank you for, for, for that.
And yes, I apologize that I, I
keep saying, oh, I don't know
the answer. But again, I'm, I'm
happy to, to follow up and like
look into this as well. In terms
of what reform
um, is available. I think
there's some people in this room
that may be able to speak on
this a little bit more. I know
there's, um, health security
now, you know, just like more
system level change, um, and
maybe Doctor Feldblum can talk
about this a little bit more.
Sorry to delegate, but yes, uh,
in terms of the algorithmic
denials, I also, again, don't
actually have an answer for it.
Um, what I do know with AI, you
know, we're, um, I think we're
really slow with
addressing the issues that have
popped up with AI and are
addressing it as it comes
around. I think my hunch would
be that I don't think there are
a lot of um places that have
addressed this yet. But, again,
I'm happy to look into this and
follow up with you because I
don't know.
I apologize. Thank you.
Thank you. And I'm sorry for,
for continuing to interrupt.
Emma, I will say that I just
recently finished a tour of, um,
I was on an NCSL Health
Innovations Task Force, and we
did look at one of our meetings
was based on, was looking at AI
And I think we left with more
questions than we, um, left with
answers. So it's, it's really,
it's developing and it's it's
developing faster than we can
possibly think about keeping up
with it, but, but it know that
NCSL is looking at it in
healthcare, um, and hopefully
we'll get more answers as we go
along. Sopresentative Ferrari.
uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, Melanie. I
appreciate it. Um, all your work
into this study. Um, I think,
uh, along the same with private
equity and why this person
thought they would leave if they
got bought out. Um, at New
Mexico being the highest private
equity owned um hospitals having
the most than other states, more
than other states, I should say,
um, could be, you know, part of
the reason there are a lot of
doctors who are leaving. Um,
that correlation seems to be,
you know, something that, uh, is
pretty high, but I also think
that um if there were a way to
ask um the um
uh providers that we approve,
um, at the state level that if
we ask them to have some kind of
move to value-based instead of
just service.
um, paid, um
fee that, um, we would be able
to get better, um, responses
from them where they weren't
worried about denying everything
just so that they could profit
more. And, um, I, I don't know
if we, you know
instead of having to pass a lot
of bills, maybe it would be
better to um see who we approve
and see and make sure that they
understand we want them to
approve what's needed by the
patient.
Does that go along with what
you're.
study is showing.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, Ferry, thank you. Yeah, I, I
think so. OK, that's all, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Chavis. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and yes, again, thank you,
thank you for this study. Um
very enlightening, um, lots of
good information in it.
Um, and I just wanted to say
that I, one of my cousins is a
doctor
um, and he recently retired
little, I think earlier than he
wanted to.
But one of the main reasons he
gave was the administrative
burden, having to do all the
things that he, that you talk
about in this study. He was
spending weekends, um, and he
was in, uh, um, private practice
in a rural area.
Um, and I also wanted to comment
on the denial of prescriptions.
I experienced that
when my husband had cancer, uh,
the insurance company denied his
chemotherapy and we had to fight
them for a couple of weeks, and
during that time,
the place where he was going
donated his chemotherapy to us,
otherwise he would have gone
without.
So those are some things that
I'm sure I'm not the only one
that's based, um, there's other
families other families that
have faced that and many of them
have probably gone without.
Um, the one question that I do
have is based on this
you know, based on the fact
that, that, that there's so much
information in here. Do you have
any recommendations in terms of
any future studies that you
think we should follow up on.
And then also, are there studies
that we should follow up on
specific to rural areas.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Chavez, thank you
for your question. Absolutely. I
mean, as, um, um, Madam Chair
has, uh, repeatedly mentioned
this is just like a small study,
just really just a small facet
of this, so there's definitely a
lot of opportunity to do further
studies, um, as you saw on that
one slide with the graph, with
a, with a map, we, we tried our
best to be as um geographically
representative as possible, but
there's still a lot of rural
counties we didn't, um, touch
that we would love
to have a chance to talk to
because again the rural
challenges were very particular
and specific. Um, I think it
would also um be helpful to to
conduct a study with the
patients and their experiences
to really just highlight those
voices and those experiences to
really drive home, um, you know,
the need for systems level
change, um.
yes, I, I think there are
multiple, I have so many
different ideas, but I'm also
curious to hear whether the
committee has ideas of studies
that they would like conducted,
things that they would like to
learn, so I appreciate your
question. Yeah, I appreciate
that answer, and I think that
they're, you know, out of this
discussion, there probably are
some studies that we want to
follow up on, um, and then just
enclosing one of the things that
I wanted to say too is that, um,
I know that some of these
billers and coders and folks who
are
working in patient finances, uh,
face quotas in terms of, you
know, the amount of work that
they have to get done, um, in a
certain day, uh, and that puts a
whole lot of pressure on them,
and I've seen a lot of burnout,
um, and I've also seen, um,
mental health issues with um
some of those workers in terms
of the workloads they face and
the demands that are placed on
them. So thank you so much
Um, Madam Chair, sorry, may I,
um, I just want to share that we
do address the issue of quotas
in the final report too, which
I'm happy to share with the
committee once it's, I'm
completely finalized because
they're, there was a lot of
content that I was just not able
to cover. Otherwise, we would
have been here for like 2 hours,
but, um, I really appreciate it.
Thank you. So, so when the study
is complete, we would love it if
you would send it to Xander and
he will share it with the entire
committee. And then, um,
hopefully, we will have some op
opportunity to digest it and,
uh, maybe revisit it
at.
in our spare time in this
committee because we have no, no
subjects to cover. So, um, thank
you, Representative
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, in
addition to the final report,
um, I kind of nerd out, um, a
lot, and I also really enjoy the
narrative part. I, I feel like a
lot of the narrative gets lost
in just putting numbers up. And
so I'm really, really
appreciative of this in
particular. Um, so in addition
to the final report, um, would
it be possible to read through
the transcripts if they're an
anonymous, of course.
Madam Chair and Representative
Hanaya, thank you for your
question. Um, let me double
check. I just really wanna make
sure that they are completely
anonymized because as you can
imagine, this is a really
delicate topic. So, um, but yes,
um, and let, let me check, but
I, I will follow up with you on
that definitely. Thank you.
Thank you. um
you know, as I feel like
as a younger person who wants my
friends here and wants a cool,
buzzy state with a lot to do and
a lot of, uh, professionals and
everyday workers across the
board. One of the things that I
really see in common
whether we're talking about
medical providers or otherwise.
It's just workplace conditions.
and like how hard it is to be in
the workforce as a person who is
trying to earn for your family
or yourself, or
get a down payment for a house.
And so, I think about Burnout a
lot and I also think about
generations of workforce, um,
and how it's changing throughout
the years. Like, what does it
mean
What do workplace conditions
have to do with burnout right
now, especially knowing that
younger generations of people
are looking at
workplace conditions, sometimes
overpay. And so I just, I, I
want to thank you because I feel
like this is an issue that we
have to address as we're looking
at the workforce as a whole. Um,
I, I'm very sad, um, with
Martinez is not here, but I'm
happy to get with him after, but
I did want to speak to the
private equity piece as well,
because as we know, private
equity is not necessarily, um,
experts in whatever subject
field they're buying up at the
time, their whole purpose is to
turn profit for their
shareholders. And so to me, like
as we're turning hospitals into
these kind of like money-making
factories. One, I think about
the workforce burnout that comes
with it. Um, but I also think
about the reality that we're
fa cing like the reality is,
yeah, we have private equity
hospitals here, right? We are
the highest percentage in the
nation. And like, it's a reality
we have to live with.
It doesn't mean we're like, hey,
get out right now, cause that's
just not real. Like, we just
can't do that. Um, but what we
can do, and I feel like this is
a place where we can have a lot
of common ground and come
together is figure out, OK, so
what do we do about the private
equity that is here? How do we
stop future private equity from
coming in. Um, so I think about
regulation and I think about
transparency, um, because we
have to know what's going on
behind Cly closed doors in order
for us to make smart
decisions about patients, about
workers, um, so I'll close,
Madam Chair, in just saying, I
actually think that this is a
place where we have a lot of
common ground when we're talking
about transparency, when we're
talking about, um
uh, transparency for private
equity and for insurance. Um,
thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
stop there.
Thank you. Um, Representative
Johnson
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, colleagues, and, uh,
thank you for your presentation.
I'm, my apologies, I missed it.
I had to check into work, so
I'll continue to listen. Thank
you.
Senator Pinto, OK, thank you.
Um, so I just have a couple of
things. First, thank you for
doing this study. It, um, showed
us a lot, and it showed us
mostly that we need to learn a
lot more. And I, I just, uh,
something that, um, recently
that's really come to my
attention is that, um, the
suicide rate in physicians is
really, really high. I just
found a statistic that in female
physicians, their suicide rate
is between $250 and 400% of
women in other professions, and
workload is frequently the
cause. So, uh, and, and, um,
probably most of you have heard
of moral injury, where you go to
medical school to help people,
to heal people, to save people,
and when it comes down to you're
spending half your time on the
phone with an insurance company
trying to save people, um, that,
that's really frustrating and so
we, we
need to get a handle on all of,
I mean, and this is not a New
Mexico problem. This is a
national problem, but since we,
uh, we are the health committee
of the New Mexico. We are going
to try to, um, to do what we can
here. As I said, we have done
some prior authorization. Um,
there's a lot of, um
pushback. I, I, the last prior
authorization bill that was was
passed was for a pharmaceuticals
for cancer, behavioral health,
and things like, um,
uh
oh, like lupus and I'm, I'm
blanking on the name, but so we
are slowly, um, slowly moving
that way. Thank you. It takes a
village. So thank you so much
and we will be in contact and we
will be waiting anxiously for
the final report and, um, and
then we will probably be back in
touch with you and hopefully we
can come up with some more money
for some more studies. And, and
just to the committee, if you
have ideas, please
share them with, with the whole
committee, but particularly with
me. So as we're, we're, I think
we had a million dollars in HB2
this year for interim expenses,
and we were told that we can use
some of those for studies that
we need. So, so hopefully we
can, of course, you know how
that goes, you hear things and
then when it comes time for the,
the bucks to hit the pavement.
They're, they're not necessarily
there. But thank you so much for
your time and please thank, um,
Doctor Sanchez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
OK, and we will next go to, um,
our own committee members, um,
on alcohol harms, alleviation
coalition, Representative
Ferrari and Senator Pinto.
Go ahead whenever you're ready
No rush, but hurry up.
That was your first test. You
bare you barely passed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I need
more protein
Hm.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and committee members. Um, we
are gonna be presenting about,
uh, again, you've heard many
times, but we do have some new
members that might not have, uh,
or just to remind people too
about um alcohol harms
alleviation.
in our state, and what we're
trying to do, uh, and why, and,
um, excessive alcohol use is
leading cause of injury and
death, not only in the United
States, but in New Mexico and um
in 2020, uh, mortality was
estimated to be 2.8 million, uh,
years of potential life loss
with an average of 29 years, uh,
loss per death. Um, and so when
we're looking at, um,
over 2000 people in the last,
you know, um, since in the
twenties, 2000s, I should say,
um, we have a lot of potential
that we're losing
And
often we think of, you know,
alcohol poisoning or alcohol use
disorder or cirrhosis of the
liver, but it also includes, um,
things such as individual injury
to like falls, suicide,
drownings, and
um, then also bystander homicide
unintentional firearms,
injuries, motor vehicle crashes,
and child maltreatment.
And, um, so we're looking at um
trying to change how we think
about alcohol in our state and
um
when drinkers compared to
non-drinkers in past studies,
um.
we've, uh, only 50% of our
population really does drink,
and the other, and they consume
only 20% of the alcohol, whereas
uh, the other, um
20% consumes 80% of the alcohol.
and
what we're trying to do, um,
is reduce that intake, um, and.
with the different studies that
we're learning about all the um
effects of alcohol and then also
what we can do to affect alcohol
use.
uh, reducing consumption is
really important and other
recent studies have also shown
how alcohol use, um, which is a
carcinogen
and the cancer risks that
they're seeing, um, such as, uh,
cancer of the mouth, the throat,
the, um, esophagus, uh, breast
cancer, liver cancer, which
we've known liver cirrhosis of
the liver. And then also, um,
uh,
uh, colon and rectal, uh,
cancer. So these are becoming
more and more um
known in some states have even
uh put up warnings on alcohol
products, uh, to let people know
how in uh cancer uh really is
impacting, um, their health.
and New Mexico has been one of
the highest, um, state rates of
alcohol-related mortality. Um,
we had a big push in 1993 to
increase our excise tax and then
also put in uh funds for
especially, um, DWI prevention,
which also affected, you know,
other health outcomes in a
positive way, um, but then
because we didn't have it where
that excise tax would
increase over time with
inflation, um
things, fatalities started
creeping up in 1997 and since
then we've been ranked 1, 2nd or
3rd, um, there was a period, um.
um, where we were 6th highest um
state for overdose nationally
and, um, 2 times its rate of
death from overdose.
and we also have the problems of
gun-related mortality that
we're, uh, New Mexico ranks 3rd
in the country from 2010 to
2019 and 32% of suicides and 42%
of homicides are alcohol
involved.
Youth drinking is associated
with increased risk of alcohol
use disorder, and it's higher in
New Mexico than other states,
21% of New Mexico youth reported
having a first drink of alcohol
before the age of 13 compared to
15% nationally. The reason this
is so important is because
um, the sooner we can stop the
early onset of drinking of a
young person, the less likely
they will be to have a lifelong,
um.
uh, addiction or problem with
alcohol.
Um, alcohol-related mortality is
increasing in 2019 to 21, um,
our deaths have increased by
31%, reaching an all-time high
in 2021, and, um, I think that
was the year we were up to
2,274,
um
uh.
alcohol-related deaths, and, um,
now it's kind of come down a
little bit, so we're hovering
around 2000 deaths per year.
but you can see in, um, the, um,
slide 6,
how the graph of New Mexico, it
has increased, yet nationally it
is kind of stabilized, but it
has shown a slight increase too.
Um, so, um, excessive
consumption, uh costs New Mexico
$2.2 billion. That was in 2010.
and um equivalent to $22.77 per
standard drink, and adjusting
only for inflation, costs was
estimated at $3.1 billion in
2023, or almost $4 a standard
drink cost.
to um
our state and New Mexico's
entire 23 Medicaid budget was
$8.9 billion.
Thank you
So as we talk about this too,
especially in this section of
the state for, um,
the Gallup area and the Navajo
Nation up into the Four Corners
area.
There's much concern because we
also have with the legalization
of marijuana.
that
we also
we're starting to see cannabis
drinks and the combination of
the two along with alcohol, yet
we separate it, um, but with
this legalization of marijuana,
we see our consumers in our area
also, um, mixing the two whether
it be um through the liquid or
um.
smoking it or gummies or
whatever, um, whatever access
they have to it.
But also it has created much of
a problem because we do have
some gaps within our area in
treatment.
and infrastructure needs to be
built up.
So with this Act too, what we'd
like to see is a stabilization
of funding, a funding source for
this particular um
so that people have the
opportunity to seek treatment in
the area.
And I do not suspect, even
though there will be proponents
that say that it's going to drop
the, um, consumption of alcohol.
but you will see that there is
this commercialization of even
having mini's accessorized along
with their, um, attire.
and
knowing that we seem to be in
the trend sometimes that you
will see that occur. There was
some legislation to take out the
miniatures, the smaller, um
proof liquor products on the
shelf which led to some of our
gas stations being closed, in
which they decide to just seek
revenue from alcohol sales.
In the Gelop area, you also hear
about citations or even DWIs
data saying, well, there was a
decrease in it or even charges
or in that sense, but there has
been issues prior to
to addressing this, that um
some of those did not actually
follow through. They'll say,
well, the data went down. Well,
there's a lot of this is a
justice system in which working
with MMIP, um, there are systems
that need to be adjusted and
have a little bit better
cooperation between um
our law enforcement agencies all
the way up the line to the
prosecution because if there's a
gap in which we're in a dilemma
right now currently in this.
district in this county with the
district attorney.
that
these small cases that if we see
somebody with a DWIC domestic
violence charges, and they're
not brought up are fully
prosecuted, it could lead to, to
murder.
and rape
that these smaller crimes, um,
if treatment is not
something they, they, they can
have to
go into um it it just escalates
from there and um it's not
saying that it's gonna be a
relief, but I think it is
something that we as the members
of this area, pay our taxes to
have those services to
relating to this issue
And
I couldn't say much more,
wouldn't
they say, well, the death rate
is down, while many have died
before that, so therefore, the
death rate probably will go down
because there's less in the
population in that sense. But we
will see a push, um, for our
younger generation, um, because
of this
and I
I really was against the
legalization because we did not
have a handle on the alcohol.
and I don't think we will
actually see real data on the
effects of marijuana until a
couple more years in which I
think we'll see an increase in
the fatalities, but it'll be
related also with the substance
abuse in the area that, um,
just continues.
Thank you, that's all I have.
Oh, on slide 8.
you see this, there is a, um
table there. That's it.
on the
alcohol consumption and the
mortality by race, ethnicity,
and tribal affiliation.
Um, the red numbers there.
you'll see the Alaska Indiana
American Indian or Alaskan
Native numbers are the highest
and then the second category.
past 30 days that the um
that one alcohol drink is less
for the Native Americans.
But the knowledge that they
have, and we know this too of
the tolerance of the mind and
consuming alcohol that you would
have to consume a higher proof
alcohol to achieve whatever high
you are seeking. And as that
goes up, you will see that it
it is less in that sense, but
they're drinking a more potent
proof alcohol in this area and
the manufacturers and the
sellers, um, those that sell
alcohol beverages, know this,
and they readily stock it by the
cases, um, and some of it.
is even about $5 a pint and A
they'll, they'll top it where
and price it so that they can
come in and um
that is all they have to raise
in a day or in an hour and go
into some of these.
liquor establishments and um
some of them actually are bars
and packaged liquors at the same
time.
where they can go in and then um
buy before a certain time and
leave the establishment with um
something else, um.
for later on in, in the night or
the day, um, thank you.
I think what we are trying to um
have recognized is that, you
know, with 283 deaths in our
Native American group in New
Mexico and then only consuming
36%, um, compared to, um, lower
death rates of other um groups
such as black, Hispanic, and
white, um, and their consumption
is higher than what we're seeing
and as a Senator Pin
to is pointing out, the effects
are much um
or what is being uh
consumed has harsher, harsher
effects and um
they don't have the
resources either to help, uh,
mitigate, um, the consumption of
alcohol, and we call that the
paradox, uh, alcohol harms
paradox in New Mexico, where
less drinking, um, but yet have
higher um alcohol related
deaths.
In those categories, as you can
see on page 9 also pointed out.
um
and
when drinking the same amount of
alcohol disadvantaged
populations experience greater
harms from alcohol than a fluent
populations. And one of the
recommendations, um, that I'm
sure we've repeated over and
over is, um, and especially from
the Department of Health is to
increase alcohol taxes, and
that's been shown to decrease
drinking, especially with
underage drinkers and many of
the other groups such as
excessive or binge drinkers.
and there's other things that
can be done too, like changing
outlet density and screening a
brief intervention, which we've
talked about, um, Espert, uh,
being more available through our
doctors and healthcare, and
there's other things, um, such
as warning labels that, um,
we're talking about for cancer
and, uh, World Health
Organization and the CDC have
all, uh, been supportive of
raising the alcohol tax, and we
have, uh, considered, uh,
different things like just
raising the excise tax, 25 cents
a drink, then we've also had,
um, other views of we need to do
sales tax, so what we're looking
at is a hybrid, and I won't go
into all the details of that,
um, but it's
really important that whatever
we do, the funding goes into um
uh communities that can use the
funds for prevention, also for,
um, uh
Medicaid assisted programs that
might help, uh, people who still
need to have alcohol, but in a
controlled manner and also to
have housing that might be
provided for them while they're
doing that, um, and so with
that, I'd like to introduce, um,
Miss Deborah Martinez, who, um,
is part of the, uh, Gallup
coalition that's been working on
this, um, for many years in
their community
and have seen great results.
but yet we need to support with
further funding and
opportunities.
Madam Chair, committee
Deborah Martinez, I would just
like to talk about our um social
detox program, which, um
operates about as many intakes
as we have, um, as a population
in Gallup.
So it last year in 2024, we had
19,331 admissions.
Um,
45% of those were for shelter
either, um, people who are
intoxicated or um sober, but
10,575 of those individuals were
brought in under the detox
Reform Act where they were
unable to care for themselves
and others, and the reason why
the, the city is really um
involved in um the liquor excise
taxes, we're unable to secure
funding, um, from the DWI
programs or other resources, so
we do have to use our local
liquor excise tax.
We use about 835,000 of that to
provide services throughout the
year, um, more than, uh, most
programs operate, uh, annually.
So with that said, um, our law
enforcement, um, responds to
52,424 calls a year.
So we're a biddy pretty busy,
uh, community, um.
that, uh
that takes on, we do
collaborate, we have an alcohol
task force, and we've worked on,
uh, local legislation like
increasing our local liquor
excise tax from 5 to 6%, um,
we've worked on alcohol outlet
density. We've worked with law
enforcement and state police to,
um, tackle some of the problem,
uh, alcohol establishments.
we've done, uh, a social host,
uh law back in.
a couple of years back, it's no
longer used, but those are some
of the things that we'll
continue to work on and we'll
work on with the alcohol harms
alleviation, coalition, um, to
provide support. So I stand for
any questions.
So with that
especially in this area.
that the stabilization of
funding is really the focus on
this and establishing a fund so
that we can allow not just here
in this area but um throughout
the state our entities to build
up their services. I do not
think that this will be the, I
mean, this is probably one of
the oldest substance abuse
items, but there is always
something around the corner, so
I hope we really try to be on
the forefront on that, um,
because the
earlier they catch it, the more
likely they're able to
handle it and have the
opportunity to have a better
quality of life in that way than
that way you have seen lately
thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
and I'm just gonna jump in here,
uh, for the, particularly those
of us who sit on the tobacco
committee we've heard for years
that, um, youth are, are most
responsive to price. And so we
know that by, if we raise the
alcohol excise tax, we're not
going to affect the guy who
drinks, uh, you know, 2 L of
vodka every day. We're, and
that's not who we're targeting.
We're targeting youth because
they
are most sensitive to price. If
we can make the price a little
more expensive. They will drink
less. And, um, you know, we'd
love to help the folks that are
further down the road, but
that's a much more difficult,
um, so what the, the attempts, a
lot of the attempts of the, of
raising that tax is to prevent
youth from ever becoming
um, regular alcohol drinkers or
from even, even, um
trying it for the first time. So
we have a lot of time for
questions, so we'll start with
Representative Johnson, and, um,
well, pretty much be unlimited
unless people go crazy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you,
Deborah and
my colleagues, representative,
and senator, and thank you,
Representative Thompson for
explaining the purpose and the
youth range, um.
as you know, I live in Gallup,
and I also my folks also live,
um, past the county line.
So I have both experiences and
um
I see on a daily basis the
bootlegging at the county line.
and then sometimes I'll walk
into the store for
uh, something to drink or a bag
of ice, and the line
and the purchases that are being
made. And so oftentimes I wonder
you know, um, what are the root
causes, and we know that it's
jobs and depression, grieving,
uh, transportation.
and, uh, the county line
provider.
and then, of course, um, our
lack of DWI.
um response responsibilities,
um, sometimes we read the paper
and a person is going on their
7th DWI. I mean, it's
unbelievable.
um,
my elders recently, uh,
celebrated someone who was
notorious for driving drunk on
uh New Mexico Highway 566.
Finally apprehended and um
serving a felony.
So
we live those types of
experiences on a day to day
basis, and we are concerned
because we do transport our
elders and our children on these
roads and um provide a
livelihood in these communities.
and I did introduce and pass a
bill that closed
our liquor establishments in
this community on Sundays.
but that bill was reversed and
now we're, we're, we've reopened
on Sunday, but I think that
Sunday closure gave us a little
break, and uh, but now we're,
um, we've reversed that
situation
So I, um,
you know, I support our
initiative. I just wonder why we
can't get it past the finish
line.
Are we asking too high of a
are we asking too much?
Uh, maybe, you know, what is the
middle ground? What have we done
this far?
And, uh, before you answer that,
um, I just wanna also thank
Doctor Jenny Way with GIMC who's
been at the table. Um, I missed
her today. She couldn't be here
today. I did inform her and then
of course, Mara, Shane Phil with
the four corners. I see her in
the audience and all her work.
So, uh, with that, that's, um,
those are my thoughts. Thank
you.
OK. Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
necessarily have any questions,
um, but one of the
um
one of the things that I think
would be really helpful is
seeing the comparisons in a
chart form
Um, I'm kind of a visual learner
and so I'm trying to like flip
through all of these, but seeing
the differences between the
percentages taxed for alcohol,
for cannabis, um, I think that
would be really helpful just to
see in a chart. And then the
differences between the pieces
of legislation that were
introduced over the last few
years. This way we can kind of
see the progression of like what
was introduced, um, and I would
also like to talk through like
what were the hurdles, um, for
each
of those, each of the years? Is
it ever changing or is it kind
of the same thing? Um, yeah, so,
no, no questions in particular.
I think I just want to start
learning more about the history.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Vice Chair, I did have a
little question in there and
that was kind of the same as
Representative Anaya was, you
know, what were the major
hurdles this last time and why
didn't we finish the
you know, past the finish line
and what are we thinking going
forward?
Um
fair questions. Um, we
had started 25 cents a drink,
and then we had an opposing, uh,
legislation that wanted to make
it uh that was for an excise tax
increase, um, and then there was
the idea that we have a surtax
and so we um put the two ideas
together, but without an
increase on the excise tax, um
and then a 6%
uh sales tax, um, and then that
was negotiated, um, down to 3%,
but, um, didn't it
passed, but with an amendment
that, um, failed or um wasn't
correct, so we had to go back to
the committee and then, um, that
did not pass through the tax
house tax Committee.
So
we are looking at, um
shoring up support in that
committee and uh and expanding
our um coalition, which included
a lot of groups from around the
state in behavioral health in
our local DWI groups, um, other
coalitions such as uh Doctor Wei
and, uh, Deborah are part of
here in Gallup and, um, also
expanding to more support as
we're finding out more about
cancer risks and including
you know, groups that would um
come from Matt Engle and um so
we're
you know, in the process of
getting all of these ideas and
information to people and
getting that uh bill
reorganized.
Sure.
And also, um, for, uh,
Representative Anaya, um,
wanting to see how, um, I think
it was comparing, uh, the
the different, um, other taxes
such as for tobacco and
cannabis, you know, alcohol is
very low compared to those and,
um, you know, in our state, we
aren't highest in the nation
like some people tried to claim
for alcohol, um, taxes. We have
not kept up with inflation and
so that is the whole motivation,
um, to, you know, find a way to
get that in with the sales tax
it will, um, you know, increases
the products go up in price, so.
that way it's kind of built in
that we won't have to come back
and do this all the time.
Madam Chair, if I can, I have
one follow-up question on that.
Um,
when we're taxing tobacco and
when we're taxing cannabis, how
is it that we're taxing them? So
if they have higher, higher, um,
taxes are we taxing them?
um, in excise tax, sales tax,
both how does
I guess how does the
distribution work?
I am not sure. I think, well,
tobacco is at sales as a sales
tax, and cannabis, I believe,
also is a a sales tax that is
increasing
from 12%.
up to I believe 18%.
So 1515 now, is it?
it
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Chavez. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I, I have a
few questions. Um, and I think.
was particularly interested in
what Ms. Martinez, um, talked
about, um, so one of my
questions is, you said that you
had 19,000 admissions, 10,000
were brought in under the detox
detoxification reform.
So are those all from McKinley
County?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, Senator, our
Representative Chavez, OK, and,
and do you have a demographic,
um,
yeah, they're based in McKinley
County, but because this is a
border town, you will see a lot
of people from Arizona, um,
coming up from ZUI to do their
shopping here or to
because this is an economic base
in some sense to, to, to all our
reservations, um, and we also
have the same thing
with the Farmington area, so I
wouldn't really say they're all
from McKinley County, but that's
where the services are. OK,
that's helpful to know. So do
you, do you keep, um, sort of a
demographic breakdown in terms
of um
race, gender, ethnicity, age,
and then now that you uh
mentioned sort of geographic
location? Do you keep that data?
Madam Chair members of the
committee? Yes, and, um.
Senator Pinto is correct in
saying it's where we pick them
up so they could be picked up
anywhere in the McKinley County,
but like she stated they're not
necessarily from New Mexico,
from our county, um, when we
last looked at it, um, a
majority were from the county
and about 1/3, but I can get the
data for you, um, are from
Arizona. We do do the expert
screening when they are
discharged, and we do that every
6 months.
and a lot of that data is
showing that people are from
Arizona, so we're having to work
with Arizona Access, so we're
looking at collaborating with
Navajo Nation because they are
opening uh treatments, a 90 day
treatment center in Phoenix to
get those people, um, some
services, OK, and then, um, to
follow up on that, so in terms
of treatment,
if they're from New Mexico,
where do they, what's available
to them?
Madam chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we have various
resources. It just depends on
what they're interested in. We
created a case management Google
Drive, which has a lot of the
programs and services, um,
available. We do have 4 Corners
detox and we are working with
them if they're interested in
going here to the detox or to
the 30 day residential treatment
center.
and then Madam Chair, um, the
next question that I have is, do
you provide um
either your program, does your
program provide therapy, sort of
looking at a family sys or
taking a family systems
approach? Do you refer them out
to other organizations that
might provide that kind of
therapy.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we're still trying to
build
our our systems of care, um,
most of our individuals are
male, um, single, um, so we do
work with them in that aspect,
um, whatever the client needs,
but these are, are individuals
on the street, so there's a lot,
a lot more services that are
needed, a lot more case
management, intensive, um,
resources that are needed within
our community and this tax would
help. That's why this tax is
beneficial. It looks more at
prevention as well.
instead of us waiting until some
of these individuals have been
drinking longer than I've been
alive, so there's a a lot of
a lot of issues that we're
working with. So what kind of
housing supports do you have?
What kind of housing supports
are available to you that you
can
place to say someone who's
unhoused drinking on the street,
where, where can they, can they
go? Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we do have a shelter
within the detox that people are
allowed to stay in
but one of the programs that was
providing housing was recently
cut, um.
so we are really trying to
figure out where that transition
of housing, once they go to
treatment, kind of that step
down and sober living. We have
been working with, um,
facilities in Albuquerque with
sober living, so that's, that's
our next best resource, but
transportation is an issue. When
one example Representative Madam
Chair is uh Four Corners detoxs
right now they're located in a
former juvenile detention
center.
So, um, or I wouldn't even say
it's a center. It was a juvenile
detention facility, more like a
jail aspect. So, um, but other
than that, those are for just
individuals, no family, um.
units or anything as far as um
when you talked about
gender or anything like that,
it's just strictly
So just following up on that,
are there any Madam Chair, um,
plans in the county to sort of
build any housing, so permanent
housing for people.
um, affordable, permanent
housing is, are there any plans
for that?
that you know of
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, there is, um, some
land that has been discussed
with the Las Cruces provider,
but no plans have been um
gone further than that.
And then my last question is,
um, so you said that you
increased the excise tax from 5%
to 6%, so I sort of have two
questions.
Did you see or were you able to
like track any kind of a
decrease in the amount that
people were drinking, um, and
then what would you recommend in
terms of, you know, an amount to
increase that might have to
increase the tax by that might
have an impact on.
um
stopping folks from being able
to buy. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, we were looking
at that data and we continue to
look at it. Um, COVID happened
and that really put a wrench in
some of the resources. We did
see a decrease when we did have
that COVID funding because we
were able to, um, uh, house
people in the motels. So we did
see the 38% decrease that was
reported by Department of
Health.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Madam, Madam Chair.
May I, on that point? Yes, not
on that point though, because I
had a caucus chair once. She
said that never happens, so.
um, the, uh, I just wanted to
let you know that about 3 weeks
ago, we had a bridge ribbon
cutting ceremony on I-40 and
566, and the governor was here.
So we toured, we took her to
Four Corners detox and uh she
toured the facilities and she
spoke to the director, uh, Mara,
gave us a nice tour and spoke to
staff and
um saw the entire facility, so,
um she may assist us some way,
somehow, um, so that was a good,
a good day for us. Just wanted
to add that note.
So, Senator Charlie, in mid by
I'm, I'm, I'm practicing to be a
waitress.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters. This is
the 2nd time, um, I've had the
pleasure of hearing this
presentation. We heard it at
Indiana Affairs Committee
earlier that last month.
Earlier.
Um
and
there was just something about
slide 8 that I couldn't let go
of in my body. And I've have had
time to think about it and
wanted to address that point. Um
so I appreciate the opportunity
to, to be able to readdress
this. Um, so the report
highlights that natives consume
less alcohol than other
populations. Yet we carry the
highest burden of
alcohol-related deaths.
And that truth matters, but I do
take issue with how the fact is
being used here. Without
context, it risks turning native
suffering into a data point to
advance an agenda rather than
call to rather than call to
address the actual root causes,
the historical trauma, um
that has led our our population
to use this substance.
Um,
disparity, the disparity is not
about individual consumption. It
is about historical trauma.
Chronic underfunding of our
healthcare systems, inadequate
housing jobs and care.
The report highlights native
harms but fails to center tribal
sovereignty, culturally grounded
healing and tribally led
solutions. It perpetuates the
same pattern of extraction,
using native pain to justify
state policy. Without investing
in the communities that are most
impacted.
So while I support the increase
and want to help shift this
narrative, um, because too many
families, including my own, have
been buried from cirrhosis. It
is, it is not beyond the reality
of my own life. Um, but I can't
support normalizing the use of
people's pain.
as justification
If we center this data, let's
center the dignity of our people
and ensure
it comes from the solutions come
from the communities that are
most impacted.
So I have two questions, Madam
Chair. How are we ensuring that
this data is not weaponized, but
instead drives real tribally led
investments and solutions that
address the root causes of the
historical trauma that our
communities are grappling with.
And then the second is around
tax structure. What percentage
of this tax will come to the
counties with the high
population of Native American
people, and what percentage of
the tax is proposed to go
directly to tribally led
initiatives. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator Charlie
There is a, um,
what do they try to do a, a
formula too that the DWI, I
believe, task force already had
um developed, but to more
formalize it to those, to target
those entities that need it. Um,
and then the, um, fund also, um,
with what was um
drafted headlines in there that
it would, whatever the tribal
communities would be received.
That is up to them to deal with,
that there will be some
flexibility, a lot of
flexibility for them to address
it in their own ways and more
funding than they have had in
the past to address this
particular issue. So whether it
want they want to use it in the
the young the youth or in their
their facilities and um that is
really really left up to them in
the very broad, but it was
specific that they would receive
part of that funding and the um,
well, the numbers there, I think
it's, it's one of the facts that
um
the data plane and
we know the sensitivity of our
tribes, nations, and pueblos,
and we know the history. I think
anybody that's sitting here, um,
who's very familiar with the
history of what, um, how it was
introduced to our people, so it
is um
depending on who, who you talk
to in that sense is very, um,
I think that's one of the things
too, when we try to do trainings
and making sure and assuring
that the people in those fields,
the people that provide those
services should have that
training and um
that that's just, but it is also
a hurdle for us to, to have that
incorporated within our state
personnel and with them, those
that work within our tribal
communities to make sure that
training too is
comes from our people, that
they, they understand that and
put that forward that it's not
somebody else building that, so
it's, it's another issue on the
uh on that side to educate those
that are not educated about it,
but thank you, thank you,
Senator Charlie, for bringing it
up. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And just
on that point until the first
question, um, I would like to
work with you on reframing this
because I think there is a way
to do it that is grounded in
dignity and humanity, um, and
that is what I want for my
community. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. And if you could
briefly, and I know there were
probably 30 iterations of this
bill as it went through this
past session. Just briefly talk
about where the money from the
increased taxes was going to go,
um, either at how it ended up
finally where you started out
just to give the committee and
the public some idea of, of the
direction you were going and how
to spend the extra, um, funds
that came in.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, as
we were, um, projecting, um, 150
to $200 million at the 6%, um,
we were, we had uh a formula
that um was very complex, but it
took into account as Senator
Pinto was saying the community
and um the uh enormity of the
problem.
and um the uh we wanted to keep
the um local DWI groups whole,
and, um, possibly in double what
they were getting and then as
other funding, uh, with, um,
the
surtax itself, uh, would go to
different programs, um
such as for Medicaid, for
behavioral health, uh, uh,
shoring up in which we're really
going to need now. So we need
this, uh, more than ever, uh,
for a lot of the programs that
might see cuts. And then also a
special as it um kind of got
reduced. We were going to make
sure that at least 50 million
was going to go to um, uh, the
tribal, um
uh
coalition, um, I'm trying to
remember the
uh, you know, it's just been
but for tribal, um, programs
that um
need um
to be expanded or, you know,
just to be started.
So, um
you know, with all respect, you
know, we are, we know that those
are
just numbers, they're people and
that we do recognize that um
there is this paradox of harm
that isn't.
you know, uh, there to the
people of our, you know,
communities and that that's why
we were looking to be sure that
the funding went to programs,
um, such as what are already
here in, uh, Gallup area, the
four corners and the um other um
detox facilities that we are
able to help target the funding
where it will be the most useful
and um helpful
to our state and we recognize,
you know, that.
um, you know, on page
I don't know if you saw it, but
the very next page of
10, where we do recognize the
structural violence and the
intergenerational trauma, the
historical trauma and the social
determinants of health that are,
um, seen by uh Native American
and Hispanic, uh, groups.
in our state
and we appreciate your offering
to help with.
you know.
conveying that, you know, as we
in our bill
uh, uh, Senator Charlie.
Madam Vice Chair, do you have
questions? Just a comment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I always
have a comment, huh, um, and,
and I appreciate also that we
heard this in Indian affairs
when we were in Tahachi, um, and
we've heard it in committee
before too, um, and I want to
say thank you to both of you and
Senator Serio Lopez also for um
I call it bird dog in this
scene. Um
oh.
alcohol, I know many consume.
different levels, whatever it
may be, because it's a pastime
that we have in our country.
um
there's always the history that
comes behind Madam Chair,
prohibition and what that did.
when you
I mean, there's just history. I
won't go into what my other
comment was going to be. Um, but
Madam Chair, on, on page 2
2 I believe this is.
if I'm correct anyway, um
there's uh New Mexico Department
of Health recommendation.
recommendations
And of course, um, some of the
things that can be done is
increase alcohol taxes, which we
know does have as a chairwoman
did mention we've heard this in
tobacco settlement. I've been on
that committee for a number of
years also as the chairwoman.
Um, increasing a cost does have
an effect, especially on our
young people.
And I think that is part of the
directive of what we're trying
to do too is looking as to how
we can change the trajectory of
our young people.
because once you get your foot
in that door, it's hard to
change it.
We've had the same conversation
about vaping.
and how that too, um, opens the
door for the young people. Oh
yes, it doesn't have any, uh,
you know, effect on your lungs
while vaping is, I think, if not
worse than the actual cigarette
of what it has in it, the
carcinogens, and the same goes
with alcohol.
of how it destroys and what it
does and and as we are people
of, of um
uh,
how would I say, you know,
looking for different ways to
take care of the ills that we
feel, right? Depression,
anxiety, and all the other ways.
This is one of the easier
access, and Madam Chair, a few
years back we did change
um, those little tiny bottles
that we used to sell at the gas
stations. We did change that one
thing and it was like a big
thing. Um, I had suggested that
and we did put it into the bill
that was passed a few years
back.
But all it, I mean, it got rid
of that little tiny one, but
then they just, you know, the
next size up is the most um.
easy sell at the gas stations
now, so it's just you replace
one with the other
And Madam Chair, in the history
of our state, we close the
drive-up windows and I remember
that very clearly when we took
the vote and did that in the
legislature, but our gas
stations have become the next
drive-up liquor.
dispensary
I've seen it. We all see it, um,
in different communities, it's
not just an Indian country, but
it's everywhere. People go and
they walk out of the gas station
with like 26 packs or something.
That's, that's their next
place to purchase liquor
So Madam Chair, I think even
when we talk about driving drunk
we should stop selling liquor at
the gas stations. That's the
biggest moneymaker, that
maverick and everybody else has
in the state. You see it and
across the country anyway, but
talking about New Mexico, I'm
putting gas yesterday when I got
into Albuquerque, sitting there,
standing there putting gas. I
saw people walk in and walking
out with both arms carrying
booze, beer.
and what does that not do for
our young people to see more and
more, right? Adults purchasing,
walking out with that, getting
into your car, maybe they popped
one as they're driving off.
So, Madam Chair, this is, it's
an issue that we do have, um.
with all these different
pleasure items that we have. I
don't know what you want to call
it.
but
um
I, I really believe that
we need to take a stand and
taxes, I think it's fine. So
we're increasing the cost of a
drink.
Big deal
If you wanted it that bad, you
don't need alcohol to survive.
It's not a necessary like, you
know, food, you know, fruit, all
the basics that we need.
For those who don't have a
problem, you know, being um an
alcoholic.
Big deal. So you pay 25 cents
more. What's that going to be on
your pocketbook?
But it may have, Madam Chair, in
effect in other communities,
especially for the young people,
is where my concern is too, as
to how we offset their access
and what um the the information
is there. It's the same kind of
basic information for tobacco.
I think it has the same width
and can have the same effect
with regards if um we finally
get
a bill that increases statewide
the cost of purchasing alcohol.
And last but not least, Madam
Chair, um, I said I always have
many comments. I remember when
we had a debate on the Senate
floor when we allowed, um, you
know, wine to be sold.
at restaurants and we changed
the time frame.
of when we could sell uh wine on
Sundays.
That was a big, you know,
discussion, but once you open
the door for other sales,
everything opens wide, and then
we land up with the problem,
Madam Chair, that we're trying
to deal with at this point in
time.
Um
it's, it's, uh
it's how we regulate the sins,
the pleasure sins, purchases of
all these different items which
are big moneymakers and of
course, it hurts the economy, of
course, that's the argument that
goes back, but to build our
economy on these um items that
hurt our people, that cause and
have after effects as we grow
older.
Um, I think that's, you know,
another big conversation to
have, that we should be having
it every year, every session,
because that's, it's the truth,
it's what makes a difference in
our communities. Thank you.
Thank you. And I just, I think I
just have a few comments. So,
um, on slide 7, it's
shocking actually that, um,
excessive alcohol. In 2010, so
who knows what it is in 2025,
um, that excessive alcohol
consumption costs New Mexico 2.2
billion.
And when our state budget is
somewhere around maybe 11
billion, and it's kind of
shocking that
that that's 20%. Um, adjusting
for inflation, 3.1 billion in
2023, or $3.93 per standard
drink. So if we look at
making changes, improving the
situation, the return on
investment is going to be there.
I mean, we, it's, it could be
multiple, multiple times what we
invest, um, so it seems like a
no brainer to me, and I will
say, um
Madam, Madam Chair and Madam
Vice Chair from Indian Affairs.
We were here last month. We met
in Pinedale, and there is what
used to be a gas station on the,
and it's kind of out in the
boonies, um, there aren't a lot
of shopping opportunities
around, and that gas station
stopped selling gas because they
could make more money selling
alcohol. And so this, these
communities for lack of a better
word, more like settlements
really. um
now have to go further for gas
because it was, it's more
lucrative to sell alcohol than
it is to sell gas, and we need
to consider those kind of things
too that we are making it harder
for folks to, um
to get gas to get groceries. I
mean this, this place sells, it
looks like it sells alcohol and
ice, um, and, uh, there, there
isn't another store for what?
30 miles maybe
And if you're low on gas, 30
miles can be, can be far. So, I,
I, I want to thank you, um, and
your, your partners, um, Senator
Cedillo Lopez, in particular,
for your stubbornness or
dedication or stick to
itiveness, whichever, whichever
verb you, whichever word you
prefer, um, and, uh, please know
that I'm in the fight with you,
um, as are a lot of members of
this committee and, um
hopefully we'll get it done one
day. Thank you for the
presentation and um
and with that, thank you so
much. We will, yeah, we will go
to public comment. We are a
little bit ahead of schedule,
which is so unusual. 2 days in a
row. Oh, Senator Pinto, I
shouldn't have said we had more
time, I'll say, oh, OK, um,
thank you about that comment
about the return on investment
because I think there's been a
push about crime and increasing
this and you put more people in
jail, that will deplete most of
our area's revenue
ue um, trying to do that versus
trying to tackle it on the front
end. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Could I just add, it also will
help reduce crime, you know,
with alcohol involved, um, gun
violence and sexual assaults and
all the other things, um, we can
make a big impact. So thank you,
and I'd like to thank again, uh,
the Gallup alcohol reforms.
Thank you, and there are many
things that alcohol contributes
to a risky behaviors which
result in sexually transmitted
infections, unintended
pregnancies, domestic violence,
child abuse, the list
could be, could go on forever
and we're looking, we're kind of
looking at
pie in the skyways to attack
these things and to decrease the
incidence and alco alco
decreasing alcohol use will
suicide. I mean, there's just
any any of the bad things that
we are trying to reduce
almost all of them, if not all
of them, have some sort of a, an
alcohol related, um,
causation or effect. So thank
you so much. We will go to
public comment. We do have 2
people in the room, so we have
Mary Feldblum and Lynn
Heneman
I, I knew that, that you was
silent, but I couldn't remember.
So Mary go if and after those
two if you would like to come
forward, if, even if you haven't
signed up, we have plenty of
time. So, so we, I will be
generous today and give you 4
minutes.
Oh yes, and if you are on Zoom
and would like to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
We will hear from the people in
the room and then we will hear
from the folks on Zoom.
Go ahead, Mary. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm really going to
speak to you today as a social
scientist, someone who has been
working on healthcare reform and
cost issues for all too many
years. I don't know if you saw
the Albuquerque editorial, uh,
in July that said New Mexico is
facing a time bomb, and leaders
must address it. Now, it seems
overwhelming all the areas that
you have to address and Madam
Chair, you have consistently
said we need a roadmap. And what
is clear that in this roadmap,
if you don't address the
systemic reasons why costs are
rising
Um, you're not gonna solve the
problem. There are many other
short-term solutions that you
can consider, and that's why you
need a roadmap, but your billing
and accountability is just one
piece of this big problem. And,
and that's part of this puzzle.
Hospital costs, for example, are
not only due to billing and
absence of payment and all that
what you heard today, but it,
they, they also are connected to
drug prices. They're also
connected to a terrible IT
systems that lead to
inefficiencies, um, and, and so
we could go on and on, um, and
what both Dorothy Muller in her
drug presentation, and you will
hear from others say, if you,
you have to see these solutions
as interconnected. They cannot
be siloed. Um, and, uh, so what
you can do this coming session,
uh, and the next session is
figure out what in your roadmap
you could pass here and now. For
example, prior authorization.
New Jersey has the strongest
bill in the nation. They do not
have, uh, gold cards. There are,
there are states that are not
piecemealing this. They're doing
something holistic that so it
would be great if you all could
get that on the call and
introduce something like that,
it would energize the public
and, and medical professionals.
There are other solutions as
well, um, so what, what you
really need to do is address the
intermediate situations that you
can do, but the more complicated
problems such as lowering drug
prices, how to do that, such as
hospital budgets with CMS is
recommending that more states do
what Maryland has done, but
smother it in green and red
chili is what we would have to
do it. Um, and, um, and many
states like, uh, North Dakota,
uh, Minnesota, and Ohio recently
are
their, their rural hospitals are
joining co-ops to share
resources because they do not
want to, to lose their
independence.
And, and, uh, there's
information about that that you
need to hear about, and that's
why funding for this project is
critical. Um, and, and I also
urge you to consider that having
Dorothy Muller and, um, and the
Center for Social Policy and
some future, uh, presentations
go before legislative finance
Committee, because I don't think
there are, um, there's
knowledgeable as you about these
issues and to understand
that investment, this is an
investment in dealing with the
sources of rising healthcare
costs, is that an investment
well worth doing for the state
of New Mexico. We have to, and
as the Albuquerque Journal says,
you, you know, the legislature
has to do this. So that's all
I'm going to say. I hope I've,
I'm gonna do the 4 minutes.
And I'd also be willing to
present an ideas for a roadmap,
uh, at a future, you know,
having a little bit more than 4
minutes. Thanks. Thank you,
Mary. Um, Lynn
thank you again. 2nd day, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Good morning.
Y Bena
I want to follow up on the
comments from yesterday with
just a couple footnotes, and I
sort of touched on two topics,
and one had to do with so kind
of shifting gears here, but one
had to do with mobile home parks
and uh we happened to have a
residents meeting yesterday
evening, and I wanted to share a
comment that one of the persons
who's resident Redhill Park
mentioned
and it had to do with thinking
that the owner who lives in
Florida doesn't do much to keep
up the park. Now it's not dirty
or anything, there's staff that
go around every day and pick up
things and so on. But like we
used, there used to be a
a tenant, not 10,
uh, I think volleyball court
there, it's totally gone. They
haven't restored it, uh, things
like that. And the comment was
that
they do minimal maintenance or
development because with the
affordable housing shortage,
they don't have to do much cause
they're going to have the park
full.
because people are looking for
places, and so that shortage
affects how much they put into
it. And meanwhile, when we
talked about trying to get a cap
on how much rent can be
increased.
Share a couple of figures with
you.
If you figure about a $400 a
month rent average it varies
double wides or.
lots are more than single wides
and so on.
If and when I said that they
raised the rent 10% the last two
years, each of the last two
years.
But if you add that
and 429 units in the park, uh,
that comes up to $2,265,000 and
they were well over $2 million
is there
revenue from that
If there were a cap that limited
the increase just to 3%, saying,
OK, you can do handle inflation.
The total revenue would still be
over 2 million. Now, obviously
there's, there's expenses for
upkeep. There's taxes, there can
be land tax, there can be
corporate taxes, and so on, but
we're talking about um
you know, some kind, some range
of over $2 million that the
company receives. So when we're
talking about trying to keep a
rent
cap, we're not asking them to
suffer, OK, so I just wanted to
point that out in terms of um
uh
trying to get legislation that
will put some kind of limit on
how much they can increase the
rent each year.
The other thing I talked a
little about yesterday, which
has some overlap, but it's also
distinct topic and, and uh ties
in with what we just heard.
The, the matter of homeless and
unhoused people in gallop and uh
how that relates to sometimes
the lack of affordable housing
and so on. I just wanted to
mention that
there are over 65.
programs, organizations,
services in Gallup.
that interact with homeless
unhoused people.
and we're not a city
We're just a town, a little over
20,000 people.
but there's over 65 different
programs and services that
interact with and that ranges
everything from police who
interact in one way, to private
mental health counselors to
shelters, to food programs, and
I, I, uh, I'll give a, a few of
you I don't have copies for
everybody I was going to run
some more this morning and my
printer ran out of ink, but I'll
give a copy of that draft list.
It's not perfect. It's not quite
complete, but I'll give it to
Madam Chair and to a
couple of people here who are
closer to Gallup, um, but they,
the thing is
we've got people making valiant
efforts to deal with the
homeless, with the substance use
thing and now it's trying to
adjust to younger people and
fentanyl, but overall the
problem's still here and it
doesn't seem to go down. And so
what I say to the committee is
just keep, keep on it, keep
paying attention, keep educating
because there's so many factors,
uh, when it comes to the state,
sometimes there's a need for
funding for programs.
Sometimes there's a need for
regulations and laws and like
you mentioned, even on the local
level, if you increase the price
of alcohol, does that
statistically, it usually leads
to some reduction in
consumption.
um, and then looking at the
historical factors, historical
trauma. What's what goes into
these, these situations, um,
historically, most of the
homeless street people in Gallop
or Navajo with Ritz in the
reservation. Well, there's
another factor there, and that's
been historically ineffective
education.
Our educational systems have not
been adapted culturally to, to
be effective at times. That's
times, sir. Thank you so much.
And, and we, we will, we can
have Xander, um, get that, get
that handout to, to all the
committee members, including the
ones who, who are not currently
present. So thank you for your
time and I believe there was
someone, yes, go ahead and come
up and introduce yourself.
um
and you push the person to turn
the mic on.
There you go. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chairman, and a committee
members, uh, my name is Patricia
Sheeley. I live here in Gallup.
I'm an elder. I'm on Medicare.
Uh, I'm a retired dietitian, so
I have a little bit of, uh,
experience with the medical
system and the and the, uh,
oh, I forget the word, where you
have to decide what you're
billing for and stuff. Uh, so I
have many concerns and listening
to you was, was helpful and
brought things to mind. I'm
really concerned that different
insurance companies make
contracts with hospitals, so
your insurance company may pay a
different amount than my
insurance company and I, if I
come back and I don't have any
insurance, I probably pay way,
way more
So that's one concern. The other
concern is these pharmacy
benefit managers, which I think
are increasing the price of
drugs, but another concern that
I think is even more of a
concern to me is the, uh,
private equity. OK, and I think
representative and I isn't is
right. We can't just say you
can't be here. But, but can we
find out what they are doing
My understanding of, of private
equity is they come in and they
suck money out because they want
to make money and this isn't not
really old thing that happened,
but the Sears stores, private
equity bought that and then they
managed to sell the store.
you know, to make money on it.
And then this the what's left
has to pay rent
They must be doing the same
thing. So I would ask you to
find out, do a little study of
what, what is happening. Maybe
they're doing good and we can
say, yeah, come in, we like you.
But I don't want them to come to
Rehoboth right now
I'm, I'd really be concerned. So
thank you very much.
Thank you and just, just kind of
as a, a follow-up, um,
yeah, that we do know that, that
private equity is there to make
money, um, venture capital,
whatever, um, and, and they
frequently do come in and they,
they
um, sell the or sell some of the
sell off some of the, you know,
the, the CT scan machine or
whatever, they squeeze the money
out and then they desert, and
then we have, we have hospitals
who can no longer make it. And,
and I will say, um, talk about
layers of opacity
It's really hard to get to the
bottom of all of that. We are
trying and the whole country, I
think, you know, is trying, but,
um, they have many more lawyers
than we do, and many more layers
of, of non-transparency. I did
have a bill this year, um, for
hospitals to have to publish the
price for certain um
procedures, you know, you need a
total knee, you can shop around,
uh, uh, as opposed to, you know,
you need an emergency
appendectomy, you kind of have
to go, but if you need a total
knee, I wanted to be able to
follow in Colorado and I believe
Ohio's leads where hospitals
have to publish a, you know,
we'd have a list of 150
procedures where they have to
publish what they charge for
that, so patients would have at
least that capability to price
shop.
Madam Chair, may I make another
comment briefly, um
I think we need to find out how
they are changing, uh, services.
Uh, we had a, a really good, uh,
veterinary service here in
Gallup with 4 veterinarians and
had has been bought, which I
think by a private equity there
is now one, so most of us are
having to go to Milan, uh, with
our animals services are just
decreased. That, that is a
common occurrence, as, as the
study showed, you know, 11, I
think it was a physician, one
provider said if private equ
ity buys them out, they're, they
are leaving. And we, we see that
that happens very frequently. So
thank you for that. Um, anyone
else in the room who wants to
make a public comment?
Oh, OK, come on up.
and you have 4 minutes. Please
introduce yourself.
Great. Uh, I, I, uh, Madam Chair
and other members of the
committee, uh, thank you very
much. My name is Paul Charlton.
I'm an emergency medicine
physician. Uh, I live and work
here, here in Gallup. Um, I've
been here for the last 7 years.
And um it made time to to swing
by today, um, out of the
hospital, just to let you know
that I have been seeing some
noticeable changes over the last
couple of years, uh, with
different types of conditions
that are presenting here more
related to extreme heat, and
then issues, issues with
flooding
I mean I do realize that it's
not up to the government to
solve all of the problems that
that we experience and that's
part of the joys of, of being a
a physician is being able to
work with people during
difficult circumstances, but I
did want to put it on the um on
the committee's radar that we
are noticing some pretty
significant changes um around
the, the way that um weather
environments and and our climate
is shifting.
And it's no longer something
that um people's health is able
to to be entirely removed from.
The um so specifically noticing
more kids that are coming into
the emergency department, um,
experiencing heat illness. Um,
we've at the hospital that I
work at, we've had to close down
certain parts of the hospital
due to overheating. We have had
a multi-month uh disruption in
our supply chain due to flooding
events that took place in other
parts of the country in North
Carolina.
um, as well as issues with our
own staff members being able to
come to work. Um, this is
becoming more frequent. It's
becoming more severe. The, the
primary reason of flagging it is
because as a health focused, um,
you know, arm of the of the
state government, um, or the
legislative branch, the to to be
aware that there may be some
opportunities to, um, one, see
this as a health issue, um,
rather than purely an
environmental issue.
And to recognize that New Mexico
has a profile of certain
categories and certain
communities of people being a
little bit higher risk as these
changes continue to take place.
Um, the other thing I think
would be to be aware of some of
the innovations that is
happening and are happening in
Arizona, um, especially around
extreme heat, and many of those
are being conducted at a state
level, and they may be models
that New Mexico will want to
follow in future years.
And it's something that we
continue to watch closely. Um,
and then finally, thank you for
all the other support that
you're already giving our
community so that we can keep
New Mexico a very livable, um,
wonderful place. That is the
reason that so many of us are
really proud to to live here and
work here, um, and thank you all
for your service. Um, I'm sure
you don't get thanked enough,
um, and I'm sure this is a
pretty tough job. So, so thank
you very much for being here in
Gallop as well to hear comments.
Thank you. And just as an aside,
I will say that, um, Charles
Goodmacher, I can't remember the
name of his. Does anybody
remember the name of his. He's
really working on, um,
cli heat, heat and workers uh
that, you know, getting air
conditioners in buses and making
sure that outdoor workers have
breaks and shade and water and,
and so, um, if you haven't
gotten contacted by Charles, I'm
guessing you will. Um, so, so
there is someone in the state
who is really pushing forward on
heat-related issues.
Yeah, there have been several of
us, including many of us from
Gallup, they've been working
with Healthy Climate in New
Mexico, and not non nonpartisan
organization just trying to
offer a health voice as we try
to tackle these hard, hard
challenges.
Thank you. And yeah, and just, I
mean, a lot of places in more
northern New Mexico have no
swamp coolers or air
conditioning because it, they
didn't need them until recently
and you know, you think about
Hogans, um,
chances are good, there's not a
lot of shade around and, and
they don't have electricity, a
lot of them, and, um, so it's
gonna be a, you know, a really
major issue, particularly, I
mean, everywhere, but rural
areas, maybe even more so.
Representative Ferro, thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I, uh, know of
a person in Department of Health
who is, you know, working
specifically on heat, um, and
health issues. We might have
her, uh, come and present to us.
OK, we will go to Zoom. First,
we have Mike McMillan and Mike,
you have 4 minutes.
Hello, thank you, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee
I really appreciated the
presentation, uh, from you and
him, uh, this morning, and
highlighted many of the uh
burdens with the medical claims
and the billing system.
This highlight this study
highlighted many of the things
that healthcare providers and
medical clinics have been
dealing with for many years, and
I, and I want to thank the
Legislative council Service for
uh commissioning that study and
hope that um we can commission,
commission a study on um some
solutions, um, a couple of
solutions that that were
presented or talked a little bit
about, discussed this morning
that I think would, would help
would be um
the prior authorizations, prior
authorizations have become a
huge burden to providing care to
our patients
Um, anything we can do to
streamline that process would be
helpful. Um, also on, uh,
payment recruitments, uh, payers
seem to have almost an unlimited
time frame, many years going
back 1 or 2 years, and saying,
you know, when you treated this
patient a year and a half ago,
we don't think um it was paid
correctly, so we're going to
recoup that payment
um, and they'll either demand
that we repay the money, and if
we don't, they just take it from
reimbursement from a current
patient.
Um, so that's another area, uh,
providers are limited to 90 days
to.
uh provide a uh submitted a
claim for patient care. I
believe our, our payers should
be limited to 90 days, just, you
know, determine if
uh a payment they believe was
made inaccurately.
Um
the other issue is, I think the,
the elephant in the room is a
medical malpractice. We need to
reform to medical malpractice.
Um, this is not only a cost
issue for uh
current physicians practicing in
the state, but it's also a
recruitment issue. Many of our
physicians, um, um, in the
clinic I work at, are gonna be
retiring in the next 5 years. We
don't have the physicians
to replace them and recruitment,
um
is a primary issue in medical
malpractice, I think is the the
issue behind a lot of that.
Um.
also just, uh.
something that we, we heard, you
all heard yesterday from
Secretary Armijo very concerning
is our federal Medicaid funding.
is gonna be slashed, and it's,
it's
very concerning because we just
got reimbursement rates for
Medicaid increased.
cutting those back
although necessary if we lose
that federal funding, it's gonna
be very detrimental to our our
providers in New Mexico and
especially our, our rural
providers.
Um, so we need to, um
be looking at that. I know the
legislature, the state's looking
at that, but anything we can do
to avoid reducing
um Medicaid reimbursements.
uh, would be greatly appreciated
with the looming federal cuts.
Appreciate everything you do,
uh, for our state, and
appreciate the time for the
comments. Thank you.
Thank you. And, and I would ask,
we are looking for data around,
um, insurance
medical malpractice insurance
costs and increases. So any
information, any data, any, um,
any of your costs. If you could
share them with Xander, who is
our lead, um, staffer, uh, that
would be wonderful. We are
trying to figure out what's
going on, um, but we just don't
have the data and so if
providers can provide us with
their, their insurance quotes,
um, what the costs were last
year, what they are this
year, what they were 10 years,
any, any kind of data that can
help us look at patterns and
figure out where things are
going on, would be most helpful
for us. So thank you. And next
we will go to Karen Kushner.
Madam Chair, members of the
room, thank you so much for
allowing me um to comment. I
just had a couple comments about
your billing, um, person this
morning from UNM. I would like
to say that I was in billing and
collections as a practice
management person for over 30
years. Um, I was in Northeast
Ohio, large hospital groups, and
I can say that, you know, even
way back then, in the 90s and
early 2000s
the electronic health records
when they are first coming out,
also made provisions so that
there was crossover to billing,
um, that, you know, the, the
billing would help code the
billing uh with electronically
send claims. We would
electronically get those
payments back. We would also be
able to verify insurance on a
patient 48 hours before they
arrived, as long as we have that
information. And we could also
we had a list with every single
insurance payer of who needed a
prior authorization for what and
how long it would take, as well
as people to talk to about it.
I understand this is a different
world. New Mexico is a different
place. Um, but even when I came
here and was approached to work,
um, at our biggest hospital
institution, I was quoted that
they were only collecting 30% of
their billables in their
accounts receivable, which is
unheard of in any kind of
practice management. Um
so I, I would also like to say
that UNMH negotiates their rates
directly with Blue Cross Blue
Shield as someone who's covered
under UNMH and Blue Cross Blue
Shield. I can tell you that
every year we get a schedule of
what's changed, how much more
our deductibles are, how much
more our copays are, but they
are directly negotiating. So
when you call the insurance
company, they tell you to call
back and talk to the HR
department. So it, it seems like
it's a circular conversation
that
you know, maybe there needs to
be more input there. I'm not,
I'm not really sure. I don't
know what the solution is. The
other part of a conversation
that I didn't hear in this um
study was what people with
disabilities go through trying
to find a provider and how so
many providers now, as has been
pointed out, they have to do so
much verification, they have to
do so much documentation, you
add a person with a disability
or a ch
ron ic health condition in
there. We don't often get the
time we should with providers.
Um, I've heard this from many
people. I know it's true in my
own life, and I'm still to this
day having a problem getting an
appointment with a neurologist
in this state, going on 5.5
years now of my disability and
people who don't work with it
and they just don't want to deal
with it.
Um, and then the last thing I'd
like to say is it would be nice
if Troy Clark from the New
Mexico Hospital Association
could come and give a
presentation to this committee
because so many people do keep
tabs on this committee and
what's happening. He was one of
the few people that laid it out
succinctly of what New Mexico is
with our pair bases and how
we're completely upside down
from other states, and that's
why we have the problems we
have. That's why some of the
things that are are working in
Maryland or Vermont or, you
know,
Virginia don't work here because
we just don't have the private
payer base. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much. Um
great points. Uh, and
for those of you who don't know,
I have an adult son with severe
autism who lives in a group home
and um
I, I know far too well how hard
they he he had a broken tooth in
February of this year, and he
needs to go into the operating
room for dental work, the first
available appointment is
September of 2026. So more than
18 months with a toothache. So
tell me that we're being humane
to people with disabilities. We
are not.
Um, and we'll just leave it at
that. We have one more um
one more, uh, person on Zoom,
Davina Norris.
So go ahead, Davina, and you
have 4 minutes.
Excellent
Let's see. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Debina Norris. I'm a
pharmacist and pharmacist
clinician. Uh, originally from a
small rural town of Cliff, New
Mexico, and I currently practice
in Las Cruces, New Mexico. Um, I
have worked with a family
medicine residency program with
multiple family physicians and
other health professionals. I
wanted to comment regarding the
presentation on the analysis of
the billing and coding system.
Um, I appreciate, uh,
representative
s Thompson and, and Chavez for
um the contributions that made
this possible because I think
it's very important. I believe
that this report really shows
what many of us that work in
healthcare kind of already know
and that that is that the
administrative burden of our
current healthcare system is, is
very problematic. Um, I think a
big thing is that the time
that's spent doing these things,
um is time taken away from more
importance
um patient care activities, um,
which is, is worsening really
the um
or contributing to the, the
access problems that we have
within our state. Um, in terms
of next steps, I really don't
feel like we need additional
studies to show that this is a
problem. What I would like to
see is, you know, what are the
next steps in terms of
solutions. So
how can we simplify our billing
and coding system to reduce
this, this administrative
burden, um, and so I would like
to see kind of some more steps
related to that. I think another
thing that this presentation,
um, point or kind of highlights
for me are two things. One, it
raises really the question of
the utility of um private
insurance companies and calls
into question as to whether
or not they are positively
contributing um to the clinical
outcomes for our patients. And
then it also tells me that it is
time, um, or past time for New
Mexico to set up its own health
plan to ensure that all New
Mexico residents have
healthcare, and in doing so, if
we do this in a very thoughtful
manner, it would actually
address many of the concerns
presented in this report. Like,
for example,
um networks, it would eliminate
networks, which we know it can
be very burdensome to both
providers and patients. Um, and
then also if you're working with
predominantly one plan, um,
rather than multiple different
insurance companies with
different formularies and
different rules that also
simplifies the system
significantly.
The last thing that I wanted to
do was, I know this wasn't the
topic of the presentation but
was to real quickly comments um
on the comments related to
private equity control of
healthcare, and I would
encourage uh members of the
committee to think about this a
little bit differently. Um,
instead of making the statement
or asking the question of do we
need outside capital, um, in
order to ensure that our um
vulnerable hospitals and
healthcare facilities stay open.
I think instead we should be ask
ing what makes hospitals and
healthcare facilities at risk of
closing their doors and
vulnerable to takeover by
private equity firms and um how
do we implement solutions like
for example, um, evaluating
global budget systems. What a
global budget system help to
actually stabilize the revenue
for hospitals and decrease their
risk of, of um closing and being
vulnerable to private equity
firms take over, um, because we
know and we've um
the legislature, um,
legislative, uh, the court's
Corrections and Justice
Committee as well as finance,
um, presentations have shown
that private equity control of
healthcare facilities is
associated with worth
outcomes
Um, because that's my time.
Thank you all so much for
considering my, um,
and thank you everyone for your
public comment. It's uh
we hear you
not that we're going to solve
the problems. I wish, you know,
I wish all of our magic wands
would come out of the shop so we
could get this done, but we will
do the, the hard work to do the
best we can. And with that, we
are ready for lunch, so we will
come back at one o'clock for an
evaluation of university
workforce endowments by the LFC.
