All right good morning everybody
it's great to see folks
we're going to go ahead and ask
our presenters to come on up
and we'll get started.
We're gonna we'll go ahead and
start with brief committee
introductions starting with
senator share on my right
good morning i'm bill sharer
unstate senator from senator one
which is farming.
Good morning
in public and state center david
gave us from any analytic county
beautiful area nice.
Facility on my granddaughter
actually moved in to a dorm here
this is weekend some at least a
porting mexico state of blood
shell thank
good morning mr chairman
surfaced here that i'm senator
michael pavia represent the
southern portion of bernelio
county and senate district
fourteen also service the senate
majority web thank you and thank
you for having us our loss
christmas good morning mr chair
of course by his chair to the
members of the let's say to
finance committee uh
staff as they continue to go
into work eligible to ensure
that we have.
Okay alright
the state senator peak compose
representing all the protest
seven counties in northeast new
mexico but again it's great to
go ahead and be here and I
really want to go ahead and
thank the work of the people
here at the convention center
under the leadership of a little
league garcia uh who if you get
a chance to talk to him boy he
has a lot of great stories to go
ahead insurer and so that's what
it's all about how we build
relationships how we move
forward and as we listen to the
revenue outlook today
what that's going to be looking
like so again thank you very
much mister chair.
Good morning thank you for
letting us come down to new
mexico state and last crucials
we appreciate it's kind of my
old stopping grounds i'm
steveline error from district to
just down the road farming ten
astech about seven and a half
hours.
Thank you mr chair good morning
i'm senator in a call to buy a
send from district twenty one
northeast alva kirkin.
Good morning chairman.
Good to see this morning
thank you for having a meeting
and last crucials next to the
new mexico state university or
agriculture school home of our
department of agotion.
Are immerial from eastern new
mexico mode district gives
curriculum union and harding
uhm
I appreciate you have in this
year today and.
My name is pat woods thank you.
Morning chairman what's going to
introduce them as part words but
he did remember
uh good morning when i'm i'm
senator of any schendo senate
district twenty two from hamas
public.
Only mr chair i'm state rep joy
garrett uh west side of earlier
county now the kirky home
good morning mr chair good
morning fellow members I am show
audience members i'm sure that
little a represent house
district sixty eight which is in
northwest albuquerque thank you.
Hi good morning i'm
representative seriously the
house district fifty three
welcome to last crucials I
represent the estimates of last
crucial white sense must arrange
and check out
good morning everyone good
morning mister mark dunken I
represent someone county farming
can area thank you.
The.
Okay ours is working
good morning my name is derek
lentaken from sandy a public i'm
proud to represent district
sixty five in the house of
representative that includes
parts of rearieba county send
one county and said about county
good morning.
Good morning and everybody
representative jack chat field
northeastern core of the state
i'm a rancher up there I
represent coflex curry art in
quays and mcgail and union
counties.
The.
Good morning a and
representative married at dixon
from house district twenty in
southeast albuquerque.
Good morning everyone i'm george
mios I represent smaller mcness
and one county nice to be in a
place where it rings because of
those of us including senator
share and center linear and had
no rain in in the north west
corner of the state in it it's
the dryst i've ever seen it so
it was nice to see rain and it
was actually color here then it
wasn't in gallop new mexico
words fifty in the morning
already so thank you mister
chairman thank you mister
crucison and having this year
thank you very much thanks
everybody my name is nathan
small uh represent house test
for thirty six really excited to
see everybody here today
grateful for our staff and the
members are making it down
really excited we're going to
have some fairly full days so
we're going to dive in really
manage the time make sure every
of as we have questions to dive
into those if there's things
that were sort of run in a
little bit short on time since
we do have some travel uh in
business it'll be taken as
different places we want to make
sure that members are connected
offline to the experts in the
staff and with that we'll turn
over to the experts in the staff
uh great grateful for stuff
uh secretary sharon clark
securitary props and of course
our chief economist is my plates
we'll go over to you for
whatever order you want to go
thank you mr chairman members of
the committee is pleasure to be
here with you and I know you
have an ambitious agenda today
so I plan to be a little more
brief than typical going through
the macro economic slides and be
happy to stand for your
questions afterwards and the
executive slide dec i'll be
taking you through the macro
economy the US and in new mexico
new mexico macroeconomic outlook
and then some details on our
larger revenue sources like oil
and natural gas got personal
income tax and corporate income
tax before turning it over to
secretary props
just a reminder on slate three
the members of the consensus
revenue estimating group worked
very hard on this forecast as
always.
On top of the forecast they've
also been working on digesting
everything in the federal h r
one and making sure that to the
extent possible the impact of
that bill are also included in
the estimate I want to highlight
that the members of the dfa
tax and rav and lsc economist
teams are here just wave to the
to the group for very thinkful
for your contributions
ok onto slide number four will
talk a little bit about how the
baseline forecasts that we
subscribe to from moodies s and
p and u n spear of business and
economic research have shaped up
since the previous estimate that
you received are in december
twenty twenty four so starting
with moody's and the national
economy a US g p growth was
expected to have been one point
five percent in twenty twenty
five and flattening out to one
point three percent now in
twenty twenty six and growing a
little bit faster and twenty
twenty seven at one point seven
percent consumer spending
remains the primary driver
supporting us gdp growth with
federal government spending
coming down word and trade being
a netdrag on the US GDP growth
in the us labor market hiring as
slower but still positive and
unemployment is now expected to
rise towards for the four
percent mid four percent range
in twenty twenty five
the inflation forecast for money
is a slightly elevated over the
previous estimate the fed is
expected to hold fed from street
steady until september
just next month now with rate
cuts expected by moody is in
september in december twenty
twenty five uh they are
expecting a weekend economy and
weakening economic forecasts to
outway inflation concerns for
the coming months
tariffs the us effective
terrifrate is expected to peak
at eighteen percent using to
about thirteen percent in the
second half of twenty twenty
five uh compared to for for
reference the two percent
average effective terror freight
in the beginning of twenty
twenty five.
And to the snp is forecast and
they assume a little bit
different earned the uh the
actions of the fed they were
assuming the fed would hold
rates stable until december
twenty twenty five without a
rate cut in in september
and then proceed with three
consecutive rate cuts have have
a cumulative seventy five basis
points
similarly they assume national
duty p growth in twenty twenty
five at about one point four
percent down pretty
significantly from what was
expected of two point one
percent in october twenty twenty
four um
they're a similarly looking at a
national unemployment rate peak
of four point six percent in
twenty twenty seven and notably
the hr one federal bill is not
incorporated into s and p's
forecast but they're forecast
did and
assume that many of the
provisions that ended up and in
that bell would and then finally
unams beaber forecast
has new mexico unemployment
growth remaining pretty close to
what was estimated by being in
december twenty twenty fourth
forecast coming down from one
point one percent in the the uh
last year two point two percent
by so we got a real flattening
of the employment growth in new
mexico.
And then they're now expecting
unemployment to peak a little
sooner than before at four point
eight percent
in twenty twenty sixth
okay so that sort of sets the
stage rate we've talked about
the the major economic
indicators that have gone into
today's forecast
next I think it's helpful just
visually to look on flight five
and one um at how some of these
projections have changed since
the last estimate so I slide
five or go pretty quickly i'm
you can see if you compare the
harm the gray line is what we're
now expecting for a us gbp
growth compare that to the blue
dotted line that's what was
expected in in the last forecast
you can see that the expectation
for US GDP growth has called.
Next we look at the same data
unslate six but for the state of
new mexico and very similarly
following the national trend
were expecting slightly less
robust gdp growth in the state
gsp growth.
The.
Sunslade seven we can look at
the us um employment forecast
and again it's expected to be
just a little bit less robust
than in the previous forecast
non farm employment increase by
seventy three thousand and in
july twenty twenty five and
nationally you're you're today
average drive growth is about
eighty five thousand
the gains are centered primarily
in health services social
assistance retail trade and
financial activities but it is
showing signs of moderation the
trade war um internationally is
is weing pretty heavily on the
job market interest rates are
also dampening hiring decisions
and the private sector is more
cautious in its outlook
and slate eight will move to new
mexico's employment forecast and
in our case it actually exceeds
the previous desk estimate
somewhere.
Um employment gains averaged
about eighteen hundred jobs per
month in calendar year twenty
twenty five so far and i'm new
mexico has been adding about
just recently added twenty nine
hundred jobs in june twenty
twenty five employment group in
new mexico by one point five
percent in calendar year twenty
four and that is expected to
level off to just point one
percent employment growth and
calendar year twenty six and
level our flat growth no growth
and calendar year twenty seven
into i'm slay nine we've broken
down the recent year over your
employment growth by sector in
new mexico so over the last year
from june twenty twenty four to
june twenty twenty five new
mexico added seventeen thousand
four hundred jobs and you can
see strong growth across about
two thirds of the sectors uh
construction notably grew
fourteen point eight percent
with seventy nine hundred jobs
um in let you do just the table
without going through them all
out loud.
Unslated ten we've added as a
new side I am breaking down
employment by sectors so that
visually you can kind of get a
sense of which uh sectors in the
new mexico employment base are
the largest in the most day
namic so of course um we have
about nine hundred and six
thousand jobs currently
education and health account for
about seventeen percent of those
construction and other seven
percent and under the list
and flight eleven um we've
provided some new data about
labor market tateness this is a
graph that basically is is
demonstrating the number of job
openings available versus the
number of workers looking for
jobs so when you have more
openings than workers you have a
tight labor market when you have
more workers looking then you
have jobs
it would be a slack market and
so
one on this table would show in
equal uh and an equal number of
workers for jobs.
So a most recently um
historically new mexico had a
fairly slack labor market with
more and employed than job
openings but currently both new
mexico and the us have a tight
labor market with more job
openings than unemployed who are
looking.
And slide twelve we look at both
the forecasts for the US and the
new mexico unemployment rates
and you can see new mexico in
recent since twenty twenty two
has has really met or or been a
little bit better than the US
average and that's continued to
hold conspected to hold the
unemployment rate currently in
new mexico is about four point
two percent and that's right on
par with the national average.
On slight thirteen we turned to
inflation forecast and interest
rate for a cast which sort of uh
go hand in hand as two sides of
the same coin on the rate hand
side we're looking at consumer
price index which is the the
best uhm way to look at
inflation as a projection the
consumer price index has been
higher than anticipated since
the previous forecast but is
expected to reduce a little
further in twenty twenty seven
and beyond them before so near
term inflation as higher than
expected but in the longer term
it's expected to be a little
lower.
Gasoline decreased both eight
point three percent compared to
june twenty twenty four um and
shelter has been for the last
several years a stubborn part of
inflation continued to rise by
three point eight percent
compared to june twenty twenty
four
and the rate hand side we can
see the estimated or the and the
anticipated actions of the fed
so basically the target rate
that that the fed is expected to
target remains unchanged but
they're expected to get there a
little more slowly than before.
Alright next we'll turn to oil
and gas markets of course a
major determinant of new
mexico's revenues on slide
fifteen we can compare the oil
price forecast to the previous
and oil prices of course our
influence by many global um
issues global demand for oil
policy decisions made by opec
plus geopolitical events in oil
producing regions.
The forecast for oil price has
been re- by his downward
considerably since december
twenty twenty four for foy
twenty five the year that has
just concluded it was revised
down by one dollar and fifty
cents per barrel for twenty six
the current year that we're in
its been revised down by seven
dollars and fifty cents per
barrel and for the outer the
budget year by nine dollars and
fifty cents per barrel
and in the outers prices are
expected to average in the mid
sixties he can see the actual
projections in the table on the
lower rate
some of the key factors that are
driving this uh price outlook or
that opaque plus um supply
increases are are having an
impact on price rising north
american production including
here in new mexico and the
permian basin is impacting
prices and then globally there
is expected to be weakened
demand with economic activity
cooling not just in the united
states but globally and then
there's a lot of uncertainty
about us trade policy and
tariffs that are potentially
dampening consumption of oil
and the next slade we instead of
talking about oil prices now we
look at oil production volumes
that are expected to occur in
new mexico
production volume where is that
the price forecast is down the
production volume forecasters
revised upward we are expected
to have produced an additional
thirty million barrels in f
twenty five and an additional
twenty million and twenty six
and fifteen million barrels in f
twenty seven f way twenty five
product production is projected
her reached a record for new
mexico of seven hundred seventy
five million barrels that that
from seven hundred and ten in f
twenty four the recount has has
declined some white but does
remain stable and we currently
have about ninety six rigs where
previous it was hovering at
maybe about a hundred and four
some of the factors shaping the
outlook for oil production in
new mexico
is has a lot to do with
corporate activity and
expectations.
Er weaker price expectations are
increasing the corporate break
even points
slowed pretty ah projected
economic growth is creating
uncertainty for producers and
capital discipline continues to
be a constraint on production.
Unsled seventeen alternative
attention to natural gas which
is another large driver of new
mexico's revenue and in this
generation of natural gas
production natural gas really is
tied to the oil market pretty
tightly this natural gas is
coming up along with oil and
sometimes we are catching up on
the transportation and
production constraints that are
are coming along with that
volume of natural gas.
The natural gas production is
expected to reach three thousand
nine hundred fifteen bcf and foy
twenty five at an average price
of three dollars and thirty one
cents per mcf
near term production growth is
following as they said the oil
trends but long term growth is
going to be driven by rising
demands for new mexico's natural
gas globally including liquid
fight natural gas
us supply growth is supporting
higher international demand and
that is putting upward pressure
on the price for new mexico
natural gas um with it up
sixteen cents per mcf for f
twenty six twentieth and and in
effort twenty seven it's revised
up by twenty two cents per mcf.
On slate eighteen sorry slide
nineteen we'll turn your
attention to the largest single
revenue source for the general
fund the gross receipts tax
for every twenty five the gt
estimate was increased by
seventy six million dollars over
the december twenty twenty four
forecast which is in a pretty
significant upward revision
given that that year is is
basically concluded and the
current august forecast estimate
has lower year over year growth
though expected versus december
as again where were expecting as
they mentioned at the beginning
less robust economic growth in
new mexico and nationally so for
every twenty sixth year over
year growth is now expected to
be three point eight percent
versus four point nine percent
in the got and also for twenty
seven growth has called to two
point seven percent vs three
point four percent in the
previous forecast so while we
had a fairly big upward revision
of seventy six million in the
afford twenty five year we have
only increased the four twenty
six forecast by seventeen
million and effort twenty seven
and twenty eight are basically
unchanged from the previous
forecast so
the you know the the base is
higher to end up with twenty
five but the expectation for
growth is lower so they are
unchanged in the outers.
And slid twenty um I I can skip
over this but leave it for you
we've we've charged the match to
taxable grocery seats by sector
in new mexico match taxable goes
to see it is the guarantee based
and you can just sort of compare
how different sectors grew from
twenty four twenty five
and then on twenty twenty one
we've provided a detail again on
match taxable grocery seats just
an eddie and lee counties where
the permian basin is located
really again just to emphasize
the tire between oil price
leading to rig activity which
leads to g r t being collected.
On say twenty three go to the
personal income tax outlook for
every twenty five uh the
personal income tax contracted
or declined by point seven
percent but that was actually
better than expected in the last
forecast we expected it to
contract by seven point eight
percent and as they mentioned in
the last forecast that's not a
sign of underlying weakness in
our personal income tax that's a
result of legislative changes
that were expected to uh reduce
the we made we made cuts to it
but that is an increase of
hundred and fifty six million in
pett for effort twenty five vs
the last forecast and the
reasons it out performed are
basically we had less than
expected tax payer uptake of
some of the most recent personal
income tax cuts
and in fact it was about seventy
five percent so if another way
of saying that is that when we
pass that legislation we scored
the fiscal impacts of
legislation against the revenue
estimate but the fiscal impacts
were a little lower than
expected because of tax payer
activity and we currently have
about thirty one as one day to
point we have about thirty one
thousand letters sent out to tax
payers from the department that
we who we think are eligible for
the child tax credit but didn't
claim it so we are working on
trying to get up take higher and
that will depend on tax per
activity
for every twenty sixth through
twenty eight for every twenty
sixth the personal income tax
forecast has been revised upward
by a hundred and nineteen
million upward by ninety one
million for afford twenty seven
and upward for sixty eight
million for effort twenty eight
from the last forecast pit
growth is still positive but
it's growing at a more moderate
leveled laugh rate then it was
in the december twenty twenty
four forecast.
And the moderated growth is
enlarged being driven by
both slowing with holding that
has to do with economic activity
as well as the rate reductions
that were made in twenty twenty
four legislation and then the
impact of the federal hr one.
I'm to get a little more detail
on those recent legislative uh
changes that have been impacting
the personal income rate cut I
think uh twenty twenty five is
is good to look at you can see
and and the far left twenty four
twenty five was in the
darkrooted columns that's what
we expected the is recent
legislative changes to reduce in
revenue but in the shaded bars
you can see what they
preliminarily were in a for
twenty five so uh for example
the child tax credit as I was
mentioning as the gray bar you
can see that the amount claimed
was pretty significantly less
than expected and and so on.
On slide twenty sixth and we
talk a little bit about the
adjustments that have been made
to the forecast to reflect the
changes that have just been made
federally under hr one um the
main things and I I presented
this to restaurant as well as
the federal funding
stabilization committee and more
detail but
the federal government has
changed the standard deduction
and that will reduce personal
income tax revenue by about
forty one million per year uh
federal government has provided
for no tax unqualified car alone
interest that will reduce new
mexico revenue in turn by about
five million per year so there's
a a total loss of about forty
six million from those
provisions to new mexico for
conforming to the federal
return.
Next on side twenty eight tuck
up minute about corporate income
tax
the corporate income tax outlook
for every twenty five we
decrease the corporate income
tax forecast by fifteen million
over the previous estimate that
includes a decrease of thirty
five million of past three
energy tax which is incorporated
into set up but also so i've
said that the film credit for a
cast was reduced by one hundred
and fifty five million reduced
to the estimate for new incoming
gross corporate and contacts but
we more than that reduced the
expectation for refundable
credits being paid out for film
so we had a net decrease i'm
sorry when you when you net
those things together we had a
combined increase in corporate
income tax of a hundred and four
million.
Um the gross uh corporate income
tax in past three eighty four
cases have been revised downward
for the outlook increase it's
decreased by a hundred and fifty
five million per year in f o
twenty six and twenty seven
legislative adjustments continue
to include the new corporate
income tax credits that have
been enacted and then moving
from a marginal sit structure to
either flat five point nine
percent corporate income tax.
And then again similarly on the
next slide twenty nine we have
incorporated expectations for
how the federal hr one will
impact the corporate income tax
we asked to meet that by
limiting the cap on state and
local tax deduction
will have an average reduction
in corporate income tax of about
seventy million per year
in ag across the pte revenue and
then everything else combined
from her one is expected to
reduce it by forty four million
per year on average so total of
a hundred and fourteen million
negative um to corporate income
tax as a result of the federal
bell
okay and my last section will
talk a little bit on slide
thirty one about severance taxes
rents and realties these are the
direct revenues benefiting the
general fund from oil and gas
production and slide um thirty
one I think it's a nice visual
to show basically in blue you
have the amounts of these
revenues that are going to the
general fund and then as a
result of fairly recent
legislation you can see the
amounts of sort of windfall oil
and natural gas revenue that
instead of hitting the general
fund and creating volatility
there are instead being set
aside for future use whether it
be in the early childhood trust
fund or the tax stabilization
reserver elsewhere um and so you
know I mentioned a a few minutes
ago that we've revised down or
pretty significantly the
forecast for the price of oil
but today we will not
necessarily need to see that
that reduction in the price of
oil is going to hit the general
fund instead the general
offenders now insulated from
that volatility and what will be
instead reduced or these
transfers to other funds.
General find arm again severance
tax revenue is coming to the
general fund are now capped at
effort twenty four levels so
since we're still in excess of
that we've had no change to the
amount of general fund that's
expected from severance tax it's
one point one for five billion
I won't go through all these in
detail but you can see basically
the the transfers that are
expected to occur to these other
funds
and no to honor her recent
federal change that is is
actually hitting the general
fund but at an undetermined time
and this is the non recurring
issue I mean maybe familiar with
the federal royal tea resiliency
act of twenty twenty four or
this is a federal bill i'm
affecting federal royalties that
are shared with the states this
was effective september first
twenty twenty four and from an
industry perspective this
federal legislation was intended
to streamline royalty payments
so that producers could apply
for production and get to work
producing more quickly
and so it allows producers to
submit to the federal government
these communisation agreements
are case and unit agreements and
they could begin producing and
then on the back and the federal
government would reconcile um
when production occurred they
are going to tell the federal
government what type of land
they're producing unfederal land
state land tribal lay on private
land and the federal government
says go ahead and start
producing will reckon so what
land type this is on the back
and keep that sounds good for
producers they can get to work
more quickly but in actuality
new mexico has over eight
hundred unreconciled
communisation agreements and it
turns out the the federal
government has alerted us that
they've overdistributed to us
and the assumption that more
production was unfederal land
than actually was so what will
happen is we're currently
expecting about a hundred and
fifty million dollars to be
clied back at a few true royalty
distributions from the federal
government as a result of this
this that hundred and fifty
million giver take.
Ah represents over distributions
of royalties from september
twenty twenty four through may
twenty twenty five and so we
have included that in the august
uh here forecast we're not
exceed exactly what month that
will hit
and for reference I think are a
monthly royal t distributions
from the feds are about two
hundred and fifty million a
month so
to put in perspective that's
less than one month's activity.
And finally her one a little a
little bit more about how that
federal bill will impact new
mexico's royal royal tears that
we receive in the future so
before the new hr one
we had recently through the
federal government increased the
royalty rate from twelve point
five percent to sixteen point
six seven percent um and we
received forty eight percent of
that so uh the realty read uh
less a half of it less a two
percent administrative fee but
because of her one uh now the
royalty rate is once again being
reduced to twelve point five
percent so we will now receive
forty eight percent of that
reduced amount the craig
baseline uses a twelve point
five percent royalty rate.
Um so estimated one point seven
billion dollars of last realties
over the next ten years as
expected or an estimated one
hundred and seventy million
annually
i'll turn over to secretary
past.
The.
The.
The.
That would I thought it would be
green
good morning mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is wayne props the department of
finance and administration.
I'm as german and start off by a
congratulating you on your
ascension to the chair of the
legislative finance committee
and that's a very exclusive club
uh in the history of new mexico
and look forward to working with
you and your staff in the
committee uh as we begin to
prepare for the upcoming session
I miss chairman I keep taking
that one these days i'm going to
have to show up with some bad
news
but fortunately today is not
that day.
Uh the physical position of the
state of new mexico remains
strong
it remains stable
it remains brazarian
with multiple protective layers
of questions sent bill twenty
six and a bill seventy eight
house bill to fifty three
reserves above thirty percent
for us to be able to deal with
hopefully most if not all
expected and unexpected events.
Uh today's uh consensus revenue
forecast general fund overview
reinforces uh all of those
positions with regard to where
we are
as stated new mexico.
On slide thirty six as a
chairman this is while I was
slides at secretary sharing
clark covers most of the
information uh some nothing has
spent a lot of time here I do
want to highlight in fy twenty
five
the third I guess it's a second
four twenty five highlight uh
that investment income for the
state group at eleven point
three percent
that is reflected in uh on the
bar chart to your laughter in
the blue
piece of that chart and an
indicates that what we have
talked about many times with
this committee is that we have
now taken significant volatility
out of our revenue projections
and forecasts related to oil and
gas and replace that with
investment income earnings which
at some point and not to distant
future will become the largest
source of revenue growth general
fund revenue growth.
Fy twenty five the last bullet I
want to highlight that as well
as the result of some revisions
to the december forecast at five
twenty five is now projected to
close at three hundred and
ninety million dollars above the
estimate that we provided to you
in december of twenty twenty
four three hundred ninety
million dollars is in reserves
and has increased as you'll see
in a slight or two uhm our
projection of reserves for both
that for a twenty five and five
twenty six.
For the fi twenty six outlook
miss chairman members of the
committee
again uh investment income
earnings are spot will plan a
large part and our revenue
growth and revenue available for
recurring and non recruiting
expenses.
And then for fy twenty seven to
FY thirty.
Uh as secretary of shart and
clark noted sales and income
taxes are expected to return to
moderate growth but remain
slightly below our ten year
trend investment income will
become an increasingly key
driver for general fund growth
as i've mentioned uh general
funds share
as a result of investment income
growth as expected to go from
fourteen point five percent in
FY twenty four uh to twenty
percent in FY
thirty.
A group look at that as
potential revenue for recurring
expenses but it does not need to
be appropriate for recurring
expenses it could be appropriate
for non recurring expenses but
overall for the fi twenty seven
we are anticipating an
additional for four hundred and
eighty five million dollars
which is pretty pretty
remarkable
at in addition to that miss
chairman and members of the
committee you'll see that below
that we are into speeding uh two
point eight billion dollars
of last years appropriation
levels to be available again in
FY twenty seven and this is
mister chairman the part of
money that we generally look at
for non recurring appropriations
and expenses again it does not
need to be expended for that but
that is how we generally look at
the slide new money is four
hundred and eighty five million
dollars but there will be two
hundred two point eight billion.
Similar to last year as non
recording appropriations that
are available
side thirty eight or mischairman
members of committee again for
twenty five came in stronger
than anticipated for twenty five
reserves general fund reserves
are our estimated at three point
four seven billion dollars or
almost thirty four percent a
versus what we were projecting
in december of research general
fund reserves being at
approximately two point almost
three billion dollars and a
twenty nine point two percent
and again FY twenty five revenue
came in three hundred and ninety
million dollars higher than we
as a consensus revenue group
projected in december of two
thousand and twenty four.
For if I twenty six growth is
slowing and that's probably that
i'm sure it doesn't come as a
surprise to anybody on this
committee or your staff this was
anticipated that has slowed a
little bit more than we thought
it would as a result of some of
the.
Ah reductions that secretary
shart and clark covered in hers
last slide related to uh federal
appropriations
and tax uh the policy
but we are still projecting some
growth and f twenty six with FY
twenty six general fund
reserves.
At almost four billion dollars
or thirty six point four percent
of recurring appropriations
again this is significantly
higher my almost five hundred
million dollars then what we
anticipated or projected in the
december
twenty twenty four consensus
revenue uh report to you course
the FY twenty six reserves are a
pending any appropriations that
you make in the upcoming
sessions for that number will go
down but again very very strong
reserves projections for both FY
twenty five and FY twenty six
and then finally again miss
chairman for FY twenty seven we
are projecting a total amount of
new money to be almost four
hundred and eighty five million.
Dollars.
On slide
thirty nine this is very
repetitive of what the
information I just provided to
you but with a little bit more
detail if you'd like to go
through it.
Again highlighting FY twenty
five reserves being projected at
almost thirty four percent and
fy twenty six reserves at thirty
six percent
as a reference point mr chairman
every hundred and seven million
dollars equals about one percent
increase in or decrease
depending on the way it goes but
hundreds of seventy million
dollars equals one percent uh to
our
uhm general fund reserves.
The.
Turning to side forty miles
chairman and members of the
committee you're all are
familiar with the next few
slides this is as you know
our economists are working with
our consultants moody's and
others spend a lot of time on
looking at risks to the forecast
that we present to you.
I'm not going to go through
these line by line you can read
them uh some of them are both
downside and potential upside
risks there's been a lot of
focus of course mister chairman
on possible impacts from the
federal budget process uh I
think we should also this
chairman as we look at are risks
to our forecasts focus not just
on one particular piece of
legislation but the near and mid
term economic outlook are right
now things are looking
reasonably good my for a one k
is doing pretty well uh these
days and I hope yours is too
but I do have some concerns that
there are.
Some cracks showing with
relating to with the relation to
potential slowing of growth
continued inflationary uh
pressures and impacts to
employment so.
These are risks uh some of them
I think our higher wrists and
others but I do think it's
important that we go through
this exercise with you
and you as as well determined
what you consider to be risked
to these forecasts that we
present to you on side forty six
this is the actual stress
testing that we do sort of like
the old proverb be prepared for
danger and times of peace and
times a peace be mindful of
dangers that's what we're trying
to do here.
But again it the slide tells a
remarkable story and ties back
to some of my opening comments
about the position the fiscal
position of the state being
stable strong and resilient and
that even under the worst case
scenario that we model and
that's the small red data line
that's the low price of oil
scenario
uh and that prices approximately
mids in the middle of thirties
for a price of uhm uhm a barrel
of oil
you'll see that
there are some less
money available for non
recurring appropriations but we
still are well above existing
levels for the past several
years of appropriations that
have been made through the
legislative process and at law
low scenario we place at a five
percent probability so
again shows that even
in unexpected circumstances we
have taken into account uh
significant stresses to this
forecast
and we remain in a in a very
well positioned even in the
worst case scenario.
Slide
thirty forty two
similar information under the
low oil price scenario recurring
appropriations in FY twenty six
remain well above the negative
impact of an oil shock of that
magnitude
but again there would be some
less money available
approximately estimated
approximately one billion of the
two point eight billion dollars
that was appropriate and FY
twenty six four non recurring
appropriations that mean we
wouldn't be able to find non
recurring appropriations but
that would likely be at a lesser
level than we've been able to do
uhm in the past I do think this
is important mister chairman is
executive in the legislature
began to put together their
budgets to focus on that non
recurring part of money
we from the executive
perspective expect that we will
need to make some significant uh
investments in medicaid and snap
in particular we would like to
see the trust funds for both
behavioral health and medicaid
that you established last year
we'd like to see those filled up
as soon as possible and
potentially ahead of schedule
having two point eight billion
dollars in non recurring
appropriations available for f
twenty seven FY twenty seven
guess it's an opportunity to do
some of those things from our
perspective.
And miss chairman on side forty
three uh the revenue trend
general fund revenue versus uh
the ten year trend we have debt
below uh the ten year trend of
nine point seven percent but
that's that's okay um little bit
below nine point seven percent
growth i'd take any day of the
week
and as we always note with the
slide what is important here is
that those two lines remain as
close together as possible
because that means that we have
eliminated to the extent we can
a volatility in our projections
and revenue outlook uhm some as
chairman where we're pretty
close there as we have been in
the last couple of revenue
forecasts that have been
presented to this committee uh
so once again on side forty
three
good news
i'll close mister chairman with
retorating that from my
perspective the states physical
position is strong.
Uh i'm not sure of too many
other states that are in the
position that their max goes in
with continued revenue growth
albeit declining or sightly
with very strong reserves
and because of the actions
that's a legislature in the
executive taken together
particularly over the third year
as I mentioned.
A lot of opportunities to
continue to make investments in
your priorities and the prior
priorities that the executive as
well I will close my determined
by saying that the executive
continues to support very strong
reserves of thirty percent or
higher earnings sometimes when
you are facing periods of
uncertainly and certainly like
we are now it's good to let the
dust settle a little bit and I
see what the real needs are and
uh be a little bit cautious and
I think that's how we will be
approaching the executive budget
recommendation that will come
out in december but we do.
Uh continue to support strong
reserves I think we can continue
to maintain those and and make
some of the investments that I
have mentioned such as the
medicaid and behavioral trust
funds uh any gaps in as a result
of federal actions as well so
miss chairman thank you for your
courtesy and nice to see you
thank you very much mister
secretary.
And welcome back up
thank you good morning mister
chair and members of the
committee my name is my daughter
and the chief economist for you
all the legislative finance
committee and you can find are
materials behind to have a
in your binders that should look
like this and I know where we're
running short on time and you
will have a bus to catch and I
think this makes really good bus
reading material so I I think if
you want to take it with you and
dive deeper
we're always here for questions
if if you find anything of
interest or anything you wanted
to deep run in in the briefing
materials please reach out to us
and we're happy to set up one on
one times or or group times with
you or your staff and I think my
three goals or or maybe take
aways for this presentation from
this new revenue update are
three fold one what the revenue
figures are and hopefully help
contextualize that in the bigger
picture in in terms of what they
look like before and what they
look like today and the the
short of it is less less new
money i'm less growth
and and hopefully i'll do a
better job contextualizing that
shortly but two it's that from
my perspective the economic
forecast has shifted in some
ways
we had been predicting a slow
down and that's certainly
playing out but maybe there's a
little more shakiness to it this
time around then we were
expecting an in previous rounds
and i'll get into that um as
well and then lastly it's the
broad amount of uncertainty that
we're seeing it's actually
expanded in in many ways I know
um probably as an as economist
you might hear us say that
there's a lot of uncertainty
always but this time I really
mean it I guess is what i'm
saying there feels like the
uncertainty is gotten bigger i'm
in part because of the federal
policy changes but also in some
ways because of these mixed
signals that we're getting from
the economic data and from the
revenue data so I want to start
actually with the the chart at
the bottom of page one and this
is a little bit of the the
challenge in the new ones of
this revenue estimate sometimes
it's easy to get to come in and
say it's all up or you know and
bad times who say it's all down.
And the reality is it's mixed
you can see an FY twenty five a
strong growth a strong revision
to the upside we went from
expecting one point six percent
to four point six percent that's
good but then in the next year
we actually expect that growth
to go from two point six to
point four so that that's bad
that's down where we're down
from our expectations and then
you can see in the outyours were
down a little bit from what we
expected previously and what
that translates to is the table
at the top of page one if you
look at the the beach line there
all the way to the rate and
column fy twenty seven that's
the budget year that you all
will be talking about in the
upcoming session you can see
fourteen point one billion
dollars estimated for the
upcoming budget year but if you
look at the line above that you
can see how much this revenue
estimate revised from december
and it's only seventy million
dollars so we are only expecting
seventy million dollars more in
the budget year this time around
then last time around and that's
the combination of the upside in
the current year or in the
previous year but then the
downside sort of in the outers
and what that translates to and
as sectorary perhaps mentioned
the FY twenty five column three
hundred and ninety million is
the extra strength in this year
and so that contributes to your
reserve number or potential non
recurring spending in the
upcoming session and so maybe
more to the point the table or
that little box fy twenty seven
revenues less appropriations
this these are what are
frequently called the new money
figures and the old traditional
new money figure is the one at
the bottom there three point two
seven billion and that's total
that or that's recurring
revenues less recurring
appropriations and they used to
be a really helpful number back
when non recurring
appropriations were maybe two
hundred million dollars or less
two hundred million in a good
year now you all know very well
that non recording
appropriations are now north of
three point five billion in any
given year they're easily more
than a third of total
appropriations and something
i'll get into on the next page
they're actually happening in
the future years it used to be
the case the non recurring
spending occurred in the current
budget year.
But now they're also occurring
in the future budget year
against expected revenue in the
similar way that recurring
revenues are and what that can
do is is create a little bit of
a treadmill where you're always
having to forward appropriate
non recurring appropriations and
so what we find to be more
helpful now is what we call
total new money so that's the
total revenues minus the total
appropriations and what we see
is four hundred and eighty four
point eight million secretary
props mentioned and to give you
some more context last year we
were closer to nine hundred
million and total any money so
we have about half of the total
new money this year just further
speaking to that slow down that
we have been talking about and
expecting for several years now
so if you turn to the next page
on page two this is a a
an abreviated financial summary
this is our steed's balance she
at a very high level and I want
to dry your attention to the
middle boxes here so you have
revenues at the top your
expenses in the middle you're
bottom line at the bottom
looking at the expenses you can
see those non recurring
appropriations three point five
billion and f twenty five and in
the future year which is our
current budget you're now back
when you made the appropriations
it was the future here two point
seven billion already made so
you can see the challenge coming
into the next session to make
more non recurring
appropriations and the current
year the capacity's limited and
you can see the transfer two or
from reserves line eighty
million that's all you have left
between expected revenues in
that year and you're already
committed expenditures and that
you're only eighty million so
that's sort of that treadmill
challenge that you will have in
making appropriations into the
non recurring appropriations
into the future fiscal year
which in some ways limits your
ability to be namble if revenues
come in less than expected or
maybe just challenges you all to
to take the reserves a little
more seriously to make sure you
can cover the appropriations in
that future fiscal you're in
case those revenues don't
materialize
okay I I want to move on to page
three and and speak a little bit
to the mixed signals in the
economic forecast.
And if I could draw your
attention to the employment
forecast at the top it might be
a little hard to see but the
december expectations for
employment growth was better
than today our employment growth
expectations have been revised
downwards and in part that
that's
being experienced on the
national level what we'd seen
over the last year the last
twelve months we had seen the
national economy add about a
hundred and fifty thousand jobs
per month on average over the
last year
however in the last three months
we've seen that kind of go off a
cliff and we're now closer to
thirty five thousand jobs per
month and those are coming from
significant downward revisions
to the jobs expectations and
those downward revisions can be
an indication of maybe a turning
point for example when the
economy is doing really well the
jobs figures get get revised up
on a monthly basis we get more
information and we see that
people were hiring faster than
we had originally expected.
And the inverse can be true when
the economy is doing poorly we
get more information and we find
out that maybe people were
laying off more more folks than
were as expected or maybe people
were hiring slower than expected
and so we're in that downward
revision territory which is not
in and of itself you know a
declaration that the economy is
doing poorly but it's certainly
a a yellow flag you might say to
pay attention to what's going on
there and so we're seeing that
and and that's something that's
at the top of mine for us
another thing that we're seeing
is a slight up taken inflation
of course we're all worried
about inflation on and and
really what we're seeing is the
start of some of these tariff
impacts as as we sign the latest
figure inflation picked up a
little bit and we don't think
that tariffs are fully baked in
the prices yet and so as those
tariffs continue to roll through
the economy we might see
stronger and stronger inflation
and that actually is in the
economic expectation but if
those come in stronger than
expected that can be a challenge
and i'll give you an example of
this our national forecasters
expected effective terrifics to
level out at around ten percent
well that that's what's been
into this forecast we're already
passed that and we're heading
towards fifteen so we might see
inflation come in i'm stronger
than then presented again so
that's something that we're
keeping an eye on and and
keeping at the top foremines
another thing that's not fully
backed in as was mentioned in
the previous presentations is
the full impact of the house for
the federal h r one
the forecasters that this is
built time expected an extension
of the tax cutting jobs act
which was part of it but some of
the other pieces weren't
estimated in this in this
revenue and so we we have to
keep analyzing that and the
national forecasters have to
keep analyzing that so we can
see what the full impact will be
in the months to come and and
finally I just want to point
out.
Leave her expectations or are
both challenging because of the
declining uh hiring rate
the to the extent their new jobs
are being created that slowing
but we are also having a
supplies supply side shock we
having less folks in the labor
force and so what that can kind
of do is hide in the
unemployment data what exactly
is going on if less people are
looking for work because less
people are in the labor force
than it might look like the
economy is doing better than it
otherwise might be doing if
those people had state whether
that's through
earlier retirements at the
federal level or through
increased immigration
enforcement actions which are
reducing the the supply side of
the labor market and one last
you know mixed signal yellow
flag here is that I don't expect
that the fool extent a federal
layoffs is showing up yet in the
data many of those deferred
resignations are deferred
retirements take effect in
september so we will see that
also in the months to come so a
lot of mix signals and and
yellow flags in the labor market
briefly i'll alternate a page if
you'll turn to page five with me
to talk about um oil dynamics
the secretary shouldn't clark
mentioned oil prices are
significantly down
interestingly enough in the
press fiscal year we were very
close we were very close to on
target for what we expected but
in the next couple of years
we're significantly down seven
dollars and fifty cents lower in
the next year and then almost
ten dollars in the budget year
and what that translates to is
more expectations for slowing
and platoning oil production
growth as you can see in the
chart at the top of page five
but a really interesting maybe
new development to me or new
perspective that was that i've
taken up is the natural gas
production expectations at the
bottom of page five you can see
that chart there unlike oil it's
expected to continue to grow at
a at a moderate clip and as you
all know natural gas especially
in the premium basin or or
specifically in the premium base
and is an associated product
when you go produce oil you get
a bunch of natural gas with it
but if you remember your oil.
Decline curves so much oil peak
oil production per well occurs
in the first three to six months
and drops off very quickly after
that the natural gas associated
with it from that well does not
have a steep of a drop off it
actually continues to to a
produce set up at a much higher
rate than the oil decline her
would suggest and so what that
means is as these oil wells
mature in the premium the remain
with high elevated levels of
natural gas production and so we
might see continued natural gas
production growth despite um oil
production declines in the
future.
Let's see you need to skip ahead
here
if you turn to page eleven maybe
some more eleven and ten and
eleven here will be some more
insights from from oil and gas
are updated rule of thumb
figures is about fifty seven
million dollars per one dollar
price change so if prices
decline one dollar we might lose
fifty seven million dollars in
state revenues expected state
revenues so you can imagine ten
dollars price differential could
translate to five hundred and
seventy million dollars and less
state revenue but a secretary
short and clark mentioned some
of these insulating measures
that you all have put into place
if you remember that barchard
those take the hit first until
the general fund is an
experiencing that decline and
then if you look on page eleven
these
kind of busy charts here show
what are frequently called break
even prices what prices needed
in certain basin to maintain
production on an existing well
at the top you can see thirty
three dollars on average in the
permian delaware forty five
dollars in the permian other but
the the chart below it is
perhaps more interesting and
this is what price do you need
to profitably drill in you well
and you'll see the premium
delaware at sixty two dollars on
average and that's just checked
this morning what we're sitting
at today so you can see how how
close we are on maybe a knaps
edge on that price point two.
Have much slower production
growth if prices for below sixty
two dollars barrel a lot of
folks are going to be stopping
new production stopping new
drilling because it might not be
profitable at that price but
there's a small amount of folks
at the bottom of that bar who
can still drill profitably down
into the forty dollars a barrel
so we'll have some growth but
will have much stronger growth
certainly if if prices are
higher and that's translating
into that platowing effect that
we're talking about on those
previous pages
moving on to page thirteen i'll
spend a little more time here
these are these the table at the
bottom is a break out of our
expected revenue losses from
federal policy changes and the
chart shows
something a little different
than the chart secretary sharon
clark presented and this is
maybe a high and low
alternatives to our baseline
expectations at the lfc we
stress there we push them a
little harder how bad to these
losses be or how how you know if
if things turn out really well
maybe they could they might be
less of a revenue loss and so
you can see your expectations in
the chart broken out by item on
the right there and what we see
is maybe about a hundred million
dollars so we're we're expecting
in this baseline about two
hundred and six million dollars
revenue loss from federal policy
changes but it could be north of
three hundred million and as
little as maybe a hundred and
forty million hundred and thirty
one million I should say and I I
want to point out another you
know back to one of the three
points brought on certainty.
This is we we think we've found
the potential biggest impact of
these policy changes but this is
certainly not an exhaustive list
we're seeing a lot of national
analysis still being done on the
potential impacts of just the
tax changes much less the
economic ramifications but we're
also still doing that analysis
and the tax and reb department
is still doing that analysis and
and this is definitely not an
exhaustive list and more items
might be added as as time time
goes on or maybe we'll see items
come off as as we determine that
their impact is negligible or
or.
Or or not materialising
if you'll turn to fourteen and
fifteen
page fifteen we have the stress
test here and the the blue or
the bottom sheet at bars
represent recurring spending the
white represents non recurring
as I mentioned non recurring
spec- spending is happening into
the future year and so when
we're thinking about how much
reserves you might need in a
potential revenue crunch where
say oil prices crash a recession
takes hold of the economy we
take into account the non
recurring spending as well
because you're committing that
into the future year and if you
look on page fourteen you can
see the bars here represent how
much money might be needed to
cover those existing
appropriations with no cuts to
those appropriations and it's
about one point two billion in
fy twenty six and one point six
billion and f by twenty seven
that's about two point seven
billion dollars total that's
about more or less twenty seven
percent reserves just to cover
existing appropriations.
And then i'll close on on page
sixteen
at two things here the trend
analysis is hopefully helpful to
you all in understanding where
you might be in in the big in
the grand scheme of things the
total trend total revenues you
can see you're close to the
trend that's generally a good
sign if you have a large
deviation from friend you can be
experiencing about a volatility
if you're close to trend you
might have a little more
certainty on on the forecast but
I want to point out the pit
revenue deviation this is in
large part because of those tax
changes so much revenue from
that revenue source personal
income taxes has been returned
to taxpayers and you can see the
divergence from trend from the
result of those of those tax
changes but really the the
highlight here for me on page
sixteen is the general fund
balances when we had a
surgeon revenues over the last
couple years you could see those
reserve surgeries surge as well
but as appropriations have
certainly picked up and and in
in the last couple of years out
piece the revenue growth you can
see how reserves have come down
and that's even with the
inclusion of of a couple of new
reserve funds and their
behavioral health trust find and
the government results in
opportunity to grow fund those
both have been added and counted
towards reserves and and that's
about eight percent of reserves
now so you know if you if you're
looking at this general fund
reserves chart where north of
thirty percent but maybe about
eight percent of it is in trust
funds or or other maybe
or or funds with other missions
and then reserves there so just
important to keep that in mind
and then lastly I just want to
make a pitch for our our website
all of this data is is being
uploaded there into interactive
dashboards that have you know
den- downloadable functions and
so that's live as of this
morning and you can find that w
dot and i'm legislative slash
icon and with that mister chair
I think we're ready for
questions excellent thank you
very much we'll go straight to
questions starting with
representative chatfield.
Thank you mister chairman mister
chairman I remember last year
when we were talking about this
very safe subject being told
that the one thing they might
really throw us a bump in the
road was medicaid the feds were
were going to cut out a certain
percent of our medicaid funding
and that has happened and I know
you went slightly into it but
tell me how
we're how we stand on the
medicaid debt in the state of
new mexico.
Mr chairman representative
thinks with the question I would
I would try your attention to
that table with the oba impacts
and in the LFC briefing
materials on page thirteen
I think it's really important to
keep in mind the distinction
between federal revenues that go
towards supporting
appropriations so they're sort
of the budget impact and then
there's the revenue impact and
today just talking about the
revenue impact we do expect that
the declining medicate
enrollment and the
restrictions on state directed
payments to have an impact on
insurance premium tax revenues
that's both to the general
finance of the health care
affordability fund and also the
gross receipts tax on those
insurance revenues and so that's
a at the bottom of this table
are current estimates forty six
million dollars loss because of
those
because of those changes but
then of course there's also the
budget impact which i'm sure you
all actually will will get a
presentation on later this week
on the potential budget
ramifications of that outside of
the revenue implications so
mister chair we have reserved to
cover that we're good.
Yes or no.
Mr cherry that mean up years as
big of a budget impact
as was originally expected and
i'm sure you'll get into that
but reserves can be used for
that purpose or for other thank
you that's what I wanted to hear
from you
second question
in the risk factors one of the
things that I see out there
possible is an embargo on
russian oil uh if putin doesn't
settle earth we're talking about
or maybe I increased the.
Tax on russian all it was that
brought into the risk factors at
all I I mean we're negotiating
that right now done look real
good to me like poon is going to
settle the threat is if he
doesn't well then we're going to
either
we're gonna
do something about trade either
shutting down his ability to
export all her are putting some
kind of
tax on
that is that included in the
risk forecast
mr chairman representative I
would say the big bigger risk to
our forecast is actually maybe
the lifting of the of
restrictions on russian oil that
could bring a lot more oil into
marketing and drop prices and
that's that's a bigger risk
likely than more restriction
effective either way if we put
more sanctions on them
more saying more restrictions
could boost oil prices if if
less rational entered the market
so I guess my question was is
that in this risk's forecast
mr chair to the extent that it
could be a possible low oil
price scenario that's one of our
stress test scenarios but
changes to the current status
quo on un russian oil supply it
there there are no changes
expected in this forecast
last question natural gas all is
going down nature gases in
higher demand and going up in
you tell me some of the factors
that uh cause it to be in higher
demand uh internationally and
nationally uh just right quick
and off shuttle
mr chairman representative just
quickly broader more supply
capacity out out of new mexico
certainly helps but a global
demand for natural gas is
increasing especially as a
replacement to your last point
for russian energy supply
especially in europe but also in
in the asian markets as well so
global demand is up and in our.
Take away capacity is increasing
thank you thank you mister thank
you very much next we're gonna
go to vice german
thank you mister chairman and
thank you guys for all your hard
work everything you've done it's
been quite a since twenty twenty
it's been cried a difference in
the state in new mexico and and
I don't know whether you call it
it may be a curse to new mexico
that were aligned on one revenue
source in them here in your
lecture in there is a reading
between the lines about
everything slowing but if
everybody looks to page fifty
two so I can get a brief history
lesson if you look back in new
mexico from o six
you can go to twenty sixteen the
mountain money that we had in
reserves and a budget maybe in
twenty sixteen dollars about
five point three billion minute
guests right in their five point
six and in twenty sixteen
we are bouncing check.
And then we hit this
slow growth
and raised what we want to
reserve target rates to be right
we funded everything we can fund
in new mexico from early
childhood free college to you
name it we've we've got money
and we spent it and we we
targeted things in the right
places I think but they haven't
come to fortune right we're
still in their client in jal
market we're still a slow
economic growth were more
reliant on federal money than
ever before between the labs and
in the federal government and it
will not seem that growth in new
mexico with the man investment
did
but new mexico has never been in
a more stable place than it is
today
this is the most stable economy
in the mexican i've been here
since two thousand and nine and
that was I think they call that
the great recession when they
call in twenty sixteen is he we
still in school then
per oil bust
no you look those jersey ok what
can you do to make a state more
resilient right and less
dependent
and we spent money and we spent
money where we think it would
work and where it would help
but it hasn't come to portion
and we're still got that we've
got that resource curse of oil
and gas that were relying point
fifty percent of our budget and
relying on oil and gas and I I
don't know how we're going to
get there
lemme ask you some questions
on the fed rates cut on federal
lands that I seem in the
presentation that's a cut to
about a hundred seventy million
one point two billion over ten
years
in so is that that's non re
occurring money correct
mr chair
that that is recurring money in
many ways but a lot of it is
already being diverted to other
funds and so the loss isn't
necessarily experienced by the
general funds.
Okay and then.
How have you guys done an
overall look at in this
estimate of what's happening and
can't mean how much this is just
related to you increase in grt
which is our biggest increase
how much is related to inflation
so if we tax the boxes and a box
is really in twenty twenty three
was two dollars and today it's
three dollars and eighty five
cents how much of that
inflationary increase is related
to g r
t could you separate that number
in them sector she looks like
she's.
Mr chair and mister vice chair
we should talk about something
other than a box of serial since
that's your name a car tire but
but yeah if you I i'm not on the
rate slides but
but if you were to look at we
can we can look up the growth
and got you and we can look up
the growth and inflation in the
economic indicators table and
you are correct that inflation
is a part of the growth injurity
as is population which is a
lesser factor right now but it
would be also
but we're on a population
decline less than two two tens
of one percent growth in
population the statement in
mexico but do you know what that
debiation number is because in
order to try to figure out are
we really growing grt or we
really growing it off
inflationary pressures in that's
driving that number higher
mister chairman mr best on page
six of the lfc brief the grt
growth rate was four point nine
percent and so you know we might
have been closer to four maybe a
little below for in terms of
general inflation over that year
maybe even less so I would say
probably around one percent or
more if you're trying to take
the difference between the g r t
growth rate and and the
inflation rate
and you think that's pretty
accurate though
with with we could do better
analysis than had better it it
might be a good magnitude or
anything happened in the economy
right at the economy slows it
slowing in rank ever being
taught to home biller and albert
cricket is always so the new
homes in in too much so it's
slowing the economy slowing
slowing in everywhere certain
sectors are still strong but
certain sectors and on stability
with what's happening in the
federal government and across
the world it is creating nurses
for investments across and
people are holding under cash
and when that happens
we got to figure out what we're
really going to be at if we hit.
Not really gonna color recession
but more state flation because
in and straight are high and
inflation as high and odds are
the economists are seen that
will hit more stage lation
number hit a recession but we
may not hit anything
but we got to really figure out
how to get to true number of
whatever at with growth
we
I can't name an agency in the
state of new mexico that hasn't
received a wind for this early
childhood and secretary sitting
there she got a five hundred
million dollar windfall last
year there there's nothing that
an agency needs
in this next year
they may have wanted
but what are they going to need
and then the question becomes
how these are she's going to
spend that amount of money in
less than six months because
it's six months their cat they
can't spend that money so when
these agencies come forward and
sell we need these increases we
need these increases III think
we're looking at really flat
general fund budget
it can't grow
because expectations in this six
month time period they're
probably not going to achieve
their goals and a lot of the
cabinet sectors leave at that
point
administration on their way out
work slows and new
administrations coming in a come
on board and they don't know
where they're next job is going
to be but as we move forward
can you tell me any place that
you can think of in the state in
new mexico mister secretaria are
that we didn't put money to make
new mexico move forward
we and we can go through that as
is that that's that's fine at me
we we put a lot of money on the
county but we haven't we have to
see their turns but work the
point in new mexico where this
is the most cautious year that
we can be we know that if we
spend and this was our revenue
projections over the last three
years.
Reads every increase by six
percent we can grow to twenty
thirty or that may have changed
now and so now we got to start
tempering down because of aiming
happens to us the snap program
is going to cost us two hundred
and fifty million there's four
hundred sixty eight million new
money there's there's half of it
gone you look at trust that a
hundred and seventy million
dollars and losses in the
federal revenue you look across
the board on everything else
that we're going to have to just
that money disappears in the
instant
and you can't spend everything
out of reserves and you can't
spend everything out of your
phones to try to short up
quickly because we don't know
what's going to happen in the
next three or four years in this
administration
we're wrongly seven eight months
into this administration and
we're we're making a lot of
change so for the next three
years it could be even the
different roller coaster ride in
new mexico's proven itself that
we reduced our increased or bond
reading and we proved ourselves
that we can hold cash and
increase stability in the state
and that's the most important
thing as we move forward to
these revenue forecasts and
spending how we're going to do
that so so we're in a safe place
and we're not in two thousand
and sixteen situation where were
bouncing checks where the
treasure should went to jail but
didn't to pay people new mexico
can never be in that situation
as long as i'm round home we'll
try to keep that straight in
narrowing in and keep us on pat
for investments in spending so
thank you great thank you very
much by share it where you go
next to representative such as
and then represent monday thank
you mr chair is he I think you
mentioned the price per barrel
of oil and I thought you
mentioned that we're pretty
close to the price where a
production there slows down or
stops
I know there is a attempt last
year to increase the taxes on
oil and gas significantly.
Is there any chance that
increase would have knocked us
below that number and stopped
production or slower down.
Mr chairman representative
that's a good question I think
the increase was certainly less
than a percent
I don't know I have to talk my
head was it
point twenty five I was going to
say three quarters so you know I
I guess one way to think about
it is the because it's dependent
on price on on value you could
say that the price breaking
point would increase by that
point five percent of sixty two
dollars a mere or so you know
maybe
at risk of doing quick math
fifty cents or less might be
added to that sort of price
point.
Thank you mister chair
thank you representative lending
thank you mister chairman thank
you secretaries and chief
dollars for your presentation
this morning
a lot of discussion was was made
on non recurring expenses and
the effect that it has not only
just now been into out years
as I I thought of non recurring
it goes to my mind not requiring
being
in my head was the lion shares
probably capitally but it
actually isn't capital they
reflects about eighty percent
thirty percent of that my
recurring spending
and in in for all of us that uh
capital outlet practice and
process is really in many cases
the way that many of our
districts and many of the
communities in our districts get
that drink of water each year
for projects that are really
essential in our communities and
when you think about that thirty
percent of the total last year
for this fiscal year it was
about eight hundred million
dollars in capital outlay and so
as we look at modern the
modernization of capital outlay
to which will have a
presentation on thursday of this
week in regard to the work that
we're doing in that sub group
it's going to be really
important in terms of how we
move forward and looking at the
modernization of capital outlet
and I think for the staff that
are presenting this morning
especially for those in the lfc
group does that mean that
perhaps we need to begin to look
at
managing expectations for
legislators so that senators
can't expect to get for million
dollars plus per member and
house members shouldn't expect
to get two and a half million
per member and the governor get
her share you know I think we
have to begin perhaps to look at
that if that's premature than
tell us why it is premature
further more when we talk about
the practice of spending into
out years how do we manage that
is it better is it okay to
continue to look at spending
into the out years three plus in
the out years to be plus years
into the out years.
Or should we begin to look at
those
current years and spending that
money down and create yours I
think there's a lot of of
variables that we have to be
getting look at right now
i'm reminded again that while
the capital outlay is about
thirty percent of non recurring
forty percent of that goes into
those trust funds that we set up
legislatively so we're not we're
not just blowing money we're
putting money away for for rainy
days it's creating that wall
activity to go down so that
we're not having to figure out
where we're going to find the
money and begin the cut budgets
and begin the cut program so I
think we're doing we're doing
the right things but I think
it's managing for those
expectations in the future so
that
man if somebody has a has a
phone number to trump down to
stop what is doing so that we
can figure out what we're doing
here in this state so that we
can get get get our budget back
in line because I think we were
on the right track but I think
there's a lot of variables as to
what chairman your said earlier
that we're only seven months in
to this
administration we have years
left and so how do we begin to
make sure that new mexico is
safe new mexico is not just
protected but that were
prospering so that we can we can
manage for the future if not
just for the sake of being
politicians around this table
but for the sake of the
constituents back at home
appreciate the time mister
chairman thank you very much
representative next we're going
to go to representative
some good thank you mister chair
I just have one question and
that's as we look at natural gas
who are major purchasers of that
and word as mexico fit into
that.
Mister chair represented it I I
would love to dig to do some
research for you you know most
of it actually is ending up in
in the golf of mexico but in
texas and so from where it goes
from there I don't know that
i've done a a good analysis so
i'd like to do that for you
thank you
thank you represent sovereignty.
Think you chair I think you
offer the presentation so it's a
really helpful I have one
clarifying question
and then
um and then another brief
statement but i'm page thirteen
of the report that you offered
in the money matters you talked
about the loader high lfc
scenario on
the federal policy changes
impacting our revenues and
secretary short and clark also
mentioned a hundred and fifty
million call back from the rre
is that included because if I
add the the revenue lost for the
pit and the set plus the rre
that exceeds the high end of the
estimate so can you clarify that
for me thank you
thank you mister chairman
representative for this chance
clarify it it does not these
only reflect the hr one changes
it letters and so for that
matter it also doesn't this
these tables though don't
include any expected license
from the change in royalty rate
either so royalty rates are sort
of outside of these expectations
think you chair and so should we
in our minds in include like how
do I make sense of the having
those revenues not included the
rre revenues thank you chair
mister chairman representative I
would say that they are baked
into the revenues you know all
of these are are included so you
don't need to necessarily take
them out again
but you know maybe fifty million
dollars a year over the next
three years is is one way if you
are trying to sort of add it up
in a table in your mind thank
you thank you chair and then
finally I just want to note that
the state land office just had
their um highest record for
their oil and gasley sale
auction this morning and it
brought in two hundred and fifty
six million dollars.
And you know last month the
record was fifty six million and
so that's that goes to our
common schools that's you know
our universities are public
schools and and that's money
that we that's like now money
and so i'm wondering if you have
a perspective on that
appointment view on on that
record lease sales thank you
chair.
It if so and if that we can go
with happy to chat off lane
great excellent thank you very
much next we have representative
dixon in center with.
Thank you for the the
presentation i'm always chuck
fall of information so it's
going to take a little bit of
time to uh process but is there
um
I saw that there is a
predictions for the corpus of
the early childhood trust fund
but do we have something
that shows us what we're likely
to see for the behavioural
health trust fund and the
medicare trust fund since we are
now diverting some of that
access revenue.
Mr chairman representative
dickson if I could have you
turned a page twenty one of the
lfc brief there is a behavioural
health trust fund forecast there
sort of towards the bottom of
the page and believe with
highlighted and blue uhm the
medicaid fund has not yet
received any money and
I think if unfortunately we did
not include a separate forecast
for that one but it is included
in I think secretary short and
clerk had a bar graph that
showed small slaces and how much
that find might receive and and
actually it's also on our page
eighteen nineteen and where
expecting about half of the
amount in twenty six twenty
seven and twenty eight so
medicare trust one we might
expect a hundred and thirty
million and twenty six forty
million and twenty seven.
And maybe fifty sixty million in
in twenty eight so hopefully
that's helpful
it is to some accent I guess the
early childhood trust mean
though is approaching ten
billion dollars rate and the
sorry mister chair.
And so ten billion dollars is
um.
Producing her providing the
general fund with five hundred
million dollars so you know
what is it is there any chance
that the behavioral health trust
fund or the medicare trust fund
are going to get to those levels
in a period of time that's going
to be useful because a billion
dollar trust fund only spends
our fifty million and uhm i'm
just I want to make sure that is
we're discussing
setting money in a trust fund
that we are cognisant of the
amount that it returns um
mr chair and is it the other
thing I just wanted to flag was
that on page thirty six
I think of this is an uh from
the secretary sharon clarks um
presentation or secretary props
actually had this slide
that
the table is showing that in
fiscal year thirty it's
estimated that the state
investments ah the investment
income will exceed
the revenue from oil and gas is
that correct.
Mister chairman and members of
the committee
i'm having a little trouble
reading the number in that top
blue bar but it's getting very
close if it's not there
absolutely thank you mr chair
thank you secretary I mean and
that is a light sooner than I
think a lot of folks had
anticipated and that's I meant
wonderful news particularly
given sort of the volatility in
other revenue sources that were
sort of experiencing so I just
wanted to highlight that thank
you mister chair.
Thank you very much now go to
senator what's
thank you german
according to your revenue
estimates income tax revenues
and twenty twenty six declined
by.
One hundred ninety seven million
from twenty twenty five and yet
growth receipts revenues
increased by a hundred and sixty
six million and twenty six from
the twenty five levels
now that the plan in tax
revenues and negotiate increases
that do you said to tax payers
participating.
Have you done anything about
that participation in increase
spending other than grocery
seats that's where you're
showing
the benefits to new mexico
is who gross receipts taxes.
So
that's pretty significant.
And yet now.
The revenue estimates states at
the recently adopted federal
budget recognization bill house
uh.
Number one the house uh.
Has
got two hundred and six point
eight million average impact on
the state revenues.
Across physical year twenty six
to twenty two thirty.
In these estimates include
changes to standard deductions.
No tax on car interest loans
higher limits on deductions for
state and local taxes which is
assault.
Various business related
provisions and changes to
medicaid.
But I don't think you've made
any
reference in your estimates on
the revenues in back should your
legislature decide to mirror the
federal tax law in terms of no
tax on tips.
No tax on overturn pay.
Or the new senior citizen
deduction related society.
Have you given a thought to that
whatsoever that we mac decided
to give those tax breaks to new
mexicans
mister chairman and senator
woods as usual the consensus
revenue estimate reflects
current law at the time it's
made and of course we can have
future legislative sessions with
tax and appropriation changes
and if those were enacted at
that point they would become
part of the consensus estimate.
I hope that answered your
question well I understand
mister chairman I understand
what you're saying how can we
see in the future you don't know
what the future is and yet with
these
these deductions that to
personal income tax.
In the federal level there has
to be some revenue in cities
in the state for grocery seats.
I mean if we're given more money
to people to spend
the gun probably spending
and so you know twenty six
hundred dollars to each senior
citizen that kind of money
that's let's go feel like a
a gift and they'll probably
spend it that we
have we calculated the number of
senior citizens that that's
going to affect it where that
money increased that revenue
increase might help us in what
i'm trying to do is offset the
two hundred and six million here
is is my thanking and and all
that may be plumbed outside the
box and and like you say how can
you do that it's all a guess but
kind of what we're doing is a
gas right so this cheer at this
if you would call me please
chief thought is on this too but
mister chair and senator woods
you're correct that there are
provisions of the federal bill
that will have dynamic effects
on this new mexico enemy and
revenues and some of those will
be positive in the some of them
will be negative like to the
extent you're saying senator
woods that uh if the federal
bill puts more money back in the
pockets of certain new mexicans
they may spend that that may
drive consumption higher which
drives due to p growth etc but
we've also offset that with
expectations for a trade war and
tariffs which are attacks on
those same folks i'm so there
are dynamic impacts another one
that's interesting as the
dynamic impact of um you know
reducing snap benefits makes
more food deductible which
increases the states hold
harmless there's there's any
number of
changes that are indirect
impacts of that bill yes
have you uh i'm sorry.
That was mr chair that that was
great I was I was you know
changes to snap and medicaid
necessarily might decrease
income so there's some
offsetting effects but I I think
in a way we do attempt to
capture it through our national
forecasters who estimate the
economic impact of all of those
changes which translate down to
consumption to the consumption
level and I think I just want to
really flag that I don't I don't
think our forecasters have fully
understood that the the total
impact and so we may see changes
to the to the positive certainly
if if economic activity grow it
is better because of these
changes but I also want to
highlight another potential you
know I think we highlighted in
the brief
upside is more construction on a
border wall is direct g r t for
the state and so that that's a
potential upside too but there
are some confounding economic
impacts to income in new mexico
and we we are
estimate those through the
general economic expectations
for consumption gdp and so forth
in in mister as you say the
construction over all we've
pushed millions and may and to
dollars into uh contractors to
be add on projects and some of
the projects have increased
costs but thirty percent and yet
that thirty percent we've been
fit through the gross receipts
tax on that increase just like
if if terrible pushed goods up
we we benefit from the the
grocery seats tax all those
higher costs so you know
I am.
I've got mixed feelings
about uh
the gross the the terrorists on
food coming into our country but
are also no it costs more to
raise food in this country than
our country we have lost our
green chili production
interstate due to the labor cost
being so high in the rules that
we have to
do here and might it be that we
bring those industries such as
green chile back into our state.
If their own more level plan
feel.
Which increases are income tax
which increases our gross
receipts tax I know we're not
going to get rich off green
jelly but I do realize that that
we are importing a lot of food
in our nation.
And if we raise the price of
that commodity the bear
commodity.
That would help our american
farmer to to.
Have his ability and when a
farmer gets money moved here a
guarantee he spent
its a move and targeted to pass
that rate on through so
thank you for your comment thank
you very much we have five more
folks and I have a couple of
quick questions so we're and
we'll cut it off at ten so we've
got fifteen more minutes we'll
go next to represent dow and
then send out.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you for the presentations i'm
looking at page thirty nine and
I believe last year our budget
was around eleven billion
dollars an over three billion of
that was new revenue am I
understanding that even with
that three billion dollars or
plus we still transferred money
from reserves to balance our
budget.
The.
The.
Mr chair and representative in
FY twenty five we do expect that
an operating reserve transfer
will need to be me to the to the
spending account the operating
reserve is is part of reserves
but it's in many ways
a spending account for the
legislature so that's not
uncommon but to your point yes
ninety three from reserves to
the spending account.
Thank you thank you mr chair and
then um.
I'm.
Wondering about the two hundred
and eighteen executive orders on
the south work fire and the salt
fire lincoln county there's
eighty nine executive orders and
chavis county for the floods.
There is twelve executive orders
on trout fire and great county
the national guard at a cost of
about nine seven hundred and
fifty thousand a month um I
think that's well over two
hundred million how do how do we
account for
hundreds of executive orders.
How are they where you are day
on this budget.
The.
Mr chairman representative eh
you can find that on the general
fund financial summary which is
in both presentations but in the
LFC it is twenty and twenty one
and i'm frequently that will
show up as uh disaster
allotments coming out of the
appropriation contingency fine
also reserves or the operating
reserve also reserves so that
doesn't show up necessarily on
them.
On the line item for total
spending
thank you mister
one more question.
We've created a lot of funds
hundreds of them actually and
therefore special projects and
receiving them for rainy days or
whatever they may be have you
done a breakdown of which of
those revert to the general fund
and tough times and what stays
as um.
Earmarked for those special
funds do we know.
Mr chairman representative
really only a few come to mind
the taxibilization reserve the
early child to trust find the
grow I think now the behavioral
in the medicaid i'll have
provisions that allow for use in
in revenue declines but they
don't necessarily just
automatically revert or or make
a transfer without um
appropriation but for that
matter you know other funds may
or may not depending be
available to you whether or not
they explicitly say in a
revenue.
Downturn thank you mister and
then I would just say that you
know the amount of money that
the state hasn't reserves we are
a very very fortunate state and
it is ironic that we have the
poorest population in the nation
and it is ironic that businesses
are operating month to month and
weeks away from shuttering and
it is ironic to me that.
Had we made investments in
generational wealth for our
citizens they'd have a little
bit of a buffer for a rainy day
they'd be able to weather
changes in in economic crisis so
it just I hope that we can think
strategically and I like a lot
of the ideas about switching
from generational poverty to
generational wealth you know
these common funds that we can
can pass on and help people out
of poverty jobs that live that
lead to wealth instead of
funding general studies and I
think there's a lot of smart
people in this state who can
find solutions that that not
only create wealth at the
government level but for the
citizens that level mexico and
caught home thank you thank you
very much center next we'll go
to senator pity and then senator
share
thank you very much chairman and
thank you to the presenters the
secretaries and chief
authorities are you're doing
outstanding work we really
appreciate this kind of
knowledge when we make decisions
here so mister chairman i'm back
on page fourteen item left hand
corner here you have a funds or
reductions needed to meet
stressed tests scenario do you
have AAA category in there for
what you already know about
potential federal cuts.
The.
Mr chair and center that's a
great question this would be
no additional federal impacts
and a low oil price scenario i'm
or at a low oil price scenario
so if you want to build in
expectations for you know.
Back feeling you could.
Maybe maybe incorporate them to
this analysis or maybe a better
way of thinking about it is if
you have a a appropriation
target which you know
the committee will develop say
four percent the back filling
would have to be inclusive of
that four percent target so you
could kind of think of it either
in the reserve side or or maybe
on the spending site in okay so
so chairman I don't think that
this is going to be the only
year that you mexico is going to
have to deal with this so I I
hope that you may be start
thinking about how best to blend
that in there and put that in
the blender when you're making
the cake or the whatever okay so
please put that in there as well
I guess another question I have
then is on that same line is how
much do you trust the data
that's coming out of the feds
right now because you have all
sorts of things going on at the
bls you have a number of other
things I how comfortable and if
anyone wants to comment on this
but maybe chief daughters you
could how comfortable are we
with the stuff that's going to
affect new mexico that it's
accurate and.
That being someone throwing
something at a dark board or
something.
This.
Mr chairman senator something
were definitely keeping an eye I
think we're still trusting the
data and.
I think you know you know to the
extent that we can validate
through other sources is is
going to be useful in the future
yeah and I don't want to put you
on the spot or anything but
please be thinking about that
like how to validate some of
this data because these are
obviously huge numbers and huge
impacts for new mexico and then
the last thing chair that i'll
mention I know you have other
people on your list is when is
it the best time for us to have
a special session if there is
one because it seems like i've
i've heard that maybe there's
the potential to have one in
september but won't we have our
final sort of stabshot on
october first of what what's
going to come out of our or
federal scenario should we wait
till after that I don't know
that we should be having a
special session before we know
exactly what the story is for
new mexico.
And this chairman of members are
committed instead of a video
discussions with our the timing
of the special session i'm not
in the room for those I think we
have a pretty good idea right
now um obviously we have the uh
updated consensus revenue
forecast there is as we all know
some uncertainty as to the
extent of somebody impacts from
that actions or inactions but I
think we have a pretty good
handle on those as well between
your staff and the staff at the
fa in the staff at a taxation of
revenues I don't know what data
would come before between now
and october first or november
first of whatever the special
session is that would
necessarily change change the
numbers or change what we know
okay well that's that chair
that's good to know then I
thought we were going to be we
needed to wait for some massive
nine hundred page report to come
out for us to understand what
was going to happen to new
mexico
and then so on the flip side of
that does it make sense to to
have that kind of a debate
knowing in say an october
november time frame knowing that
we're all going to be seeing all
of our lovely faces in on the
middle of january again should
we be having that conversation
then or do you wish to comment
on that or would we just be
complicating everything by
making changes at that point.
As chairman and
members of the committee and
senator I mean I I go back to a
point that actually
representative dixon mate for
example if during a special
session you decided to take some
money.
And put it in to the medicaid
fun now
to begin earning interest.
Uh instead of waiting until a
regular session
bill signing uh implementation
date I think argue argument
could be made that are doing
some things now
would have long term benefits
that I think you really have to
be very strategic about the
amounts make they have to be
significant amounts of money if
you're going to do something
like that but I do think there
is some merit to making
investments as soon as possible
so that we can begin earning
that eighth wonder the world of
compounding interest wonderful
well thank you chair and I
really appreciate those comments
because I think we have an
opportunity maybe to get
together on a couple of other
subjects we're especially in why
don't we just take established
some of these things that we
know about to hit a straight on
so I thank you very much chair
thank you down to six minutes to
go and on to senator share than
represent dunk center share
thank mister chair thank you
first per man secretary you
talked about and I asked this
question all time participation
rate versus just unemployment is
our participation rate changing
any or are we still below the
national on that senator sharer
let me just and mrperiod chair
let me find that slide where we
give those figures page twelve
thank you.
And i'll operate it by saying we
know look at the stater but I
don't think that the national
and the new mexico trend have
diverged significantly since our
last estimate
so I write
it's not late twelve.
Well i'm not finding it I know
it's and most lights somewhere
but but the national and the new
mexico trends are
of seven thank you are
relatively unchanged and we do
still lag behind the national
labor force participation
I think you listen to that slide
seven.
So mr chair I think that that's
always something to to look at
okay so if if you've got ten
people in the state and five of
them are looking for a job
then you got fifty percent but
if you got the same ten people
as state but only once looking
for a job while it's ten percent
so are you
just keeping that
in perspective I think it's
important I do want to share
just them some thoughts here
with the investment our revenue
so you know our permanent funds
work actually create it so that
when we ran out of natural
resources we would have enough
investment income to pay for
schools that's why it was
created nineteen ten k
within the severance tax in
nineteen seventy something too I
think
but
so this is all great to oil and
gases dumped ton of money in
there in and now
investment income is going to be
at twenty percent massive
analysis a direct oil and gas
revenues at twenty percent most
mentals
but if we lose either one of
those will then the taxes on
everything else have to go up by
twenty percent
so in the and that's because
we're the more money we get the
more money we spend so we're not
you know if it the ideas that we
would have a flat budget if we
didn't have to increase taxes
when when the
resources ran out
so I think it's great that oil
and gases has built all these
funds I also want to point out
that the you know the power of
compound interest is like a
super power
and we've rated our permanent
funds at least twice that I know
of okay I call it a radio so the
people all know is raining okay
great where would we be today
that's kind of a question that's
almost unanswerable but a
question where would we have
been today had we not dipped
into the permanent funds twice
in the last quarter of the
century i'm.
By my calculations which are not
near as good as is mr tourists I
know okay
shows that we would be at about
twenty five percent of our our
general fund could be funded
through through investment had
we not done something under
richardson and again more
recently
so
when you keep that in mind.
You know it's it now we're
seeing it okay where would we
have been before great would
have more money today had we not
done it and and when we dipped
into the permanent funds before
because we had solved the
problem we insolve the problem
education was a miserable when
richardson did it in his
miserable
all the way from them till now
also that money didn't change
anything except that it might
have been valuable to us today
had we stopped trying to get
into it then or not got into it
the
I hope that that we will now
view this as real revenue in
stop going after it as if it's
destoyed money so cause it is
real revenue now.
The other thing that we talk
about is the volatility while
we've always had volunteerity
this is nothing new it's not
trumps fault it's not key the
the terrible ideas that trade
wards and everything's going to
go up by five hundred percent
and we're all going to diet
because we can't afford to
anything well it had happened
okay
in fact nothing has happened
other weird things normally wind
up when you bomb places like it
ran or any place in the middle
east when there's a two year war
going on price of oil skyrocks
it and it didn't happen no that
happened something's different
in the world now okay so I think
the
the the fear of course is
natural for us as human beings
but I think that things are not
nearest is ugly as is it's been
trade here because we palmed
around in a price foil actually
went down not up
of course you know are entire
exercise there was twenty
minutes
but I also think that we need to
look at
our entire tax policy or what
we're doing we are not overtaxed
in new mexico we just don't know
how we're taxed in new mexico
even madame secretary over here
can't understand all twelve
thousand pages of this stuff I
think it's only twelve hundred
pages but still she's she's the
only one that's close
and so the cpa's that are all of
all of the industries that
they're looking at here going on
understand this let's move on to
arizona texas or anywhere but
here
so I do think that when we're
talking about a revenue
estimates we have plenty of
opportunities to do things data
centers want to come somewhere
denise setters need power the
reliable power of america today
is natural gas who has natural
gas new mexico so we could have
data centers right here we don't
have to sell our natural guest
anywhere else and will win sell
to.
Our data center right and
farmington assuming we had a
data center in farmington and we
were allowed to open up the of a
power plan to get burned natural
gas moves we just got out of our
own way we would sell more
natural gas to ourselves than we
could sell to the rest of the
world.
And then alvisor in new mexico
by the way
by current things about three
hundred years worth of natural
gas at current standard so you
know it's it's it's what's going
away but i'll start because
somebody else wants to thank you
very much center sir we're gonna
go to represent dunkin and then
represent a data from some
dunkin thank mischer is he
you've told me not to worry and
so i'm not worried we're we're
doing fine
mr charges quick question
we've talked about the knee
perhaps of back filling and not
back filling
are you ready to tell us what we
probably should back fill in
what we shouldn't make fill.
Mrperiod chair representative no
but I I know that the staff is
working hard on analyzing that
and i'm sure you all will be
getting recommendations from us
in due time great thank you
thank mister thank you very much
for some dunkin reservation
please.
Thank you mister chair
is mail and looking at a page
fourteen of your presentation on
the other forecast rios
a lot of these things we have
new mexico legislators can't do
anything about global conflict
is an honor is in in our lane
however the film tax credit
payments are how much do we spin
last year on film tax credits.
That is a great question and mr
chair
there there's
a whole conversation we we
skipped over further in the
interest of time but we actually
saw those credits
sort of an aberration
we only had thirty four million
claimed in that year but if you
turn to
age
nine of the brief
you can see what it's been over
time you know we had been over a
hundred million for a few years
and what we think happened was
taxpayers who probably
would have would have otherwise
been expected to claim tax
credits in the past year didn't
and they're in the pipeline they
have already been approved for
those credits and those are
likely to show up in the coming
year so we think it might be you
know close to two hundred
million in the next year and
that's part of the uncertainty
we're talking about there
thank you for that and I I
really do think we we need to
address those figures a i've got
that for many years and then I
hope to present legislation to
do that thank you great thank
you very much for that
that wraps us up I want to take
a big just quick moment to thank
the consensus revenue team for
all the economics and the t
members with five year mister
gray family and others can you
guys raise your hand one more
time thank you all very much
this is a deeply important
exercise that i've had the
privilege to see refine and
improve
from a very strong product the
decisions that we're going to be
tasked with making as we have
this flattening of revenue and a
much more sort of turbulent
chaotic and challenging overall
picture particularly at the
federal level it just really
reinforces how important the
decisions that we work on
collectively and that's just a
big thank you to the members for
really great questions uh and
dignity.
Thank you all very much madame
secretary with invite you and
your team up here
and mr gere mosely whose
knows their stretch of last
cruise as well
were very.
Please at his part of lsc one
thank him for his work at h a f
c this past session and now
excited with uh doctor denandez
to be here today so mister
moseley startus off members
we're going to go quickly we do
have to get on the bus is at
eleven so
i'll be quiet we'll go through
the presentations any questions
that we have that we don't are
unable to address before we get
on the buses will make sure that
we get addressed offline thank
you very much mister
mosle
good morning mrperiod chair
members of the committee I am dr
doctor a leger and numbers and
today my colleague mostly and I
will be discussing that early
children cannot build your
report which you will find in
tab and we will move as quickly
as possible the early childhood
accountability report is
completed by lfc staff every two
years and aims to understand how
young children in the state are
doing while focusing on brand
new systems that are intended to
improve outcomes for children's
children and families the main
finding of this report is that
finding levels remain sufficient
and the implementation remains
an issue and every topic area
that we will discuss
looking at the report this is a
unique report at the lfc does
and so I just want to take a
minute to walk you through what
it looks like to the first two
pages will go over funding and
main findings of their port
and then if you skip to the
fourth page what you'll see as
you'll see health safety if
you're ready to ever child as
ready to learn by kander garden
and how educated they are by
third grade as you can see from
these measures which were taken
from twenty twenty to today that
we are doing about worse or the
same that we were to it years
ago when this report was
completed most recently and so
from that what you can see is
that as you all and it's the
legislature have continued to
convest
we aren't seeing the outcomes
that were originally predicted
when you chose to invest this
money.
And so then if you put flip to
page five what you'll see is
that this is how every I page
locks and from that you will see
a headline banner that has the
main outcomes that are necessary
for each of the focus areas that
will be discussing and then and
top of that will have a deeper
dive in analysis that you are
free to read on the bus and we
are happy to discuss more
so if we return back to the
first page what you'll see in
chart when i'm page one and as I
alluded to earlier
be
my apologies.
So as you can see and chart one
on page one you allows the
legislature have made huge
investments in early childs had
programs particularly in child
care assistance in pre
kindergarten in fiscal year two
thousand and twelve funding for
early childhood programs were
was less than two hundred
million dollars in fiscal year
twenty twenty six early
childhood funding amounted to
nine hundred and eighteen
million dollars.
Turning to page three if you
well
you will find that early
childhood programs in the state
of new mexico begin prenatally
and go all the way hast age five
to age thirteen for childcare
assessors and today we will be
discussing childcare systems pre
kindergarten for three and four
year olds family infinite
hobbier program which you may
also know as idea per b or c and
early intervention and then our
final two programs are home
visiting and child's welfare
with that in mind I ask you to
turn to page five
so child cares a sense provides
a child care subsidy for
families working or going to
school for children from six
weeks to thirteen years of age
as you can see and start too
since fiscal year twenty twenty
three families of up to four
hundred percent of the federal
poverty level are eligible for
child care assistant subsidy and
today's earnings that means that
a family of three can make a
hundred and six point six
thousand dollars and still
remain eligible for child care
subsidies
however previous alace reports
have found positive benefits of
childcare assistance including
increasing families earnings
despite this outside staff
conducted analysis which
confirmed previous analysis
showing that those enrolled in
child's care assistance were
less academically prepared for
kindergarten when compared to
students attending pre
kindergarten regardless of
quality reading of child care
center.
Moreover if you continue down
the page you will see that new
the new mexico child care system
has less capacity both generally
and for low income families
turning to table one on page six
I have seen staff analysis
founded state why there are
thirty two child care slots for
every hundred children under the
age of two in new mexico
additionally if you look at
chart for according to the
cradle to career policy
institute at the university of
new mexico between fault twenty
nineteen and spring twenty
twenty three childcare system
capacity declined by three
percent mostly through the loss
and registered child care homes
which are fifty one percent
reduction during the four year
period
moreover
if you look at the last column
data provided by ecd indicates
that registered homes dropped
from six thousand to three
thousand in a two year period
registered childhood homes are
predominantly used by families
of color as they offer more
flexibility meaning that
conserve non traditional working
families better
focusing on low income families
the ccpi report also found a two
point nine percent reduction in
twenty nineteen and the number
of child care system slots being
used by families with incomes at
or below a hundred percent of
the federal poverty level
while branding the eligibility
port of four hundred percent of
the federal poverty level means
that more families have access
to child care assistance than
ever before the additional
capacity disproportionately
serves higher income families in
this category meaning that low
income families are accessing
child care systems less than
they did four years ago this
indicates the third legislature
may want to focus policies
towards both income high risk
families.
Finally new mexico child care
teacher wages remained below
administrator wages in us since
it's data administrator regions
are ring to second in the
country while child care workers
wages are ranked fifteen
importantly teacher pay has
improved since the twenty
nineteen accountability report
think you I will now turn it
over to mr mosle to further
discuss early childhood programs
thank you doctor hernandez
mister chair members of the
committee as previously
mentioned my name is gary and
i'm a program evaluator at lfc
if you will turn with me to page
seven we will examine the pre
kindergarten program.
Pre kindergarten is offered
through local in public through
local public schools and
community based organizations
including home based child care
child care centers and head
starts and the twenty twenty
four to twenty twenty five
school year almost fifteen
thousand children weren't rolled
in state funded pre
kindergarten.
Previous lfc research has found
that students who enrolled in
state funded pre kind of garden
had better assessment scores
higher high school graduation
rates were held back from early
grades less frequently were less
likely to be referred to special
education services and had fewer
disciplinary issues than their
appears who did not attend
precaution garden
funding for pre kindergarten
group by four hundred eighteen
percent since fy eighteen going
from fifty two point three
million dollars to two hundred
seventy two million dollars in
fy twenty six.
Increases in funding have
resulted in more children being
a rolled throughout the state
with nearly three thousand more
children in rolled in fy twenty
five then fy nineteen
looking at charts six you will
see that lfc staff estimates
that if five thousand more low
income students participated and
one of the highest performing
pre kindergartens approximately
two thousand or ten percent more
students would enter pre
kindergarten enter kindergarten
proficient and reading if you
turn to page eight you will see
that new mexico pre kindergarten
faces large disparities in
teacher preparation between
school based in community based
providers in the twenty twenty
two to twenty twenty three
school year ninety six percent
of school based pre kindergarten
teachers held a batch lose
degree or higher while only
thirty one percent of community
based teachers did per reviewed
studies and prior lfc research
indicates teacher education
level matters when it comes to
early childhood educational
outcomes as pre kindergarten
continues to expand strategic
implementation is needed if you
turn to page nine you will see a
map of each school district in
the state noting the number of
preconduring slots available to
four year olds wow about eighty
percent of the states eighty
nine school district serve more
than half of the four year olds
within that district roughly
twenty percent mostly rural
districts served less than fifty
percent of four year olds in fy
twenty four
if you will now turn to me to
page ten we'll examine the
family infant told their
program.
The family infinite told their
program or fit provides early
intervention services for
children from birth to age three
who have or maybe at risk for
developmental delays
disabilities and serious medical
conditions the program works to
limit future intervention
required based on a child's
delays and is projected a served
nearly seventeen thousand
children during fy twenty six
for five twenty six the state
appropriate seventy six million
dollars for fit and increase of
twenty two percent from fy
twenty five fit operates at no
cost to families in new mexico
regardless of income level
between july twenty twenty four
and may twenty twenty five
seventy percent of participants
received medicare however the
state may be slightly under
billing for medicaid meaning the
state is losing out on crucial
federal dollars underfit states
have the option about in an
eligibility category for
children at risk for
developmental delays the
percentage of children
oh and if you look at table
three you will see that new
mexico is the second largest
state for enrollment for at risk
the percentage of children ages
zero through three and rolled in
fit grew from seven point nine
percent and twenty twenty two to
eleven point two percent and
twenty twenty three the increase
in a roman may indicate new
mexico's under three population
is becoming more at risk of
having developmental delays or
that ecds and rolling eligible
children who had not been
previously enrolled further
monitoring is needed to better
understand increase in a roman
and fit within the state
if you turn with me to page
eleven we will examine home
visiting
home visiting is an educational
program for expecting families
and families with children under
five as table four demonstrates
eccd offer seven different home
visiting program types each with
a different completion timeline
depending on family need an
interest.
Depending on the program
benefits include improving
maternal and child health school
readiness economic self
sufficiency positive parenting
practices and a reduction in
childman treatment and FY twenty
five the state spent fifty one
million dollars on home visiting
and in fy twenty four seven
thousand seven hundred seventy
five children reserved
new mexico's rates of home
visiting completion are
significantly lower than the
national rates while low
completion interaction our
problem nationwide national
research shows that when family
stay in home visiting for the
expected length they are more
likely to get greater benefits
examining chart nine you can see
that only thirteen percent of
families who left the home
visiting program had completed
the program completion rates
doubled in fy twenty four
compared to fy twenty three
however children treatment rates
for families and rolled in home
visiting increased from point
six two and fy twenty one to one
percent in fy twenty four
although there are several
factors that may contribute to
this increase it is important
the state continues to monitor
how providers deliver home
visiting to ensure it is
delivered as intended thank you
I will now turn it back to
doctor hernandez to conclude
with the discussion on child
welfare thank you turning to
page twelve
new mexico consistently rings
worse than the national average
and key child safety to six in
some cases by significant
margins in fact now treatment in
the state is forty seven percent
higher than the national average
and the childman treatment rate
is seventy percent higher than
the national average.
Additionally looking at her ten
you will see that repeat
maltreatment rates hover around
fifteen percent
this leads to significant
recommendations focused on
evidence based programs looking
at figure to with an our
treatment prevention secondary
intershare prevention strategies
are aimed at families with great
risk factors during the twenty
twenty five legislation
legislative session you are made
significant reforms that child's
welfare system ten courage
preventative strategies by
passing senate bill forty two
implementation of both family
first prevention services act or
the ffpsa plan and multi level
response would help to address
repeat mail treatment a new
mexico does not have an approved
ffpsa plan despite cypt
initially submitting a plan in
september twenty two absence of
an approved plan by the federal
government makes new mexico
ineligible to receive federal
funding to implement evidence
based programs in the federal
title for e clearing house.
Additionally our c and ourselves
suggest the state may experience
cost savings ranging from four
point nine million to ten point
eight million due to the
implementation of a multi level
of response system if
implemented with fidelity
evidence face models national
data demonstrates that fourteen
percent of cases screamed by
child protective services use
differential response or multi
level response and twenty twenty
two c y accepted twenty thousand
reported cases of abuse or
neglect if new mexico were to
refer fourteen percent of the
twenty thousand cases to an
alternative response instead of
an investigation roughly two
thousand eight hundred cases rid
receive an alternative response
through the passage of sp forty
two you all as the legislature
required both in fps plan and
multi level response
implementation state wide
returning to page two
you will find the key findings
of this report
ultimately I have seen also
indicates that funding levels
remain sufficient and the
implementation remains an issue
across the board thank you
thank you very much doctor
nunders and mister
madam secretary will turn over
to you
and good morning mister chair
members of the committee I am
thrilled to be here with you
today thanks to the bold vision
of government or michelle
hungrish and the bipartisan
leadership of the legislature
new mexico is leading the nation
in building a universal family
centered high quality community
based early childhood system
that is
And we prioritize universal
aspects to slots at a rate that
is exorbitantly faster than
we're graduating any
professionals that were able to
offer professional developments
we shouldn't be surprised when
we see
a decline in the quality of our
staff because we're not training
them at the rate that were
growing slips that's I mean it's
just a fact we give waivers to
cyfd on social work I think less
than four percent of our social
workers i'm I know this is the
child welfare pages not
necessarily you but when less
we've got more social workers in
home visiting programs and we do
it cyfd and the home visiting
programs are voluntary
so we're we're we're doing we're
making good investments but
we're not putting them all where
the evidence based outcomes are
which could have the greatest
impact so i'm concerned about
this rethink have you I know
they're over two hundred people
came to the early trial hit
advisory committee and over
hundred on the follow up very
concerned about the change of
star five on accreditation
moving those are credited
programs these are are our
beautiful community based
programs that were the
demonstration models for all
this expansion to be moved to
star level for have you
rethought that and why aren't
you working with your crediting
bodies to more line with what
you're looking for then just
eliminating them as the highest
level of quality
mister chair representative dow
so the accreditation
conversation is improcessed and
it's um the if the accrediting
body meets the criteria of the
focus redesign the state will
absolutely consider it as a five
star so those are the the that
has been shared through the sub
committee and for the advisory
council and so that is still
under consideration and in our
september meeting and silver
city won't be talking with the
advisory council about about
that and is this report showed
quality did not seem to indicate
better out comes for children
and so I think it's something
that.
You know talking to director
silly and others as we make
these investments you know what
are we what are we buying and
what is that investment giving
back into into the state so I
think it's a a good question and
the cross walk has to happen
under the focus redesign with
the seven a crediting bodies
that the state currently accepts
as a five star thank you
mrperiod chair and thank you
secretary I would just not that
mona sorry it's not part of that
while drops not part of that
they are already excluded from
one of those seven a crediting
bodies and I think when you talk
about community and parent
choice and voluntary access to a
variety types of programs that
this would take us in the wrong
direction so I just want to have
if this body only focuses on one
page five page four and five of
this hand out is is pretty
telling I mean i'm am a got a
sera county which has third
lesson thirty four percent of
adults have a high school
diploma higher yesterday the
medicaid report showed that over
seventy percent of the folks are
dependent on medicaid or snap or
some sort of government
assistance and this is saying
that forty nine percent of those
kids from the most attributes
families in our state one of the
three most at risk counties that
fifty percent of them are
developmentally deliveredly on
track on every developmental
area
and then thirty percent are at
risk in a win area that's that's
seventy percent I don't think
the categories system has been
able to say that for a very long
time and when you look at the
number of children that are
unfit most of them might have an
ip
I don't know what more you want
from these providers I don't I
don't want to I don't want to
take up any more time but I do
want to be on the record saying
that I would like a separate
meeting with you i've not gotten
this many calls from parents
providers early childhood
experts across the state
expressing concerns whether it's
fit home visiting and there are
a lot of concerns about this big
pivot and I would like to meet
and get some follow up but I
want to be on the record.
Because there's no amount of
money that we can spend to reach
these goals
so if if it public school had
kids in each grade at seventy
percent proficiency we'd
probably all be stouting from
the rooftops in this room thank
you thank you very much for have
down next year representative
chapel
thank you mister chair
I start off by cover meaning the
secretary on what she's done
what she's done she done well
there is no way to separate her
job completely from cyfd in in
my mind and I see where where to
worry about a lot of the same
children so forgive me a
some of this does not fall under
your perview but I think uh it
bears bringing up right now and
in the is I look at a in our
report the the staff report i'm
looking at page for and says
inform mortality his worse
lowbars weight is worse
rate of babies more and
substance exposed is worse early
access to prenatal care is the
same abuse or an elected neglect
death is worse rate of tel
maltreatment is the same rate of
foster care placement his worse
repeat male treatment is worse
in that I once again I will say
i'm a point that you I think a
lot of this comes under CYFD but
I know you have some up overlap
i'm hoping maybe you can help us
out with this okay that's the
reason i'm bringing it up we got
to have to do something about
this
reading which would be the older
kids a little better reading low
income kids is better so after
the kids going to get their
freedom most of these things are
our better
math is worse.
Uh.
Rate of children under five
reasons in poverty is a little
worse
I would just call this out to
bring attention to the fact that
our youngest kids are struggling
I might have some things in
common with the chairman that
maybe there needs to be some
something additionally put in
there for those very young
families especially the care of
families but I would add to that
I don't think it should be a
freebie I think it should be
mandatory that if you are
addicted to drugs and you have a
baby then it's no longer you're
freedom you have another little
right life in another little
responsibility that you have
taken on and I think that are
current mandates should be
amandated I think it should be
not your not a choice but a
mandate and and uh I also
believe that there needs to be
an enormous revamping of CYFD
which you will know I worked
with them faster our treatment
foster care provider I am very
familiar with the with the
institution and the process but
I do think that we have a
problem in new mexico network
drugs uh it's finally other
drugs uh in that is
filling over into our children
and our children's future and we
need a stop at here and we need
to provide those children with
what they need to become healthy
for deductive members of society
so that we stop this uh
like hereditary
drug abuse poverty cycle we need
to shut it up now thank you for
your time thank you very much
for which I feel next we have
same garrett at ata and then let
and will in the concern to buy
some.
What you're going we're going to
wrap up at eleven
k short answers we can get
longer answers offline
first and response to what jack
chuck feel just said I sometimes
think what we need is not
financial planning for high
school but family science and
care so that we can cut off some
these problems before they start
on page thirteen you mention
that the family first prevention
services act but still has it
been completed and were now
three and a half years can you
give us any kind of update I
sell mister chair members of the
committee I as far as I am aware
the fps plan has still not been
approved
by the federal government
I think you and then what is the
impact of federal governments
said they don't want to have a
documentary children and had
start is that effecting us any
update on that
mister chair representative
garrett and we work closely I
had start collaboration director
with a headstart association and
at this point there have been
different
it has not impacted right now
because they don't collect
information on children and
children's status so there's
been some reversal and i'm i'll
get to the exact update though
that's been some emails going up
the last week or so but so far
our headstart programs are
staying strong and um
serving all the families thank
you and mister chair in the on
page fire it sells that child
care center star level ratings
to not contribute to a child's
likelihood have been determined
proficient when testing for
kindergarten language arts
abilities is done with thai
station my pet people is there
any effort to test them and
third grade because many are
star centers focus very much on
the whole shild and I would be
interested to know how that hurt
child has a few late years
later.
Any effort to extend that so mr
chair representative garrett as
of right now we have not done
any analysis with third grade
however
excuse me.
Representative good in the
twenty nineteen told evaluation
I believe we did look at the
great proficiency we did not see
any significant impacts in
regards to store level one child
positions.
Thinking and research are my
less question is over embracing
the dolly partner mention a
should library zero of five and
I think if we can study the
impact of that because plain
with books is very significant
that's just my final
recommendation thank you thank
you reserve a better than
representative center in device.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you all for your presentation
and thank you for all of this
information it'll take some time
to go through that but I deeply
appreciate all the work that
you've done in providing facts
for us to understand.
Mah for those of you who don't
know around the table I the land
of foundation rights director we
started the first home visit
steady on home visitation over
twenty years ago
at the state gave us a we raised
a million the state gave us a
matching million to do a
AAA five year study on home
visitation which we did and we
found the first foreign program
to be a a commendable program I
would like to say that the state
still uses for this point
but you should know that local
proof hiders
have complained that you know
they'd love to use first born
but the state reimburses state
really recommends the family's
first because we get a medicaid
reimbursement on that do I get
that yes
but I still have problems with
accepting federal money that
limits what we can do especially
when we have money but I I will
go on from there just ask a few
questions
i'm i'm comp i'm curious what
you mean by completion in home
visiting what what what is
completion of a home visiting
programming so o mister chair
madame representative I
representative I here if I could
actually first turn you to page
eleven to the third paragraph
what you'll see is that first
born to your previous point is
are currently being are studied
animal to your
study to see if it can receive
medicaid reimbursement so that
is in the works it's obviously
it's not going to happen
immediately on but just so that
you are if you were not aware if
you so that you are aware the
second thing that i'll say is
that how home visiting
completion rates are defined as
by the home visitor and so if
the home visitor determines that
if a family says we want to stop
in a home visitor determines
that they have completed the
program.
Then not as when they are
considered completed versus so
if a program is five years and a
family stays for three years but
determines better home visitor
in the family both mutually
determined that they've
completed the program and have
received what they needed out of
it then they would be considered
as completed and can I just put
our jumping for a couple points
of clarification so in regards
to the multi you're study that
is to look to see whether and
first more and could qualify for
a mic refunding and if it was
able to paul for for mcney for
named then in the future we
could potentially uh
position the federal government
for a medical imbursement eh in
regards to the completion rates
and those are determined by the
home visitors so at the end of a
would have the only says that I
have no longer wanted rolling
home visiting the the uh home
visitor determines whether they
have completed or not but that
like that is not necessarily
five years that is dependent
upon the type of program as to
what but you appropriate
visiting
well I like to add mister chair
that
when we did I had the ran
corporation do the study on our
home visiting program but it
there's a lot of politics based
on who get that's a whole other
conversation so I won't go there
are
but when I want to see is.
If you have pregnant teenager in
a home visiting program you know
first foreign use to say three
years and they used to really
work to keep those kids in the
pro- obviously they needed much
more counseling and help.
Night as the the the founder of
the program I they stopped at
three years and she said well we
just stopped at three years
because then we knew they could
go into a preschool situation
you know pre k and we felt that
they would that family would be
taking care of and it's just
kind of common sense she said
you know for a a family that's
what away when I say a tell me
that's kind of got it together
they found that every family
could use services for about the
first year that it was you know
it when you have a newborn and
every baby is different that's
what you need to know every baby
is different but when you have a
newborn are probably pre
pregnancy I mean pre birth and
that first year the most
important times and and most
families could just you know
kind of gently go off because it
takes a lot of time it's in an
hour a week guys to do to do
this so it's a real commitment
so after that first year
families that were kind of
well situated would be would be
just fine going off the program
and they would call you know
they could always call their
home visitor it at the in two or
three and say here is what's
going on can you tell me
something and and that home
visitor would be prepared to
give that answer so I honestly
think that
five years is a long time for
home business I am very costly
and ends so I would recommend I
mean that when you look at this
that you has anybody kind of
looked at that
those completion rate that
completion rate process at a
national level or a local level
or state level to say what works
best
mister chair represented for
rare thank you and thank you for
your great leadership on home
visiting over the decades and
the
we have actually taken it on
since the LFC report on home
visiting we have.
We're looking at this we have
worked with the home visiting
provider community and were
again it goes to this issue that
they pointed out in the report
and that we agree better data
that are use of accountability
and transparency and what's
happening for families so we can
get with you because we just
have updated definitions and
processes around the issue of
completion so
well that's wonderful cause I
know this in the report that
your completion rates went from
twenty two percent down to
thirteen last year and I I first
well I didn't understand when a
completion rate was or can you
tell me why that lowered.
Mister chair
documents
mister chair representative
rirer the complete rates do go
down from twenty two percent but
I believe that was in twenty
twenty and then they have now
gone up from from seven percent
in f or twenty three to thirteen
percent for twenty five so there
has been on almost doubling for
the last few years.
I mean
we're gonna be thank you
please finish up we're gonna try
it will go a couple of minutes
but any other questions we're
gonna say last question I had
that thank you very much for
upset the
better residential anything uh
briefly and then center to to
buy us and and then again will
make sure that staff the ma'am
secretary of you would with your
team will continue to discuss
enough
yesterday mr chairman thank you
very briefly I want to first
thank the staff for ececd and
art you've done to make sure
that there are most vulnerable
regardless of their geographic
location in the mexico or their
family's economic status are
protected and promoted in ways
that will benefit them in their
outer years have one question
but first of quick comma mister
chairman that I I want to once
again just appreciate that the
work that you've done in in a
quick time frame from many of
the tribal nations that I
represent mind you that my
district is very much native
american new mexico and you cook
and you keep making mention
about your your appreciation for
the travel partnerships that we
have and I have to also
recommend
your your former native american
secretary secretary sneddy that
was here before beach because
she she laid a lot of the
groundwork that I worked closely
hand in hand with her in
developing those types of
policies and in doing so it
really represents the turn in
regards to how policy for early
education or education for
native students has evolved from
what once was a reliance on
federal policies that was the
head start program right we had
to adopt historic program
because that was our only then
you provide type any type of
early childhood education for
our students right but in need
of country it was head start but
we don't know where as a
historic too and the head start
to many of those programs was in
a simulation of our native
american cultures languages etc
and so when I worked with a
former secretary sneaky on a lot
of these policies it was a
matter of making sure that.
It was an estimate it was not in
the simulation process but it
was one that was based on making
sure that those tribes had the
ultimate authority to determine
what was best for their students
and how the practice and
policies and what they were
going to teach in those programs
were to best fit those programs
so I appreciate that
no I will also want to recommend
I recommend excuse me here
commend the programs for once
again partnering with the
capital outlet process with the
ped
with the administration and with
this legislature to making sure
that we have the on the ground
facilities to promote and
continue to promote these types
of programs and I will say that
in this year alone we will open
up new early childhood
facilities in send to the mingle
public key will public incentive
public zeal public that already
open and so those are huge
accomplishments that had never
had that type of appreciation
for anything related to the
early childhood care programs
one quick question mister
chairman is
based on ac easily's total
budget is there AAA certain
percentage that is to support
early education for tribal
nations
mister chair representative lent
thank you and thank you for your
leadership and helping support
the department with them the
legislation that you passed we
have now little over six million
that's dedicated just for that
piece of tribal investment
strategy we call it so
government to government what
are the priorities of the
presidents and the governors in
addition though this year we
expanded I mean home visiting
pre k all those programs their
budgets go directly to tribes we
now have nine tribal governments
running their own prek programs
up from just a couple when we
started so the six million is
just that dedicated funding to
come out to do government to
government collaboration but
then all the budget of ec cities
available to a tribal
communities thank you so mr
chairman and secretary still.
That's just a portion of of you
entire budget rate but it's not
exclusive to a certain
percentage of your entire budget
mister chair representatively
correct thing thank you mister
chairman and thank you secretary
again I I appreciate you and I
look forward to working with
your new assistant secretary for
indian education in your
department thank you very much
thank you very much wall close
with your device thank you
mister chair
okay so this is a lot of
information for me and i'm
learning every time that we have
conversations senator round and
child welfare so I think if I
remember correctly lfc reported
that were number one in the
country in our spend on early
childhood development in number
fifteen and provider pay I do
remember in this session that
was a conversation you had with
us that we need to be preparing
providers more it seems like we
have accomplished that because
those are two of the highest
national rankings i've seen for
anything in the state and that
being said the money that we're
spending really looking at the
outcomes that were not there yet
rate and if i'm looking at the
rates of maltreatment I think
it's on page twelve chart ten
were were at an uptick of
fifteen percent and it looks
like we almost doubled in
maltreatment of children in home
visiting I could am I on target
there
so mr chair I senator to buy
some
it did in this if you look at
page of other in the banner the
substant the substantiated
maltrement referrals during
purchase patient of home
visiting didn't quite double but
it did increase from fiscal year
twenty three to point from point
eight seven percent to one
percent and there are two
possible reasons why that
occurred the first is that now
treat the child now treatment
rate across the state has just
increased the second is that
home visiting is actually doing
what it's supposed to enable
home visitors are finding
maltreatment and so we really
need further work to better
understand why that number.
Increased thank you mr chair
then it seems to me that we
should be focused more on
targeted approaches versus
universal because we're
challenged specifically going
back to what representative down
said um with the poorest people
in the nation and something else
that i'm very focused on you you
may be aware is the fact that
we're number one and adult
illiteracy there has to be a
direct correlation to that
so who
who is in charge of figuring out
like children in um foster care
so are they automatically
enrolled in home visiting if a
child is in in foster care and
under five I so I mr chair
senator to buy us and they are
not I will however point to
certain models of home visiting
reducing children our treatment
rates and so if you look at
nurse family partnership you see
on average of five to eight
percent reduction in children
treatment versus if you walk at
a different program either the
facts are unknown or they are
much smaller and so there are
targeted home visiting programs
that do focus on reducing
children our treatment
okay and mister share though
specifically with foster care
are you involved in that and why
wouldn't these services in the
home visiting be required
at mr chair senator to buy send
so we were very closely worth
see way of de and the protective
services and that's part of that
linkages the work of the
department being able to make
sure that those families are
connected to the point can we do
more can we do better absolutely
but through the children's
cabinet we have number of
strategies around the exact
point you're making as these
programs have been voluntary and
that's how just traditionally in
our country they have been
voluntary and so I think we're
hearing a lot from the
legislature about this need for
mandated clearly in senate bill.
Forty two there are some
mandates but I just I think that
the importance of our
departments the children youth
and family's department ececd
having those deeper linkages and
connections i'm it's going to
get it exactly the point you are
making and and we agree with and
and so to secretary cositos
thank you I apologize for
another in one more question we
do
about ten minutes late for the
departure time one more question
i'll be brief mister chair so
who is authorized to sign iphone
paperwork when a child is in
foster care and they need
services is that your department
is that cyfied you have a joint
approach
mr chair I sent to buy a send I
think out I would love to get
back to on that we don't we
don't sign off on anything but
we are available we work very
closely where co located in many
of the offices around the state
but let's I would like to follow
up with you and make sure that
what i'm giving you the exact
correct response on how that
happens well thank you mister
share great thank you very much
center thank you all very much
thank you madame secretary and
we'll look forward to being
staying connected gate we're
gonna turn it over to director
solely uh we'll he'll get us on
the bus and we'll go from there
if you want to head out the west
stores there is the air
condition charter bus waiting
for us it'll take us down to the
senatory suggestion for a riving
cutting for a capitally project
that you've helped fund then we
will head over to the race track
and have lunch and here you can
leave everything here you're the
world staff will take care of
any notebooks or handouts and
stuff to take your your personal
things mister chair and then
we'll have lunch and a couple of
panels and then a tour of the
border where will stay on the
bus but see it and then a very
nice evening reception and
dinner at argo
if we want to drive to the
location
and then we can hop on the bus
with you a bit at the at the jet
port or do we need to go in the
bus to get to the jeb work.
Could we do that okay we could
drive down there
it's about a forty five minute
drive down to the jeopard open
