Good morning, everyone. Thank
you and, uh, welcome to the 4th
meeting of the Land Grants
interim committee, um, we'll go
ahead and begin with, um,
introductions. We're here in
Monsano Land Grant. Thank you
for welcoming us. We're so
excited to be here. It's such a
beautiful drive in this morning.
Um, but I'd love to begin with
our colleagues, uh, introducing
themselves. Uh, if I can start
to my right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. State
Senator David Gaygos from
District 4180 in Lee County.
I've been on land grant off and
on for
all the time. I'm in the
legislature, love it out here.
The drive was beautiful coming
up. Um,
interested in seeing what Jill
Lee from here to Chill Lee looks
like on the way out. So, thank
you for having us
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
uh, Joshua Sanchez, Senator
Joshua Sanchez, District 29. Uh,
I have the Tome land grant. I
used to have the, uh, Marcus
land grant and several when I
got redistrict, and I only have
190 in my area. I've been on
this committee now the 4 years
that I've been in as a senator.
I always love coming and it's
always great to come to this
side of the mountain. So, and I
want to thank the ladies that
made this breakfast, the chili,
the homemade tortillas, sauce
area like grandma's house,
perfect, so thank
them very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
High Representative Stefie Lord
and welcome to my district. I
love these people so much and
they're just amazing and great
hosts, and I appreciate you guys
so much. Uh, great ride as you
saw, and as you go through,
you'll see the rest of my land
grants, uh, all the way down,
all the way till you get to
Cornwell. So, thank you.
Uh
representante Miguel Garcia.
theatrisco
um
Mindirito Clue comunidades uh.
um traditionales Indo-Spanas.
uh
Iambiena tengova comunidades
poran South Broadway.
uh Barrela abida and Mila and
Setecientosincuenta tomo via
iloa risco.
er mersequetaion means as
secientos nontados.
or mi abuelo and uh
noveno poder
my great grandfather to the 9th
power.
and
Pedroduani Chavez establishio.
er embras and reva Trisco in the
1640s.
and then my great great grandpa
to the 8th power, established at
Trico 90 in 1692. He, uh, I'm
the sole remaining, uh, member
of this committee
Uh, it was my legislation, uh,
and my junior funding that
started this committee in 2003.
So I've been a member from its
origination. It's always an
honor to be here, Manzano. I
haven't been here since, um, oh,
somewhere between 2005, 2009,
when Danielle was the uh
I, Daniel was the president and
kind of uh still instilling hope
in terms of reviving the land
grant. So we're really
appreciative of Danielle and his
original efforts uh to kind of
really, uh, realize what you
guys are doing now and what
you're having here in this
beautiful building, Kibonito
Mirral Techo origin.
quejuanito. It's an honor to be
in here. Thank you for hosting
us.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, uh,
members of this committee, it's
great to be back
Um, I, before redistricting, I
represented Mazzano, uh, for 8
years, uh, and it was, uh, a
pleasure, uh, driving back down
here, uh, I hadn't been down
here in a while. Um, but it's
great to be back. Uh, I'm
Matthew McQueen, House District
50. Um, I no longer represent
Monzano, Toontique, Chilili,
Ontadadaguaa, um, but they do
represent, uh, San Antonio de
los Muertos. So it's a pleasure
to be here.
Senator Ant Thornton, I'm, uh,
this is my new to the committee
this year and, um, looking
forward to learning more and
more as the years go by. Um, I'm
actually, this is just outside
my district, but, uh, I feel
like these people are part of
my, uh, district as well, so I'm
really glad to be here. Thank
you very much.
Good morning, Shera. Good
morning, everybody. I'm Angelita
Bejhia from Chavez County. Glad
to be here.
We want to see aini Tamu. Good
morning. I'm State Senator Leo
Jaramillo. I represent New
Mexico Districtive, which
includes Ria Riba, Los Alamos,
Santa Fe, and Sandoval Counties.
And within my district, I will,
I have the most uh land grants.
So it's a pleasure to be on this
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
And I'm a, uh, Chairwoman Linda
Serrado. I represent the south
side of Santa Fe. Um, I've been
not, we, we work on land grants
during the, the session in the
land grants Committee. So I'm
really, really wonderful to be
out here. And again, thank you
to Monzano for welcoming us. Um,
I'd like to turn it over to Ian
to introduce the staff we have
as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Ian
Keller, staff attorney,
legislative counsel Service, and
a new lead staffer for the land
grant committee. Also joining us
from LCS are Mark Edwards and
Nicole Wagsback. Thank you.
And, um, if we could also have
folks that are, uh, here in the
audience also introduce
themselves. It's a tradition of
the committee as well. Um, so we
can, we can kind of go from here
and around if that's all right.
You do not know our official
language, which is Spanish,
Spanish, and all of the native
languages, Pueblo languages, um,
welcome and thank you for
returning here. Um, I don't want
to take any credit for the, the
wonderful uh building that we
have. That was all the Lovato
sisters and Jason Quintana. So I
tried real hard, but I failed,
but they're the ones who pushed
it through. So thank you.
Santoibunacias dere Dios. Uh, my
name's Arturo Archeleta. I'm
with the New Mexico Land Grant
Council, um, real excited this
interim session because you guys
have been to the two land grants
that I am from, the Tierra
Maria, which was the last
meeting, and then, uh, Manzano
is where my mom's from, so, um,
welcome all to to Monzana.
When was the uh my name's Irwin
Lesbras, vice president, Chili
Langrent. Happy to be here.
Thank you to the fine people
here in Monzano for hosting
this.
Uh, good morning. My name is
Andrea Padilla. I'm the
president of the town of Toma
Land Grant, and I'm happy to be
here. Thank you, Manzano, for
hosting us. It's always
wonderful to come and visit you
guys. You know, we are family.
Uh, thank you very much
Grant Archle theta New Mexico
Land Grand Council.
Hi, I'm Samantha. I'm Senator
Sanchez's district aide, and I'm
glad to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
board. My name is Jason
Quintana, um, I'm actually here
in my official capacity is real
frontier Equity Ombudsman, but I
am also advisor to Monzano land
grant.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
good morning, Senator, uh, Leo,
welcome everybody. It's nice to
see so many familiar faces here.
Thank you for coming down on
this beautiful day. I'm the
Lenora Lovato Romero, president
of the Mazano land grant. Just
don't tell nobody, please.
Oh, I'm sorry
I
Go ahead and step around
Good morning to all. Uh, my name
is Teresa Loraine Silva. I'm
here from Manzano and also from
Peralta in the Valley where I
live most of the time, but love
this area.
I'm Angela Nunez. I'm from here,
from the Monzano land grant. I
sit on the land grant board. I
am the secretary.
Good morning. My name is Rufina
Lovato Otero. I am a land grant
member. Been here forever.
Great. Thank you, everyone, for
the introductions. Um, we'll go
ahead and get started, uh, with
the, uh, welcome from the
Monsanto Land Grant, an update
with Lenora Romero and Jacob
Quintana. Um, I also just wanted
to let the members know we have,
we're going to be voting on the
minutes from the last two
meetings, uh, right after this
presentation. So if you have any
questions or anything, just take
a peek at those, um, ahead of
time. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Thank
you for being here and also, uh,
Senator Leo Jamilo and all of
those around you, I don't have
my back to anybody, but uh.
Bienvinidos a manzano, our
beautiful manzano la Mercede
Manzano.
First of all, I wanted to invite
someone up here, um
to sing the sound of silence,
and his name is David Gallego.
David Gallego, are you here?
Where are you? when I when I
came in, we're outside talking,
and she's wanted someone to
sing. I told her for your
benefit, I would do the sound of
silence before she does the uh
the prayer, uh, at my church,
they've always asked me to be in
the back and as quiet as I could
be. So, uh, I will
give just a few seconds of sound
of silence before
uh Miss Lamarra will do her
prayer, so, uh, we'll be quiet
for just a second. I'll turn it
over.
It's from me
Thank you
Thank you. You know the sound of
silence is so important in our
busy rush day, and I did ask him
if he would do the Sound of
silence because I can see a
musicians as they walk in and
sagoi sing sanda silence, he
goes, I go, yeah, but be silent.
So anyway, uh, the only thing I
don't see on this agenda is a
prayer.
and I always start everything
with prayer.
Uh, so I myself will personally
stand up and pray. Uh, you guys
can sit or stand, but I'm gonna
stand.
Dear graciously heavenly Father,
today I thank you for all that
you have given me. I'm so
grateful for all the gifts, our
land, our water, our family.
and I thank you for all these
people that come to join us
today for their travels and
their family.
for their goodness, their
sickness, whatever they might be
having in their heart.
And I also want to thank the
cooks. Where are those cooks in
the kitchen, Chisafina, and uh
Kyla. I think the cooks. I wanna
thank the farmers that provide
for our food to nourish us for
this busy day.
And also with that
I want to just be grateful. So I
will say the Our Father.
Our Father who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name, Thy
kingdom come, thy will be done
on earth as the distant heaven
give us this day our daily bread
and forgive us our trespasses as
we forgive those who trespass
against us and lead us not into
temptation but deliver us from
evil. Amen.
Dear gracious the Heavenly
Father, thank you for all our
gifts, but I also pray for us to
help those of the poor and the
needy they are in more need of
our assistance
This is my prayer for today.
Amen.
With that, I also, I thank you
all. With that, I wanna just
thank all of you and them staff
that has helped us. I know it's
not polite to say names, but
today, hi Mr. Jacob. Welcome,
Jason. All these Jas Jason,
Jacob, Joshua. But this is
Jacob. Jacob, introduced herself
to Madam Cher.
It's, this is me
OK.
Hi everybody, I'm Jacob
Quintana, treasurer of the
Monzano Land Grant, president of
the Monzano Spring and Ditch.
Nice to meet you.
Thank you, Jacob. You know, when
you're living here in
Monzanoena, you're always busy
feeding the chickens or doing
chores out on the farm, so if
anybody comes in late, they're
probably kind about doing their
chores. So I know with that, I
want to finish saying thank you
to um
everybody from DFA and I don't
really like to mention names,
but I'm going to today because
Arturo, wherever you, where are
you Arturo? when I need help, I
promises Arturo, this is too
much work for me and I'm not a
uh I need your help. I always is
there to respond. Vera, she
works with the QuickBooks and
you know what we used to do
everything by just paper in hand
and now we do everything on
QuickBooks. It's been a big
transition in a lot of work of
learning. And for Miss Anita,
anytime I have a question
forissa. She's just so awesome.
She goes,
If I don't know it, we'll figure
it out. And we are figuring it
out together.
And when I put all the knowledge
of all our brains here together,
we do have a powerful group of
people and then with that, not
to leave out Jason.
our bossman, and he's being
worked out. He was our
president. We also have our
former president back here, but
Jason was our president and they
needed somebody to step up to be
a president, and I didn't want
to step up, uh, but I'm here
because I was a treasurer, but I
did step up with, I wanna help
and uh I did with that it's just
um
just thank you all. I wonder if
you guys that are here today I'm
glad you enjoyed your breakfast.
And I also want to just throw a
little word in before I hand it
over to somebody else, to Jacob
as a treasure, um, to always
remind you guys that we really
want to work on aseas our water
is what keeps our community
going.
our lake and our waters so
important to our area, so just
keep our aegas in your prayer,
in your thoughts. Thank you. And
David, thank you for the sound
of silence. Um, it was
beautiful. Thank you.
I'll hand it over to
This is.
Well, he's just reviewing all
his paperwork that he's just
going through the Agenta seini.
I'll go ahead and say that, you
know, with the funding that we
have gotten, um.
from people who have helped us.
We do have the beautiful acreage
of land, and we see the elk
going through their often and we
have the water, we have put some
water sources there. We have
water there. It's just a
beautiful place. Tomorrow you
all will be going on a field
trip with us. And for lunch
today, we'll be providing Frito
pie.
We will feed you lunch also
Uh, tomorrow we will be our
field day tour out in the land,
and for those of you that just
came in late, welcome. And uh
there's a signing book here if
you haven't signed. What's your
name, sir? Hi, Mr.
Cody. Welcome. There's breakfast
in the kitchen.
uh help yourself into the right
side here if you go this way,
there's bathrooms, men and
women. We don't have a uni
universal whatever bathroom in
the country without a men's and
women's, but you're welcome to
the bathroom.
Madam Chair
I'd like to thank everybody for
all the assistance that we've
received over the years.
and to hopefully keep continuing
to receive assistance and to
everybody to understand how
important it is for the help we
get and the projects that we're
doing, the projects that you're
helping us with.
as far as the land grant and as
far as our SECs and everything
else, we'd love to have as much
help as possible.
and help also goes in how to
prepare the projects, how to go
through the projects, how to do
and keep up after the projects
are done. So there's, you know,
many, many steps of the funding
that have to be done many steps
that have to be followed through
even after the projects are done
so that way we make sure we
don't lose the projects that we
did do and be back in the bad
situations.
And thank everybody here.
for coming. We appreciate
everybody here. We appreciate
all the help that we get, all
the knowledge, it makes a huge
difference when, you know, a
little project becomes
overwhelming for
for people and it actually turns
into a really big project.
Um, last year, the council
introduced the infrastructure
fund.
and we're hoping we can get more
support for it this year.
and continue on as long as
possible with that as well.
And it is greatly appreciated
for any kind of help we get.
And also, uh, if you guys have
any questions for me?
I.
do my best to answer
Sorry, um
also, uh, Madam Chair, uh, one
of the things that they would
like to
thank um
uh
Representative Lord
Representative Matthew McQueen,
representative Miguel Garcia and
all of the rest of the board,
uh, Senator Jaramillo for
supporting land grants and
specifically this land grant
went over.
representative McQueen was one
of the first ones to reach out
when I
was president and first started,
he gave me a lot of help him and
senator Stefani, so
we really appreciate that.
Sorry, I'm stepping in a little
bit so.
if we don't share, thank you.
I'm sorry. If we don't say thank
yous now we forget. So you all
know who has served us and
helped us and uh also before I
forget, we are having our
matanza annual matanza, October
18th, and hopefully, I know that
Stefan Lord, thank you for
coming with your husband and
enjoying that fun day. Uh, if
anybody can come from Matanzas,
you're welcome. We try and have
an annual yearly matanza on the
acreage that we have bought with
the funding that we have
received or that we're still
buying and purchasing. So if
anybody can come from Matanza,
they're really wonderful. Thank
you, just
an update on that October 18th.
Uh, if you're ready for
questions, we'll, we'll gladly
take some from the committee un
let's do some more.
Yes, I'm ready to take any
questions if you have some for
me.
Fantastic. Thank you. Well, um,
I'll go ahead and start with uh
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you guys for the
presentation. Most important,
this, the Matanza. It's a great
Matanza. I actually got to stir
the pot last time. It was great.
Thank you guys. I, I just want
to tell you, thank you so much
because I appreciate you guys, I
appreciate your hospitality.
It's always a pleasure to work
with you because you guys have
all your ducks in a row, you
have everything lined up,
whenever you come to me and you
say you need help, it's very
easy.
Jason's been great to work with
you all this time. So I
appreciate it and I think the
thing I like the best about the
land grants, especially out
here. It's always bipartisan. I
mean, it's never an issue. It's
like, OK, well, we haven't a
sick yet, the drain's messed up.
We need some funding for this. I
get it, you know, you get it
done and you always usually guys
will show me or send me pictures
or something so I get to
actually see it get done.
So it's nice to see
less politics
and land grants, that's why it's
one of my favorite committees.
Besides the hospitality and the
food, I'm alive. The food is
amazing too. I will be at the
Matanza. I just want to tell you
guys that's basically just how
much I appreciate
appreciate you and I was able, I
was glad I was able to do the
200 year anniversary up there at
the Roundhouse that was very
important for me and uh
Representative Garcia made me
cry. Thanks a lot,
Representative Garcia, breaking
down my heart exterior.
Anyways, I, I just appreciate
you guys so much and it's always
a pleasure to work with you.
That's all I wanted to say.
Thank you.
I can't imagine you ever
stirring a pot,
Representative Ward.
Um
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you, Leonora
for your leadership, uh, Jason,
Jacob.
um
you know, um
a couple of questions. One,
uh, when was the Matao land
grant?
granted
um, established. I know that it
was during the Mexican period.
after 1821
But when was it, uh, established
and uh
what was the original acreage
Uh
um
when it was established
and also uh
um how did you guys come to lose
the land?
and also who
were the thieves involved in the
loss of the land.
and um
um
so those are just some of the
questions. I have some other
ones, but if we could start with
those, then I'm sure.
OK, so it was established in,
I'm sorry, Madam Chair. It was
established in 1829.
It was roughly 17
17,000
234 acres.
and then as far as what most of
was lost to was taxes.
Um.
Well, uh, thiefs, I guess would
be basically the people handling
the taxes or people that
couldn't pay their taxes. The
government more than likely.
OK, um, I chair, uh,
you mentioned that it was lost
by taxes,
uh, uh, delinquent taxes.
When was that, when did that
happen?
Approximately
It started in 1912.
and continued from then.
So my chair right after
you must go became a state
and uh
um
so the landinner for auction
Lanham chair.
and
who basically
purchased the land in terms of
the delinquency
I would like to have our
that I always call on as like
those games on TV. I colored
group to Kamigui some history I
would step back please, I'll
change. I'm another burrito.
But I'm sure I yield to
Arturoto.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee,
Representative Garcia. So the as
uh Andrea mentioned earlier this
morning, uh, that everyone being
related, the Monzano land grant
was actually established from
people from the community of
Tome. So actually in the, in the
early 1800s and 18 teens, folks
started coming over from the
Tomelan grant because there was
too many folks in that community
and started establishing
themselves all along this area.
Um, the process for recog
n ition started in the Spanish
period, um, prior to uh Mexican
independence, but the grant
didn't get confirmed until uh
as, as Jacob mentioned, 1829, so
Mexico had gained independence
in 1821. They had actually
petitioned, uh, like in the 18
teens, I think like 1819, um,
and then, um, we're actually
given the grant in 1829. So it
was during that crossover
period. Um, the original claim
was for a larger area under the
Spanish period, uh, and then it
was uh essentially established
as
a blue league, so it was 17,000
acres square, uh, one league in
every cardinal direction.
Normally, they take the league
from the center of the
community, which is, uh, was
usually the plaza and the
church, um, and this community
requested when they came to do
the survey that they take the
center point from an area known
or place known as Pino de la
Virgen, um, and that by doing
that, they were able to
encompass both the town of
Manzano and the town of Punta
Diagua, which is right kind of
on the the outskirts. So this
community had ideas
about um making sure that they
protected uh those individuals
within those communities early
on.
Um, once the grant was
established, it functioned, uh,
quite well, and the, uh, you
know, issued uh grants to the
ihuas to folks within the local
community, um, and, and then,
uh, the, you know, the United
States, 1848, um, gained
sovereignty in this area, and
they go through that
adjudication process. Uh, the
Monzano land grant gets
adjudicated as the town of
Monzano doesn't have a patent
issued to it until 1907, uh, in
1907, the patent is issued
and then, um, as, as was
mentioned, immediately the
state, once the state gets grant
statehood starts to tax the land
grant. So one of the curious
things that we see is that it
almost immediately and, and the
land grants actually still have
these records. Um, when the land
grant gets receives its patent
because it's confirmed in 1908,
1907, and then the patent
actually comes a couple years
later. When they actually
received the patent at the same
time in 1907 is when their
statute is passed. So the
legislature created the Monzano
land
grant in 1907 as a political
subdivision. At that time, uh,
the term was called the body
corporate politic. And so this
land grant was always a
government entity, so it likely
should have never been taxed,
um, but starts receiving taxes
early on, and it's sad because
one of the very first actions
that the board of trustees of
the Monzano Land Grant takes,
uh, is to is to pass a
resolution to sell off a large
portion of their common lands in
order to pay the back taxes due
to the state of New Mexico. So
one of the first official
actions is to go
seek um court approval from the
district court to approve the
sale of land, uh, in order to
start paying the taxes on, on
the remaining common lands. Um,
and then subsequent to that,
what happens is um those
delinquent taxes,
um, results in the loss of
common lands. Back in the day,
um
the assessors could actually
just anybody could go in and pay
on a delinquent tax and the
assessor could issue you a tax
deed. So what's happening here
in Torrance County is the
assessor actually was involved
in a lot of the times new, all
these ones are delinquent, and
they would just go pay the taxes
and they ended up with a bunch
of the properties uh here the
Torrance County Assessor ended
up with a bunch of the
properties from the land grant
communities, um, just by
utilizing that system. It was
prior to them doing the tax
auctions and
um and in addition to that, you
had um the land grant was at
that time issuing 80 acre parts
of plots to individuals from
within the community for
agricultural plots, and they
were limited to only 80 acres in
size. Um, and you have folks
established in the different
sort of outlying communities,
um, but then you had individuals
who then sort of realizing that
the lands were being lost, I
think, also took advantage. And
I'm actually the descendant,
like, my great great
grandparents were out in the
kind of towards the Monzano
State Park, um, and then the
like 50s, my great great
grandfather, they did a quiet
title suit and they ended up
taking some lads that they had
probably purchased the 80 acres,
but also probably taking more
swats in terms of the um common
lands claim, uh, and then the
land grant defaulted on that.
They just didn't appear in court
to fight the the suit and so
they quiet titled uh quite a bit
of acreage, and then that
acreage has since been lost over
time with sales and, you know,
sort of outside, um, so the, but
the, the community itself
was able to gain back some of
those lands, um, through some
lawsuits, um, on folks who had
established more than 80 acres
and were trying to make those
claims, um, but it was kind of
hit or miss depending on the,
the resources of the land grant.
And so, you know, for today,
fortunately, the land grant,
you, you know, prior to 2019 and
being recognized again as the
united government, which was
something that, um, you know,
it's, it's kind of unfortunate
that they had to seek that res
recognition again just because
that original um sort of
determination wasn't recognize
d right? And so the council had
actually asked for the Attorney
generals to issue an opinion as
to whether or not they were
under original statute of unit
of government, um, and during
that time in 2019, the land
grant was also seeking some
capitalatley dollars and, and
trying to sort of um get
recognized and so they said,
well, let's, let's repeal our
statute, go to 491, we'll also
get recognition and we'll get
some dollars to be able to
purchase this building.
and that, that was successfully
happened. After all that
happened, then the AGs issued or
they actually never officially
issued the opinion. We found it
in the archives later that they
basically said, yeah, they were
a political subdivision. They
were considered a union of
government.
Um
but since that time, you know,
in 2019, the land grant was down
to about 150 acres of common
land of their original 17,000
acres. Um, and now today, um,
because of the becoming a leader
of the government, because of
being able to have access to the
Langren Mercy Assistance Fund.
Uh, the land grant has been able
to recuperate. Now they're at
about 1200, 1200 acres of, of
common land that they've been
able to regain one through this
um purchase that we're still
working out the details with and
I think NMFA is gonna present
about the the loan a little bit
later on this this morning. Um
uh, and that was like a once in
a lifetime purchase of about 800
acres of of common land that
that was lost to back taxes that
they've now been able to get
back in the community. They've
been able to pick up some of
their parcels around, uh, and
so, you know, this is uh
definitely just in that short
span of time, um, want to
recognize that this community
and this board of trustees has
really been active about taking
progressive steps to getting
those common lands back and
figuring out how we can now
start managing them and then be
able to engage in some of the
things like language grass like
Chile are doing with affordable
housing and
having access to the community
for some of those uses on the
common lands.
Sorry for that long uh
introduction.
Thank you. I called my first
day. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Arturo.
Arturo, uh,
you mentioned that the 1907
article.
uh
that established that recognized
the Manzano land granted
statute.
Did it have, did it spell out
that it was a body politic
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Garcia, that's correct. It was
curious because at the same
time, at the same exact
legislature that in 1907 when
they passed the general
provisions, which was like the
catch-all for all land grants
was like, if you're not covered
by any other statute, you fall
under the general provisions,
which is what we today
recognizes language a spoke
subdivision in that exact same
session, the Monzano land grant
was also created. So it's almost
like the legislature, we're not
going to create any new land
grants. We're gonna all follow
you into this one, except for
Monzano, we're gonna recognize
them as the land grant, and
we're gonna
recognize them as a body
corporate politic, which was the
term of art at the time that
they used to recognize uh a
municipal body. And it was
issued the patent and the
confirmation was to the town of
Monzano, uh, land grant and so,
you know, we do know in the
history of the
the legislature and then even
the Supreme Court here in New
Mexico, there was a struggle
with, with understanding exactly
what these uh corporate entities
were that were established under
Spain and Mexico, weren't
recognized under American
jurisprudence, and so they just
said, well, we know that there's
a land issue and we're
recognizing who has the land,
but in terms of their powers and
in terms of what is that
governance structure or that
entity look like that's going to
really be up to the legislature
and that it, that's how it sort
of has become the legislature
who defines um the powers of
land grants and in
it ial ly the legislature
recognized Monzano as a
government, local government
entity, um, but then that was
kind of lost through time and
through interpretation of the
courts, um, and it's unfortunate
because it did affect them in
terms of their, uh their common
lands. Uh, and even as I
mentioned earlier
um, the parcel that became the
state park. Um, that was part of
the parcel that my grandfathers,
uh, great grandfather had
actually um quite a title to,
and then in the 70s, they sold
it to the state for a state
park, and so, um, the land grant
has always had an interest. It's
unfortunate that State Park has
been opened all those years and,
and they've never hired any
local folks to actually work at
the park, um, even to this day,
you know, it's always someone
who comes in, not even the
general maintenance stuff or
the, or have they ever hired a
local uh sort of to take care of
that. And so,
you know, we're hoping to turn
the, the wheels on some of that
and, and turn the page on, on,
on, on those years and, and
really get back to helping the
community sort of thrive. Um and
I'm sure tomorrow during the
tour, they're probably going to
go to a lot of these, they'll
explain some of that history
that relates to that, as it
relates to the leak, um, and
sort of some of the work that's
been done here in in the
interaction with the different
agencies of the state.
OK, thank you
for that Arturo, um.
Lenora and Jacob um
how many villages are in within
the
the uh Monzano land grant. I
noticed that, I know that.
uh Punta Yawa
um.
what other
villages or communities are
within the Mazzanogra, aside
from the Punta Yawa.
I, Senator, uh, there's only the
two Monzano and Punta. That's
the only two communities within.
Um
I guess I, I, I have a question
regarding the lake.
Um
what is the status of the lake
in terms of the ownership,
and I'm sure the lake actually
belongs to the Monzano Land
Grant, and then as far as the
ditches that come out of it and
service the agriculture areas,
that's part of the the
association.
So the two entities work
together to preserve the lake
and the water and to try to get
the water to the Parcientes.
And Madam Chair, um
does game and fish have a role?
uh regarding uh to play
regarding the lake? Do they help
so it
answer
Oh, man, uh, no, sir, they do
not. They used to have a part in
it, and they refused to do a
proper agreement with us to
restock the lake.
as far as the fishing and
everything, so right now we're
it it is our date, it is our
soul control and everything, but
they don't want to work with us
as far as sucking the lake and
providing the proper funds to
help keep the lake clean as far
as trash from the people who
come and, and actually help pay
people to keep it because we
have to go at least 2 times a
week to clean out all the
garbage bins and everything and
all that trash off, otherwise
people start throwing it on the
ground. It ends up in the lake,
ends up in the town, and we
didn't
ask for a whole lot, but they
offer was very offensive
considering the monies they give
to other lakes and stuff like
that, and some that are even
smaller than ours.
And Madam Chair, um
it, it's in terms of, of the
lake itself is, I guess, seen as
private belonging to the Merce
um
Can you fish on it without a
fishing license?
Madam Chair
Madam Chair and Senator Jamio.
on behalf of the Lake thing, the
lake is, I'm, I'm representing,
I'm sorry, uh, anyway, uh, where
is the latest that we did have
um contract with Fishing Game.
and the total amount we're
getting was $6000. As we all
know, the economy has gone so
high just for someone to clean
the lake, the gas expense,
everything to do that, you know,
trash bags, and as the summer
comes, we have more people
coming in. So $6000 wasn't
covering the expense to uh for
them to come and give us a
contract to fish in there. So
last, last year we did a
proposal fishing game and we
kind of uh totaled the whole
amount that we thought would
cause us to do it, and I can't
off my brain, I'm gonna throw a
ballpark fee with 430.
33,000, I think that we did the
uh the contract if they would
help us with that. And their
response was that they didn't
have any money at this time
either. But we did a proposal,
uh, hoping that they will have
funding because we started to
take over funding maybe they
will trickle down to us.
At this time, I can say that
there is fish in the lake just
when the fish is there.
The, the lake is open. The lake
was mostly an agricultural lake,
not a fishing lake where some
lakes for agriculture is what we
use it for. Um, the thing about
the people still come and now as
summer comes, people are coming
more and more. Uh, me and my
friend Tesa just went Sunday and
walked around late, but the
people do around here, you take
your bag, you walk around the
lake and you pick up the trash
that's there because I don't
understand it, it's not my
understanding how to do that,
but people walk around Lake and
can drink their Coke and beer
but leave their trash there. Why
they do that? Maybe they were
never taught the skills of how
to take care of our land, but it
costs and all that trash up his
pay trash, $6000 was not
covering it. So we refused to
sign the contract with him as
land grant. We refused to sign
the contract. We thought it's
not helping us.
It's not helping our people. Uh,
we're just, uh, the reason we
decided not to sign it because
we need more money for it.
And I says right now we don't
charge anybody to go hunt, you
know, fishing in there. People
come all the time, kids just
come. We did put new signs up
because we don't want to be
responsible for accidents. We
have no boating, no rafting, and
just for the safety of the kids.
and our community does get
together like, you know, twice a
year we do a cleanup of the lake
and we have the community and
the young children at Common
help clean the lake up. Um, we
just put some new signs and
little by little everyday, the
people do welcome the people do
what they can, but as of now, a
fishing game is not helping us.
Thank you. OK, thank you for
that, ma'am um
What do you, uh, is a, is a
fishing license required?
to fish on the lake
Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, sorry, um, no, because
it's private, we could actually
stop it and charge our own like
sledder lakes or one of those,
um.
so
game of fish cannot come in and
sight somebody if they're in
there fishing. Uh, we do not.
Gonzano Landrag does not
currently have any kind of uh
um charging system, so
it's just that, uh,
with the sign does say that we
have the right to refuse
entrance to anybody who's found.
um either Laing or doing
something that they're not
supposed to and
we have the backing of Torrance
County that if we have an issue
with somebody, they will have
them removed if necessary.
OK, thank you for that, Madam
Chair. Uh, one last question,
uh,
do you guys, um,
feel that it's important
that um
that you enter into negotiations
with game and fish.
in terms of providing some
assistance regarding the cleanup
of the lake, the stocking of the
lake.
Is that something that's
important to you all that you
would like to continue to
pursue
I personally, my my personal
opinion is, uh, yes, we are
trying to be self-sufficient
within our land grant, but our
voices of our people want fish
in the lake. They want to have
the same memory that they had
when they were a child coming
fishing at the lake.
And that's what they're hoping
that we could stock it uh with
fishing game. OK, so I'm sure
I'd like to make a proposal. I'd
like to propose that the
committee
draft a letter, submit it to
Game and Fish.
asking them in good faith to
enter into negotiations with the
Manzano land grant
in terms of providing assistance
to the lake.
in terms of maintenance, in
terms of stocking, etc.
And I think God, the details can
be shared with our staff.
you know, by Jacob and Jason and
then Nora.
So I, I make that in the form of
a motion, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I don't mean to jump in, but on
that point, if we could do state
parks as well. They have a
bigger budget money for maybe
maybe ask them for some funding
as well as game and fish.
it's your, you know, I just want
to state parks, they have money
for
you know, maybe we could ask
them for some money on that
Madam Chair, I, I think that's
well taken. If it could be a
joint letter to both the uh
and fish and state parks.
Thank you. Um, I, Ian's taking
notes on this right now and so
we'll, we can get look on
something and um we can talk,
discuss it at our Santa Fe
meeting. They going to make some
sense. Um, Senator Geos.
Mature, we have a core and we
connect on the motion now.
Pardon
is.
Yes.
Yeah
My second book
We have motion on the table to,
uh, draft a letter to Game and
fish and state uh parks, uh, to
request support, uh, or
resources for the Monsanto land
grant, uh, and restocking their
lake and taking care of it with
a second from uh Representative
Ward. Um, do we have any
opposition to the motion?
Uh, seeing none, um, staff is so
directed to do so.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And with
that I and my comments and I
congratulate you folks for
hanging in there
you know, and, uh, keep kind of
pushing the needle.
You guys are right in the middle
of the tank.
And I think uh you're in the
right direction of kind of
taking that needle all the way
to full.
In this committee's here to
help, and some of us are even
willing to kind of go the extra.
uh leap and assist in whatever
capital projects you feel are
important to you all.
Thank you.
Senator Dagos.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you both for the presentation. I
have another question for Arturo
if you don't mind, and it's on
the overall the land grant
perspective, uh, Arturo and if
you remember back when we sent
someone to uh Spain to get their
law degree.
and we're working on the
on that land grant, uh, getting
back the federal acreage to the
common lands, thinking through
where we're right now with the
taxes. Is there any way to use
that perspective that the
Spanish land grants were here
first, and the way they were
given to us as far as land grant
errors. Well, let me tell you a
story. My dad was running on
sheep up on Santo Mountain.
and that is federal land grant
then, uh, but also they started
putting up fence. My grandfather
told me to move all the sheep to
the north side. Maybe we didn't
own the map, and they did, ended
up being federal land, but no
one ever opposed it, but
thinking through how you got the
tomele, uh, common lens back. Is
there anything in there that
would change the statute?
to be able to allow them
to reduce the tax burden on the
land grants, but also you think
through some of these people,
uh, and, and it's not land grant
property, but some of these
people have done, uh, cemeteries
on their property to reduce the
tax base on property, and I
don't, I don't know how that
doesn't affect us if the land
grant has their own, we've got a
family cemetery in Antonito
where our or Ortiz, uh, in that
takes away some tax burden. I'm
just trying to think through. I
totally believe
it was stolen from us because we
didn't have the finances to keep
it, but the, the reality is this
is put in place in Spanish law
before British law took over,
and I'm just wondering if
there's a fine line there that
we could look at to reduce the
overall burden from the state to
the land grants.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Gallegos, a great question and
it's packed with a lot of, I
think, potential answers, um.
there is a definite separation
between um the federal and the
state in terms of not just the
obligations, but the history of
how, um how land grants were
impacted. Um, I think uh from
the federal perspective, it, it
really is, uh, and I think even
in the state perspective, it's
sort of a case by case because
every land grant has a sort of a
different history of how they
were impacted or affected by
taxation or by adjudication. Um,
I think that for the the
question is it releases to
taxes, um,
in my mind, and I think most of
the land grant, all of the land
grant leadership that that we
work with is a sort of a like
mind, um, and why we sort of
moved in that direction of land
grants being exempted from
taxation of the common lands
because they are units of
government, and we've been
moving in that direction. We
still, um, we currently have a
case and and you'll probably
hear an update from the San
Antonio de lasuertos land grant,
um, this afternoon that's being
litigated, um, they won a
protest board hearing, um, to be
exempt from taxes and
Sandoval County, uh, Chili Lang
Grant won a protest board
hearing in Bernalillo County to
be exempted from taxes, um, and
several of the counties have
followed suit and just exempted
land grants from paying taxes on
the common lands. Um, there is
an issue that we're facing now
as it relates to um housing, uh,
uh, improvements on the common
lands for affordable housing
projects. How do they, you know,
what's, how do the county
reconcile taxing those
improvements and how does that
work? And so trying to work
through that, but I, I think
there are some solutions on the
horizon, um.
we, we know that, I think at
least in the council from the
perspective they've taken and,
and, and, and the consejo and
the land grant sort of the
united leadership has been that,
you know, going through the work
of the committee, getting the
state to commit dollars like the
Langat Merce Assistance Fund,
um, like the, uh,
lingretse Langer Mseki
infrastructure fund that we're
trying to pass. Those are all
ways to sort of make Langgrant's
whole for some of those past
injustices that'll actually
provide the resources that'll
help them get back.
um to where they should have
always been, had it not been for
some of those losses as a result
of the, the, the taxation of the
common lands, um, that it wasn't
just the taxation, there was
also, um, at that time you had
the New Mexico legislature, uh,
there was a struggle between
people from the communities that
were elected to office and then
land speculators who were
elected to office, who came here
oftentimes were put in into key
positions through the New Mexico
territorial legislature, uh, and
through the New Mexico
territory, they were appointed
officials who are really taking
advantage of these
communities, um, and we're
passing laws
uh, like allowing land grants to
be adversely possessed, the
common lands, and so, um, all
those things we've now trying to
roll back, um, and we did, we
were successful at passing the,
the statute that doesn't allow
land grants to be adverse
possessed after 2007. Um, we're
currently
testing and we're, we just put
up on appeal. Um, there's a
statute that creates um immunity
from wa being named in a quiet
title suit for political
subdivisions, um, we're testing
whether or not that applies to
land grants for political
subdivisions, and it's, it's,
uh, we've requested an
interrocutory appeal at the um
appeals court level right now
when we're waiting to hear that
just got submitted earlier this
week. Um, so we are working on
some actual systematic changes
that will, that will protect
our, our land grant communities
and hopefully write some of
those traditional wrongs.
Um, but we're always looking for
opportunities, uh, and we're
always looking for ways to do
that, even at the federal level,
um, you know, I know that there
was the recent sort of attempt
to try to return lands, um, at
the federal level for housing,
uh, and it was, it was met with
a lot of um public scrutiny from
a lot of, a lot of public lands
groups. And we saw that as, hey,
that's an opportunity because we
do have the landlocked lands
that were surrounded by federal
places, and there may be
opportunity for actual housing
opportunities because we are
having some of those crises
as a result of being surrounded
by federal land. So, um, it's a
little bit of a mixed bag, but
we're always looking for where
are there opportunities for us
to be ready, and the more work
that this committee has done
over the years and the continued
work is really putting land
grants in a position to be ready
for those types of opportunities
and to take advantage of being
able to make purchases, do
projects, and, you know, we,
we're just leaps and bounds from
when this committee first
started, I, that was my first
fora into this was testifying
before one of those first
interim committees in 2003.
um, and just where we are in
that 22 year span of going from
land grants really just barely
holding on by the skin of their
teeth through big sales and
still having to pay taxes and
burdens to being able to be
functioning units of government
that are now serving and helping
not just the Langren heirs, but
the general communities around
them and the region, um, you
know, we're, we're, we've just
come a long way and thankful for
the help of the committee and
for, um, you know, the support
that all the legislators have
given us over the years.
And through to one more
question. I appreciate the
forward knowledge, and I, and I
understand uh the statute of
limitations in years, not
hundreds of years, but I guess
what broke my heart is when
you're talking about the catty
Birk, who has the knowledge
of the process and then they
used the process by taking the
land that's important to the
people that had the right for
Spain.
not from that county clerk, so I
appreciate it. It just really
irritated me when you made that
comment because that's pretty
important for us as this New
Mexico and, and I don't the
Spanish language grabs went into
Colorado, but it's one of those
things, those historical lands
are valuable and it's just, it
really, really irritated me when
that clerk's comments, you know,
that you'd give where she ended
up with the land or he or she,
but it just uh to me that's
highway robbery going back to
the feds.
s The feds at Beer when the
great river to where the sun
rises, that dialogue for the sun
never rise at the bottom of the
mountain, spoke volumes.
but it's just one of those
things I think I, I appreciate
what you do looking forward, but
I think it was highway robbery,
so, uh, we also, Madam Chair, I
have a gentleman in the back
wanted to make, make comment is
that
OK.
and Madam Chaser was just one
quick point in terms of policies
that, that this all this body
passes and where it helps in
some of those areas, I agree,
it's, it's unfortunate and it is
frustrating and it's um
heart-wrenching for a lot of our
communities and for us that sort
of have lived this, this
history, um, but moving forward,
you know, there has been some
great things done, but there can
always be tweaks, you know, we
do have the right of first
refusal now on a tax sales for
land grant communities. Um, we,
I think one of the things that
hasn't been um
that, that, that the counties
haven't done a good job and
partially because they're not
directed to, is they don't give
notice to the land grants when
they are going to sell, uh, tax
li properties within the land
grant. So, now that land grants
are a little bit more organized.
We have a strong structure. We
have points of contacts with the
council. It might be time to
revisit that, that even that
writer for refusal and put the
onus on the counties to make
sure that they're giving notice
to the land grants when they are
going to do a tax delinquent
sale, whether it's the county or
whether it's the tax and rev
department to give direct notice
to either to the council to pass
it on or directly
to the land grants. Um, I think
that's something that's that
we're sort of due for. And then
the other one is, you know, we
did the notice for um surveys
that are done within 4 specific
land grants that got notice of a
survey when it's done with their
patented boundaries or their
exterior boundaries. We don't do
it for all land grants, and
that's still a potential threat
for folks is the loss of land by
these erroneous surveys and if
the first time you find out
about the erroneous survey is
when someone goes to try to, to
make a claim in 10 years, um,
then it's too late to actually
challenge that survey
y because the statute of
limitations to challenge survey
is only 10 years, so people
perfect, you know, they get it
and then they try to go quiet
title it, and they say, yeah,
I've adverse position. And even
though we have some um
predictions against adverse
suggestion, you could avoid
those costs of litigating by
simply getting a survey and
challenging it from the get-go
and administrative process and
say, hey, this survey's
encroaching on our common lands.
Um, and so I think expansion of
notice for those two areas would
be something this body could do
policy-wise that would help
further protect looking forward
um the common lands of the land
grants.
Thank you, Madam Chair
gentlemen still want to make
comment.
They do the research on
Oh, can you step forward to the,
to the um
I'm not uh
it replies to being
me being a history teacher in
Berlin for 10 years and also
being a history teacher, math
teacher in mountaineer. So I do
know how
uh what I'm talking about, plus
I was part of the research team
that went to Washington twice to
retrieve this information.
Could, could you state your
name? Oh, Daniel Antonio Herrera
de Manzano. Uh, first of all, it
was 193,000 acres that Spain
gave to us.
and it was through our
relatives, our ancestors of
Tomay that helped us get that
land.
OK, that's number 1. Number 2 is
during the American period
and again, I'm going to speak as
my personal preference is one of
the greatest presidents that
ever lived. Theodore Roosevelt
unfortunately.
he signed his name to take away
all of our mountain land and
turned it into national forest
before then, we helped create
what later became Bolin and
Albuquerque.
by bringing in, um,
lumber
through what later became the
mountain Road in Albuquerque,
but it came from the, the
community here and Car Noel
Tajhique, etc. who would bring
the wood, horse and buggy days
through these big old
Clydesdales and Belgium's. My
great grandfather had such a
company and we were prosperous
So just based upon those two
historical facts, whether you
want to, I don't know what you
want to call it legally, but we
were once a prosperous, we were
actually, we're one of the
largest communities here going
all the way to Texas.
but over the years, you know,
we've turned into this, which
through the recent efforts,
we're trying to regain who we
once were. We didn't all have to
go to Albuquerque to become uh,
you know, to go on welfare. We
were one self-reliant and
prosperous.
That's all I wanted to say
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
yield. Thank you, Senator. Um,
thank you for the presentation,
uh, today, Monzano. Um, I do
have one brief question. Uh, I'm
just curious, you mentioned some
of the capital that you've
received, uh, recently, and I
was hopeful that you could maybe
give one example of kind of how
you put some of your capital
outlay to use, um, and how that
process has worked out for you
all.
Madam Chair,
um,
so the, since we've been in
since Manzanole Grant has been
able to receive capital outlay,
the building that we are all
meeting in right now is one of
the purchases, uh, the latest
purchase is across the street
where with other capital outlay,
we now have money to be able to
um make a a facility that uh
they can have indoor basketball
and stuff like that for the
youth.
and
other things that been
properties that we've been that
the land grant has been able to
purchase back and put to use for
agricultural purposes and the,
the whole intent of it is to try
to have
stuff for the next generation
and for the generation that had
to leave to be able to come back
and enjoy, um, if, if it's OK, I
would like to add to uh
Representative Garcia's earlier.
from the documentation that I've
read through in 1918, Monzano
land grant received a bill, a
tax bill for over $3000. Uh,
that first attempt, they sold a
bunch of timber in order to try
to pay those taxes down, but
because
however, the tax was worked out.
It kept coming up to so much
money that they were not able to
keep up just with timber.
And um one of the other things
too is that um
up until 1986 when it was
repealed, Monzano land grant was
the only land grant in the state
that had taxing authority.
and it was repealed because
um the board at the time was
told that the county could not
help them with the snow removal
or any of that because they
quote unquote have their own
taxing authority and they could
buy their own equipment.
Another thing as an example that
was taken from the Manzano land
grant is the ruins in Punta.
Somehow that ended up in the
state's possession and then
ended up in the federal
government's position, but that
the
the, what's that
Oh, I thought I heard heard
somebody ask a question. Sorry,
um, so Salinas is within the
boundaries of Monzano land grant
and to Dan's credit, uh, it.
the original ask was over
197,000 acres. He had that study
done through UNM.
Oh, where did he go? Oh, he went
outside, sorry, um, which
included the, the salt lakes.
which everybody knows salt was
gold back in the day, so of
course they would have wanted to
have that as part of the
the, the property.
Um, my dad, who is no longer
here, used to tell me stories
about going out there in the
wagon to go get salt and bring
it back to the town, and they
would trade back and forth with
doma and so on and so forth.
So just to answer your question.
Thank you all for the, for the
information and everything.
Thank you everyone who also
spoke as well. Thank you so
much. Um, we're gonna have turn
to our members that joined us,
uh, I turn to you, Senator. Uh,
if you could introduce yourself
to the committee and to everyone
present today.
Good morning, everyone
Apologize for being a little
late, um, actually a lot late, I
think.
um, which I think Senator Lopez
might touch on, um,
my name is Debbie O'Malley, and,
uh, I represent Senate District
13, which is um
uh older part of Albuquerque.
It's uh takes in some of the
older historic neighborhoods
like Martineztown and Parelas
and
it also goes into the far uh
North Valley and um
so uh
I'm very happy to be here. I'm
sorry I missed the other
meetings. Um, like many of you,
um, my family's been here for
many, many generations. And um
I'm not exactly sure what land
grant we're associated with. I'm
starting to do more and more of
our history, but, um, I think
it's really important to support
all of you who are really
working hard to keep the land
and, and to be good stewards of
the land. So I'm happy to be
here. Thank you.
Mhm
And thank you and good morning,
uh,
Madam Chair, Mr. Co-chair
Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, the Southwest
quadrant of Bernalillo County.
and this is where my family came
from.
Um, I'm an error
and go across the street to the
um to the church, we have family
members, of course, who are
buried there.
My father was born here as well
as his um other siblings.
So this, this whole community is
where I spent summers and I was
telling the senator we'd come up
to Montanilla, um, spend summers
with my Theo, my great aunt,
uncle and stuff. So there's,
there's history, um, that, that
I have here.
and I apologize, yes, we're
late. I lost my car keys.
And it's one of those pushbutton
for the car and I have no, I got
home last night, but I have no
idea where the car keys are, so
I'm grateful for um Senators
stopping by to pick me up.
So thank you
Madam Chair, uh, my name is
Diane Torres Velazquez, and I am
in Borno County, the northeast
heights of Albuquerque, House
District 30, the area around the
Arroyo Rosso golf course. I just
want to acknowledge my dear
friend, um, Daniel Herrero
Bramo, who has taught me so much
inspired me, um, in learning
about the land grants, and I'm
honored to be here with y'all
today. Thank you and uh thank
you everyone for being here. I
think we have a quorum and we
can go
ahead and approve the, um, I, I
would like to entertain a motion
to approve the minutes of the
second meeting of the land grant
committee and the third, uh,
meeting of the land grant
Committee. I mentioned earlier,
these, um, the minutes you can
find inside your folder. Uh, is
there a motion to approve these
minutes?
OK
Motion by the vice chair. Is
there a second?
2nd, uh, by Senator Sanchez. Uh,
is there any opposition to the
motion?
Seeing none, the motion
carries.s are approved. Um,
we'll go ahead and move forward
with our next presentation from
uh the Mexico Finance Authority,
um, from Johnny Quintana and Ron
Cruz, uh if we can have you all
come up as well. Thank you so
much, Mo, before we do that, for
the people that came late,
there's breakfast. You can get
up and get your breakfast if
you're hungry and bathrooms are
on this side, OK? Thank you. And
Linda, uh, I think your land
grant uses are expired. You have
to pay the land grant dues for
being an heir, you can pay
Jason. Thank you.
Yeah
Can you hear me OK? Thank you.
Well, good morning, uh, I'm
Donnie Quintana with me get her
up for a moment. If we could
just keep one microphone on at a
time. OK. They're a little
finicky.
Good morning again. I'm uh Donny
Quintana with the New Mexico
Finance Authority. It's great to
be here this morning. Uh, I wish
I had the excuse of Senator
Lopez that we locked our keys in
the car for being late. We were
just lost, um.
difficult for a former colonel
in the army to say you're lost,
but we actually were lost, uh,
we were in Toryon.
made it multiple times to find a
community center which uh there
is one. However, however, none
of you all were there, so, but
I'm glad we found the right
location. And again, good
morning.
Uh, we're here this morning to
provide you information, um,
pertaining to the resources and
the uh funding mechanisms that
are available for land grants
through our agency. Uh, we're
also here to be able to answer
any questions you may have in
regards to getting access to our
funding, um.
With that, I'm gonna go ahead
and turn it over to Ron Cruz,
who is our lending manager with
the uh organization that can
provide some valuable
information when it comes to
land grants and accessing some
of our public funds.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ron Cruise. I'm the
managing director of lending at
the New Mexico Finance
Authority, and we want to start
off by thanking you for inviting
us to be here today. Our
relationship with, uh, the
Merceds goes back quite a, quite
a few years. They were included
as eligible entities at the NMFA
in the PPRF program and since
then we've been working towards
making that program a lot easier
for meerceds and land grants to
you.
So I think it's important to
note that the legislature
recognized the importance of
land grants and Mercedes because
they were included as eligible
entities going back to the
beginning of the PPRF.
Um, they understood the need for
financing for these individuals.
So,
the NMFA also created what is
known as the junior lean, and in
that junior lean, what we do is
we're able to extend lending to
individuals who may not
traditionally be eligible under
the PPRF. Uh, they are a
qualified entity, but because of
the risk of the uh revenue
source. Uh, we were able to
create a junior lien and that
fits perfectly for Merced's. So
some of the benefits of the
PPRF, um, include that we have a
AAA bond rating, so we're able
to extend
low interest rates to Merceds.
Uh, we also have, uh, no
origination fees. NMFA has, does
all the underwriting, we do all
the um
bonding of, of the, uh,
information, uh, of the loans
that we have. We also have
what's known as disadvantaged
funding.
And with disadvantage funding
we're, we're out Merceds are
eligible to receive either a
portion of their loan at 0% or
at 2% just depending on the MHI
for the community. Um, we also
lock in our rates for 90 days.
So once a loan is approved by um
the NFA board, the, the rate is
locked in case rates just
skyrocket at the federal level,
we're still able to honor those
rates that were provided by the,
by the, um, board.
So until recently, House Bill 22
I'm sorry, in session 22 under
House Bill 8, that established
the Merced Land Grant Assistance
Fund, and now we have a
mechanism by which they can, um,
they receive a distribution
based on their audits and then
they can pay back the, the loans
that, um, they're eligible for.
So with that, Madam Chair and
members, we look forward to our
continued relationship, working
relationship with Merceds and um
we'll send for any questions.
the committee. Thank you for the
presentation. We appreciate you
coming out today, um, and
especially discussing kind of
the PPRF all up to the committee
to see if there's any additional
questions.
Uh, Senator uh, O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
just curious about the audits
that are required. What do they
cost the or we know what they
cost the organization to.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Senator O'Malley, you know, that
that really is contingent on
where the entity lies in regards
to the State Audit Act. Some are
in tier 1 and tier 2, tier 3,
depending on the revenue that
the entity has. So obviously, as
you get closer with more
revenue, then it's a full blown
audit. I believe the threshold
is 100,000 in revenue. Up until
that point, it's a, it's a tier
system and uh an AUS form
and it typically is a one page
form, uh, that they get, they
basically attest to. So if it's
an entity that has less than
$10,000 in revenue beyond, uh,
not inclusive of Carae
but just rebbing you then they
required to complete the tier
one form, which is not too labor
intensive, and again, the, the
more revenue that they do
generate, the closer they get to
a full blown audit.
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
I just mention that because um
not only do the universe heads
or the plan trust, they have
that challenge, right, of having
to do an audit, and audits are
not inexpensive. In fact, you
know, it may be a one-pager you
could attest to something, but
uh audits typically run anywhere
from 10,000 to $20,000. That's a
big, um big hit to a, to an
organization. And it's also a
big hit to nonprofits, um.
so I think it's something that
we probably need to look at. It,
it's a burdensome thing and um
um, yeah, I think we, we need to
look at that because that means
they can't use, I'm sure they
can't use any funding that they
get, certainly not capital
outlay, it's certainly not from
a loan program. That's money
that they would have to raise
separately or privately. So I
just wanted to bring that up,
that that is a big burden for,
for that amount of money.
Thank you Madam Chair, member,
uh, Senator O'Malley, uh, the
land grant were said Assistance
Fund was created to help them be
able to pay for audits along
with any other um debt, for
example, with the authority. So
there is a portion and the
authority ensures that we
don't take the entire amount of
that fund for for repayment of
the loan because we understand
the need for audits, um, for
them to be able to pay for
audits.
from that fund
OK, I wasn't clear about that.
It's good to know. Thank you.
Representative McQueen
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
to follow up on the senator's
question he talked about revenue
of less than $10,000 being tier
one, does the
uh income from the assistance
fund count as revenue?
Thank God we have Lisla here
with Arturo Archuleta, um, yeah,
it's my understanding or
listening to him I believe it
is.
So anyone that uh Madam Chair,
um,
I.
anyone receiving income from the
assistance fund is going to be
bumped past that tier one.
I mean, because that's, I mean,
it's just fun. I think it's
running, you know, it depends on
the size, uh, it depends on
other factors, but 50,000, you
know, 75,000 a year, so they're
already gonna be over that
10,000.
Madam Chair, Representative
Queen,
again our directioning Council.
Um, yes, that's correct. So, uh,
when, when both land grants that
have received distributions
because right now the current um
uh threshold for an agreed upon
procedures in the not of
fullblonada but an agreed upon
procedures engagement is
$50,000. So since the inception
of the Langa Marceta assistance
fund, those languages that have
received distributions have been
bumped into having to do those
agreed upon procedures, um,
engagements, uh, and those right
now are running anywhere from
1500 to, I think the most we've
seen, uh, is maybe pushing about
5000, um, so it's still less, a
lot less
than a full blown audit, which I
think now are probably running
around 1000 to 15,000 an audit,
um, but the, uh, the agreed upon
procedures because it's it tests
less things, um, or, you know,
and the, the bigger challenge is
finding CPAs to do those agreed
upon procedures and to get them
submitted on time because
there's not enough um out there
that are willing to take on
these smaller entities in the
rural communities.
And Madam Chair, uh, and members
of the committee, this, this
discussion, it relates back to
the conversation we were having
a few minutes ago about property
taxes. So some of the
counties have maintained that
the land grants aren't
governmental entities, but not
only are they recognized as
political subdivisions and
statute. They're subject to the
audit Act. They're subject to
the Open Meetings Act. They're
subject to the criminal conduct
that they're subject to IPRA. I
mean that they're governmental
entities and so for the, the,
the county governments turn
around and say, oh, you owe us
property taxes even though
you're the government.
Um
uh, it's just, it doesn't seem
to uh hold up logically. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that too. It's,
um, I know that relates to some
of the conversations we've had
earlier this year as well with
the auditor's office about some
of their efforts to get more
CPAs going around and, and, and
to your point as well, how, uh
how oftentimes land grant
communities have been left
behind in some of these, uh,
moving forward. Um, I had a, I
had a couple of questions. You
were referring to the PPRF, uh,
and I, I met a Mr. Pete, uh,
PDRF and, uh, and the land
grants, uh, fund. I'm just
curious, what's the lowest rates
you've been able to offer some
of the land grants, um, and help
would those look like
Uh, man, um, members.
I would have to look at the
current rates, so I think the
net in interest cost of the one
loan that we've done so far.
It's been about 3.5, where is
the Monzano and Grandpos.
They just stepped out. It's
about 3.5 net interest costs. So
the way the PPR works, it starts
at like 2 and then moves up
incrementally till the 20th year
and right now we're looking at
about 4% of tax exempt rates in
the 20-year period.
Now, now they could also be
taxable depending on the rate,
you know, the use of the
property, so those could be a
little higher, um.
and how, and going back to kind
of the previous conversations,
well, we've heard from a lot of
land grants that have, you know,
up in the Hermit's peak Caf
Canyon fires, they received
these large chunks of money, you
know, millions of dollars to,
you know, repay for all their
losses and damages. Does that
also count towards the amounts
that they've been able to, they,
they're, um, the revenue, uh,
that also answered that. So,
Madam Chair, we have been able
to use um
Caparately and contributions as
contributions to the loan and
then the loan will serve as the
gap financing for that. So
they're they're allowed to apply
various revenue sources before
our loan will kick in. She's
asking the federal money that
they received from the federal
government counts towards the
caps,
OK, yeah,
yeah, yeah.
Those that can't see uh Arturo's
nodding vigorously in the
background.
Um, yeah, again, that's very
helpful, especially because
those are intended to help repay
and help them rebuild after a
tragic losses. And so the fact
that there's those gaps, there's
uh really interesting as well.
Um
I'm not seeing further, oh, I'm
sorry, uh, Representative
Vallacis Torres.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
really interested in finding out
if any of the information you've
just provided to us is available
somewhere either online or in an
Llefe guidebook or some type of
resource that we can go back
historically and where we can
look at some of this information
in prior years and also for this
year, um, in future, uh, you
know, in, in the future, I'm
gonna want a resource to go back
and look to.
Thank you, Madam Chair
So we, we've done one loan and
it hasn't quite closed yet, but
we do anticipate building a
baseline and moving from that.
uh forward
Adam Chair, I just want to say
to the committee members I'd be
remiss if I didn't have to take
this opportunity on behalf of
our CEO Marquita Russell, uh,
Tubistow the message that we
definitely are amenable and
willing to work with this
committee and the legislature to
find solutions that will allow
the land grants to get access to
these resources, may maybe more
effectively, more efficiently,
uh, we definitely see there's
opportunities, but there's also
challenges, as you alluded to,
the fact of compliance with the
state
Audit Act, procurement code, all
of the administrative executive
burdens, it's great to see
additional public bodies and
entities eligible for resources,
but with that comes some
challenges in ensuring that we
have the administrative capacity
to be able to do that, but at
the Finance Authority, our
leadership definitely is willing
to assist in any endeavor so
that we can look at solutions
and possible options to
accomplish that in a good
accounting principle, safe
manner.
And I think at least on the
House side, we can, you know,
ask for, uh, Ms. Russell to come
in and speak before the
committee as well to offer some
more pieces as well. Thank,
thank you all, uh, for this as
well. I think we can, uh, sing,
OK, uh, one more from
Representative Garcia. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen. Uh
what is the PPRRF?
So Madam Chair,
um, Representative Garcia, the
public project revolving loan
Fund was created in 1992 to
provide uh capital, uh,
primarily our focus is to
coordinate the
financing of uh projects at a
low interest rate and also
provide that disadvantage
funding for communities that um
meet those thresholds based on
their MHI in the community.
So it's Capital
OK
got it. So it's, it's low cost
capital to to entities that
qualified. So we talk about
schools and police cars and, you
know, and, and municipalities
and counties and water
associations, Merceds, all of
those eligible entities under
the PPRM.
Hey, uh, thank you for that, um.
you know, you guys are scheduled
to speak for an hour.
I wonder if you kind of uh uh
tailored your presentation to
kind of include that.
include at least 45 minutes.
You know, I wonder what else you
guys can kind of share with us
that kind of
fills in that gap
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Garcia, you're
exactly right. We were a little
uncertain exactly where the
conversation was gonna go, but I
think the bottom line for us was
that we recognize that there
needs to be some change,
possibly statutorily, uh, in
regards to how the land grants
are able to access some of the
resources as an example, I'll,
I'll state that uh for my former
days as director of local
government division with DFA and
working with the land grants.
we had the opportunities to work
with the land grants, securing
capital outlay for the
acquisition of land, but that's
only 11 venue and if entities
are uh approach PPRF on uh
looking to act, you know, get
some acquisition of property or
possibly other options. They're
doing that right now to the real
estate contracts.
which makes it a little risky
for the entity, the land grants,
to be able to utilize that
model. So my suggestion earlier
about the possibility of doing
some analytics and some research
on what are the other options
available that we may have to
look into so that we can put
position the land grants in a
better position to be able to
maximize and capitalize on the
available funds that do exist
today. I hope that makes sense.
Yeah, it makes sense. Arturo,
did you wanna?
kind of chime in himself.
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, yeah, I think,
um, one of the things that we've
learned in this process of
trying to ensure that land
grants can actually be
uh, there are already eligible
but actually be good candidates
for receiving some of these
funds, and not just land grants,
but I think all of these smaller
entities, um, why it's important
is that land guns can try and
rely on Caley dollars, but as,
as you all know, that's a once a
year process and even once you
get it passed, uh, the
legislature, it's still another
3 to 6 months out before you can
actually spend the dollars. And
so we have projects, uh, and
particularly purchases sometimes
that are time sensitive. Uh, and
so being able to access these
type of funds that even though
NMFA isn't uh
the process is slower than a
traditional loan. Um, but, you
know, you're talking several
months of, of work to get it
done. And in our case with
Monzano, we were going on 2
years, I think, um, but part of
that reason that that's
happening is because of the
interplay between the capital
dollars and the, the loan
dollars and one of the
challenges that I'm not sure why
this is, I know it's a policy
and it may be as it relates to
the bonding when it comes to
severance tax bonds, but I don't
think it impacts general fund
money, but one of the challenges
is that
the legislature um has a policy
of not utilizing uh capital
dollars to pay loans, right? And
so if you're gonna capital
dollars to a project for, say,
for example, a purchase, you
have to bring those dollars
upfront as part of the clo prior
to the closing, so you have to
pay it and then you know you
reduce the, the potential
principle. um
but I think there's legislators
who are willing, we seem to pay,
you know, once the loan's been
made to help land grant lift
some of the burden by paying
some of that capital dollars
they have to pay that down. And
NMFA is willing to take that
money, you know, they'll take
any payment, but the, the do
usually get flagged at the
legislative level to not be
released for that. And so this
year we had that language for
the Monzano land grant, um, to,
to also be able to use the
capital they received in this
session to pay a loan so that we
could close on the NMFA loan and
then it it
surprisingly made it through the
legislature and then it got
vetoed um by the governor, um,
that just that line item veto,
just that language of the of the
payback the loan and so what it
did, it caused us to now wait to
have to reduce the principle by
waiting till the grant
agreements are issued and then
have the land grant paid down
the principal balance on that
real estate contract before
closing the loan with the NMFA,
so, um, you know, they're paying
a higher interest rate on the,
on the uh real estate contract,
but we have to do that in order
for them to reduce that
principal balance, because once
NFA takes the loan on whatever
that principal balance is,
they're, they're, they're on the
hook for, particularly if we
can't get legislative dollars to
help pay that down over that 20
year period. Um, and so that may
be something that can be looked
at by this committee and by the
legislature in general is like
not to pay all loans, but maybe
working in partners like with
New Mexico Finance Authority
that there's ability for
entities to go seek capital
dollars to help them um offset
the, the burden of pain. And you
know, obviously, maybe it's not
the entire amount and the local
community is gonna carry some of
that burden.
um, but if a local legislator
has capital dollars available
and they want to put it towards
paying those projects, uh, so
that they don't have the full 20
years, maybe they can pay it off
in 10 years. Um, that may be
something for this body to
consider.
With that, Madam Chair, could I,
uh, suggest that we also ask Mr.
Archuleta to kind of discuss
currently what exists again is
the use of real estate contracts
to acquisition property and the
risk that land grants are
facing. Basically, it's a, it's
a typical real estate contract,
and if you miss a payment,
all of the money is lost for
naught. So I think if there are
opportunities in the future from
this body to create a viable
solutions and options for these
land grants to be able to, uh,
acquire property other than a
real estate contract, I think
it'd be great to be able to hear
that.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, yeah, I think that's
an excellent point. It, you
know, that was the process that
the Mazzano land grant had to
utilize in order to acquire this
once in a lifetime property.
Um, very rarely do you see large
chunks of land go for sale um
within a community and in this
instance in Monzano, it was
nearly 800 acres of former
common lands that they had lost
through the back tax process
that was, was on the market, um,
and in order for them to sort of
secure that, you know, the, the
seller wasn't willing to wait
for a capitally dollar uh
process to go through. They
weren't willing to wait even for
the NMFA loan process to go
through, uh, and so in order to,
to ensure that that opportunity
didn't go
away.
The land grant had to enter into
a real estate contract, and that
real estate contract is, as you
kind of mentioned.
are very one side for the
seller, um, you know, they, they
can set the interest rate. They
can set the payment terms. Um,
this real estate contract is a
10-year contract, uh, and paid 2
years so far on it, but let's
say for some reason they
couldn't pay the 30 or couldn't
pay all of it, um, under real
estate contracts, that property
owner can then take the property
back and
it's almo it converts the
initial payments were basically
converted to a lease. So it was
just like, well, you had a lease
during that period and so you
paid for the lease and you, you
lose any dollars and that's not
really a good way to finance for
public entities, um, because
that's public dollars that have
then been lost. Uh, and so that
is something that's a challenge.
Um, it's, it's a, it's a tool
it's been utilized, um, in by
land grants to try to make sure
that they can, can, can get
those purchase those properties,
um, but you know, programs like
NFFA or the
Land Grant Merced and Sea uh
infrastructure fund that would
also allow for purchases. Those
are the types of things that'll
help land grants avoid having to
go through that process of
entering into some type of a
real estate contract, um, for
the purchase. Now, fortunately,
the real estate contract,
because it's not considered a
loan, um, that is, they, they
are able to utilize capital
dollars to pay down the, the
real estate contract, but it's,
it's a, it's a scary way of
doing business for a community
that, you know, could risk
losing it and losing all those
dollars invested
into uh, into, into that
project.
Madam Chair, uh, in light of uh
Representative Garcia's comments
about 45 minutes, uh, and
optimizing the use of our time
in our discussion this morning.
Um, the other verbal or
considering factor is how do
these land grants generate
revenue beyond the allocation
received from gross receipts tax
and so forth and some and maybe,
you know, definitely great to
have the subject matter expert
sitting to my left, uh, about
what are the options and what
are the possibilities for some
of these land
gra n t s to generate revenue,
i.e., uh, charging fees for
recreational hunting and things
to that nature. So I think
that's an aven another avenue.
It's not the magic pill, but the
ability for these land grants to
charge and generate revenue, uh,
art. I mean, if you want Madam
Chair,
Madam Chair,
before, uh, Arturo kind of
uh acknowledges, uh, the
question I wanted to go back to
the real estate contract manner.
is uh man and chair.
is the real estate contract
matter issue.
just unique to Manzano
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Represent
Garcia, um
we have had some land grants
that have had to utilize like
short-term real estate contracts
in order to secure a property,
uh, and then they're able to
utilize like capital dollars
that they're getting to pay that
down. This is unique in the
sense that, um, for Monzano,
the, the, because it was a large
amount of property and the
price, um, they weren't able to
get, you know, uh, all the
capital outlay to pay that down
in one year. So, you know, the,
the, the sale price was 700.
$800,000 and so they've been
able to get about 350,000 I
think in capital LA um to go
towards that, but obviously, you
know, no one representative uh
can give that much capital to do
that kind of a purchase. So on
these larger pro properties,
that's the sort of the only
option that they have is, is a
real estate contract that's
gonna be over a term of years.
Um, we've had a couple of other
guys that have been able to do
real estate contracts just to
ensure the property up, but then
they get the capitality that
covers the entire
purchase amount
OK, uh
Madam Chan ortudo or
the
Finance Authority guys,
um.
Mr. Quintana
so
you, when you are looting
to the fact that
we might need some statutory
changes regarding
this issue
The issue is basically that what
would the what would the
statutory change look like in a
general sense.
Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, that's a great segue. I
was gonna ask, uh, Ron to speak
to one of the challenges or one
of the items that uh land grants
must go through in order to um
secure a mortgage on property,
and if one of you can kind of
discuss that.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, member
Garcia. So under 49111 uh I'm
sorry, 49111 NMSA.
Um, that requires the district
court to issue an order
affirming the Board of Trustes
resolution, which has caused,
um, time on this loan,
particularly because you have to
go to district court, you got to
wait for them to put you on the
docket and hear your case. If
there's a challenge to that,
then that could be extended. Um,
so one of the things that that
we've been talking with um with
the group about is can there be
a change to that particular
statute.
which would allow um them not to
have to go to district court to
get district recorded in Arturo
of Fiona.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, um, members of
the committee. So one of the,
the, the issue here is that it,
it becomes a chicken and egg
thing, right? Uh, under the gras
statues, and I think this is a
good statute, um, it requires
that whenever a land grant is
going to convey common land, um,
they are required to get pass a
resolution, uh, adopting it
formally the body, the, the land
grant board of trustees and, and
the heirs in the community has
an opportunity to challenge
that. So there's a 30-day
waiting period. If there's
questions about,
you know, whether or not it's
for the benefit of the
community. Um, and once that
period has passed, the, the land
grant then has to go to the
district court to get um
approval uh acknowledgement that
that is a, a um a valid uh
resolution that was passed and,
and given to the OK to to convey
the property. And we don't think
that's an issue that that where
it's an issue is that a, a
mortgage has been defined as a
conveyance of property, right?
Because you can ultimately lose
that mortgage. Uh, you can
mortgage the property and lose
the property. And so, um, I
think those protections are
important, but
when it comes to a, a, a loan
like through the New Mexico
Finance Authority, New Mexico,
uh, Finance Authority, they're
not interested in seizing the
land, and they'll work with the
community, uh, on a mortgage. I
mean, they have actually in
place where you, you, you pay
extra so that you have one full
year's payment that they can
sort of dip into if necessary,
and I don't know the, I mean,
Ron can explain that better, um,
but those processes and, and
then, you know, if they needed
to reamortize the loan or
something, they're gonna work
with the public body because
they don't want to take the
investment of the local public
body away
from them. They want to just
figure out how do we just make
sure we can pay these loans
back. Um, so maybe we can amend
that statute to allow for
mortgages by the mortgage
Finance Authority or very
specifically that those do not
need to go before the district
court, because what happens is
we can't close on the loan
because technically you'd have
to file the mortgage at the same
time you close on the loan, but
they don't, the land grant
doesn't own the property yet,
it's on a real estate contract.
So one, they, they'll own it
when they pay it off, but they
can't put a mortgage on it in
the the NMFA won't
give them the loan money to pay
it off until they have a
mortgage on it. So it's almost
like, well, we have a whole 60
days before that can even be
possible from the time you
actually fund the loan. Uh, and
so we're in this weird trying to
discover how do we make that
work and how do you make that
happen legally? Uh, and so that
is an excellent point. You know,
if we could exempt mortgages for
from the New Mexico Finance
Authority or maybe, maybe some
type of language that sort of
alludes to that type of a, a
mortgage, um, and exempt that
from getting approval by the
district court, that would
expedi
ate the process and free up
their ability to move these
things forward quicker.
OK, and Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Quintana.
um, so then,
this definitely would need to be
an item.
at our interim committee next
year.
and exclusively in terms of
of having the same dialogue
except expounded to the point
where you're coming before the
committee for the sole purpose
of drafting a piece of
legislation with this type of
language, and it would behoove
you madam chair, if you would
come with a draft.
to that presentation and then
lay out the specifics that you
have kinda shared to some degree
this morning.
uh with us uh in detail.
at that point, but I think it's
an issue well taken. I think
it's something we have to move
on. Unfortunately, we're coming
up to a 30 day session where
this would not be.
your main, but Madam Chair, next
year for sure.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Garcia, absolutely, and that's
kind of my message earlier on
behalf of the Marquito Russell
is that you definitely want to
be part of those communications
and identify solutions, work
with Arturo and his staff and
definitely with the interim
committee so that we can propose
legislation that actually
addresses the fundamental issue
and allows these land grants to
be successful in ascertaining
the property that they're
seeking. So definitely a great
idea and we definitely would be
uh willing
to be part of that process
Thank you, uh, for that. Um,
we're gonna go ahead and close
out this committee, uh, or
sorry, this committee, so I
apologize, we're gonna close out
this hearing, this, this, this,
this, uh
I'm sorry, this presentation, I
apologize. Uh, I do want to
thank Arturo for coming forward
and assisting, uh, you know, uh,
unrequested ahead of time, we
will be discussing finances more
when, uh, Department of Finance
and, and, uh, administration
comes up next, uh, but for now,
let's go ahead and move forward.
Um, do we have a lot of ebbs and
flows in the committee.
Sometimes things go along,
sometimes things go short. Um,
but, uh, it would be wonderful
to have a more detailed, uh,
presentation the next time we
hear from you all. Uh, moving
forward, let's go ahead and, uh,
hear some updates from the
Chilely
land grant as well. Um, I just
wanna thank them for their
participation in helping build
out, uh, some of this stuff. I
know you worked a lot with our
staff, um, you know, and helping
to work with Monsanto as well.
So thank you for coming out, uh,
really looking forward to your
presentation. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name's Irwin Lesperance, vice
president of the Chili Land
Grant. If you ask me how I got
here.
I couldn't give you a straight
answer.
Uh, as a Marine Corps veteran,
allow me to thank each and one
of you for having a heart for
service.
and a voice to represent our
land grant committees. Thank you
for that.
This morning, uh, I've prepared
here is very simple. It is a
brief share of good news and how
we are growing our future
generations, uh, within La
Mercel de Pueblo de Chileni.
Uh, there's a little handout
here for the purposes of this
discussion, it's, uh, you know,
housing development projects
our first original housing
projects
were is from
received $300,000 from the
Community Development Block
Grants program.
Planning started in 2008.
And in this development, uh, we
had 10, 1 to 2 acre lots for
lease.
Each one of these leases are now
being
each one of these leases are
now, they now have.
errors living on them. So our
errors are growing families at
each one of these locations,
myself included, you see the
little blue house there? When I
moved back from Seattle,
Washington, kind of the last
place I was considering uh was
actually leasing from the land
grant that I grew up in. And as
we explored, uh
and, and kind of made sense of
of where we want it to be
I don't look back on that
decision. I see our people
being united
further by having these types of
communities, uh, being
established and built within our
land grant. It is so important
to us.
Also keep in mind that, you
know, as we go through a couple
of these projects, um.
as a land grant, we've always
made leases available to our
heirs, um, as long as the, the
land itself was within, you
know, the Chile land grant. So
these, these aren't
representative of how many
leases we have within our land
grant. These are just some of
the most recent projects that,
you know, are a little bit more
of a success story or a story in
the making.
Um, our centile housing project
was a land purchase of 11 acres
back in 2020. We have 5 2-acre
lots and 11 acre lot for lease,
uh, infrastructure development
is in process and again here.
no vacancy
As soon as we are announcing
these lots available for leases
to our heirs. We have a great
mix of our younger generations
that are interested in living
within the community, and then
that is also mixed with, um, you
know, some of our errors that
maybe had to move out to other
places of the state for work or
family reasons or education that
are wanting to come back and
live within the boundaries of
our land grant.
Along with the sandpile housing,
some of the
setbacks or or continued
challenges along with the
sandile housing infrastructure,
uh, particularly is setting up
infrastructure. Uh, we finally
have an approved route for
electricity to come over, you
know, South Highway 337,
uh, but it is progress in the
making. We have one young heir
who absolutely
uh
refused to wait. She moved in a
mobile home. Uh, she set up a
generator and her focus for her
family was to be living.
on the land grant
before her child was born.
and she accomplished that
mission.
Um, so, you know, we
have a challenge of, of being
able to roll these things out
and maybe kind of put the brakes
before we uh
advertise to our errors that
hey, look at this income live
here and then everybody signs up
and then we kind of have to
backtrack, slow it down, make
sure everything is addressed
properly, that some of the
infrastructure is, is in place,
um, that way, it is a more
expedited process for our heirs.
Moving forward, our Torrance
County housing projects. This
one was a blessing that just
fell right out of the sky.
Um
We had 293 acres that was
donated to us back in 2021 by a
gentleman of the name of Max
Trujillo.
Max Trujillo was the secretary
of the old, uh, Chile Lee
Cooperative and a longtime
friend and advisor to our land
grant as we now know it's
on the 293 acres, there were two
homes and a barn.
and 2 water wells. One of those
homes was pretty much move in
ready and we have an air, uh,
that is leasing that area now.
um
the other home was in need of
some cleanup and reser uh
renovations. So that home was
offered to our heirs.
um.
at an auction, at a silent
auction, and, and that went to
the highest bidder.
Um, so we were able to generate
uh very few dollars for that,
but uh we're happy again to be
able to provide for our future
generations.
As you can see here, we have 71
acre lots for lease. Again, no
vacancy.
Uh, as soon as
we make mention and we, you
know, around the campfire gets
spread out.
We have multiple people that are
interested.
So, you know
the great news here is that
we're a growing community.
Uh, our rural community is kind
of bucking the trends where we
see in other rural
towns of uh New Mexico. We, we
are trying to
provide a place
uh.
because we're within close
proximity to Estancia, Moriarty,
Albuquerque. It's a 35, 45
minute commute, which is a
beautiful drive up and down that
canyon. Um,
so we're, we're kind of bucking
the trends where in some of
these.
hard pressed rural communities,
their youth have no choice but
to pick up and leave, and then
with hopes of someday returning.
we want to kind of set that hook
early and keep each other, keep
us united so as we grow as a
community, our future
generations are gonna feel much
more connected to their land.
Some of the challenges that we
face
uh with regards to, you know,
development for our future
generations.
Uh, funding for land purchases
within and near our ground
boundaries.
funding for infrastructure, road
maintenance, electricity,
water wells or well
explorations.
Currently, you know, we're
subject to
county
land subdivision ordinances.
Excuse me, um.
we could use some, some help
with that and discovering ways
to um come up with a solution
there.
And most importantly, you've
heard me say youth over and over
and over again.
You know, sharing with you a
little bit about myself.
my father, born and raised here
in Tahique.
My mother from Chile
the long-standing joke in our
family with my father, he says,
when I graduated high school, I
wanted to move to Colorado. I
only made it 14 miles north.
And so, you know, they've raised
us boys as a family to uh not
only look out for each other but
really close knit community. Um,
some of the stories that are
shared from our, um,
aunties and uncles and
grandparents, you know.
our younger generations are
seeing this
our elders to slowly pass away,
and with them, they're taking so
much knowledge of, of how we
need to continue as a community,
um,
Earlier I made the joke of, you
know, how I got here, I, I
couldn't give you an answer. Um.
Madam Chair, and
committee present here this
morning.
I believe that it comes from the
heart of service. I learned that
early on, that we are blessed to
be we are blessed to bless that
if, if I can find a way or a
connection to help our future
generations, um.
be more proud of, of where they
come from, educate them, um.
make connections to really
solidify and give them the
foundation, build on the
foundation
that is set before us in, in our
land grants.
That's, that's
my goal, uh, in being part of,
uh,
something like this. I know my
words are, are a little
scrambled this morning, but, you
know, I, I have
uh,
some big shoes to fill here this
morning.
A lot of you are used to seeing,
you know, our president, Juan
Sanchez, who has done not only
phenomenal work for our land
grant
but for a lot of land grants,
you know, in the state of New
Mexico, so.
I have everything to learn and
nothing to forget.
And I thank you this morning
for, uh, allowing me to bend
your ears and just kind of give
you a, a good report, you know,
something that's lighthearted,
or a growing community and uh
we just need to make more
provisions to prepare for our
future generations.
Thank you so much for the
presentation. Thank you for
preparing this piece for us as
well. That's always very helpful
to kind of get us centered in
what the conversation is. I've
been handed over to, uh,
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you for
being here. And I, I laughed
when you said, how did I get
here? Same thing. I was happily
not working, riding a
motorcycle, being an activist,
and the next thing, you know,
you get called to service and he
answered that call because you
care.
Um, I do have some questions
because I have gotten some
concerns about, there's some
coding issues, I believe, that
are happening in Torrance County
with the building. Can you tell
me if that, if that is actually
a legitimate thing or what's,
what is going on with the
Torrance County because I know
they have their own set of rules
that you have to jump through
those hoops as well. So can you
tell me a little bit more about
that?
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord.
um
as I understand it, the issue is
within Torrance County, that
particular development is being
uh
referenced as a subdivision and
within that there are some code
infractions or things of that
nature that need to be
readdressed, um, before, you
know, our errors can actually
move into, um, you know, the
next chapter of their lives and
living on that development is
these lots simply need to be
addressed. We have
infrastructure in place, roads,
electricity, and water. Um, but
at a deeper detail as far as the
challenges we're experiencing
with Torrance County itself. I
cannot speak to that, but I'd be
happy to pick it, you know, Juan
Sanchez's brain and, and get
back to you with that.
And thank you, I, I appreciate
that because you have, you know,
I've worked with, um, Senator
Lis Stefaniks in Torrance
County. You now have Senator
Thornton out there who I, I'm so
appreciative that he's trying to
learn as much about the land
grants as possible, and myself,
who are willing to help you on
that issue. So I wanna make sure
you have my phone number and I
know Juan Sanchez has it too as
well.
Um
I do like hearing that you say
that, you know.
there's a big interest in people
moving back there, and I can see
why. I mean, it's beautiful out
there. I'd want to move out
there too.
And can you tell me a little bit
about the challenges for the
funding of the land purchases.
um, what, where, where's the
issue with the funding on that
or or what is it that needs to
be addressed on that issue.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, um,
so, and I got to review some of
my notes here some talking
points that Juan shared with me,
um.
you know, the lens that we are
blessed to purchase back his
been uh with our own monies, um.
I think that we are seeing a lot
more opportunity, um, within the
Maybe been passed down family
land from the 50s, 60s, and 70s.
They live out in Oklahoma or
Florida or something, they have
no interest in it. So they're
reaching back out to us to see
if um we would like to purchase
it, uh, within that, the
valuations and I know we spoke
about taxes earlier and it gets
pretty thick, um.
being able to purchase some of
those properties and having the
financial backing to do so so we
can proactively build and
continue to build our land
grants, um
I don't know if our pseudo is um
I
Sorry again,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee are to the Grand
Council. Um, some excellent
questions, and I did tell uh
Irwin that I would back him up
if, if there was anything, um,
so, um, as it relates to the
first question relating to the
um
issue with the county, it really
is, is that right now, under the
statute, the land grants are
subject to the New Mexico
Subdivision Act and the
subdivision Act gives
jurisdiction to the counties to
oversee anytime land uh is being
subdivided. And so the act
itself exempts certain entities.
So for example, municipalities
are exempted from the
subdivision Act. So, um, you
know, the city of Albuquerque,
the city of Santa Fe, they can
do subdivisions of land.
and they don't have to get the
the permission of the county. So
in this instance, the land
grants are not exempted. So the
land grants have zoning
authority, um, the land grant
can say this is, we're gonna do
a housing development and we're
gonna do this many lots, um, and
they can go ahead and put that
many uh houses on the ground,
but they can't split that land
um under the subdivision Act
without getting approval by the
county. And so one thing they're
seeking is just that authority
within their own um governance
structure to do that and, and
all that requires
is a simple, uh, amendment to
the subdivision Act that would
exempt land grant Mercedes from
being subject to the New Mexico
Subdivision Act, um, they would
just have the 30 in-house as
opposed to it being that of the
county's jurisdiction.
So that's the first one
Uh, on the second one, the
current housing project that
they're looking to purchase,
that's actually lands that have
gone up for sale that were
former common lands, um, that
were lost as a result of
taxation, um, one of the things
that happened apart from
straight um delinquent tax
sales, uh, is they also in a, in
an attempt to try to tax land
grant common lands. Uh, one
thing that they did were these
plain table surveys where people
went out and, and this happened
in Chili Lee where they said,
well, where, where are the land
that you're using?
And they may have had an
allotment that the land gun had
given them for for grazing or
for, you know, um, and, and then
they were able to say, whoa,
that's this whole place here,
and then the counties uh did a
plain table survey where they
actually mapped out the parcel
that they were using, and then
started assessing the taxes to
those individuals and then they
were able to sort of gain access
to title to that property as a
result of paying the taxes for
10 years. And so in this
instance, um, and I'm not sure
what the exact history of this
property, but it is property
that was former common land that
the land gran's now looking to
purchase.
They did receive Capie dollars
this most recent session, so
we're just waiting for the grant
agreements to be executed. Um,
we've been in conversation with
the realtor, the com the uh
individuals selling or
interested in in working with
the land grant to purchase that
property. Uh, and so, um,
they'll be able to purchase uh a
couple of the lots that are up
for sale that are those that are
most advantageous for doing a
housing development, um, and
we're hoping that that'll be
done sometime this fall, um,
once we get all the, uh, once
the grant agreement is issued
and we can come
to some agreement on the price,
uh, then we'll be able to issue
the notice of obligation and uh
do the drawdown to be able to do
that purchase. So hopefully
we'll get that wrapped up um
sometime this fall, and then
they can start
issuing the lots and working.
The, the only issue is going to
be the subdivision of the land
because it's, right now it's one
parcel and I think you guys are
looking at probably uh splitting
that up into maybe uh 5 to 10
lots.
Yup, Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, that is correct. Thank
you, Arturo. And again with the
said
uh land that we're looking to
purchase, uh, word's already
getting out there, so we have 3
of our errors wanting to
jump on that one as well. Uh, we
have to do a little bit of water
well exploration there to ensure
that we're going to be able to
meet the needs for water,
electricity is in close
proximity, so we sit, uh, you
know, with this growth, we have
to be able to look at some of
these uh
land purchases from the point of
does it make sense? Are we using
this for agricultural purposes
or, or is this to grow our
community, um, so water wells
are huge. I mean water is going
to be our final frontier. We can
do without a lot of themes. We
can pretty much do without
everything, but water we cannot
live without, um
so I hope I answered your
question.
Yes, you did, and, and I'm gonna
say a couple of things. Yeah,
water is super important. I was
able to get up there and talk
about a huge housing development
that they wanted to put in my
district with 4000 houses, 2
golf courses, uh, a resort, and
all kinds of stuff. And we were
able to get that at least
delayed. It's back in the courts
again cause they're appealing it
because, right, my well went
dry. If we don't have water,
we've got nothing. You guys
don't have water, everything is,
everybody's just going to move
right back out again. So it's
super, super important on the
water issue. What I'd like to
suggest, what I think, so we
don't have to talk.
never mind
I'll just still Senator
Sancheson, she left
Um,
what I would, here's what I'd
like to suggest that you guys
have us come out for a meeting.
I could bring my assistants on
as well, and we can sit down and
kind of talk about the issues of
what we can draft and we can't
draft and then get bipartisan
support, and what I mean by
bipartisan support is hopefully
a Democrat will put their name
at the top, because
unfortunately, that's how life
works here and try to help you
get some things through for that
land grant, if that works for
you.
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
absolutely, uh, again, thank
you. Thank you for your service
and, and hearing, you know, some
of the what seems maybe be basic
needs, but huge needs in when
we're talking about growing our,
our future generations in our
land grant. Thank you. And, and
Madam Chair, also we got to sit
down and figure out how we can
make sure that you have like a
40-year plan for water because,
you know, the water changes. I
was actually looking at some of
the water tables. Ours is going
down
inch every year, you know.
I was going to say knock on
wood, we get a couple of good
years and that's very helpful,
but looking at the long term,
making sure you have enough
water and all that stuff. And of
course, I would like to invite
Arturo to be there because, you
know, why not? You can come to
that meeting too.
Anyway, so that way we don't
take away from the meeting. So
thank you.
Uh, Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I just
had a quick question, I hope.
So my understanding is you lease
up, uh, a lot or portion of land
to, uh, an heir. Who owns the
improvements of that?
property
Do you separate those two things
out or?
Madam Chair, Senator O'Malley.
Yes, so
the land, of course, will always
belong to the land grant, uh,
the improvements are, uh, that
of the air.
Um, we have the ability to lease
either 1 acre
2 acres. It is on the old, you
know, 50-year contract and
depending on utilities that are
present, that is the variable
with how much we charge uh per
year. Now, that can range
anywhere between, you know, $50
a year for someone that is
leased 2 acres or an acre that
they had to bring in the
electricity and bring in the
water, but for example
where I'm leasing from the land
grant, uh, you know, that
development, the electricity and
the water was already present on
that cul-de-sac. So, uh, with
those utilities being present, I
pay $100 a year, and that's on a
50-year lease agreement. OK. Is
this a renewable lease
or is, is it just a fifty-year
lease?
It's not renewable necessarily.
They are renewable, and they
also are transferable. So in the
event that, uh, you know, one of
our errors had to pick up and
leave for a job or school or
family needs, um, the
improvements would need to be
sold to another heir.
There has been some discussion
that if our errors were not able
to afford or purchase those
improvements that it's a
possibility that the land grant
would be able to purchase those
back.
and then maybe include that into
the price of that next lease,
uh, that potentially would exist
there.
OK, thank you. That answered my
question. It's very similar to
like a community land trust
almost really. Um, I, that's
what I was uh wondering about.
So you can use capital dollars
for improvements, public
improvements.
Madam Chair, Senator O'Malley,
yes, we can. Yes, so that would
be electricity.
It would be all those public
improvements, public dollars
could go into that. OK, thank
you very much.
And just for clarification,
that's because you're you're a
political subdivision. Is that
just so for the understanding,
Is that right?
Madam Chair, yes, that is
correct. Um, Senator Thornton
Thank you, Madam Chair. So a lot
of my questions were already
asked and answered, and first of
all, thank you for your service,
uh, and I'm actually glad I just
came back from a vacation in
Washington State and as
beautiful as it is here, there,
I think it's just a beautiful
here and especially making
strive this morning so I can
understand why you've come out,
come back here.
Um, uh, my, my, my, I'm new to
the committee, so the questions
I have are pretty basic like how
how large is the total acreage
for the Chilale land grant right
now. How much acres do you guys
own?
Madam Chair, Senator Thornton,
initially our acreage was at
41,0481 acres. Um, we're
currently, um,
at 12,000 acres
Over the past 10 years, we have
been blessed to buy back
approximately 500 acres within
our boundaries. So again, we're,
we're slowly looking for growth
anywhere we can get it.
Thank you for that. That's, uh,
well, got 3 times as much to
get, to get back. So that's
great.
Um
so my next question was, given
the demand that you talked about
in your presentation, it seems
like there's no lack of demand,
and you had no vacancies. Every
time you open something up, you
find people to come in and take
the leases. So, so there seems
to be a huge demand to want to
move out here. Uh, I think
that's, that's, that's good
sense that this is a community
that people want to live here
and people want to come back
here. Um,
and, and I think you've already
addressed the question on the
second question I had was, you
know, you said you were looking
for funding for land acquisition
infrastructure, electricity,
water, what are the highest
priorities right now? What would
you put as number one?
in terms of needing funding.
Madam Chair, Senator Thornton
I think our biggest challengers
are the costs of infrastructure
Um,
so
let's use the sandpile housing
for perspective there, you know,
this is 11 acres with 52 acre
lots and 11 acre lot. Now,
if you see the proposed and
approved route from P&M um
in the orange there.
we have been given an estimate
of $72,000 to run electricity,
uh, from a pole back over the,
you know, the state highway 337
and into the center of that
specific development. Um, the
cost of infrastructure is gone
up exponentially and I would say
that would be
a priority, but the close second
again, would be able to find
and, and purchase lands for more
availability. It's a close 1st
second there.
Well, thank you for that. I
appreciate, uh, Senator Lord
offering my time to, to meet
with you all, but, uh, I, I do
plan on doing that as well. And
so, um, I think it's something
that I think we can help with
that and especially on the
Capitol Outlay side of this, um,
I clearly am, I'm impressed by
the fact that they're, there is
a demand and it seems to me that
we should help fulfill that
demand as much as possible. So I
look forward to working with you
closely down the line here. So,
thank you very much for your
presentation.
Thank you, Representative
McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Lesference,
uh, pleasure to meet you. Uh, I
used to represent Chili Lee, uh,
I had, I've always had a good
relationship with Juan and the
line grant as a whole. So, uh,
look forward to working with you
in the future, even if I don't,
uh, directly represent you. Um,
I, I just wanted to say, and I'm
glad our tour is staying behind
you because uh um
happy to talk to you more about
this. I, I will say I'm a little
nervous about
exempting land grants from
subdivision regulations, um, I
believe, I, I think what you're
doing is fantastic. Uh, I
believe we need more housing,
uh, we need to build houses
faster. We need to have
affordable and attainable
housing, and the fact that
you're, you know, taking the
bull by the horns. That's good
news. Um, I also think that
we need to make sure we're still
building good housing
And there is a sort of
discipline that comes from, I'm,
I'm an attorney, I do real
estate work. Uh, there's a sort
of discipline that comes from
going through the process, the
subdivision process to make sure
you have, uh, proper access, um,
drainage, um, you know, room for
septic, things like that.
uh, that I don't want to
short circuit. So I like, I, I
think in order to build more
housing, the example I use is,
um, we should be building
warehouses faster, but that
doesn't mean we should be in the
building codes. I mean, we still
want to have a quality project,
uh, product at the end of the
day.
That being said, I, I know, um
Sanfoe County, for example,
is incredibly slow
and that's part of the problem.
That's part of the bottleneck.
They're it's slow and improving
subdivisions. I also, in my
experience, Torr Torrance
County, uh, has been
um
I, I would say disrespectful of
the um sovereignty of the lens,
of the, their authority. Uh, and
I think they've always sort of,
you know, especially with the
three-person, uh, commission,
um, and no land grant
representative on that
commission. um, you know, I, I
don't think they've been treated
well by the, uh, uh, county
commission. So
there, there are certain issues
on both sides, but I think it's
just something we might want to
think about, like
how can, you know, is there, uh,
is there maybe a mill path where
we streamline things, uh, but
still make sure we have, uh, you
know, vigorous review or maybe
we find a way to bring
additional resources to land
grants, so they, they have that
expertise, something that, to
tap into, um, uh, as they move
forward with subdivisions like
this. So it's just sort of my
two cents on, on that issue.
uh, but, uh, thank you for
coming in. Uh, if you have
anything you'd like to add,
please do.
Madam Chair Representative
McQueen, thank you. You do bring
up some excellent points, and I
can only speak on my own
experience, um, and what I see
on the ground is that we are a
community that is built on
volunteers. Uh, the majority, if
not all
you know, we're not talking
about custom homes being built
on these 1 acre and 2 acre
leases, um, when we talk about
affordability, and therein, uh,
our errors, myself included, you
know, we're looking at, at
mobile homes, and within that,
you know, we're still under the
guides of Bernalo County for all
the placement permits, uh, we
fall under PNM for any type of
inspections on the pedestals and
meters
and things of that nature, land
grant president, you know, Juan
Sanchez will come out and ensure
that the septics, uh, the septic
systems are up to, you know, our
standards within the land grant.
So I, I agree that, you know, we
need to ensure that in part of
the excitement of doing a good
job for our future generations
that we are doing things
correctly. So, you know, I, I do
agree with you.
those are good points
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Garcia
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
Irwin, uh, nice meeting you.
Uh,
L'Esperance sounds like a French
name.
Uh,
is the
L'Esperance uh family unique to
uh
the East Mountain
Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, absolutely, uh, and you
are correct. L'Esperance is
French.
It means a lot like Esperanza.
Hope, yeah, French would be the
hope.
my
great grandfathers are from
northern New Mexico and Mineral
Hill, San Geronimo.
uh, great, great grandfather
Pierre L'Esperance ran the first
sawmill off of the Pecos River.
My great grandfather
Pedro L'Esperance, when he moved
his family in herds of cattle
here to the Monzano Mountains, a
place that we call Rancho
Arriva.
um.
They built a cabin and fashioned
themselves a home. Earlier there
was a gentleman who shared, you
know, stories of logging with
horses and ox.
That is
the same and and it just those
visions of of when that was
being shared with us earlier
today
that is the Esperance that you
see here today, um, we grew up
in these Monzano mountains, um
we have always been contributors
to our community. My grandfather
Ramon Res Esperance was a World
War II veteran in the army. He
fought on, you know, in the
Aleutian Islands. He came back
to Torrance County and became
the Torrance County Sheriff in
the 60s. Um, so it, it is uh.
it's not a
popular name, but it, it is
amongst, um
our communities here in the
Monzano Mountains.
Uh, man, it's good to know.
and it is kind of a
colonial
New Mexican Indo-hispano
surname.
even though it is French
you know it is, it is within our
community, you know, and uh
evolved within our community and
I wanna say, uh, Irwin, um,
for being your first time before
this committee, terms of your
presentation, um,
it was flawless
You know, Juan Sanchez will be
very proud of you.
and I have to uh applaud Juan
Sanchez, Madam Chair, because
uh
a kind of grooming people like
Irwin.
to assume uh
leadership post within the land
grant.
and uh
and not only that, my chair, my
understanding is that there's a
21 year old Chica
that's also a board member.
and an official of the land
grant.
So I kind of looked to the day
where she kind of come before
this committee and also presents
or co-presents uh with you,
Irwin, um
but, uh, Madam Chair, um
you know, the Chili Lee Langren
had always been kind of a
foremost, kind of a model Lang
Grand.
you know, um
up to the 60s, your elders were
still toting 6 shooters.
when they'd leave the house,
they wouldn't leave the house
without Toto toting the six
shooter.
you know, and, uh, so that tells
you the nature of the resistance
that your family in the
Chilili La Gran has uh
kind of portrayed throughout the
decades and it's because of that
resistance that you still hold
on to some common lands.
and um you know, on your
presentation on, uh, but also
Madam Chair, um
Gillie Langren is a role model
in terms of housing
developments.
You're the first one
of all the our 28 polucosa
divisions in our 6,
kind of statutory specific land
grants.
uh, Chiliri was the first one to
actually develop a housing
project.
And, uh, and you're continuing
to do so to this day and as you
develop these projects, uh,
manager Cha Norwin.
they sell out. They sell out
once you post it, you know,
which is, which is, I think, an
accomplishment to kind of your
vision.
in terms of what the potential
our land grants have are kind of
providing housing to our
existing families, young, middle
aged, old, uh, that within the
community and Manchoweta outside
the community.
that for some reason or another,
as you stated, had to leave the
land grant and go elsewhere.
in pursuit of
feeding the family
you know, etc. etc. And uh
so I really applaud you for
really stepping up and being
real eloquent in your
presentation.
and you mentioned one project
manager that really stood out.
It's historians County Housing
Project 293 acres
donated by Max Trujillo.
And, and you acknowledge Max
Trujillo.
uh, in your, in your, in your uh
presentation
um
and your PowerPoint
presentation.
uh, but one thing about Max
Trujillo, I've known him
I've known him Max since 1976.
In 1976,
there was a mobilization on the
land grant by
Chili Lee Lang Grant Airs, and
some supporters.
to block a road known as the
Hara Road
and uh
uh the Chili Lee La Grant heirs
and the leadership
uh
basically, um
uh
barred up the road
blocked the road
chains, etc.
And naturally, Bernardo County
Sheriff Department.
um
mobilized heavily all their SWAT
teams are there. The
helicopters, there's over
50
um deputies there
to kind of uh
arrest people for blocking the
road, a land grant Road.
The thing is that this
development was using the axis
of the road to get their
subdivision because they were
landlocked. The only way they
could get to their subdivision
was going through the land grant
road. So the the and and that
that subdivision was illegally
bought out
you know, and, uh, but the long
story short
Max Trujillo
helped bail out those 12
individuals that were arrested.
He used his own funding, his own
money.
you know, to bail out those 12
activists, you know, um, uh, uh,
for, for that protest.
and uh
so Madam chair, I really kind of
applaud you
uh
kind of really absorbing.
what goes into these projects,
you seem to have a really good
handle, and I think it's because
you're one of the
one of the persons that moved
into one of these projects.
So I think you're really kind of
established a good footing in
terms of what's to come.
for people like you
uh, coming onto the land grant
and establishing routes through
these projects.
you know, uh, they couldn't have
a better mentor than you,
brother.
Uh, cause you've been there,
you've seen that
you know, and that's important
and um
uh lastly
before
Chili Lee again Mao Lare, Madam
Chair.
Chili Lagran's first land grant
that challenged.
the property tax
seeing that there've been,
they've been a political
subdivision for some time now.
They still had to pay property
taxes.
GED challenged that in the
courts, and they won.
And that's what all land grants
have to do in terms of getting
that non-exempt status.
And uh
I hope that we can kind of
resolve that to where we can
just have a blanket, no
non-exemption for all the land
grants instead of having each
one of them go before their
assessor.
you know, and, uh, and make that
complaint.
Um, but my question was,
prior to that, uh win.
on the property tax exemption
where the land grants don't have
to pay property tax. In this
case, Madamerchili Lee, who was
paying the property tax on these
projects.
uh prior to that Fort win.
was it the land grant or was it
the
you know, the individual that
had leased the parcel.
and that had established uh
improvements on it.
Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, um.
as I understand it
is, um, is the land grant that's
always been responsible for
those taxes.
um, we currently are in a
scenario where the improvements
are being taxed.
and trying to
navigate a path with Berne Leo
County to
really understanding grasp how
these taxes are being assessed
and how they're being
compiled because
as we've shared
our errors do not own the land
and now being taxed on the
improvements we are dealing with
scenarios who
errors that have never seen a
tax bill now are looking at
possibly a tax bill of $2800 a
year, $4000 a year based on a
standard calculation through
Bernal Leo County.
Um
but to answer your question, it,
it, the land grant has always
kind of stayed on top of, of
paying their taxes. Now we've
lost some to taxation, and
that's why we're interested in
purchasing some of those places
back.
um, and then to dial back a
little bit more with regards to
Max through Heel as a kid,
seeing him being a leader in the
community I grew up in, the
instance that you spoke of
directly in 1976 is one that was
shared with me as well, and
at that point in time, the chain
that you spoke of that was
across Lajara Road. Uh, my
mother was pregnant with me.
and she wasn't arrested on that
day because she was, uh, you
know, it was January was around
the corner and I was yet to be
born, but, uh, absolutely, um,
so my mother's maiden name is
Gutierrez.
and Les Bronson, we kind of
joked a little bit as French
last name, but uh.
uh some of these roots and
stories that, that have been
pressed upon me, again, it is
a sense of duty to ensure that
we are as close as a community
as possible
to continue the fight, so to
speak.
And I hope I answered your
question.
Yeah, no, thank you for that.
Yeah, that was real um
that was real enlightening
knowing that your mom was there,
you know, that event and uh
I was also at that event. I was
also one of the ones that got
arrested.
Uh
and um
you know, uh, Irwin, I wonder if
that's a matter, I don't know
Arturo if I can yield to Arturo
on that issue of the
improvements is, is, is, is
there a potential there, Madam
Chair Arturo, where we can
maybe do something legislatively
that looks at that that resolves
that, or is that pretty much
kind of set in concrete.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, um, again, Arachlati
Mexole council, um, that's
currently where they're at. I
think what happened and what
what's interesting about this,
and I think what everyone was
speaking towards is that the
land grant has always sort of
beared the burden for the
property taxes because they are
on these leases, um, but it
wasn't until recently that
Bernolio County, um, I guess got
around to starting to assess the
improvements. So the land grant
was being taxed, uh, most of it
for agricultural, uh, exempted
land and so they were have been
paying taxes all these years and
it wasn't until I believe 2022,
that the, the Langer received a
tax bill of like $30,000. They
just said, here's a new and it
was because of this like sort of
assessment of improvements that
had just Bernolio County hadn't
gotten around to doing, um, for,
and many of those homes, I think
had been there already for
probably 20 some years and it
was, um, you know, like we
oversight on the county's part
and so that prompted this
protest to say, hey, we got to
reevaluate and see what's
happening. And as a result of
that, the common lands are now
exempted, but they're trying to
figure out
how do we um go about actually
properly, um, assessing the
improvements and the land grant
has opted to this point to
continue to be the individual to
sort of bear the burden, knowing
that they'll have to pass it on
to the individual leasees and
just figuring out how do we do
that through our leases and in a
way that's going to be
appropriate, but also as Irwin
mentioned that these um
comparables and these analysis
of what the valuation is, is, is
accurate to the situation on the
ground, and it's not, um, part
of the problem is there are no
comparables on on any of these
leases and they haven't been for
years and so finding the exact
way to evaluate that is, is, um,
sort of the challenge and, and
the land grants trying to
advocate and make sure that the
errors are gonna, that those
improvements are gonna be taxed
at the rate that's appropriate
to their actual value, um,
versus being compared to like
properties and other
parts of the county where there
may be higher values. Uh, and so
I think that's kind of where
we're at right now in the
challenge and um Chili Lee's
looking to, um, is in
negotiation with the county and
uh we've been sitting down with
them and we have um identified
several parcels that the county
actually even still got wrong
because, um, I want to say the
land grant is billed for at
least, memory serves me 165
different parcels, um, that some
of that are now exempted, um,
but you know, because of the way
that the land was divided over
time in
this um the uh
uh
survey that was done, the plain
table survey that was done, and
the language that's being able
to we acquire some of those
parcels so they, they are still
all a bunch of different
separate parcels that make up
what is that 12,000 acres that
they have today. Uh, and so
that's even for the land grant,
it's a big deal to go through
every year and look at every
valuation and make sure that
they're correct. Um, and so
within time, they may look to uh
combine some of those and do a
replat and get some of those
put that number of parcels down
so that it's not so burdensome,
um, particularly those that are
gonna stay vacant and remain
vacant, uh, and separate out
those that are going to be be be
used for future housing, um,
and, and sort of this concept of
uh looking at the uh
improvement. We don't know
exactly what that is yet, and so
there may be a need for some
type of a policy that would
address how improvements work
within land grants. Chilili's
always been a sort of the 1 to,
1 of the ones to push the
envelope. So this is all new
territory and so we know that
land grants are being exempted
now. We're
hopeful that they'll all be
exempted and, and we know lang
some Lagas are going to follow
suit and start doing their own
housing developments because
it's sort of the next era of
things that Magnus are
interested in doing and the more
we can solve on how we address
this issue of uh taxation of
improvements, uh, with land
grant communities, um, the
easier it'll be for, for land
grants across the state.
Thank you for that, Arturo and I
uh
so right now you're basically
uh just
kind of rolling with the
punches.
in terms of what, what the land
grant can and can't do on this
matter and also just kind of
um
going with the punches in terms
of what.
the county has already
structured into that.
Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, that's exactly right,
um, you know, the, the question
is, is valuation? What, what is
the market or marketability of
any of these improvements that
are within our land grant, um.
you know
within details, with uh Max, you
know, one of the places that he
left to us, and we put it up for
auction. The most recent
example, of course, this is
Torrance County, not Bernallio
County, uh, that went at auction
for $10,000.
So you know what now that that
is on the land grant
what is the market for that? You
know, what's the marketability?
How are you going to tax, uh,
the improvements on the land
grant and be a little bit more
transparent, you know, I think
we need some transparency of, of
how this calculation is coming
about because
um we weren't given
the ability to go back and so
some of these errors that are
leases, they might have a
property uh valuation freeze,
you know, they may be veterans,
uh, head of household, things of
that nature, you know, we're
just getting the tax bill. What
we're not
we weren't afforded in some
cases, the process of protest
per
I guess lease and improvements
that were being taxed, um, some
of these, uh, assessments that
came through were jumbled up
with, uh, land and improvements,
which we made those corrections.
Um, so absolutely we're, we're
rolling with the punches and I,
I think that we need to find a
few punches of our own on how to
uh make this right for our
errors and how we do leases, and
then, you know, maybe share that
knowledge
Absolutely share the knowledge
with the rest of our land
grants, brothers and sisters who
want to grow their communities
as well.
OK, thank you for that, uh,
Madam Chair, Preser just to, to,
to add to that, I want to just,
um, I think there, there may be
a point where we do need to talk
about some legislation maybe
within the tax code that
specifically addresses um how
valuations or how uh taxation on
the improvements work. I mean,
we are still learning, I think,
uh, and to Chilele's credit, I
don't think they're just rolling
with the punches. They they are
sort of punching back. I mean,
we're in these negotiations
because Chile continues to
protest, right? We're now back
to the point where
the one the protest board
hearing several years ago, but
because not everything's been
resolved within that two-year
period, and there's still some
mistakes in how taxes are being
issued, cheatingly filed 165
protests this year on all their
evaluations. And so the
challenge for Chililido, and I
think um
words can be difficult is that
within the tax code and the way
that it works now, you know,
there's a presumption of
validity of the assess valuation
by the county. So the, the land
grants, you know, whoever's
protesting is always at the
disadvantage that you need to
then you need to be able to
rebut that presumption that the
valuation is correct. Uh, one
thing that we've learned is that
the way the county, Bernalillo
at least does their valuations
is, you know, it's based on a
mass market because that there's
no way for them to individually
assess each parcel, given
the number of parcels in the
county. And so they do a mass
assessment that's supposed to be
based on some national and
regional numbers that are
crunched by, you know, these, um
software programs that they buy
and that they are, that they,
that they pay a service for
doing. And so those don't always
hit exactly right. And so the
only way that you get out of
that mass evaluation is you file
a protest. And then when it goes
from the protests, Bernal Leo
County has
3 ways that they do that. The
first way is that they look at
the actual market value for that
specific parcel, and it's based
on comparables. Well, in an area
like Chileity where there aren't
comparables and there aren't a
lot of land for sale. That's
sort of like not an option for
them to utilize. The second way
is they can do it based on the
income that the property
generates, and they learn that
by getting, you know, the
leasing and figuring out, OK,
well, what's the lease value?
What is it, what does that mean?
Um, and so that's something that
we just learned last week. And
so Chilili, you know, they do
lease
as uh Irwin mentioned, and the
leases vary depending on the
acreage, but they're not high
value income for the land grant.
So that would potentially be a
factor into determining the
valuations. It didn't get used
in this current valuation
because we didn't, Chile didn't
even know that was an option and
the protest hearing is, I think,
uh, next is on Monday. Um, the
third option that the county
uses is they, uh, it's called
cost valuation, and what they do
is they determine what is the
actual replacement costs and
what's that value? And this is
where it starts to get a little
bit confusing and I'm still not
100% versed on it, but
they use us again, a software
that they pay into uh to, to do
those valuations, and that
there's a baseline established,
and so the baseline, as I
understand it, is supposed to be
based on, on regional data. But
I did see that on some of those
10 and I think there's 16
different parcels that are still
in protest that have
improvements.
The baseline for each one starts
at a different number, which to
me is a little mind boggling if
you start, one starts at $80
baseline, the other one starts
at $88 and it's not clear to me
how you make that diff
distinction between why is this
property that's in the same
community worth more than this
property?
And then they apply that
baseline to the square footage,
and then you add in, you know,
the number of fixtures for
plumbing, you add in the square
footage of any other additional
outbuildings, porches, garages,
uh, and keep in mind the
county's doing this mostly based
on their aerial view, right? So
they're able to look at the
parcel, maybe do a 3D image, and
then they're making their best
guess estimate. What's the use
of that? Is that a garage? Is
that a and so, um, ideally the
best is for them to come out and
look at each property and make
sure that, oh, what we called a
shed
is actually a chicken coop and
should be valued at less than an
actual shed, but their
replacement costs are all based
on the markets and what they
think it would cost to to to
resupply that.
One of the challenges though, in
places like Chileli is that many
members will utilize the
resources from the mountain to
have offset their costs when
they construct. So there is no
replacement construction costs,
for example, of aviga because
they get access to that through
membership of maybe paying for a
permit to pull Vigas as opposed
to going to the local Home Depot
and purchasing that. So
all those are some of those
areas, and unfortunately because
the protest hearing is on
Monday. Um, we're not sure of
how successful that would be
because, you know, pulling all
this together for a land grant
to have go out and get an
appraisal and, and make sure
that you can refute what those
values are based on some solid
concrete evidence, um, putting
that together might not be
possible for this protest year.
Um, so the land grant's gonna
have to determine where do we go
from here, but I think they
have, you know, over the course
of the next year to really try
to figure that out. But I think
some solutions
and maybe we need to think about
that for the 60 day is how do we
maybe address um that in the tax
code itself, so that there is a
way to look at valuations a
little bit different when it
comes to improvements on the
land grant so that the heirs are
getting a fair um taxable value
and that the land and that
they're not overburdened.
Um, you know, another concern or
issue is that the, there can
only be a 3% increase per year.
Um
and I'm not sure how that
interplays with when
improvements were made, but
since some of these improvements
were never assessed, they're
getting assessed now with the
value of, you know, the 2025
value, but they may have already
been in, been there and, and
sitting on the land since 2020
and they're as a mobile home,
which, which most of these are,
they're valuation may have
already depleted because of
depreciation and so making sure
that all that's been properly
accounted for is, is the
challenge.
Thank you for that, Arturo and
Irwin, uh, one last thing, and
you guys already answered that
as you do with the subdivision
Act
um
didn't we carry legislation this
past session?
uh, that dealt with that. Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
Garcia, a bill was uh endorsed
by the land grant interim
committee last session, but then
there was, I think, some
confusion and so the bill didn't
never, didn't get introduced and
by the time it was sort of
worked out, it was already at
that sort of introduction
deadline. So there was no actual
bill introduced during the
session, even though, um, that
legislation was endorsed last
year by the committee.
Well, good, and that's something
we can look forward to in the
in the next 60 day session is.
putting that bill upfront. Thank
you, Madam Chair Oren. You did
good, brother. Keep it up.
Thank you. Thank you, Irwin. I
had a couple of questions, a
couple of things I want to note
on too is that, um, so, and as
you've mentioned it as well,
there's so much exchange of
ideas between the land grants
and truly how Chilily is led on,
on the housing aspect has been
so important. So kind of your
experience really is, uh, you
know, tells others how we can
make these improvements. We have
also heard about the subdivision
issue when we were out in Las
Vegas, uh, with Los Vila as
well. Um, they
had brought that issue as well,
so I, I mean I think it's at
least worth investigating how to
do so in a responsible manner
that makes sure that, you know,
the, the needs are, are
maintained. Um, and then also
what you were discussing as
well, uh, Arturo, just about how
we evaluate, you know,
improvements and all of that.
Um, I, I did have a question
related to that, and this might
be more for Arturo. I'm, I'm not
sure, but, um, broadly speaking,
because Irwin, you were saying
earlier that you're also looking
at in some cases that it can
only be sold to other heirs.
Some of these properties can
only be sold to other heirs. Is
that,
can that be considered as the
county is looking at
improvements. And the reason why
I say that is that that really
limits the pool of who will buy
this in the future. That limits
the pool of how much something
is valued at, you know, I feel
like it, not any rich person can
come in and buy. So I'm just
curious if that is at any aspect
included in those evaluations as
well.
Madam Chair, I think that's an
excellent question, and I think
that's one of the million dollar
questions, right, in terms of
what would a policy look like?
Um, because that is one of those
factors. There, there are
several factors that limit the
market ability and the
valuation um for these
properties and that's why the
land grant wants to ensure that
those improvements are being
evaluated for um what they are
within the market, so that there
is a fair valuation and that
there's not an overinflation of
what that
value is, um, so that you're
paying more than, than, than is
correct as it relates to sort of
those, and so that is
potentially one factor. Um,
there's also the factor of, as
Irwin mentioned, of the fact
that it's on a long-term lease.
Um, you know, they are uh.
I think several things that we
need to sort of evaluate and
work through. And the problem is
the county's gonna evaluate it
based on what they have the
statutory authority to do or not
do. And so, um, and, and again,
the burden of presumption of of
proof is on the land grant to
demonstrate, no, you're not
doing it correctly or that
here's the other alternative.
Now, fortunately, the county is
interested in, in working with
the land grant, but um, you
know, there's a limit to how
much they're going to be able to
put in outside of what they
' re normally comfortable with
doing or how they operate. And
so, um, the more prepared we can
make the land grant to be able
to make those arguments or the
more um we can have a policy
change at the legislature that
requires the land grant to look
specifically at those factors,
um, when they're doing the
evaluation within a land grant,
um, the better, uh, the outcome
will be for the communities
because the le the, you know,
the county will have that
direction and they're going to
follow the statute if that's
what the statute says. So I
think um those are the type of
ideas that we want to be able to
generate and
come up with maybe some possible
suggested solutions.
Thank you. Um, one thing I also
did want to mention was that,
um, I had, today I know that
the, I pulled up my phone
because, um, I was talking to
the secretary of Early Childhood
Education and Care Department.
Secretary Greginsky, who was
talking about today, they're
announcing some big, um,
expansions they're doing and
increasing who can have access
to the, the funding and stuff.
But a key piece that they were
talking about is they're trying
to build more, um, places where,
where kids can have, uh, we have
early childcare centers, right?
And so, uh, being the, being
honored to be, you know, the
chair of this committee I
brought up specifically
um, I would love to have more
information about that for land
grants. And one of the things
she mentioned was that they're,
they're increasing the capital
for growth, so low-interest
loans and capital outlay dollars
for the construction expansion,
renovation of licensed
facilities, but also making it
easier for home-based care
facilities as well to take, so
taking away administrative
barriers, um, and again
increasing the support for them
building those out. And I
mentioned that because again, if
you're the housing that you're
talking about really sounds like
it's for those families, you
know, getting started. A lot of
those housing, we just don't see
anymore, right? Um, you know, my
husband
and I entered them into the, the
housing market when where kids
were already born and
everything. My parents entered
the housing market when they had
kids, right? Like it's totally
different. So, um, just seeing
that you're kind of bringing
back that model for families to
start to grow in a community
again. It's beautiful, it's
awesome, and hopefully, you
know, I would really encourage
you or any, any land grants that
are listening in, you know, to,
to reach out to ECCD, reach out
to, to me, um, you know, I'm
happy to kind of connect to make
sure it's easier for folks, um,
to get that, that care, uh,
going as well. Um, and last
thing I want to mention was
that, uh, recently myself and,
um, Representative Mejia were on
a,
we're on a trip. We discovered a
lot about trade and in other
places and, and there's, it's
interesting how the places are
doing rural development for
economic development, and I only
mention that because I,
especially a lot of the
different meetings we've had,
you know, what, what, um, you
know, how, how the different
land grants are looking at, you
know, increasing the revenue
and, and, and building something
sustainable. It's so much up to
all of you and so, you know,
really letting us know how we
can help with building out that
infrastructure because it, it is
possible in so many ways. So,
um, you know, I think, and as
Rev Lord was saying earlier,
like this is a committee that
we'd like to work together on
those things.
So, um, but I would just
mention, I just mention it
because I, I know another
committee, uh in a different
town, it's totally different. It
was an out in Corona and my
husband and I stopped and talked
to the librarian there and she
said, Oh, I, I moved back out
here and, um, I, I, she
personally didn't like all the
windmills, right, coming back
home. So just think being
thoughtful about whatever that
economy is that ends up growing,
you know, that, that it really
is directed at your, um, at, at
what the requests and with the
wants of the land grant heirs
is, um, as opposed to being
something that we see is like
overall good for the state, and
here you go, you know, um, but
anyhoo, I just want to mention
that
now where we can be partners in
that way too. Um, but I, I thank
you for the presentation. That
was fantastic. Uh, truly, um,
you know, at this point I think
we, we can take our lunch break.
Uh, we're just about on time, so
we'll come back at 12:45 on the
dot, and, um, and, and I'll turn
it over to, to you if you want
to take over a uh Lenora.
I just want to say thank you,
Irwin for the great, uh,
presentation on housing and the
needs of the future and also for
the challenges that are coming
between him and the land grants,
but the other thing also is the
unity is the one thing between
languages keep the unity
together. And I want to thank,
uh, uh, Madam Chair and all the
members here because you know
what, before in the past we were
excluded from coming to the
table to let him know our
stories, but now I want to thank
you for coming to our table and
letting us hear your stories and
I wanna hear your stories also
because we have to help each
other. It's no longer the past
with different languages or
different money or color is
about what we can do for each
other to make the future better
for our family and with the
challenges the land grant is
also, um, my thing with the land
grant is I like to keep it
simple because we love
simplicity and it gets scary
when you're getting bigger
because I don't want us to
become a city. I like us to keep
simple, so that's the thing
about taking care of our water
and our land and our culture.
So, thank you, but for those of
you who've been sitting, there's
the lake is just about walking
distance here if you don't know
where it is. Take a little
break, bathrooms
and we have Frito pie for lunch,
OK? You guys take a break,
stretch out.
