Behind you. So Greg, please go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Greg Frosted. I'm Assistant
Secretary of Education at the
Public Education department, and
it is a pleasure to be here
today to talk with you about
data and about the statewide
student information system. Uh,
I particularly like that you
came to Gallop. I taught and was
a school administrator here for
many, many years and really
enjoy coming back as well.
Um
data is key to the work that
schools are doing. Teachers need
data in order to make sure that
they are providing students the
supports that they need to
learn.
The PED needs data to make sure
that our programs are operating
smoothly and that we can um put
our emphasis on the best
programs, the most efficacious
programs, and you all need data
in order to make important
policy decisions, and that's why
I want to talk a little bit
today about a statewide student
information system, something
that I have been talking about
and working at the agency, um,
toured for the last 11 years
since I came to the agency.
The a student information system
does a lot of different things.
It is not just a great book.
When I started teaching a long
time ago, if you had a student
information system, it was a
glorified grade book that took
attendance, but nowadays, all of
the key pieces of a school are
typically incorporated into
this, that data is incorporated
into a student information
system. So it's in addition to a
great book and attendance
there is online enrollment,
there's registration, there are,
there are state reporting,
learning management system,
grades and transcripts, uh, some
places even use it for their
fiscal programs. It is one of
the best communication tools
that schools use to interact
with families with as well. So
it is really key to the
operations of a school.
In New Mexico, there are 7
different student information
systems that are currently used.
There are 2 lead, uh, two of
them have most of the New Mexico
market share and the, the data I
have to share on the next few
slides are all from a survey
that we gave out to the LEAs and
we have about 200 school
districts and charters, and we
got responses from 133 of them.
And so you can
see that
the student information system
with the largest market share is
Edgy Point's synergy, and that
is in some of the larger
districts, including
Albuquerque, and there are about
11 already that are using
synergy. And then, um, the, the
orange, the second largest
market share belongs to
PowerSchool, and PowerSchool has
less market share, but many more
uh school districts and charter
schools around the state.
So why, uh, why do we need a
statewide student information
system.
There are many, many benefits of
having just one statewide
student information system.
Some of the most important are
faster and easier student
transfers. So now if a student
is transferring to from Gallop
to Zuni, and Zuni is using
something other than, um,
synergy, which is Gallop's uh
student information system.
They are likely taking paper
copies of documents from Gallup
to Zuni, and once the family
takes that information, that
transfer information, there's no
guarantee necessarily that Zuni
will receive it or that Zuni
will be looking for it. But if
they're on the same student
information system.
then the ZUI can know that the
student is transferring from
Gallup to Zuni and Gallup can
know that the records were
received by Zuni, so there's
less chances of students getting
lost in the system.
Also one of the, though it does
not
remove the requirement to have
40, 80, 120, and end of year
reporting. Those will still be
required for certified data.
Those are points in time that
districts all take a look at
their data to make sure it is
accurate and that, that we use
for funding.
real near real-time data will be
available. So we will be able to
have snapshots of uncertified
data along the way. So anytime
that we need to look up and see,
well, about how many of this are
there or these are there, we'll
be able to pull that and provide
that quickly rather than having
to wait until the snapshot, um,
provides us verified data.
There are
a variety again of features and
modules that student information
systems have and not especially
our small, smaller rural
districts don't necessarily have
all the bells and whistles for
their student information
systems, and that is one of the
things that we hope to be able
to provide, uh, additionally,
not just a student information
system, but all of the, but more
of the modules and features, um
for, for those that have few.
And families
if you have families that have
multiple students in different
schools, they may have to learn
different student information
systems. For instance, Secretary
Padilla, she, she has children
in different schools and so
she's using multiple student
information systems and has to
learn them and has to, has to
operate both of them.
and not insignificantly, it is
much cheaper
for the state to purchase in
bulk the student information
system rather than for school
districts and charter schools to
purchase their own. It's cheaper
both for the LEAs and for the
state as a whole because the
funding does come from the state
ultimately.
and, and let me talk then a
little bit more about the cost.
So I, I'm gonna start over on
the left-hand side here, the,
the blue, the tall blue bar of
more than $70 per student. That
is the average school cost per
student. So if we, for instance,
if Albuquerque was averaging $10
per student, and Zhao was
averaging $20 per student. The
average cost then would be 15.
Albuquerque and Jal in that
instance have the same cost. So
across our LEAs across our
school districts and charters,
the average cost
per student for the student
information system is more than
$70.
Now the black, the, the shorter
black.
column
is the cost if we look at all of
the costs of the LEAs and divide
by all of the students, then we
come up with just short of $30
per student, so it's about half
of the cost overall, but because
there are so many students in
the larger districts that have a
lower cost per student. It does
drop the cost to about to just
under $30 per student, but with
the statewide student
information system, we're able
to purchase again for about half
of that or under $15 per
student. So it really, it, it
really will provide good savings
for the state, and that is,
we're not considering other,
other costs around assist. That
is the vendor cost for the
systems, not necessarily the
staff that an, uh, a school
district or charter school may
have on, on board to, to support
the student information system.
Stakeholder inputs, uh, we
at the agency, we know that this
is a, uh, because it is so
important, this is a, this is a
big deal. It's a big rollout. We
needed to get a lot of
stakeholder feedback before we
were to make a decision on the
statewide student information
system.
And in order to do that, we went
all over the state, uh, all four
corners. I myself went to the
southeast through Socorro and
Riidoso and Hobbes and Clovis,
um, and, and overall, we
provided more than 58 in-person.
feedback or input sessions where
we were able to hear from
students, from families, from
teachers and administrators and
the data, um, the data
specialists in the district to
hear what is it they need out of
a student information system.
And we, we collected a lot of
feedback in that way. We also
did online, um
online requirement sessions as
well where we could again
collect requirement, uh, from
stakeholders that use the
student information system
And we presented at the Spring
budget conference and, and other
conferences as well. We also had
3 internal or 3
working groups that supported
this election. The first was an
internal working group made up
of PED employees. Then we had a
group of Nova
coordinators that were elected
from amongst their peers around
the state, um, and those are the
real data specialists, uh, from,
uh, from across the state that
came together as well to
participate in the selection
process.
And then we also had, uh, an
advi, an external advisory group
that um that contained staff
from the LESC, from the LFC from
HED from ECECD, um, and to do it
and others, uh, and other,
again, other stakeholders, um,
that were able to listen to the,
the vendor pitches and uh help
make a decision around what is
needed in a statewide student
information system and which
vendor can provide that best
product for the state.
So, um, we, we also
we spoke to many states as well,
um, to understand the
experiences they've had with
student in with statewide
student information systems.
There are states that have
requirements uh that everyone
used one particular student
information system and so we, we
met with a lot of different
states also to under to get
their perspective.
And after all of that and, and
the two rounds of presentations,
both the internal, uh, working
group at the PED as well as the
NOA coordinator working uh NOA
coordinator external group.
made unanimous recommendations
to Secretary Padilla to go with
Edia Points, synergy, um, as, as
uh recommended vendor and the,
the secretary has agreed and so
right now we are working through
the contracting process, um,
with Edge Point synergy.
And the, the implementation
process, it's, it's really a
3-year process for a cohort, um,
right now, um, we are working
with cohort one. We have asked
for districts and charters to
sign up by September 30th if
they are interested in
transitioning to the statewide
student information system over
the coming years. And
it's still changing quickly.
This says 70 because it was done
a week ago, just today I looked
at the numbers and it's up to
80, so we now have 80, um, of
our approximately 200 LEAs have
signed up for the the statewide
student information system.
And on the right hand side
there, there's a list of some of
those just that I just pulled a
random list of some of the folks
from around the state that have
signed up. Um, if you're
interested to know if you're,
um, local LEAs have. I'm happy
to, to get that information to
you at a later time.
But as I mentioned, it's a
3-year process, the transition
this year, this first year is
data migration. So moving the
data from the legacy student
information system or whatever
student information system they
have now into synergy and that
process continues until
until the data can be verified
in the cyst that it is, um, that
it's accurate, that it's what
the district needs, and then
the, the
switch will be flipped and they
will start using the new
synergy.
um, student information system.
So that's the first year's data
migration. The second year is
implementation of the student
information system and the
special education module.
and then the 3rd year is
implementation. If, if, and if
an LEA chooses to, the 3rd year
is for the teaching and learning
modules including um things like
assessment and um multi-layered
systems of supports and um the
um learning management system.
And so considerations as we move
forward, some of the things that
the LESC may want to consider.
Um, we do have a request. The
secretary will be here shortly
to talk about budget, and we are
asking for 8.5 million down from
the 12 that we have this year.
Thank you very much for the 12
to start our implementation, um,
but we have 8, an $8.5 million
request for FY 27.
And one of the things that we
heard while we were out across
the state, some school districts
and charters were leery of
transitioning to a statewide
student information system with
funding only in the
non-recurring section. Um, they
said, why would we want to cha I
mean changing a student
information system is a big
deal. That's why we need as much
time as we can this year to
migrate the data. And um there
was concern that we only have
one year's worth of funding and
it's non-recurring, um.
but we, we did, we met with
staff at LESE and LFC and, and
it did sound like there could be
appetite for, uh, for funding
into the future as well, and we
would recommend and in our
budget, um, and secretary's
budget presentation, you'll see
that we have recommended that
that 8.5 million be in as a
recurring line item.
And there is no requirement or
mandate at this time, uh, for
schools to move into the
statewide student information
system. Uh, the data will still
be available in the statewide
student information system from
all districts, but, uh, in terms
of use, uh, there is no
requirement that they transition
to synergy. They can stay with,
uh, whatever, um, student
information system they choose
to, but to see the maximum
benefit of a statewide student
information system, um
that this body may consider into
the future, uh, having a policy
that would require adoption of
the statewide student
information system.
and we've got Justin here from
Edgey Point, uh, to talk a
little bit about synergy and
with that, I'm gonna transition
to having him provide a little
product demo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um
Edge Point, uh, and our product
synergy, uh, but Edge Point is,
is very excited to be, uh,
working with the PED and the
state of New Mexico in order to
uh provide student information
systems to all of the LEAs.
Uh, our goal actually as a uh
student information system
provider is to allow the folks
at the
LEAs, the schools, the district
offices, the classrooms, really
to focus more on the students
and less on working within the
student information system. So
when users log into our
application, they're actually
directed right towards any tasks
that they need to complete. If
I'm a principal, when I log in,
it might indicate that I need to
address a discipline incident
that one of our teachers
submitted to us or there may be
some grade change requests that
I have to handle.
Also allowing us to define
workflows to guide our staff
through the different steps that
are required to complete any
process within a school, uh,
knowing that there's turnover,
knowing that there are important
things that can't be missed
during some of these processes
like maybe student suspension.
We want to help folks guide
their staff through that.
But based on their role and what
they do within the district or
the LEA, they're going to be
guided right towards an
informational analytic page
that's going to help them
understand the information that
is contained within synergy.
Uh.
you can collect all the
information you want, but if it
doesn't make sense and help
inform instruction, there's
really not a lot of point in
doing that. And so as a
principal maybe I might land on
a page that, that gives me a
breakdown of my discipline
incidents by grade level.
or based on the time of year we
might have a particular focus on
getting our district-wide
assessments and benchmark
assessments, uh, getting these
students prepared for any state
testing that might be out there.
Focusing on attendance and
demographics to ensure that
we're able to get, uh, you know,
equitable, uh, uh, education out
to all the different students
based on ethnicities.
but our application has an
entire catalog of these
different types of dashboards
and we're working with PED to
increase that, uh, to make sure
it makes sense for all of the
folks here in New Mexico and
certainly chronic absenteeism is
one of those areas and being
able to focus our staff right
when they log into the
application to those students
that are struggling to get to
class or to get to campus, being
able to break that down by
grouping of
here are the kids that are
really at risk
and being able to look at that
information is great, but being
able to do something with it
would be better.
And so the benefit of having
these types of analytics built
into the student management
system that you're using means
that we're able to as a LEA
administrator access what are
called synergy actions.
to say all of these students
that are chronically absent, we
want to send out a communication
to their parents. We wanna
schedule a conference so that we
can meet with these students.
We want to assign them to an
afterschool tutoring group to
help get these students up to
speed. So instead of having to
go one by one through all these
students after analyzing the
information, the system will
allow me to very quickly make
all of those changes and
corrections by myself. So I
don't have to go through kind of
one by one to do all that.
It's important to, to ensure
that staff are able to be out
there interacting with students,
and that's again one of those
key areas with synergy. One of
the areas where then we provide
also a suite of mobile
applications, so that the staff
at the schools are not simply
data entry clerks that have to
sit in an office behind a
computer entering information.
They're out there interacting
with students. Uh, it could
simply be a principle
walking around campus with their
phone. Seeing students that are
not in class after the bell
rings, asking Billy where should
you be right now?
Well I can simply scan Billy's
ID card, and now the system will
tell me based on the time of day
in the bell schedule where
Billy's supposed to be. He
should be in his English class
here with Mr. Simmons, and he'll
drill all the way down into the
grade book so I can see how well
he's doing in that class.
And if I have concerns about how
he's doing in that class, I can
go in and I can look at
all of his assignments from his
teachers for these classes. I
can see notes or comments that
the teachers have made.
We can come back and maybe we
want to verify his attendance.
How often have you been missing
this class?
And maybe even enter in a
discipline incident here in
order to document that the
students had too many absences.
So being able to do that right
from our devices so that we're
not stuck behind the computer
interacting with synergy all the
time. We can be out there
working with the students.
So these devices really are
designed to take some of these
labor intensive tasks, these
time-consuming things that are
taking our educators away from
being with the students and
putting them behind a computer.
streamlining operations at the
front office, being able to set
up
on pre-existing hardware that's
out there. Self-service kiosks.
for students when they come in
to simply
uh receive a tardy pass at the
beginning of class that day if
they're late, they can again
simply walk up, scan an ID card.
It's gonna mark that student as
tardy, generate a pass form
automatically in order to take
back to their classroom.
We also give folks the
opportunity to replace many
ancillary systems that they may
be paying for at the moment,
such as electronic hall pass
systems, digital hall pass
systems. They're very common in
school districts. They're
usually paying an outside system
to do that. It's included in the
base cost within our application
in synergy.
and also streamlining that same
concept for teachers. Teachers
need to be focused on teaching,
not entering in data into an SIS
or a grade book.
giving teachers the opportunity
to also have a simple
self-service kiosk located in
the classroom in order for the
students to simply check
themselves in when they come to
class.
Students walk up, they can
simply tap on the screen to say
I'm here. That's marking those
students as present.
We know when it's time to start
marking kids as tardy based on
that bell schedule. So now his
kids come in, they're marked as
target, but it frees up the
teacher now to be focusing on
what really matters in the
classroom.
It's important at the same time
though to ensure that we're
keeping parents up to date on
all of this information. And
again, jumping in here, parents
are gonna be accessing student
data on the go, really from
wherever they are and so we
wanna make sure they can do
that.
If I log in as a parent, we do
provide for those first-time
parents logging in a tutorial to
guide them through how to use
synergy so that they understand
how to do that. They can get
access to all of their students
within the LEA or district from
one login. They don't have to go
individually to each student.
Another area again of cost
savings, we have included within
synergy our parent-teacher
conference scheduling modules so
that teachers can publish out
their schedules for when they
would like to meet with parents
and as a parent I can see what
are the available time frames
for me to get in and select one
of those. I can decide too if it
should be in person or virtual,
and that'll notify the teacher
of my selection.
But we also want to look at
little things, because little
things mean a lot to someone,
and we try not to overlook that.
And we had a district tell us
one time, you know what, we have
kids, they dread that first day
of school every year, never
fails. Teacher mispronounces
their name while they're calling
roll. Now the kids get teased
all year long because of it. So
wouldn't it be easier if the
parents or students could just
log into the portal, they can
record a pronunciation of the
child's name
It goes right into the
application as a teacher from
the seating chart, I'm able to
listen to that before I interact
with the students. Same thing
with parents, so that when I
call mom and dad, I'm able to
correctly pronounce their names.
So again, all of this
information is occurring in real
time. We have access for
counseling staff for, for
nursing staff, all of the
different administrators and
security advisors uh within the,
the LEA.
And of course, when we log in as
a uh parent, there's a lot of
information we can see here,
this is just another way of
accessing it. It's from a just a
browser and again the most key
uh the uh the most key area of
uh interaction is with parents,
communication with parents and
as an administrator, I can see
here within synergy, we've got a
communication tool called
Synergy Mail
and here we see the band
director sent out a
communication to all the band
parents, which could be hundreds
or thousands of people. He
doesn't really have any idea
what languages are spoken by
those folks. So how effective is
this communication gonna be if
only a portion of those folks
can understand it. With synergy,
it doesn't matter
The parent is able to select the
language they want to view the
portal in and not only do all
the column headers and button
labels get translated, but we
translate in real time all of
the ad hoc communication that
goes out from district staff.
So I can see the translated
version.
I can see down here the original
content, the untranslated
version, and when the parent
responds back in their native
language, we translate that
right back into English for the
district staff. So again, you
remove that language barrier as
an obstacle for communication.
So a big area of concern
obviously is this access to
data. We want to make sure
information is easy to access,
so you can access it anywhere
from any device. We wanna make
it easy to understand, uh, so we
make sure it's translated into
the lab uh native language of
the user.
But we also want to make it easy
to consume. You can overwhelm
people with too much
information. Rows and rows of
data doesn't make sense to a
parent.
They want to know very simple,
straightforward concepts. Is my
son gonna graduate on time?
I want to go to his course
history, and I want to visually
see
is he on track to graduate?
Break down by subject area,
let's say, where he's deficient,
where he needs additional
credits, generate unofficial
transcripts here if I need to.
I want to see how he does on
those tests that he keeps taking
every year, year after year, is
he making any improvements? I
can view as a parent how my
child is doing year over year in
any of the tests that we want to
publish out.
Also, again, a breakdown of
their attendance because
attendance is key to anybody's
success in a school district and
so being able to see not only
attendance rows and rows of
absences, but attendance
breakdowns by
calendar.
because maybe if we start
noticing as a parent, oh my
child's always absent on
Mondays, uh, you know, every
other Mondays and Fridays. Well,
those are the days he's staying
over at his dad's house. We need
to talk to him about what's
going on.
or he's laid a lot, but it only
seems to be the 6th hour. He
might just be too far away from
5th hour.
We gotta help him there or he
misses a lot of classes, but
maybe it's just intermediate
acting, maybe it just has stage
fright. He shouldn't be in that
class. We need to get him into
the appropriate one. So it
allows folks to start connecting
some dots that maybe they
wouldn't have if they were just
looking at rows and rows of
data.
but for our most critical
students, those that are at
risk, we want to make sure the
parents are involved with those
students because that's the best
way to ensure success. And so
when we talk about, as Greg
mentioned before, those
multi-layered systems of
support, those interventions,
publishing that information out
to parents to let them know,
listen, we've got a concern
around reading with your child
and specifically the gap is in
comprehension
and we're gonna use a tool
called Lexia here to try to get
them up to 80% accuracy. So that
would then plot out for the
parents. This is our expected
rate of growth for your child
through these weeks of
intervention, and here's their
actual progress. Again, to keep
parents informed as to what's
going on.
and reward those students that
behave well, positive behavior
points give them a virtual store
that they could go purchase some
rewards for being good in the
classroom.
And of course
finally, making sure that we're
able to assist with the teaching
staff. In the classrooms, we
want to make sure that we're
able to accommodate whatever
outside LMS system they're
currently using, so we have
integrations with all the major
ones, but I can see here as a
teacher, my class load for the
day.
it's showing me by classroom
here if I have any ungraded
assignments that I need to go
through and score. Or if I have
how many students are missing
work, uh, do I have new kids
coming into the classroom.
Again, there's so much going on
in schools today. You have to
make sure folks don't overlook
some of these critical items. We
want to call attention to all of
these very specific areas that
folks need help with.
And again, just like I
mentioned, when we're talking
about administrators for
teachers. We want to focus on
not just showing them the data,
but helping them do something
with it.
When I look at my grade book
here with all of my assignments
and my students, I can see
breakdowns by assignment of
student performance, how they
did group those kids by that
performance, and those kids that
aren't meeting our standards,
well, let's do something about
it.
Let's email their teacher, uh,
their parents. Let's set up a
parent-teacher conference. Let's
create a makeup assignment just
for those students to help them.
So again, assist folks in this
this ability to create and help
with the students that are
struggling.
and those kids that have those
missing assignments, well, let's
pull those students up and now I
can tell them
what their grade could be if
they would just get that
information in, get those
assignments in. You're, you're
getting a D right now, but
potentially you could be at a
78% if we just got these missing
assignments in.
So again for these students,
let's do something about it.
Let's create a group so that I
can always focus on just these
kids to make sure we can get
that information back on track.
And for a lot of our students
that are struggling.
when I'm a teacher in the
classroom, I'm kind of that
first level of support for these
students that need help, that
are struggling with areas and so
again built into our application
is social-emotional learning.
Students being able to go online
and kind of report each day how
they're feeling.
and teachers can actually just
overlay that across their
seating chart. This is a
teacher's seating chart here. I
could toggle the overlay and it
would give me little indicators
of which kids may be said, hey,
I'm tired today, or I'm doing
great, I'm happy.
I'm a little worried because of
that big test that's coming in,
or I'm sad because maybe my dog
is sick.
But being able to focus not just
on those academics, but on the,
the social emotional learning
aspect of it is also one of
those key areas of focus for us.
So again, all of that is in this
core package that we plan to
deliver to all of those LEAs
that wish to subscribe and we're
very excited to get going on
that. There's a lot here that we
think will really help and
benefit those folks. And so we
just appreciate the opportunity,
uh, that the state of New Mexico
and the PED is offering us. So
thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Justin, and,
and Mr. Chair, um, we're happy
to answer any questions, uh,
that, uh, membership has.
Thank you. Uh, I was just
commenting when I was last
teaching, I think we are using
synergy or whatever version at
that time to do the grading
cause lots of it looked
familiar. This looks very
updated for that. Uh, first I
have Representative Sarana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, I, I really like the missing
assignments. That would be great
to just be able to keep your
student and every, every Monday
or every Friday and have it do
Monday, that's, that's great.
Um, OK, couple of things though.
So, um
a lot of our kids are being
raised by their grandparents.
And I don't know that everybody
has a computer at home or knows
how to use it. So how would you
help them?
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of committee, um, one of
the things that, that we've
noticed, uh, lately is a lot of
our districts just right out
here actually in the, in the
lobby at Gallop McKinley, uh, is
a computer that's set up for
parents to come in, enroll
students, update information
about those kids, um, you know,
maybe enroll a new child that's
of kindergarten age, uh, they
can access their parent view
accounts there, uh, so without
access to um any of those, those
types of uh
internet or computer at home, we
do see a lot of our districts
that are including that type of,
of portal within lobbies or
within libraries, but also,
again, that was one of our goals
of focusing so uh uh.
focusing a lot of our areas on
the mobile aspect because
nowadays, you know, even, you
know, my grandparents who are
very old at this point, have
mobile devices that they're able
to access information on and so
having those types of mobile
apps that we're used to being
able to access nowadays, uh,
really gets us a much broader
audience of, of participation we
find.
And Mr. Char, also, if I may,
again, having a single student
information system or more or
fewer at least, uh, that, that
grandparents may need to access,
also should benefit if there's
only one that they have to use
from when the students enter
until when they leave school,
that, um, we anticipate will be
a real benefit for families
around the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I,
I, I
I, um, I have neighbors right
across the street who are
probably my age and they don't,
they don't have a computer. So I
just wonder if, if how really if
everyone has what they need. But
the next question, um, in
Albuquerque, at least, mobility
is huge. I mean, kids just move
from school to school. So why is
it just um
they don't, why do they not have
to be part of it. It seems like
it would be something really
important because of our
mobility rate.
Yes, Mr. Chair. So, uh,
definitely there, so
there
thanks for asking the question.
Yeah, they, the, the legislature
did not pass a statute that
would require participation.
They provided the funding, but
not a requirement. And, um, at
least initially in talking, in
talking with staff and other
stakeholders, they're, um, we
really do want to focus on those
that want to move forward
initially and, and build um
and
and build a coalition of the
willing to get started with the
student information system. Once
we have, um, a critical mass,
then it may be easier to
convince the others, um, to, to
move into synergy as well, but,
uh, at least for the beginning,
there was no legislative
requirement and um stakeholders
uh including, um, when we met
with staff from LESE and LFC did
not, did not recommend that we,
that the agency start with a
um regulation that would require
uh participation of everyone.
Thank you, Mr. Chaman. It seems
like that would lose our most
vulnerable, the ones who we
really need to be tracking
because they're always moving,
but, um, last question, um,
military, so
specifically, what is there for
military as far as, uh, I, I was
talking to them recently, a
group of women enrollment, um,
records transfer, credit
transfer, graduation rates,
requirements. Sometimes the
requirements don't mesh, so
they're not graduating when they
shouldn't should and um
and just pure support for that
frequent move. What do we have
in there the kind of
helps them
Mr.
Chair, so this really should
help more mobile students. I
mean, that is part of the
benefit of this is that it would
help mobile students, but in
terms of students transferring
in and out of state, I don't
know that there is, um, uh, a, a
real benefit for students
transferring in and out of state
because I don't think it will be
a simple um
because again, they may be using
different um student information
systems. So I don't know for,
for those that there's a real
big benefit, um, to the student
information system, having a
statewide student information
system. So, um
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, but a
so our military right now to
keep our bases in New Mexico, we
have to show that the community
supports them because they can
go anywhere. And we're having
trouble with a couple of our
bases, so it's critical that we
are supporting them the best we
can. If, if we're not in, and
some of the complaints are,
well, you know, you have
requirements, we have, we've,
we've
we've completed all these
requirements, but they don't
mesh, so our kids when they
leave here, aren't ready to
graduate the next school. So
that's something we need to look
at because our military is
really a huge part of our state
and very critical, right, thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Alata.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Thank you, gentlemen, for the
presentation. I have, I have a
couple of things, um, you know,
just recently I know we had a
breach.
uh, back home, a data breach.
You know, there was some
phishing going on and somebody
caught something and was able to
get into the system. So my
question to you, uh, Mr. Berg
is, you know, can you, can you
speak on the security system?
Can you walk us through what
that would look like because,
you know, as we know, there's
all these phishing scams,
there's all these things going
on, and especially if it's gonna
be mobile it's gonna it's
there's gonna be more exposure
to that type of of uh of scam or
breach. So can you please talk
about security and how this and
how the system works.
Absolutely, Mr. Sher, thank you.
Um, so yes, certainly student
information systems are not
immune from folks trying to get
in there, uh, with data
breaches, um, certainly there
are other, uh, competitors in
the industry that have
experienced that very thing. And
so it's always been something
that Edgey Point has an
organization has been very
focused on. We have for many
years before kind of this, uh,
most recent, um, focus on
security been through
uh, what's called a SOC 2
certification, which is an
industry standard certification
and outside party goes through
all of the processes that we
have, we have to ensure that,
uh, data privacy is restricted
within our own organization so
that we don't have unlimited
access to district information.
We host everything through, uh,
Amazon Web Services, and so
being able to partner with kind
of the premier, uh, hosting
platform as far as uh data
security and performance goals
is a benefit to us, but to your
point about fishing, that's kind
of what the SOC 2 certification
helps us with is that
that's geared specifically
towards the kind of social
hacking that happens, somebody
being tricked into providing
information versus kind of a, a
blunt force hack of your of your
database and so we go through
routinely, we have, uh, fishing
email tests that go out from our
IT staff to everybody looking
like an internal email with
links to click on. We have, um,
uh, ongoing professional
development that we have to go
through and pass these tests.
um, in order to maintain that
certification. So we take it
very seriously and from the
mobile side of things, no
information is stored on the
local device, and districts are
able to shut down usage for any
one or all of those mobile
devices at any time. And so, um,
any of that information is going
directly with a through a live
connection to our database, so
we're tracking the IP address,
the device that's being used,
who it's registered to, um, so
that we can make sure that there
is not any breach in student
information. So we're very
focused on that even through our
support center, uh, our support
staff, because that's actually
one of the ways that, uh, folks
were able to breach one of our
competitors was just through
accessing their support system
we've been able to implement
obviously multi-factor
authentication there too, to
ensure that the person getting
access to an LEA's information
is the right person.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that information
and obviously a parent is only
gonna have access to their
child's information, and people
at the district level are gonna
have access to much more
information uh regarding that.
So I'm assuming besides all
these cool things that it does,
you know, it's also going to
have demographic information,
special ed information, whether
they're ELLs and everything
else, so, and, and that's one of
the things that I'm concerned
with it's because, you know,
it's, it's happened before, you
know, uh, it may happen again,
you know, it may be a district
level employee who gets
fished. It may be it, you know,
even all these things are in
place and the trainings are in
place, it still may happen. So
that's still something that
that's, that's a possibility.
Also, I wanted to ask, I have a
couple more, uh, Mr. Chair, so
is, where is the data stored at
the school district is it stored
locally is a is a store, uh, in
the cloud? Where, where's the
data being stored?
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Sher. Uh, it is stored in Amazon
uh web services, so it's in the
cloud, it's redundantly, um, um,
backed up on two sides of the
country, so we have, uh, data
centers that we use in Virginia
and in Oregon. So if one goes
down, another one is able to to
pull up at the time to ensure uh
downtime. So all of the
information will be in the cloud
again using Amazon Web Services.
Thank thank you for that and
thank you, Mr. Chair. One more
question. So how, how closely,
uh, I think this is probably for
Mr. Frostad. How closely are you
working with, uh, do it on, on
this, on this, on this project.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, uh,
we, we are working closely right
now. One of the reasons that we
don't have a contract in place
yet is because we are going
through the project
certification committee, the
PCC, um, to, to make sure that
um we're meeting all of Dewitt's
requirements in order to be able
to move forward with the
contract. Um, another, another
piece that we're looking for uh
looking at is also moving our,
our data center that we have at
PED to do it, um, and, and we'll
be using some of the 12 million
uh in funding that we have this
year for that as well.
Thank, thank you for that, Mr.
Frosted, and, um, you know, I, I
know I said I had one more. I,
I, I, I know I had said I was
dumb, but I'm really not. I have
one more popped up, uh, so that
said, uh, Mr. Chairman and
gentlemen, so, uh,
I I just I'm just gonna ask
this, so what somebody at PED
have access to the school
district.
uh, data that's not being
transmitted or uploaded to to
the system. Help me understand
that. So it it is, is PED gonna
have constant access to that
information to that data, or to
the school districts have to
upload that, you know, every,
you know, on the 40th day and
the, and the 80th day and, and
such.
So the, the process will change
very actually very little from
what is currently happening now
with Nova. So in Nova, there,
the data is pushed from the
districts, but it's not like
pushed at 40 day, it's pushed
it should be pushed every day
and generally is pushed every
day into Nova. Um, some
districts will wait, especially
the smaller, uh, smaller
district or a charter school,
they may upload just a few times
around the um the reporting
periods because they have much
less data, um, but generally it
already is pushed and we do have
access to Nova.
generally every day. So the, the
change will not be particularly
significant, but we would with
this rollout we would then have
the ability to say we're going
to schedule daily submissions of
the data rather than wait until
40 day, um, but that's
definitely not best prac already
we because it, it is critical
along the way. All, all of the
work for 40 day validation
should be happening like from
the beginning of the school
year, data validation after
40 day, there shouldn't be that
much to do. They can check the,
the school districts and
charters can check to make sure
that their data is correct along
the way, and all of those errors
should be taken care of when you
get to 40 day. If they're
waiting to submit it 40 day and
then trying to correct the
errors afterwards. There's just
not enough time to do that. And
so that is one of the reasons
that most everybody is already
submitting on a real regular
basis, if not like pretty much
all the time.
Thank you for that. I appreciate
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. I have not
been paid for my endorsement of
this program, but I really like
synergy. I use it from 2006
through after COVID and what
you've just demonstrated to me
is the fact that, uh, at your
point
pivots as like I've seen 2 new
things in the last 4 years
developed, and I know that's
responsiveness to your clients,
uh, and I think that's really
good. I noticed during COVID
there was improved. I was with
Albuquerque Public Schools.
great improvement on putting
contact information for
guardians, including people like
grandparents or or things like
that. So I really wanna salute
that. Um, I corrected
understanding and this is
probably to both of them. This
makes
our data collection
much easier, doesn't it? If
everybody uses it across the
state.
Uh, yes, uh, it, it absolutely
does. Number one, Mr. Chair, it
allows for us to
to be trained in it. Right now,
if there's an issue at the
district, all we can really say
is you need to go talk with your
student information system
vendor to get this corrected.
When it's, when there is one
that we're supporting and one
that most people are on, our
people can be trained in it and
our people can provide technical
assistance as well, um, and also
it allows for staff to move
between school districts and
charter schools and have the
same set of skills, um, that is
transferable among them, um,
also, when we're data mapping
from the student information
system into our databases at the
PED we're, we're really focused
on one and making sure that the
data flows in the correct way
and that when we have a data
field in the student information
system, it is real clear to
everybody what that field
represents and, and where it
fits into the database. So yes,
definitely it, we are
anticipating that we'll, um, not
only increase the speed at which
data is available, but also the
accuracy of the data.
Yes, absolutely, and, uh, to
your question, uh, uh, Mr.
Chair, thank you very much. Uh
one of the other issues is just
the amount of data entry that
occurs when there is that
interdistrict transfer, someone
leaving Albuquerque, moving to
Las Cruces or, uh, Farmington,
anything like that. In that
users at each one of those
receiving districts now have to
manually enter in all of that
information. They have to take a
paper copy of an IEP and enter
all that information in. They
have to take a paper copy
usually of a transcript and
enter that in. And so this will
allow now all of those
folks to that have opted into
the, uh, the program to share
information about students when
they're transferred, uh, really
lessening the burden of that
data entry when you go and when
you move from district to
district. So that should, uh,
make things, uh, quite a bit
easier for the districts
So, Mr. Chair, and our
presenters, so ultimately this
saves uh tons of time and all of
us who've been educators here
have seen our time saved by
whatever we were using, it saves
time and it saves money.
ultimately, correct? Yes, Mr.
Chair, exactly.
Uh, and then Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, uh, Sonyana
brought up mobility because one
of the biggest problems I faced
in a large elementary school is
back and forth between power
school at the local charter
schools, synergy at APS so it's
not just that they're moving
around the state or they're
moving to another state, but
they're moving
between neighborhoods, so that,
that's one reason I personally
supported being used by
everybody because it's just a
massive and then
uh I'll never forget the child
and some of you, the very sad
child of this is my next
question, have we improved the
student IDs between CYFD and PED
because everybody, not everybody
necessarily remembers the child
that left Santa Fe Public
Schools and ended up
actually dead because there was
no follow through on where that
child went next. Are we working
on the ID system for our New
Mexican students, which affects
sy uh synergy.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so definitely
work has been done. I was part
of the task force. I don't know,
maybe 6 or 7 years ago that
worked, uh, on with CYFD on that
particular issue. I can't, I'm
not briefed right now on where
we are at, um, but that, that,
um, that task force did present
to um LESC I believe um
yeah, uh, several years ago, but
let me follow up and and get
back with you on, um, on
progress that's been made.
Thank you because I know that
troubled all of us very deeply,
um, Mr. Chair, the other, uh
another question I have is as an
instructional coach, I could
look at it or a teacher could
also but I could review the
changing tests. I don't know
what came before PAC, but we had
the scores before PARC PARC,
postpark, uh, reading scores. We
had DRA, we had DIBE, and then
we had ice station and synergy
managed to put them all in
there. However, what got left
out from synergy, and I don't
know if this was the Albuquerque
Public
schools issue
and synergy was not told to do
this. We had ECOT scores that uh
pre-K testing that never made it
to the kindergarten teacher. So
I, I'm concerned that we make
sure the scores of our
pre-kindergarten testing and,
and things also get into the
system, especially for
kindergarten and, and first
grade teachers, can we make sure
that happens
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. One thing
that, that, uh, will be a
benefit of this partnership is
these types of scenarios where
uh PED understands very well the
stakeholders in the different
LEAs within the state and what
information is necessary for a
student to be successful as they
move around or even within the
same district going from grade
level to grade level. And so it
will help us to determine part
of our conversion process must
be
gra bb ing these types of
important assessment scores,
testing results, whatever it is,
and part of the transfer process
has to be that same information.
And so we'll make sure that
during this kind of discovery
process as we go through and
determine our conversion or our
migration plan, what information
is absolutely critical to be
moved from, uh, either within a
district or from district to
district.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We're just
saying, Greg, I don't know who
was involved in the 58 meetings,
but just to once again
talk to, not just
administrators, but
instructional coaches,
grade-level leaders, and make
sure that we incorporate those
things that have been overlooked
in the past.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. Yes, we will.
Mr. Chair, that's all my
questions.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation to
both of you.
Excuse me, I appreciate the
comments that Representative
Sareanare brought up. I'm a um
grandparent, and I was
introduced to the system that
the Los Angeles Independent
School District uses, which is
part of the California I can't
remember what system it is I, I
looked it up and then I closed
the laptop and I forgot already.
Um, however, it was extremely
helpful when we were taking care
of our grandsons for several
weeks and um so I appreciate it,
but I'm concerned about those
grandparents that are not
computer savvy that are not um
online that have language
maybe other types of uh uh
impairments or other things that
would prohibit them from being
able to use it even though it's
an extremely helpful tool. So I
just keep in mind to keep
improving these, uh, systems so
that they are um
uh, more accessible.
along in the in the long run but
so my question has to do with
how is this particular system,
uh, available to persons with
visual or sight impairments. How
are they able to access the
system there were several, um,
grandparents that we're aware of
that had these issues. In fact,
while we were waiting for the
children to pick them up, they
were asking us about how they
had it but they couldn't use it
in California, so that brings up
that concern how
is the system, uh, accessible to
sight impaired.
persons
visually impaired persons.
Absolutely. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Representatives. And so, our
application, we do ensure uh
that it is uh what's called 508
compliant. And so there are, uh,
tools within the industry. It
has a screen readers that read
aloud, uh, what's on the screen.
And so programs, websites,
software programs have to be
coded and written in a manner
that supports these types of
screen reading software that the
visually impaired will use. And
so our application is 508
compliant, uh, so that
it will be um able to be used
within, uh, the visually
impaired community. I would also
say, uh, to again your previous
concern, and it is now the 2nd
time it's come up, so I want to
make sure we do
to the best that we can
any information that's tracked
about the student's current
living conditions and who has
custody, what they're spoken
languages, um, our system also
provides for not only messaging
through applications, electronic
messaging, but certainly
mailings as well, and we will
take into account the language
indicator for whatever person
that's being sent to, so if it's
a grandmother that maybe has
temporary custody, whatever it
might be. Now the attendance
letters that are going to
that person will be translated
into the language that they, uh,
speak at home or at least at the
LEA believes they speak at home.
And so there will still be
uh, some mailings that are
outside of the electronic realm
that may be able to assist with
those folks, uh, but that was to
your earlier question. I
apologize for conflating the
two, but, uh, we are 508
compliant, so visually impaired
we'll be able to access the
application. So thank you, that
did that you did OK answering
the other uh part of it because
that was the second part of my
question, uh, but first of all
just to clarify, so the visually
impaired, I'm assuming they'll
have access maybe via audio.
So, um, uh, Mr. Char and, and
members of the committee, what,
what folks use, uh, my
understanding and what we've our
development staff has coded to
is, uh, there are tools that are
available to a visually impaired
person that will read aloud
what's on the screen. And so
those tools, um, again, we are
compatible with those tools so
that they'll be able to read,
yes, um, um, audibly what
they're seeing inside of our
application. That's what I
wanted to be clear that
it's uploaded correctly in that
manner. So then the other part
was, um, you know that we have a
multitude of languages in the
state of New Mexico, so I'm
interested in knowing what
particular language system are
you using to translate or to
provide
the system in the language of
the um many different languages
including Spanish and all the
native languages that we have in
the state of New Mexico.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members. Uh, yes, so as far as
languages go, within synergy,
um, our application is able to
first up translate all of the
static information that's
presented to, let's say,
parents, so things that don't
change every time someone logs
in, that information, we can
autotranslate that, but also,
um, LEAs have the ability to
have their language services
team go through maybe spot check
that or, or adjust the
translations and
any languages that are not
supported through our automatic
translation services, you can
manually translate. Now the
automatic translation services
though are using again industry
standard tools. So LEAs have the
option of selecting either
Google Translate or Microsoft
Translation Services. So, uh,
those are the tools we use to
auto translate any of the ad hoc
communication that's going out.
So any language that is
supported by either of those
two, companies, either Microsoft
or Google is support
ed in our, uh, parent student
portals.
but as I mentioned when we talk
about emailings or or standard
paper mailings
LEAs have the ability to write
up and translate their own
communications imported into the
system and then we will send
those out based on the
information we have about the,
the recipient. So the
grandparent or the or the mom or
dad, whatever language we have
on file, we'll look for a
version of the communication in
that language.
With that in mind, thank you,
Mr. Charrett. With that in mind,
I would assume then that the
public education department
would then
um lower the LEA. Someone's
gonna need the additional
funding, additional resources to
be able to do that because I can
already anticipate that if the
system itself doesn't automat
isn't
capable or uploaded at this
point at the front end and if
they have to come in and do
their own, then we may, that may
be an additional resource that
down the road that will have to
be incorporated. You don't need
to answer that, but that's
something for our PED to keep in
mind because I'm already
anticipating that that's going
to be a necessity. So then
moving on real quickly to
representative Lara's, uh, line
of questioning about security
measures and uh I also have some
concerns about
the security measures to, that
protect our student privacy
data, but especially given that
we have um uh tribal sovereignty
to consider and a lot of federal
laws, um, to consider around
Native American students and so
what are those security measures
given those what I just, those
two entities, that's part one.
And then will the data
be accessible
um, to any federal entity,
federal agency
um, at all, including law
enforcement and ICE, so it's a
two-part question.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so in, in
the federal government would not
have direct access to the data
through the statewide student
information system. So we, there
are federal reporting
requirements that we are
responsible for, and those will
not change. The having a
statewide student information
system will not change how we
report to the federal
government, so they would have
no direct access to the, to the
statewide student information
system or the data in there
except, uh, as we are reporting
to the, to the federal
government.
And then I'll let, uh, Mr. Berg
respond to the the other
security questions.
So, uh, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of these, uh, so the information
within synergy is, is secured
obviously through our hosted
platform, but also through
access from folks logging into
the application. So, uh, we're
able to define down to the
individual field, any field in
the database can be secured to
say whether it can be viewed,
um, whether it can be changed,
uh, whether it can be deleted.
There's also an audit log that
is tracking then.
what information has changed or
modified, uh, within the
applications that we always
know, uh, not only the user that
was logged in, but the computer
or the machine that made that
change, the date and time stamp,
what the old value was, the new
value was. And so, um, you know,
to the degree of folks logging
in, our hosted environment can
also do things like exclude IP
ranges, so if there's computers
that we're concerned about, um,
or we want to stay within just
the PED's network, we can do
that too, but uh
I don't know if I fully answered
your question.
That's OK. I think, Mr. Chair,
that we're going to have to
continue to be
um entertaining these type
questions as we move along
because we know already from
what has been reported almost on
a daily, hourly basis about
breaching hacking, um, and
recently our federal government
and others have become experts
on doing this, and on insisting
on retrieving data that is not
theirs to retrieve. And so I
want to make it very clear that
in our state that we're not
setting
up a system or that we're
protecting the systems that we
have that are um
we do not leave any
vulnerability to these types of
um invasions for lack of a
better word, using the term
that's already being used, uh,
into our privacy and so because
I have in my district I have to
be responsible in responding to
their fears, uh, about all of
this and so I just wanna make
sure that we're
I know that inevitably we can't
be 100% failproof or whatever,
whatever the language is,
however, we have to do
everything in our power to
anticipate
what may happen in anticipation,
then we then
set up additional protections.
11 final question about
safeguarding, um, given the fact
that we're not requiring
districts to sign up. It's
impressive that you have 70
districts already signed up.
What safeguards are in place to
ensure that um there will be
consistent and accurate um
data entry across districts so
that
whatever statewide comparisons
we make are valid. I
since we're not, since there's a
little bit of inconsistency in
the number of districts signing
up.
That's my final question. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Sure. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. And, uh,
Representative, so the, um,
definitely that is one of the
benefits of having a statewide
student information system.
When, when we have a bulk or
more districts using one
particular system, we can make
sure that uh the comparisons
that, that the fields are mapped
correctly, that everyone's
really clear on what a field
means uh in the student
information system and, and so
that we do, we look at that as a
benefit to the system and in
terms of um
well, I, I, I guess I'll hand it
over to Mr. Bergerswald, uh,
did you have additional thoughts
about that?
I'm sorry, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, I just lost my
train of thought, uh, uh, I'm
sorry, would you mind?
Um, that's OK. I just want to
make sure that we have the
safeguards in place to maintain
consistency and accuracy
for data entry as
the reporting occurs across
districts to our statewide so
that whatever comparisons and
data that we're looking at
analyzing, retrieving, comparing
remain um
for lack of another ballot, uh,
across the board so that, yes,
thank you.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
yes. And so one of the benefits
too of this statewide's solution
is that the configuration is
able to be pushed down from PED
to the LEAs so that
configuration, if a code
changes, if there's a new field
that has to be tracked, that can
all be pushed out. Previously,
it was left to the
responsibility of the LEAs
individually to make these
changes in their SIS. Uh, this
will be able to be pushed down
and within our application, not
only can we
define the type of data that has
to go into a field like if it's
a phone number field, it
obviously has to be a phone
number, but also the concept of
data validation to say based on
this student's enter code, the
uh the value you placed in this
field is not valid. You can't
use that. It's only valid in
these scenarios and so working
with PED we're going to be able
to establish those and build
them in for real-time data, uh,
uh, validation so that it's not
left to the NOA coordinators
to clean up all of this bad data
prior to receiving funding. Uh,
there, it's going in accurately,
uh, at the beginning. So thank
you very much.
Thank you, thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair.
All right, thank you. I'm
actually gonna ask a quick
question because I have a
representative from the company
of the platform that I use every
day as a teacher. Um, so since
we've come back from summer
break, I noticed that
in our synergy, when I take
attendance, now it's almost like
a dropdown menu.
It goes to tardy or absinthe,
and we can select, um, I like
the old system. What happened to
the old system of just double
clicking for an absence,
clicking for a tardy. It made my
attendance taking so much more
efficient.
Mr. Chair and Representatives,
thank you. Um, we, we don't
ever, um, um
uh, you know, we don't end of
life features when someone asks
for a new feature, we add it and
so there are two different
methods for the selection of an
absence value. One, the more
established way that's been
there forever is just simply
clicking on the photos, uh, but
there was, um, districts that
felt that if they had many
different attendance reasons
that a teacher could select from
cycling through them all by
clicking over and over again was
not convenient, so they wanted a
drop down. We added it
in there and not to
throw anybody under the bus, but
someone at the LEA made the
determination that that's the
direction they want to go with.
is that 10, OK. I'll, I'll ask
that question elsewhere. Thank
you.
Senator Figuero
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, we've
had a lot of discussion in this
committee about the cradle to
career and representative
Garrett almost got to my
question in the discussions
about what to use in a statewide
student information system. Was
there any discussion with the
early childhood and education
and care department with the
higher education department on
the other end and even with
Workforce solutions and how we
could track data all the way
across
these systems and see for
example if the pre-K programs
that we are funding are getting
different results with students
by the time they're in 3rd
grade, and if the CTE programs
we are funding are getting
results with students
post-secondary
Is there any discussion about
how these pieces connect.
Yes, Mr. Chair and Senator,
thank you for the question. We
absolutely, we had a
representatives from those
agencies as part of our advisory
committee, and we definitely um
we need to be better about
bringing them back together. So,
um, we've, we've met a couple of
times, but we need to continue
to meet and as we're going
through the contract process to
make sure that um we are getting
everything that all of us need
in order to have a coherent data
picture
from early childhood through um
through career, yes, thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Assistant Secretary. You're in
that crucial moment where you
are negotiating exactly what
you're gonna get out of Edge
Point synergy, so this is the
time to make sure we get all
those pieces lined up and, and
Mr. Chair and Senator, I, uh,
you likely know about the sleds,
the statewide longitudinal data
system that we are working on as
well, rise and I can never
remember if it
' s Ryzen M or NMI, but, uh,
yes, the, we, we are definitely
continuing to work with the
agencies on that project as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, the
second question, I think Mr.
Burg almost got to in one of his
answers, but if we get
the school districts and all the
LEA's on board and they're
uploading and it's real-time.
Are we going to be able to tell
them we can reduce their
reporting load because we've
heard a lot in this committee
about the amount of time they
spend pulling together and
organizing information to report
to PED and it's, it's
burdensome, but we need the
data. Is this system gonna
reduce their burden in some way?
Yes, Mr. Chair and Senator, so
there is an aspect of this
project that is burden reduction
on the LEAs. One of the, um, one
of the pieces that we're looking
at this year is building an API
for assessment. That is one way
in which, uh, we will support
the LEA's.
um, for some, uh, uh,
particularly the smaller LEAs.
They may not have a system to
efficiently enter assessment
data into their statewide or
into the student information
system and this would allow,
allow that process to happen
automatically and would reduce
burden, particularly at the
smaller LEAs, um
and we are also looking at other
pieces of automation as well,
uh, again, having, having a
focus on one particular student
information system will allow
for greater automation.
Thank you, sorry, in addition,
I wanted to mention also again
when students transfer if it can
be done electronically across
the cyst that is that is a big
time saver as well and such a
benefit for the family.
Sometimes again, these IEPs, uh,
it takes a long time for an IP
to move from one district to
another, and this is a way that
it could happen much more
seamlessly.
There will be tremendous
benefits, I think, to families
in the long run and schools too,
but I think Mr. Chair, that's
why I'm wondering
why all of our school districts
didn't jump on board. Um, you're
page 7 and you said 80 are up to
80 out of 200 are signed up and
they have until the end of this
month, but I assume that
includes the 48% that we're
already using synergy
Uh,
madam, uh, Mr. Chair and Madam
Senator, actually, it does not,
there, there is overlap, but
they, it is not necessarily the
same. So we do have some synergy
districts that have not yet
signed up for for the statewide
version of synergy. I am
assuming that they will, um, but
yeah, we, we don't yet have
everyone, all of the current
synergy users signed up.
Can you roughly estimate what
percentage of student enrollment
those 80 LEAs compos.
Yes, so,
approximately 35% of our student
population, but again that at
present that doesn't include
Albuquerque, who is a synergy
user, and we are
we are hoping that Albuquerque
decides to to come on board. Um,
that would
yeah, pretty much double, uh,
the amount of students that we
have, but regardless, they, they
will still be a synergy client
which so we will, even if we're
not paying for them, if they
decide they want to pay on their
own, then uh we'll still see a
lot of the benefit because the
for instance, the student
transfers will still be able to
happen more or less seamlessly.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. My
last question is about funding.
Can you explain a little bit
more about how that works? Are
the schools who are in this
cohort going into contract
individually with edgepoint
senior energy or they gonna is
PED doing the contract and so
they will work through you and
does that mean then that they
can save all the money they
normally pay for this again, why
wouldn't they all jump on board?
Mr.
Chair and Senator, so yes, the
PED
is contracting and paying
directly, um, Edge point for the
synergy sys product. um
there is a requirement because
of the data sharing, there does
need to be an agreement between
the, the school district or
charter school and Edge Point.
But that's not, it doesn't need
to require uh uh a fiscal
component unless they're asking
for something in addition to
what we can provide at the
state. So, um, there are some
additional add-ons, some
additional support that they may
want, and they could contract
for that, but that's not
necessary. They could save the
total amount.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, Assistant Secretary.
Mr. Chair, the last question I
think is for you. What options
do we have to
ensure or reassure school
districts that there will be
funding for more than one year
so they can opt into this.
Oh Senator, if only I controlled
all of the funding for education
instead of the finance
committee, uh, this committee
would be lots happier, I think,
with general education if that
were the case, but I'm not sure
I want that directly uh on my
lap, so
uh, let's, uh, all work towards
making sure there's appropriate
funding. Uh, last question, uh,
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, most
of the questions that I had have
already been asked and answered.
I
uh, I just, uh, a couple of
things for me
First of all, uh, how many, how
many other states have gone to a
single system information system
across the United States.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator,
I, I'll, I'll, yeah, I've looked
at that data, but I don't have
it at my fingertips, but it
sounds like Mr. Burke
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator. Uh, my understanding, I
believe at this point is about
16 of the states have moved to
a, a statewide solution. Now
there's different, uh, there are
kind of different flavors of
that. Some, uh, for instance, in
Tennessee, the state has
approved 5 different vendors,
uh, in order to be part of their
statewide solution, so it's not
one, you know, homogeneous, uh,
SIS we have found, uh, the
approach that you are taking,
though it doesn't ensure right
off the
bat that 100% of the LEAs will
start using it, that the ability
to opt in to a system, uh,
provides, uh, we find much
happier, uh, uh, LEAs in the
long run because they don't feel
like something was kind of
mandated or forced on, they were
able to make that selection and
we find much more successful
implementations come out of that
process, so we always will lobby
for, uh, that type of opt-in
selection. But I, I believed to
your, your specific question
about 16 states in some
fashion have a statewide
solution.
Thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Berg. Um
1st, 1st of all, I just wanted
to comment, um, there should be
a law against anyone having as
good a hair as you do, um, so I,
I look at that and I go, well,
how can you do that? Anyway, uh,
back on point, um
so I understand there's gonna be
a coalition of willing who are
starting to get involved in this
process, and, uh, so, so the
question I have is for those
that do not, it sounds like
you're offering them a payment
of something if they jump in but
if they don't, uh, what's going
to be the recourse over time
because obviously if everyone
doesn't sign up this year or the
next year, but in 3 or 4 years,
um, that's gonna become a burden
to PED for people who are not
part of this system. So how are
you going to
make that
transition
What's gonna be the process,
uh, Mr. Chair and Senator,
definitely we feel, I mean, we
believe that it will be a more
or less natural process where
once they're, there is
uh.
when most of the state is using
one system and you have, and you
can transfer easily, uh, among
districts or charters, and
everyone is trained on how to
use that particular system
generally across the state. When
you are the odd man out, it will
become more and more difficult.
And so we are hoping over time
that that more and more people
will opt in and there will be
fewer and fewer folks that
choose to opt out. Um, 11 thing
of note, um, again for this body
to consider.
and
um a a real benefit again to
selecting synergy is that they
did waive the implementation
fee, uh, which is millions of
dollars for uh for the migration
year for this year and for next
year they've waived it for 2
years, so we've got two cohorts
that we can move in for free.
After that, we will need to
start paying and so again we, we
hope to move most people in the
first few cohorts, um, but it,
it is something to consider.
Thanks for that, uh, assistant
secretary, so Mr. Chair, so I'll
make sure I understood that you
said with regards to the cost,
you said it was going to be $8
million recurring after
that's what your request is
going forward and uh so is that
cost just for operational costs,
or does that also include
training for bringing people on
what exactly does that cost
cover?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, so
that cost does it includes
significantly more than just the
cost for the vendor, right? So,
um, we have operational costs at
the PED with bringing on a new
system so that supports staff at
the PED to support that and it
also supports related systems.
So, um, for instance, um, there
is an additional um
teacher evaluation system that
we that the public education
department is working on as
well, and that will also be um
that's there's funding as part
of the $12 million for this year
and the $8 million for this year
that will support that work as
well. Um, there are also Google
Looker licenses. Those are for
visualizations or way to look at
the data and um again, that,
that is something that, that the
agency needs in order to
share the data in the best
possible way with the school
districts as well as internally
with staff and so that's another
expense that is included as part
of that 8.5 million.
Thank you for that. Um, my last
question is, and this is, I'm
not a procurement expert, but I
was curious as to as to um
the agreement that PED has come
up with. It's my understanding
that when we
when schools approach a vendor
that they have to go through a
cooperative education services
contract.
and typically that each school
then makes that contract
directly with the vendor, um,
and I it seems like you are
circumventing that process and
I'm, and again I'm not a
procurement expert but what how
is that process being done when
you guys are securing a
particular vendor.
Sure, Mister Chair and, and
Senator, and thank you for the
question that um that is one of
the things that I thought I
might talk about during my
presentation is, um, the process
that we did select which is
going through a statewide price
agreement actually through CES,
um, so we are going through CES,
but um
it is, it is often that for a
contract of this size you would
go through uh a request for an
RFP process request for a
proposal and we decided not to
do that because those are
typically only good for 4 years,
and we do, um, and in 4 years we
will just be getting our second
cohort of schools on and to have
to and then to possibly lose the
bid to another vendor and at
that point, I have to tell our
school districts and charter
schools actually now we
' re transitioning you to a new
student information system would
be a a real difficult sell. So
in going through CES as part of
a statewide price agreement that
really should help um with
stability, uh, over time.
Thank you.
I understand that, but that
sounds almost like an exclusive
contract that you're, you're
setting up as opposed to going
through the normal RFP. I
understand the four-year
limitation, but it just seems
like, um, that sort of
contradicts the intent of the uh
RFP process was to make sure you
have an open and, uh, and, and
and, and generalized uh process
to allow all vendors to submit
their their request and so um
it's just kind of curious about
that. It's as to how you came up
with this is sort of like
you're, you're identifying we
like this group and that's who
we're going to go with. And so
I'm curious as to how that
happened, that so.
anyway, just a thought process
here and trying to understand
that a little bit better. Thank
you very much. That's all I
have. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
won't take that much time. I'll
try to be real quick. I know
we're behind. Um, could you talk
a little bit about the benefits
of this system to um transfer
students specifically folks, uh,
you know, military children that
are coming into the state, um,
and even just transfer students
coming in and is there any
possibility that maybe these
other states that have these
systems, is there any type of
interoperability or, or transfer
of some of the data.
So, um, Mr. Chair and Senator,
definitely the, there are real
benefits to transfers, so the
transfer should happen at least
for those who opt in to the
statewide system. It will allow
for easier and quicker and
electronic transfers rather than
uh a family having to go collect
the paper documents, transfer
those physically to another
location and then, um, and then
for those to be input manually,
which leads to data entry errors
and um I, I'll significant
amount of administrative burden
and a loss of time. So sometimes
the student may go for weeks or
months without the services that
they're entitled to under their
individualized education plan.
So a lot of
benefits, uh, particularly to
state internal transfers. I'm
not familiar with, um, the
process of transferring from
state to state. So I'll, I'll
see if Mr. Burke has can provide
any information there.
Yes, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. And, and senators, so
yes, uh, we do have within
synergy an electronic student
records request for any, uh,
synergy district to transfer
data back and forth. And so we
do have, uh, about 750 districts
across 22 states and you know,
knowing that they're, uh,
there's large population in
Virginia and Maryland, and so,
you know, things like Virginia
Beach, Arlington, Fairfax
County, where there is a lot of
military families. Uh, there is
a, uh
a capability to transfer data.
It's not as extensive as what
will be, uh, possible within the
state of New Mexico because
every state has different codes
and different programs and so
forth, uh, but we do have the
ability to take care of the, the
two most time-consuming areas,
one being the transcript, uh,
the transcript data for a
student has to be manually
entered generally, and the IEP
and so, um, synergy to synergy
districts, we can transfer all
that data, but we have developed
actually a tool to import in IEP
s from known other vendors, so
other vendors in areas and
states we can import their IPs
to, so we are working to try to
improve the state to state
transfer, but it'll be much.
broader and more extensive here
in New Mexico.
Thank you, thank you for the
response. Thank you. That's all
I have Mr.er.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Center Block, quickly please,
we're way behind schedule. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I just, I'm just
clarifying with you. I, I didn't
really like your answer,
actually, when it came to the
RFP process. Can you tell me why
it's a non-competitive bid?
initially for the original
contract.
Uh, sure, so we don't have a
contract yet in place, but we
are working toward it and we are
going through a statewide price
agreement so that is another
option for uh for procurement
that is available to the state.
And uh again, we selected that
process because we don't want to
have to change.
our, the, the selected vendor
after only 4 years, and the RFP
process is typically only good
for about 4 years I, I
I should have checked that
number before I came, but I
believe it's good for 4 years
and um and we
and then after 4 years, uh, what
can happen is a new vendor wins
the bid and then we would be in
a position where we would need
to change the vendor, and it
would be very burdensome on
school districts and charter
schools to have to change uh
their student information system
every 4 years, and I doubt that
we would get the kind of
response that we're seeing now
if the prospect of a change
every 4 years was on the table.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
guess I would just, I would just
wonder, is there like a cap?
on how much you are willing to
spend. I mean, usually an RFP
process says how much we, we're
going to spend. It says what the
certain parameters are of what
the system has to be
And then it's usually very
closely tailored to our needs,
whereas we're not going to get a
1000 bids from across the entire
world, right? It's only going to
be a few companies. So I'm just
wondering how, how do we
synthesize that into a statewide
price agreement circumventing
the RFP process just for the
sake of time. I'm just trying to
clarify
how that works, because you
could just write a very specific
RFP that would almost
guarantee
edgyo this contract.
So why didn't you just do that?
I'm wondering. And what if this,
I mean, this guy, I hope your
company stays around a very long
time, Mr. Chair. But what if
this company does get sold to
somebody, acquired or, or gets
changed to a different platform
and they change their business
model. Have you considered that
as well?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representatives. So, uh, yes,
any cis vendor could experience
any, any sort of um
any uh uh
I, I guess I don't any sort of,
uh, or it could be sold or uh
could become financially
debunked, but those uh
that's not, that's not specific
to any particular vendor. So I,
I don't see how an RFP process
would have made that Ben made
that process any more clear and
regardless of the
um
of
moving to
a statewide price agreement from
an RFP.
does
allow us to say that in the
future we can continue to select
this vendor if the vendor
continues to be a good vendor,
um, and continues to be on the
statewide price agreement. There
is no guarantee that if we wrote
an RFP that it would go to any
particular vendor, and, uh,
additionally, um
having a statewide price
agreement actually gives us some
additional flexibility if we
went to an RFP for 4 years, then
we could have to cancel the, the
contract, uh,
during the during the four years
where at at present our contract
is a one year contract that we
have and would allow more
flexibility should there be a
problem to actually be able to
change vendor, um, again, which
once selected, there will be,
um, it, it would be particularly
onerous, uh, to move forward
with and again, if our if our
school districts and charter
schools know that we are
participating through the RFP
process, it will discourage them
from uh from joining uh
joining into the statewide
student information system.
In your opinion, Mr. Chair.
right? I, I can tell you that
when we went out to, uh, Mr.
Chair, I can tell you that when
we went out to the district's,
uh, representative, again, that
was one of their concerns was
what's the viability of this
project? Is there going to be
funding in the future? And so,
uh, yes, and that was one of the
questions. How are you going to
that we received
was how are you going to ensure
that you will continue to have
the same vendor year over year
and, and not change vendors on
us, um
with, with some regularity. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chair. And then
last question, I kind of asked
it before, but what is the cap
that you've put for this
contract? because I know that
there are many fees that can be
accrued in the future, like, I
don't know, uh, hosting fees, I
think we said Amazon is host.
Let's just say they increased
their fees by 30%. How do we
deal with that? Because if we
put it in this kind of
structure, and we kind of set it
in stone, then it would pretty
much let the vendor be the one
to say, OK, well, our costs went
up by 30%. The state of New
Mexico needs to increase the
contract by 30%. So I'm just
wondering if we're talking
stability
how is that also factored into
this contract and then do we
have any guarantees
from this contractor for
no increases in costs in the
future? Is that something that
we can put in there? And then
it's my understanding that this
is not a current budget item in
this fiscal year. It would be in
the future. So how are we going
to work that into the PED
budget.
Mr. Chair
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so we do, we
have a $12 million appropriation
for this year and the next year
we are asking for an 8.5 million
appropriation, um, and we
the, the contract is a per pupil
contract, uh, so right now it is
written for, for all of the
pieces, it would be about 15
under $15 per student. So 15
times 300,000 we're looking at
about 4.5 million, uh, would be
the, the, the cap, uh, for that
contract, but it really is a per
per pupil amount. And
there is a piece of the contract
that looks at uh increases year
over year, and I think it's not
more than 2 I would have to look
to make sure, but I believe it's
2 or 2.5% is the, the exact
amount allowed for increase year
over year.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
uh
it's very interesting to hear,
and I will.
be looking very closely. Thank
you.
Thank you. I think that's all
the questions and thank you. I
very much appreciate the update
on that. uh, we are behind the
bit team and we do have a
reception at 5 o'clock, so we
don't have a whole lot of extra
time built in, uh, but next we
have public education department
and public schools support
request, uh, Secretary Padilla.
thank you for joining us
no
already holding it
Secretary, I think we're ready
whenever you are.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you so much for inviting me to
come today to talk about um the
public school support request,
newly submitted, we just
submitted it yesterday, um, as
for our new, uh, statutory
deadline. So this, um, budget
has been submitted by the
department about 3 months sooner
than we typically do.
So I will be working off of two
documents.
One is this one here, which is
high level kind of roll up
version
and then this version as well,
so you should have both of
these.
So I would like to just note
that um being that this budget,
we started building it, um,
immediately after we finished
last legislative session. It
takes a, it takes many months
for the department to build this
budget. A lot of hours go into
looking at our programs, looking
at the needs, um, deep
discussion with our staff, um,
as well as our stakeholders, um,
this budget
because it is due at this point
has, has quite a bit of
alignment with the Martinez Yasi
action plan, but I will say
because the action plan, the
first draft isn't due until
October 1st, um, this budget
does not necessarily reflect
everything that we're hearing
throughout our stakeholder
engagement process. So I just
wanted to note that for you up
front. Um, and I also want to
use this as an opportunity to
ask for partnership with this
committee as well as
with the LFC committee. As we,
um, finish our Martineziazi
action plan, and we've
identified some very specific
action items, um, I'm really
thrilled about the level of
input that we've been receiving
around the state. I do ask the
committee to take that into
consideration as you establish
your budget as well as the LFC
to do that as well. So, um, this
budget um
represents an overall decrease,
um, in funding and that is
really due to um the department
not including compensation or
insurance at this time because
we are submitting it early. It's
difficult for us to factor in
that total compensation increase
for all school employees as well
as insurance. We know that our
insurance costs go up every
year. We anticip
ate that we get those numbers
from NEMSA. However, we're still
in the process of working with
NIMSA as well as DFA DFA on
those insurance costs, so that
increase that you're not seeing
is really reflective of not
including compensation and
insurance that you will see in
the executive budget and of
course as the LESC produces your
own budget, you will also
include your recommendations for
those items.
C
Um, I do want to highlight that,
that there is a non-recurring
decrease of about $136 million
and that is really because the
department has made an effort to
move non-recurring items into
recurring things that we know
should be recurring things that
schools really need to rely on.
Another thing that I will note
is that we've also identified
some additional items for Perf.
So, um, as you know, we have a
newly created Perf Growth Fund,
so K-12 education has our own
growth fund and so that allows
us to fund um new initiatives
over 3 years, and so I will also
highlight that for you and then
um just wanted to note that even
though compensation isn't
included. I wanted to give you a
figure for what a 1% increase in
compensation for school
employees. um, that runs about
$33.79 million for every 1%
increase in compensation for
school employees, so just
something for you to keep in
mind.
Um, another thing that you will
not see in the budget that you
typically do is an increase to
K-12+ funding. We are not seeing
an increase
in funding, increased need. This
is due to declines in
enrollment, but as well as
schools choosing to have shorter
calendars. The average, um,
Earlier that we're adding more
school days, actually schools as
they set their own calendars as
they do every year, we're seeing
on average 2 fewer days. We'll
be able to finalize our um our
K-12 + numbers in October when
we go through that reporting
period, but I just wanted to
highlight for you that we're not
requesting an increase at that
time. Um, another change for us
is
in House Bill 2
Um, the legislature used to
include language that would not
allow schools that have K12+
programs to go backwards. The
legislature has since removed
that language and so schools
that were utilizing or
participating in K-12 K12+
programs prior now can no longer
participate. So that is also
resulted in a change in terms of
uptick of K
12+. And again, this allows
schools to receive additional
funding for days added to their
calendar above either 180 for 5
day weeks or 155 for 4 day
weeks.
OK, next, I just wanna highlight
this document here. I know
you've seen this, but I wanted
to provide for you, um, a
color-coded version and
something that I think is a
little bit more straightforward
and easier for you to uh read.
And so you can review this and
just reference for our fiscal
year 206 and 27. So, um, the
color coding, the blue section,
as you all know, is the SEG
section. This is our
formula-based funding that flows
directly
to our school districts and
charter schools, and they have
discretion over how to spend
those funds. The yellow section
is our categorical middle of the
line funding. So this is
recurring funding just like the
SCG. However, it is intended for
specific purposes, as you can
see there, like transportation,
that is something that when they
get transportation funds, they
have to spend it on
transportation.
The next section in green is
recurring below the line
funding. And so this funding
flows through the department and
that means that PED
is able to ensure that those
funds are spent on those
intended purposes. It does not
have the discretion of the SCG
funds and so those funds are um
typically tied to legislation or
can be tied to specific
initiatives.
and then the orange section.
is non-recurring below the line.
And so these funds also go
through the department and are
also tied to specific
initiatives. So again, these
could be legislative priorities,
priorities of the legislature,
priorities of the department or
tied and also tied to
legislation. So I just wanted to
provide that hopefully the color
coding, um helps
in um the understanding because
it is a pretty complicated
budget.
So now I'm gonna go back to this
document here.
that I started with.
So, uh, first item to discuss is
educator recruitment.
and quality
Um, we continue to, um,
prioritize programs that help us
to build our educated workforce.
Um, last year, schools reported
about 681 teacher vacancies.
This is about a 3% teacher
vacancy statewide, and we have
about 21,500 educators last
year. Um, this funding request
includes our educator
fellows program
We've consistently requested
about $20 million. This is a
really a grow your own program
where uh districts and charter
schools are able to identify
staff in their school that
are interested in becoming a
teacher, puts him in a cohort,
we provide funding for them, uh,
educational support, and they
also are able to be paid, we
paid for their salaries. We
currently have, um, I think it's
500, where do I have that
number?
The largest, uh, number of
educator fellows, um, that we've
seen to date, um, are in FY 26.
We have about 520 educator
fellows and about 70 school
districts and charter schools
participating. This is a highly
popular program, um, and one
that is, uh, resulting in
educators in the classroom. Uh,
this request also includes
300,000 for Grow Your Own, um,
which is a scho
lar ship program. We get the
funding and then we transfer it
to the higher ed department, and
those are about those are uh
scholarships in the range of
$6000. An educator, um, or
pre-service educator and then
also included in this line item
is some funding for PED to um
implement our educator
preparation program
accreditation process, as you
all know, we accredit the
educator prep programs in our
colleges and universities. We
have some money in there to
support that work as well as our
in induction and mentorship
efforts for new teachers, as
well as uh to support our
educator evaluation and data
analysis.
We also have 16.5 million for
professional development that is
led by the Priority Schools
Bureau. So this is a training
for our instructional coaches,
teachers, principals,
superintendents, um, that really
run in three-year cohorts. So
we're able to really invest in
these educators to um improve
their skills to support our
students.
um, let's see.
We also, um, in this, um, ask
includes a new request for
funding for school board
training. The public education
department is responsible for um
ensuring that our school board
members, um, carry out their
training that they're required
by statute to do after this
presentation, you'll get to hear
about our new school board
training offerings and process,
um, we've never had funding for
school board
training prior to now, and I
really feel like it's important
for us to ensure that we're
providing high quality training
that we're able to track it
effectively and uh utilize it uh
as part of our school
accreditation process. We really
need funding to support that
effort.
OK
I wanted to highlight some
positive, um, impacts related to
our school improve it school
improvement efforts. The
priority schools Bureau at the
department who implements these
trainings, are able to support
schools that have specific
designations. So I'm gonna give
you an example for our, our more
rigorous intervention. This is
the, the, um, highest level of,
of um intervention in terms of
designated schools for um MRI
and CSI designated schools for
graduation rates. We, um, we're
able to work with 41, the 41
schools that were designated for
graduation rates. In this
effort, we're able to help them
implement strategies and
effective systems to increase
graduation rates. Um, I'm happy
to say that, um, in these
efforts
we're seeing really major gains
in graduation rates, um, of the
2 of the 41 identified schools,
20 of those have had the highest
graduation rates, um, in 10
years, and they're, they've been
effectively implementing things
like credit recovery tracking,
attendance monitoring and
interventions, early warning
systems.
and um
it helped to support their
data-driven decision making
teams related to improving
graduation rates. I will say,
um, uh, 6 of the 8 schools that
did not see gains in their
graduation rates, chose to not
participate in PED supports
related to graduation rates. So
it's just an example that
through these programs we're
able to really support schools
and implementing the things that
make a difference for students.
Next, I'll talk about literacy.
Um, we're requesting, uh, 57
million for literacy efforts.
This includes, um,
really shifting into more of an
implementation and monitoring of
structured literacy in our
schools. This year we are
finishing um the second year of
of letters training for our 5th
grade teachers. After this year,
all of our elementary school
teachers that have been in the
classroom should have been uh
trained in letters. Of course,
we have new teachers that
entered the schools and so we do
consistently train them as well.
Um,
so this funding will allow us to
really monitor that it's being
utilized. New Mexico, we all,
you all have made a big
investment in structured
literacy.
However, we know that it's not
being implemented in every
classroom. So what we wanna make
sure is that we can effectively
monitor the implementation of
structured literacy that we
could provide coaching if that's
needed, um, but also to have
that accountability. We also
want to make sure that our
principals, our school leaders
are, um, well equipped to go
into classrooms and observe
structured literacy so that they
also know if it's occurring or
not.
This funding um requests also
includes um our summer reading
program. My hope next year is to
include math into our summer
reading program to utilize those
so those same sites to build in
some math interventions as well
as um our interventions that we
implement throughout the school
year.
Let's see. Let's move to the
next page.
On page 2, you'll see our
request for student nutrition.
We're requesting 42.2 million to
support our New Mexico grown and
healthy, uh, universal school
meals program. It also includes
um a projected 5.2 million for
overruns based on participation
because again we're we're paying
out to schools based on their
participation.
This funding also allows us to
do some really directed work
around the quality of school
meals. As we all know, we can
pay for free universal meals,
but to really make sure that
students are eating them, that
they enjoy the food, something
that we hear about all the time
to ensure that that food is
healthy, that we're buying
locally produced food products,
all of those things really make
a difference for our students.
So with this funding we're able
to
do uh trainings for our, um,
nutrition
directors and teams related to
scratch cooking. How do we move
them to, uh, from a system where
they're warming up food pre
pre-made food and processed
foods to actually doing scratch
cooking. So I just wanna share
that we have been uh traveling
the state, providing those
trainings this October we'll be
hosting a symposium where we're
bringing together New Mexico
chefs with our school cafeteria
staff to really
work on that scratch cooking,
um, aspect to really work on
recipes and to make it much more
easy, much easier for them to
implement in their schools.
The next item is uh 24.8 million
related to accountability. This
includes 16.3 million for our
student assessments. This is all
of the student assessments that
we provide in the state. It also
includes uh continued funding
for the uh statewide student
information system as well as
other related systems like our
teacher evaluation system. We
desperately need a better
teacher evaluation system, the
funding that we have, the 12
million that we have for this
fiscal year, we're utilizing
some of that funding to start
the process for building out a
new teacher evaluation system.
Um, and then I know you heard
this from Greg, but I just want
to point out that by creating a
statewide SIS we're really
creating an opportunity for
about half the cost per student
for a system and I, and I heard
a lot of conversation. I loved
everything that I was hearing
about. Well, if we have a
statewide system, why would we,
why would everyone not just do
it. And I will tell you the
intent was always for everyone
to just do it. We want every
school district and charter
school to be in this statewide
SIS. That's what makes sense.
That's where we get the
functionality, the cost savings,
um, and, and really this, this
should, this is where we're
moving. It was our expectation
from the beginning. We didn't
require a mandate, but our
expect
ation is that we will all be on
this system for all of the
benefits that she just heard
previously.
Um, next item is academic
interventions and supports.
Under this item, we have um 14
million for out of school
programs.
and 5 million for a high impact
tutoring and 7 million for
community schools.
Um, we would like to see both
high impact tutoring and at a
school time programs funded
through the PEF so that we have
3 years of consistent funding,
we know, and it really matters
for our school districts and
charter schools to have that
recurring funding. This will
also allow us to further assess
impact of these programs. How
are these programs impacting uh
student outcomes and then I'll
just highlight a little bit
about
what we have seen in our high
impact tutoring so far.
Um, for students that have
participated, they've seen on
average 43% increase in
learning. That's 3.5 months of
extra learning. That's they're
learning at almost twice the
rate of students that do not
participate in high, high impact
tutoring. We know this works and
we would like to do more of it.
Uh, we did not get funding this
year for high impact tutoring.
We got, we got a million for
tutoring, but this is
something that we really feel
needs to be consistent in order
to, to bring our students up to
the levels that we need
academically.
And then the last item on page
two is Math and STEM.
We're requesting 9.8 million
forummios. This is our um our
math, um, approach to the
science of math for elementary
school. We have funding also
through PERF. This is the first
year of 3-year funding, but we
need some funding to go through
the SCG similar to what we did
with the letters training for
structured literacy to pay the
educators stipends, so those
teachers that are
participating in the training,
they get a stipend as well as
this fund substitute teachers so
that they can be out of the
classroom to participate in that
training, um, we're also
requesting 7.7 million for STEAM
programs, um, this also includes
our professional development,
our newly created AI
professional development as well
as outdoor classroom
initiatives.
Um, and then I'll just mention
for the num numeros funding that
we have from Perth. What we
received funding for is to train
900 educators, um, around the
state and this training includes
um about 60 hours of synchronous
professional learning for our
educators and it's designed to
build content knowledge, refine
instructional practice, um, to,
uh,
support them and connect conduct
analysis of of student learning
as well as provide um parent
resources.
So on to page 3
We're requesting um for million
dollars for special education
training.
and positive behavior supports,
as well as the implementation of
our statewide IEP. Um, Greg
spoke quite a bit about the
rollout and building a statewide
IEP into our um statewide SIS
and so we have established, we
have created an IEP and there's
a process for implementing that,
um, throughout our schools
across the state.
um, the Office of Special
Education has been conducting
trainings, um, uh, last school
year and we'll be doing the same
this school year, um, for our
teachers, our principals, our
superintendents, um, they hold,
um, special ed, office hours,
weekly, um, provide high-quality
IEP training. We see
consistently in our monitoring.
IEPs are not uh
completed correctly, nor are
they necessarily followed
correctly. Um, and so we, uh,
have been conducting trainings
relate to support our schools
and our educators in that
effort.
The next item is um our programs
that support graduation. We have
$10 million
and continued funding for summer
internships and 45 million to
support CTE and work-based
learning, um, which I know you
all know very well the
effectiveness and the impact
that these programs have on our
graduation rates.
Um, next item is school safety.
School safety continues to be
top of mind for us as we see
incidences occur across the
state. We wanna make sure that
we're supporting our schools as
it pertains to school safety.
This $3.3 million request
includes funding for the school
safety summit that our
lieutenant governor hosts and
partnership with the department
as well as 3 million for panic
buttons.
and um for a statewide
interoperable communication
services system, um, we've
talked, I've talked about this
in front of you many times
before. We have issues with
interoperability of our
communication systems response
times, particularly in rural
communities. Schools are um need
help with, uh, technical
assistance with their threat
assessment plans and so there's
a whole host of things that we
need to continue to support our
schools with related to school
safety.
Um, and then I will just
highlight for you.
that so far, um, 700 schools
have current are currently
participated in the
participating in our mobile
panic button. So again, we pay
for this service that is
utilized within our schools, but
they opt in, they choose to
utilize the panic button or to
utilize another system.
And then um the last thing on
the bottom, I just wanted to
highlight for you what we
currently have either in grow or
in our Perfro.
uh funds and so educator
clinical practice is um $60
million over three years, so
it's 20 million a year, and
that's funded through Grow, um,
our special education stipends
is also funded through Grow at 5
million a year. We're in our
second year. Um
let's see
We also have our attendance
improvement interventions funded
through GR at 5.2 million a
year. Um, you heard from some
superintendents this morning
about the importance of that
funding, um, innovative staffing
strategies is funded through the
PERF this year's the first year,
and that's at 2.6 million.
uh math improvement initiatives.
I talked about numeros that is
funded by the legislature at 4.5
million a year, and, and we're
in year one and that's through
the PEF
Secondary literacy is also
funded through the PEF at 5.2
million a year and then supports
for students who are unhoused,
and so that is a program where
we will be um working with 3
school districts, uh, in the
state, so Las Cruces, APS in
Santa Fe, and we're partnering
this year with the Office of
Housing out of the Department of
Workforce Solutions, so they're
kicking in some money for us.
And so with the per funding
we're able to provide stipends
to our students who are
experiencing housing
instability. They receive $500 a
month stipend to participate and
it really encourages
strong attendance, engagement in
school, completion of
assignments, but we're with the
funding we're receiving from uh
Department of Workforce
Solutions were able to really
provide supports for the whole
family, make sure they're
connected to services, make sure
that they have um access to
housing opportunities, um,
transportation and other needs.
So I'm really excited about the
these programs. So again, when
funding comes from Grow and
Perf.
We have 3 years of funding,
stable funding
but we also have program
evaluation with that and so we
have um strong program
evaluation that the department
has developed in partnership
with the LESC and the LFC, and
this will allow us at the
department as well as the
legislature and our school
districts and charter schools to
really see what is the impact
we're having on students with
these programs.
and then, uh, finally, on page
4.
we have the agency budget
Um
as you all know, the public
education department and and
with funding that flows through
the SCG as well as all of the
other um lines that I had
discussed previously, all of
that funding totals more than
40% of the state budget. This is
um
quite a, a, a, an undertaking
for the department to oversee
and support our school districts
and charter schools and all of
our 300 + 1000 students across
the state. The department is
responsible for many activities,
including monitoring and
oversight of funds, professional
development, and technical
assistance on a whole host of
topics, educator, licensure and
quality assessment and
evaluation and insurance
ensuring equitable student
learning. These, this is not all
inclusive of all that the
department does. We're, we are,
um, we work very hard for our
students every day, and with
that, we, um, would like to
request some additional funding
for FTE, um, in the budget
requests we have a total of 5
FTE requests, two of which would
be to fund current FTE that we
have at the agencies that are
not funded.
and then to add 3 additional
FTE. And those FTE um would be
responsible for additional
efforts in our fiscal team
associated with ourO
accreditation and really
monitoring budgets. This morning
there was some conversation
about how do we know that
they're spending money as it was
intended. And so we need some
additional support in order to
do those audits. We do those
audits quarterly to look at um,
are they spending money
as they had indicated they would
at the start of the year in
their um
uh when they submit their
budgets and through their ed
plans. We also would like some
additional support in our Office
of Special Education as we look
at the increased monitoring in
schools that's happening as, as
well as the training that's
occurring, um, and then also for
licensure, um, as we implement
new um statutory requirements
related to administrator
licensure.
Also in this request includes um
396.
00 $0 to cover our rental costs
for our offices. We typically do
not receive that funding from
the legislature, but this is an
actual cost of the agency.
Um, it also includes a recent
legislative change that uh
necessitates an increase to our
health benefits for our staff at
1 million, so every, every state
agency will have an additional
cost associated with that.
And then it also includes um
just over 682,000 in increased
fixed costs and so these are
true costs to the agency,
including audit costs,
maintenance and repair, um,
furniture fixtures, equipment.
vehicles, that sort of thing.
Um
let's see
And then the last thing I'll
mention is that um we also
include annually a request for
um our, our legal fees
associated with the Martinez
Yazi lawsuit, and that runs
about a half a million a year
for um for our attorneys.
So with that, I think I'll stop.
I know that we are about
I, we started my presentation
about an hour behind Mr. Chair.
So I, I hope I went quickly
enough for you and I'm happy to
answer any questions that you
have.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. Uh,
and just some things, this is
the first blush of this, uh,
this committee and the plan is
in October. Daniel, I'm gonna
put some uh pressure on you, but
this committee will look at what
our recommendations might be and
see where they square with this,
this gives us a great place for
us to start, um, and probably at
the October meeting, we'll have
kind of more of an open
discussion rather than so formal
among members about where we
think priorities ought to be and
and other things as well. So,
yeah
certainly we can take questions
now, but don't get too deep in
the weeds. This is their
proposal. Financial committee
will come with a proposal, will
come with a proposal, and then
they kind of get reconciled some
way, somehow in the future, um
and so with that, uh, we'll open
up for questions. uh
Representative Cullen, thank
you, Mr. Chair. So I just had a
quick question, um
what is your vacancy rate at PE
because you're saying that uh PE
is uh.
361 positions, but funding only
for 340. So what is your vacancy
rate because I know you have a
pretty big turnover lately.
Yes.
Um,
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
have over this last year we have
been between about 12 and 15%
vacancy rate.
So Mr. Chair Representative
Cullen, I'll just add the, the,
the funded vacancy rate versus
so we have actual FTE for the
agency, but obviously not all of
those FTE are funded by the
legislature and so we actually
are able to utilize vacancy
savings. So when we have a
position that's not filled, we,
we, uh, crew vacancy savings and
so we're able to actually have
slightly more FTE than we
actually
have.
funded, and so that's part of
the request to have some
additional funded vacancies.
And, and Mr. Chair, if I may as
well,
I just want to point out that
the Albuquerque office in the
Las Cruces office have really
helped with our recruiting and
have opened up our talent pool
significantly and uh that's
again why we're asking for rent
as well.
And thank you, Mr. Chair, and
what is um what is the average
length of employment people have
stayed within the PE in the last
4 years.
um,
well, there's been a high
turnover, so my question is, is
how long do they actually stay
once you acquire them?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Cullen, I, we, I don't have that
figure like what the, the
average, um, turnover, but I
would certainly say we do not
have a higher turnover rate than
other agencies. I, we actually
have a very consistent staffing
at the agency throughout the
agency. Um, we do have staff
that moves within the agency as
well as um across state
government. Many times staff
will leave an agency
and go to a new agency because
that's the only way that they
can um realize a salary.
um, increase and so that is, is
typical across state government
and then of course we have
people who retire after many,
many years, um, working with the
department as well.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Vice
Chairman, um, I'm sorry, uh,
Representative Garrett.
You can give me any position you
want, Mr. Chair. Thank you. Um,
Madam Secretary, we've been
getting these from LASC and LFC,
Could we get an updated, um, PED
staff leadership thing with
pictures, phone numbers and
emails just, I keep thinking
that Daniel Manzano out there is
your new something or another,
and I, I know he's not, but it
gets confusing sometimes, um,
uh, Mr. Chair, I'll just ask
briefly and some of these
can be answered at a future
meeting even have we done a
study on the educational fellows
program like I think we're in
year 5 or year 6 now.
um, just how many, what happens
to all the entries.
who goes into education related
fields where there's a counselor
or teacher who it's like thank
you, loved it, and I'm going off
on another path.
I just I would like to see
something like that, just to
know really because we hear
wonderful anecdotal stories.
but sometimes anecdotal stories
and facts are slightly
different, so I would just ask
that if we don't have anything.
um
I also wanna know who's gonna do
the middle school math training?
Is that a future RFP or?
uh that's listed under
Mathens Steam, uh, 9.8 million
new from the SCG 2 2500 K-12
teachers, including middle
school math training.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, let's see if I could go
through all your questions.
Absolutely, I will get you all,
um, uh, org chart of the
department with photos you can,
I mean, I'm not sure if it's
fully updated on the website
right now, but absolutely we'll
get that to you, including
contact information, um, program
evaluation for Ed Fellows and
our other programs is really
important. I'm interested. We
are interested in knowing the
very same things you are. So all
of
our, all of the funding that
flows through PED, um,
has
um, program evaluation so that
we can look at that. We wanna
know if our programs are
effective, we want to truly
create a full continuum of our
educator pipeline from educators
rising all the way through. We
want to make sure that they stay
with us, that they graduate,
that they're well prepared and
that they stay in the profession
as well. And then the last
question related to, I believe
the numeros training who
conducts the um professional
development.
Um, I can tell you that the
curriculum was and training was,
was created by PED in
partnership with New Mexico
State University, and so there
is um a partnership with NMSU,
but I cannot tell you if there's
an addition to that, an
additional vendor, but I will
get that information to you.
Oh, thank you. And then you
don't have to go into the
details now, but I know that
Senator Pope, Representative
Goodro, and myself sponsored um
the STEM Network for Education.
I think 3 million went to STEM
education. I know that it gets
integrated with math. I think
you probably saw my email about
what the heck is the $20 million
for the stem Institute, which I
got an initial answer, but at
the next meeting, if you could
really break down what are we
doing about STEM because I know
that the senator and our
representatives, we had some
distinct feelings and, and we
wanna make sure
that it doesn't just kind of get
dissipated.
um
so you don't have to, I mean,
you can say something short if
you want, but you don't have to,
yeah, I'm happy the answer
absolutely, Mr. Chair,
Representative Garrett, I can
tell you that the, the STEM
initiative funding, um, is, uh,
funding that we are doing with
NMSU, that was the intent of the
of the legislature of our um
establishing their regional um
sort of structure for supporting
STEM. Um, I have asked them
to spend this first year really
focusing on math
helping us think through how we
support math instruction and
math professional development,
so they will be doing that in
partnership with us as well.
They'll be getting some of that
money out to our school
districts and charter schools as
well to support STEAM, um, it,
uh, I, uh, but I just, I, I do
want to highlight that I did ask
them, um, that I would like for
them to really lean in on math
with us, um, at least initially,
um
and then I can get some
additional information for you,
Representative. Great, thank
you. And, and Mr. Chair and
Representative as well. Just I,
I wanted to know, it may not be
clear in the material that we
provided, but the STEM network
funding is part of the STEAM
initiative that we, that appears
in both handouts.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Vice Chair
Roadto.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you Secretary. Um, I guess
I had a question, Madam
Secretary, on um what you're all
thinking is and what you all are
keeping an eye on in terms of um
the potential federal cuts that
are coming our way in public
education and where might we
might find that in the budget or
where you all are, are trying to
think about that as as things
devolve.
Mr. Chair, um, and, uh, Vice
Chair Romero, thank you so much
for that question. We have
worked, um, incredibly hard, uh,
throughout this, uh, federal
administration to be on top of
all directions related to
impounding of federal funds,
withholding of funds, um, we've
been very proactive in that
effort. We have a participated
in New Mexico has participated
and has been led by the New
Mexico
Department of Justice and in
several multi-state lawsuits
related to the withholding of
our federal funds, um, and I'm
happy to say that as a result,
um, we have had all of those
funds released so far. We have
almost all of our gans, um,
received federal funding, um,
grant agreements have been
received by the PED as well.
We've worked really hard to
communicate regularly with our
school districts and char
ter schools to make sure they
know what's happening. I've been
very clear. I do not want any
programming to stop.
I do not want staff to uh be let
go as a result of that. So we've
worked really hard to make sure
that there were no knee jerk
sort of reactions to all of the
instability that we're seeing at
the federal level, um, we're
continuing to look at it very
closely, but at this point we do
not have um an issue related to
um impounded funds from the,
from, uh, US Department of Ed.
and Mr. Chairman and Madam
Secretary, is there anything
that you're looking at
potentially in the future. I
mean, we've heard rumors about
the Trump administration wanting
to put a single block grant and
passing it on to the state, um.
is there anything you all are
looking forward to as we head
into the next session. I know
it's hard to gauge and that's
what we're trying to do as well.
Um, Mr. Chair and Mr. Vice Chair
Romero, we are constantly
tracking everything, and we're
utilizing our uh federal federal
organizations, education,
educations, uh, education
entities are tracking we're in
close communication. I'm in
close communication with other
state chiefs around the country,
sharing information, ideas, um,
we ended up, you know, in New
Mexico doing very well with ESA
funds and other funds. We
' ll just continue to track
those funds. What we are saying,
and I will note for you.
there are specific things that
the US Department of Education
has told us they will not pay
for.
Um, and what we have been able
to do is swap state money with
federal money so far for those
things that they will not pay
for. An example of that is with
our structured literacy grant.
We have a multi-year grant in
other states do as well and so
they told us we will not pay for
these things, and we said, OK,
we will not spend federal money
on those things, but we're still
doing all of the things that we
know we need to be doing for our
students
um, including our efforts
related to biliteracy.
um and so we will continue to do
that. We may end up at some
point where they may restrict
uses that are not aligned with
this administration's priorities
and then we may be in a
situation where we don't have
the, the state funds to do those
swaps, but we've been again
incredibly proactive in that
effort. Do not want any
reduction of programs, supports
and resources provided to our
students, no reduction of
staffing related to our
priorities as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your work, Madam
Secretary.
Thank you. Other quest, other
questions.
Yes, Represented Tordes
Velasquez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I am very glad
to see an increase in the number
of people working in the PED. I
think that's gonna be an
important part of being able to
address all the concerns we had
with Martinez and Yazi to have
actual staff there that has the
expertise and that can work
with, uh, people, teachers and
districts. Um, so I'm really
glad to see that. Um, my
question has to do with um
uh just wanting to know if
you're aware of what is
happening in some of our
colleges and really proud of the
salary increases that we
provided for teachers, but a
number of the faculty who had
been working at universities,
um, in the last year have, um,
now for the benefit of, benefit
of the school districts have now
gone to the public schools,
whether they came in and moved
to New Mexico from another state
or whether they had been
educated in New Mexico, um,
they're finding that financially
there's a huge difference in the
salaries they can get, um, in
school districts, and I'm
wondering if that's something
that had been brought to your
attention, if you had any
thoughts on that. Thank you,
madam. uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Torres Velasquez, absolutely. I
mean this is something that um
I'm clearly aware of and
concerned about and uh talk to
uh Secretary Rodriguez from the
Higher Education department. I
hear from from our colleges and
universities we hear the same
thing with BIE schools as well
and so our response is, is that,
you know, it would be great if
we also increased their salaries
so that um they're able to
maintain their
stuff as well. Uh, with the, the
educator vacancies we have in
K-12 schools.
you know, it's great to have
more teachers coming in, but it
does create an additional other
issues, um, and other sectors of
education and so, um, I'm, I'm
sure this is something that this
committee, uh, will be looking
at as well, and I know it's
something that the higher ed
department has, has looked at. I
also know that New Mexico AFT
has consistently uh worked to
try and address this issue as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and just
one more thing, I'm glad to see
recurring funds for the A that's
also part of the Martinez
lawsuit and I think that'll be
important as well. Thank you.
Senator Figueroa
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Madam Secretary. I am just
confirm that I understand this
page correctly to start with,
line 15
is the funding for our
uh, principal, vice principal
training initiatives, correct?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Figueroa,
yes, that's correct and then Mr.
Chair, if you skip down to 37,
educator pipeline, it's
interesting that the
administrative
training is in recurring
request, but the educator
pipeline money is non-recurring,
um, that seems a little strange
to me as they're both high
importance, but 37 does not seem
to include teacher residencies.
Am I correct?
in saying
that teacher residencies are
under clinical practice in the
Perth.
That's where we're funding those
um, Mr. Chair, Senator, yes. And
so, um, that's correct. That's
in Perth.
Um,
and I believe you said you're
asking why line 37, educator
pipeline and quality is not in
recurring.
Well, it was, it was an
observation, Mr. Chair, more
than a question, but if you want
to respond, that's fine. I think
that's really on us. My question
for you then, if I understand
those things correctly we'll
talk about teacher residencies
in October when we do our budget
discussion, um, but
toward that end
rank your 7 bullet points on
page 4, would you, cause the 10%
increase is probably not likely
in this day and age, so what's
your, what's your ranking?
Rank them 1 to 7. Mr. Chair and
Senator, oh, this is, this is
really hard, um, you know, some
of these, some of these clearly
I can't, I, we have to have like
our health benefits that is tied
to statute that has already
passed. We gotta, we gotta have
that.
Um,
uh, we also know that um
you know, we have specific fixed
costs. You know, I truly feel
that we need some additional FTE
and believe me, this is not
fully what we need. We are very,
very conservative. If I had the
magic wand, this budget would
look different. That's just
the honest truth
Um, I have my own sort of
guardrails, right? And, and
creating this budget, um, we
truly need additional FTE at the
department. I, um, I'm really
serious about our work related
to accreditation. uh, there's,
that's a true accountability and
support for our school districts
and charter school really
looking at how funds are being
spent is really important.
Having the FTE to uh
successfully implement House
Bill 157 for the new
administrative licenses, we
need, I mean, one FT is not a
lot to add for a whole new sort
of effort related to licensure.
These are very conservative
requests. So it's difficult to
rank because I already feel like
this is pretty bare bones for
us, Senator.
Thank you,
Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary.
Thank you. I have a just a
couple of questions, comments on
this big sheet. Help me
understand the orange section
down at the bottom is how is
that decrease as I total those
up between the two years.
I don't come up with those
numbers. Where's that decrease
coming from?
So, uh, Mr. Chair
the decrease is moving some
items into recurring, and I, I
didn't, I don't have a
calculator in front of me to do
the math,
but we did actually move some
items into recurring.
Go ahead, I can address that,
Mr. Chair. Um, so this is a
simplified version of our budget
request. It is it only includes
items that we're asking for
funding for for this year. So
items that were funded last year
for which we're not asking for
funding for for this year, do
not appear on this particular
spreadsheet. We do, we have the
big spreadsheet that has all of
the funding and um happy to
provide that, but that is why
you're not seeing it, why you're
not seeing the percentages add
up in the way that
you think that they might, thank
you. It's a math teacher, things
are supposed to total when they
don't.
Yeah,
I understand, um, I think
probably would and and Daniel
may have all of that because
some of those things that aren't
funded might be things that we
think are really important and
ought to be funded. Um, I also
am one that I've been around
long enough to know that we
ought to ask for what we want
and not negotiate against
ourselves as educators and make
somebody else have to make the
cuts rather than think what
they're gonna cut and do it for
them, and then they're going to
cut more anyhow. Um, as I saw
the
consensus revenue estimates for
this next year and the amount of
new money that's coming in, it
seems like in education, we
ought to be getting somewhere if
we got our percentage share
ought to be getting somewhere
around $400 million of the new
money, uh, which would make for
a nice salary increases and
other things. And so hopefully
that's some of what we're going
to be talking about in the
October meeting is really
putting out requests for what's
needed. Um, I remember, I think
it was, uh, Superintendent
Strickler, Strickland.
uh, down in Southeast New Mexico
who commented that we fund
education on an efficiency model
of trying to get as much as we
can for as little money, but
then we worry that we don't get
excellent results and we try and
evaluate on excellence model. Be
nice when we are one of the
wealthiest states in the country
that we start funding education
as if we're a wealthy state in
the country and could have the
best education in the country,
um, and so I'm hoping as we look
at the things coming out of this
committee, you may not be able
to put it in your budget, but we
can put it
in our budget, um, so that we
appropriately fund education and
the last couple of years, you
know, I've worked on trying to
put in money, essentially
esignated for districts to make
those choices for what's best
for that district rather than us
doing all of the different
pieces. Uh, Kenya, the one
question that I have is you
indicated you're not ready to
make a recommendation on salary
increases, on compensation when
would you be ready to do that
and based on what?
Um, Mr. Chair, thank you for
your questions. I will say I, I
enjoy, um, partnering with the
LESC on your budget process. So
I'm looking forward to that.
Um, I will say that, um, as the
state, as you all know, we've
made significant um increases to
education and we're not done.
nor should we be. So I
appreciate your sentiment about
funding, um, funding adequately,
fully funding our schools, um,
and we'll just highlight from a
budget standpoint, we are not in
the best of place as it pertains
to Medicaid and SNAP and other
related priorities so I just
wanna say that those things are
also at play too as we think
about how we're spending our
budget increases, um.
as it pertains to compensation.
Again, I think it depends on
where we end up with health
insurance or or all insurance
for schools. This includes
And in kids, uh, meeting the
needs of our staff and, and
students and so, uh, certainly
as we're, we start doing the
budget coming out of the LESC.
I'm, I'm hoping that we may
assist in uh trying to enhance
some of the areas. I certainly
am always looking at math, and
it seems like still math does
not have the same funding that
we're getting to literacy and
we'll continue to push for more
math preparation, recognizing
that we're on the front end, you
can't throw it all in at once.
You got to start building
some of those programs, but
that'll continue to be an
important focus as we move from
the bottom, uh, and for those
who aren't aware at the meeting
this summer at the Education
Commission of the states, New
Mexico was called out by the
teacher of the year for being
7th in the country in new
teacher salaries and something
we were at 24th in total teacher
salaries or median teacher
salaries. So we are doing well
there and we are seeing that
have an impact of
fi ll ing the colleges of
education that pipeline, but
also bringing teachers from
other places in the country
instead of bleeding them off to
other places for higher
salaries. All those things are
making a difference for our
kids. It's again, it's gonna
take a while for all that to
flow through to have the full
impacts, but we're starting to
see
all the trends are moving in the
right direction, state or
district I statewide in
education funding and the
results we get from that, so do
you want any response, otherwise
we'll move on to the next
topics, Mr. Chair, I agree, and
I thank you for your sentiment
and for your leadership, um, on
this committee and in the
legislature, um, there's so much
I could say in response to what
you, you just shared with us,
but I will say I, I wish we had
much more investment in math.
We've consist
ent ly either not received
funding for math at all or
received very little and, and
the funding uh associated with
math is tied to Perf and that
funding is over 3 years, and if
there's opportunity to increase
funding that is set at the
legislature by the legislature
through PEF or Grow, um, that
could increase before the end of
a three-year period. I'm all for
it. So, uh, Mr. Chair, I would
love for that to happen if it's
doable.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Secretary, appreciate all, all
that you do. Um, please also if
there is any of these, and we're
talking about budget issues
right now as opposed to policy
issues, but if any of them
require pieces of legislation,
please, if we can get those so
that we can work on approval
through the November and
December meetings rather than
waiting till the January
meetings when everything is so
tight, so that this committee
has an opportunity to review
those and make a, a committee
recommend
ation for support prior to
getting the legislative session
so we can be partners in getting
those through.
Thank you Mr.
Chair, that is completely our
intent. We're working hard to do
that.
Thank you.
And Madam Secretary, you are up
next, uh, with update on New
Mexico's school board training.
Mhm.
they couldn't
read
and
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, we're gonna move
on to the next presentation that
is really uh meant to provide
you some additional details
related to new requirements for
school board training as per the
uh recently passed SB 137 and
then also just new efforts on
the part of the department to
more effectively lead our
process related to supporting
and training
our school board members, um, I
will primarily serve in more of
a Q&A role. Um, I have, uh, Mr.
David Vincent here, who will be
leading the presentation. He is,
um currently leading a team of
PED staff, including myself, who
have been working in partnership
with um our external partners
like the New Mexico School Board
Association and others to really
think
critically about how are we
supporting our school board
members, ensuring that they are
being provided the training that
they really need to be um
effective instructional leaders
for our school districts and
also to make sure that we are,
um, holding folks accountable if
in fact, training is not being
done, um, and that we're able to
um track that and effectively,
um, incorporate that into our
school a
cc re d it ation process. Our
new school accreditation process
does have a requirement for our
school board training, which is
outlined in statute. And with
that, I will turn it over.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
My name is David Vincent, school
board coordinator at PED.
Thank you for the opportunity to
share an update on school board
training. PED is committed to
support school boards statewide
with quality training that
reinforces governance and
supports student success.
This work is a partnership, as
Madam Secretary mentioned.
Internally, our PED teams have
developed approval processes.
training modules, and tracking
systems externally
We've been busy working to
collaborate with New Mexico
School Board Association and
other partners as well as local
districts to align these
processes.
Co-design
training opportunities and
expand access across the state.
It's been really rewarding work.
Together, these efforts create a
strong foundation for school
board governance and student
success.
Here we go.
Let's first look at the
fundamental responsibilities of
school boards, and I'm sure many
of you have, if not currently,
are serving on some type of
school board or committee as you
all are today. I know it's a lot
of work. Sometimes thankless
work, but it's important work
and it is time and effort, so we
do appreciate that.
These individuals wear many
hats, as you know.
They work to shape policy guide
budgets, ensure accountability,
and advocate for fairness and
opportunity while generously
giving their time, energy, and
expertise throughout the year.
This list, of course, is not
exhaustive because we know you
do many things out there working
on the school boards, and it
just highlights many of the key
responsibilities school board
members should fulfill as well
as those that fall outside of
the role.
So if you look at the slide
school board members set
policies and vision.
higher and evaluate the
superintendent oversee budget,
of course, manage property and
resources, ensure legal and
ethical compliance and represent
the public.
What scoreboard members do not
do
Sometimes this is a, a gray area
for, for folks, right?
I manage the daily operations of
individual schools and
classrooms.
evaluate staff other than the
superintendent.
Why does school board training
matter?
Great question, because it makes
a real difference. It's that
simple, not just board members,
but for the students, the
school, and the whole community.
Training isn't just a check box,
it's an investment that helps
boards lead with clarity and
confidence. And when boards are
at their best, students succeed.
Schools run smoothly, and
communities can trust the
process.
So for instance, some of the
benefits improved governance,
strong decision making.
policy, and accountability, all
makes an impact.
Enhanced student outcomes.
correlation between training and
improved district performance.
In fact, there's a lot of
research out there that shows
better trained or better trained
boards, better student outcomes.
It's that simple.
Better board mindset
more confidence and optimistic
thinking with school boards.
Capacity to handle complex
issues.
budget oversight, data use,
legal responsibilities, public
trust and accountability,
greater voter confidence among
consistent constituency.
relevant to all board types
applies to local and charter
schools alike.
That would be great
This is the bottom, yeah
to ensure these benefits are
realized, there are training
requirements set forth in place.
School board training
requirements are designed to
ensure that all members are well
prepared to fulfill their
responsibilities, and this comes
from SB 137. 1st term members
must complete at least 10 hours
of training.
in their first year of service
providing them with strong
foundation and governance policy
and accountability.
After the first year, all other
members are required to complete
at least 5 years of training
annually.
To continue building their
knowledge and staying up to date
with standards and best
practices.
To promote transparency and
accountability, the number of
training hours completed by each
school member, as well as
whether they met statutory
requirements must be made
publicly available. This process
helps maintain trust within the
community while ensuring that
board members are consistently
equipped to serve
their communities
Let's take a quick look here at
the legal framework, the legal
framework that shapes how
training is mandated.
We have public school code 22,
Section 22 513, and also NAC New
Mexico administrative code.
6.2291. That is a general
provision rule and that does
kind of come and sprinkled in
throughout uh along with the SB
137. We'll look at some training
charts here in a moment.
And then also 6.19, the
accreditation procedures.
all coming from uh
portions of it coming from a
Senate Bill 137 that came.
2024 July 1, effective day.
Accreditation
On training is completed, not
just a check box, it must also
be reported.
School board training is one of
the 10 components of the
accreditation rule.
Training hours completed by
warmer board members are
reported by NMSBA or other
approved organizations to PED
where they are recorded in, of
course, uh, New Mexico vistas.
Here is an example of a uh
school district that, uh, if you
look on New Mexico vistas as an
example of a school district
here. The first term on the, the
uh column on the left.
simply as is this the member's
first term?
So the column on the left, the
uh first uh board member there.
uh, no, that's a returning
school board member, but the
other four members are
first-term members. The second
column shows when you look on
Vista, the 2nd column shows the,
the number of completed hours
they've got within the calendar
year and third column met hours
of training in this case, this
school district, all the board
members didn't meet the hours
of, of uh
of training and
the last column met categories
of training and so everyone here
is yes, it's not applicable to
the returning member because
they, they are not required to
have specific category training.
So that's the reason that is an
NA there. So this district here
looks to be in good shape as far
as training goes.
We have a two-year
implementation timeline
currently, of course, we're in
our first year.
In year one, we're focusing on
building a clear approval
process for training providers
or training presenters and
courses ensuring alignment and
accreditation roles and
consistent quality standards are
very important.
Training effectiveness will be
measured through
evaluations, outcomes, and while
board members complete
their training hours, we will
continue to track through Nvita
their progress.
to expand accessibility, PED,
uh,
will develop canvas-based
courses. We're in the process of
doing that right now. That
provide a wider range of
training content, particularly
supporting rural districts. You
know, that's one thing we've
heard a lot of. I've been in
Cloudcroft and I've been up in
Taos, and I've had a lot of
superintendents, I say a lot,
but several that have uh voiced
the need for how are we going to
support rural districts when not
all school board members can
attend
the uh the trainings offered by
NMSB NMSBA simply because of
maybe travel distance or the
timing is wrong. And so a lot of
superintendents are looking for
this type of uh uh
training to be available,
whether it be uh through
different pro providers other
than In NMSBA or uh our own
chemists-based courses developed
at PED.
Year 2 builds on the foundation
by monitoring presentations to
ensure content accuracy and
quality.
while requiring select PED
courses for all new board
members.
Efforts will also focus on
further deve developing these
canvas training suites and
building district leadership
capacity and support ensuring
that board members have the
knowledge and resources needed
to govern effectively.
Partnership framework, this has
been exciting work, uh, for me
and a lot, a lot of the folks on
the team because we've involved
a lot of people
The internal PED teams have
worked hard
to uh develop the approval
processes and training
requirements and uh the
associated forms needed for
submission
The external partners
the planning, uh, has been just
great with these groups,
including NMSBA, other external
partners as well as, uh, local
education agencies. I've visited
with several superintendents
that uh have actually called in
and said, uh, and, and gave me
some input on uh what this might
look like. And so, um, I just
wanted to, to mention that and
that superintendent Stickney,
here, I believe, uh, ZUI
Superintendent. In fact, I was
on the phone
with her yesterday and she was
given some, uh, great points.
Uh, PED canvas training, Canvas
training with 2 hours of PE
develop content by specialists
at PED.
So PED presenter and course
approvals. We feel it's
important that we uh
approve quality training.
and quality presenters to bring
this to our school boards.
and we made this simple
The school board training chart,
if you would refer to that as
this one here. It is not on the
uh
it is not on the handout. I'm
sorry, it's not on the, the
presentation.
But if you'll look at this, I'm
just talk you through it just
real quick. Looks like this.
So SB 1
excuse me, SB 137
says that
if you look at the, just the way
this is organized, just right
quick. The categories on the
left-hand side and the, the
members are, uh, on the, on the
top and the columns. But the
middle column
the middle column is, um,
first-term members and
SB 137
just says this category laws
department policies, personnel,
and it doesn't give these
examples that we've, that we've
put in here as the suggested
topics. This list is not
exhaustive in other topics may
be on here, but when you look at
the laws, um, policies and
ethics category that is on this
first page. You can see a
variety of topics, and we felt
like this was needed to be able
to give our presenters an idea
of what topic they
were presenting on and what
category it would fall in, in
bounds with, if that makes
sense, so the second page.
finance budgeting
and let, and let me clarify, it
says at the top, at least 2
hours on. That is for new school
board members. Let us not two
hours on each topic.
That would be, that, that would
be uh quite a lot. It's 2 hours
in that category.
I'm not gonna read all these
through you, but um I just
wanted to, to point this out and
give you uh an idea of the
training requirements and how
this was organized on, on this
chart.
Presenter approval
ensures that not only, uh, that
only uh organizations with
necessary qualifications,
accountability, and accurate
compliant content are allowed to
deliver trainings
Each training undergoes course
approval to confirm it meets
quality standards, promotes
equity, and engages our
participants. We want our school
board members to fill after a
presentation that
they got something from it. They
had something to take away from
it. How engaging was that?
What kind of assessment is there
at the end of the presentation.
So we felt that that is very
important. Finally, ongoing
accountability measures include
annual renewals, attendance
tracking, feedback reporting all
helps maintain a high standards
and support continuous
improvement across the
trainings.
Quality assurance. This is very
important, as you know, beyond
approvals, we're building in
quality assurance measures to
ensure training remains
effective, credible, and
accountable.
The process establishes a quirk,
uh, a clear quality standard by
carefully reviewing an
organization's qualifications,
experience, and instructional
capabilities before granting
approval. It upholds content
integrity by ensuring all
training materials are
pre-approved, accurate,
engaging, and fully compliant
with statutory requirements.
And um
I will say within the last
couple of days, days I have
visited with a couple presenters
such as DDSK and uh some law
firms interested in this process
and they're really excited about
uh working with us on this and,
and so we're really, uh, glad to
see this coming along.
By thoroughly vetting and
looking at the systems.
also promote safeguards and
public trust, making sure that
our professionals are credible,
uh, making sure our board
trainings are credible and
professional and reliable.
What are our next steps with
these systems in place here and
next steps, uh, school board
training, guidance websites set
to launch in September 30th, and
we are there. Uh, we are in
September working and I'm
working with the uh uh
contractors on making sure that
our website is up and running.
It's going to be very nice where
we can have stuff like this
available, uh.
to school board members on the
website. They can go and pull
that up. They can, uh,
presenters if you're interested
in being a presenter, they would
be able to get presenter
information and what it takes to
become a presenter and approved
presenter uh in the, in the uh
state of New Mexico.
Ahead of this is a pilot
attendance tracking, uh,
program, NMSBA in the regional
meeting we have coming up
September 15th in Taos up in
Taos, um, we were are going to
um
uh pilot a tracking system to
where board members that are in
attendance at that meeting.
Well, uh
pull up a QR code at the
conclusion of the meaning, it
will pull up their name and the
district that they're with and
credit them with the type of
training that is going to be uh
presented at that. So working
with Joe again on that, uh, and
really excited about that
tracking because uh this may
come as a surprise to you, but
I've seen school board members.
go into training and
halfway through the training,
they get up and walk out. So we
want them, we wanna make sure
that, that they, uh, get the
training and they are with the
uh, the hours that are required.
And I mentioned PD uh developed
canvas courses, a while ago, and
we are uh working towards that
end. And also co-designing with
our external partners, uh,
workshops coming up,
co-designing conferences and
workshops.
expanding the training network
with focus on rural areas is
also very important that I
mentioned a while ago, there's a
big need many, many rural
districts around the state
simply do not have uh board
members may not have the time to
travel to a certain conference,
uh, that is across the state or
the timing might not be right
for them. And in the past, some
of those board members may have
been left out of some very
crucial training so we're trying
to alleviate that.
by working with rural areas.
And the funding request as uh
Madam Secretary mentioned uh
moments ago. We are, uh, looking
for, uh, money.
and
1.5 million I believe is what
our ask is and um we are hoping
to uh bring in conferences,
speakers, uh, any contractors
that will help us monitor. We
want to make sure our, uh,
programs are working well and
contractors to help us monitor
the, uh, valetti of of that. So
before I close, I want to take a
moment to recognize and thank
many of the partners and school
board members who worked to make
this possible. We extend our
gratitude
to all those involved
We also thank New Mexico School
Board Association and others as
well as LAAs and have put in
their uh
2 cents and then put along the
way.
Thank you for your time and
attention this afternoon and
with that
Mr. Chairman, I stand for
questions.
Thank you. Uh, as former school
board member, yeah, I, I
appreciate all this. I was Mimi
or a senator Stewart and I were
the sponsors of this
One of the biggest questions
was, so what if they don't?
You know, where there were no
teeth. It was actually taken out
of the original bill as it moved
through the process.
The law, uh, school board
members can only be removed for
misfeasance and malfeasance, and
only then if it's brought as a
recall of the board member for
that. boards can only be
recalled as a total board, not
as individuals, so
you know, you talked about on
their accreditation, are we
gonna remove accreditation from
the whole district? What if they
don't? You know, I know it's the
law, they ought to. What if they
don't?
Mr. Chair, I'll go ahead and
answer that question. Um
you know,
one of the well, the primary
reason why we are really
changing, changing kind of how
we collect and document, um,
school board members, um,
participating and completing
their uh training requirements.
Um, the department has worked as
mentioned with New Mexico School
Board Association for many, many
years to really lead that
effort, um, the school board
association, um
you know, does a great job.
However, we typically would not
get that information until the
end of the year. They would
submit a report, um, all of
their attendants, uh,
documentation was they come in
and they actually physically
sign in and then the, they would
take it and, and, and give it to
us at the end of the school year
and, and for me that's really
not sufficient. We need to know,
um, in real time, um, what are
the, what are the trainings that
are being taken
and so the use of a QR code at
the completion of, of a course
could include a mini quiz to see
what they learn. It could
include um a survey about
whether or not they thought that
that content was useful for
them. What else might they need
on that particular topic, so
that's an example of things that
we're doing to make sure that
we're properly capturing, not
only did they complete that
course, but was it effective or
not? Was that helpful for them?
including school board training
in our um accreditation process
for schools is very intentional.
That allows us to be able to say
to that school, your school
board members have not completed
their appropriate courses. And
then that is something that
needs to be dealt with at a
local level. So whether or not
um accreditation will be
conditional or not approved.
Obviously, there are many things
that we look at or we'll be
looking at
as a part of that. But this is
something that is significant.
It's required by by statute, by
law, and so we want to make sure
that they're completing these
trainings and then also sharing
their um their hours, their
training hours on an Avistas is
also intentional. It's important
that that information is made
public, and these are elected
members, as you know, elected
board members and so we're able
to also share that information
publicly
regarding um their hours.
Thank you. I, I just know as I
talk with districts and boards
and other things. It's usually
the board members who need it
most, who refuse to go, um, and
this doesn't do anything except
inc increase the record keeping
for those who are being in
compliance,
uh.
I still think we need to have
some sort of, of
teeth or some changes in that
area. Certainly, the school
board Association has always
maintained, and I think rightly
so, trying to be on the positive
side of providing good training.
Uh, but it's the, the board
members who won't, that are the
biggest problem. I recognize the
need in the rural districts, but
there are so many opportunities
from training from the regional
meetings to local retreats to
the 2 or 3 statewide meetings to
the national meeting where it's
relative
ly easy to get 2 10 hours a year
if you take your job being a
school board member, seriously,
you almost can't help but get 10
hours of training, but it's the
ones that refuse and I don't see
anything that that changes much
of that, I mean, it's, um, we
talk about, well, we could pass
a law and say we really, really,
really mean it, that you, you
get the training, but
you know, it's still what if
they don't do that? So that just
kind of my continued concern,
but I'll, I'll get off that soap
opera, uh, soapbox soap opera,
that soapbox, uh,
representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your presentation.
Like many times, uh
our chairman and I are on the
same page when it comes to this.
My question very much was, so
what? Who? I guess the question,
Mr. Chairman, we talk about
accountability.
Who oversees the school boards
who represents or investigates
uh as far as misconduct of
school boards.
training I've seen the training
for this.
the fact of the matter is just
because you received the
training or you sit there
through the video, or you attend
that workshop.
Who then investigates?
when there is
some concern of wrongdoing.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
V Baca, thank you so much for
your question. Um, you know, the
accountability question is, is
really important, and I will say
that the public education
department obviously plays a
role in terms of the authorities
that we have to ensure that
they're taking their training,
um, the department, um, can also
investigate, um, in a complaints
made towards
a school board member or an
entire board. Those are things
that we do, uh, we often
contract that workout with
outside, um, investigators that
can investigate those actions,
including interviews and other
things. Um, these sorts of
things are quite common. Um, in
addition, the state auditor's
office, the state auditor, can,
um, investigate procurement
value um violations and other
sort of misconduct related
to their spending of funds, um,
the attorney general, so the New
Mexico Department of Justice can
also investigate, uh, related to
opens Meetings Act and other um
things that fall under them. We
also have um uh the New Mexico
um, oh God, it just left me.
Uh, commission that looks at
ethics violations and other
things. So we work in
partnership with all of those
entities. When we get a
complaint about misconduct, we
absolutely take them seriously.
Something that I look at
personally that I review and
ultimately make decisions on.
It's really important that our
school boards are focusing on
the things that uh they're
elected to do, and that's really
about being focused on students
and making sure that they um are
not impeding the instruction of
students but really lifting it
up and supporting it in their
role. And I will just say again,
ultimately, these are elected
officials. They are elected by
their constituents, and I think
it's really important again to
communicate, uh, the training,
but other things that are
happening so that those um their
constituents at elect them can
also um hold them accountable.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In my,
I'm gonna, I'm gonna drive home
a pointer.
How many superintendents have we
lost from January 1 to July 1.
in our districts
How many are removed from their
districts?
Mr. Chair Representative Baca, I
don't have that number, but I do
know it is very high. It is not
uncommon. We have very high
turnover of superintendents in
the state and that's consistent
annually. And so, um,
it is absolutely a concern, um,
and something that I think that
we intend to help address with
the training, but it also comes
with, with, um, more
accountability, absolutely. I'll
give you help, Mr. Chairman. It
was 31.
31 out of 89 school districts
have
made the decision. Um, in that
same time frame, how many school
board members were removed from
their office for any kind of
wrongdoing or anything like
that.
Chairman.
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
um, as, um, the chair mentioned,
the department has the ability
to remove school boards. It is
the entire school board as per
statute that has to be removed.
Um, and we have very specific
guidelines in terms of under
what circumstances can we remove
a scul full school board and of
course that's after a complete
investigation. Um, we often, I
often will
send letters of reprimand,
letters of direction, uh, to
correct specific actions or
activities by a specific
timeline, so there, there are
other, um, measures that the
department can take short of
suspending an entire board and
reappointing.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, and I
support the fact that we should
not remove an entire board. I
think that's, that's a process
that must be revisited.
but when we talk about one of
the, the things we talk about is
the improvement in our schools
and when we're turning over
about 1/3 of our superintendents
every year. That's like having
an athletic program where you
have a new head coach every year
or new president of a company
every year. When we talk about
consistency and I've talked
about it in many different
avenues. I've talked about the
consistency of our secretaries
of ed. I've talked about we need
to make sure that we are
providing
the, the mechanisms and the um
kind of the systems that we are
able to see what we set out to
do.
and I think that when we're
looking at turnover and we're
looking at this.
practice of, you know, um,
you know, turning over about a
third of our superintendents
every year.
Then no amount of funding is
going to help that.
if we're always in a constant
state of starting over.
So I, I think that, you know,
the, the question that the
Chairman Sols really asked was.
really is what so what with the
statue here and that's why I
said this, I'm not
I'm not, you know, I was trying
to be, you know
but
I do need to make the point is
that we need to look at this
process. We need to basically go
back there and make sure a very
uh a well functioning effective
school board is a huge asset to
a uh asset to a district.
but when we have school boards
that
have some difficulty then beyond
the support and say, hey, you
just didn't complete your hours.
I think there needs to be a
mechanism in place so that they
too can be held accountable for
actions. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, I, I too share your
concern. It is, it is deeply
concerning that we have such a
high
um
turnover of ours, uh, district
leadership year over year. It
is, it is concerning
I will, and I will tell you that
um I am utilizing the full
extent of the law that is
available to me at the Public
Education department. If there
are other things in partnership
with the other entities that I
mentioned. If there are other
actions that the legislature
think need to happen as it
pertains to accountability. You
know, I, I'll be happy to be in
conversation and um and thought
with, with this committee on
those
items. Thank you.
Thank you. We have about 15
minutes before we're supposed to
be at the, the Yazi Martinez
lawsuit reception, um,
representative Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'll
try to speak quickly. Um, so I
just, uh, wanna kind of confirm
so if somebody wants to provide
a class, um
so they would have to apply with
PE for approval of that class.
Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman, and Representative
Cohen, yes, that is correct. OK,
so then, so I've been master
board member. I think there's
that Scholl's is best for
remember. So we would also
present as well to like the New
Mexico School Board Association.
So if I had a one to present, I
would have to send it to you all
to be able to present to, um,
that's part of your earning your
master board members. Um, is
your criteria. So that would be
that correct?
Mr. Chair Representative Cullen.
So I'll give you an example.
There's a couple of ways this
can be done.
Um,
we, when, um, the school, New
Mexico School Board Association
does planning, right? And with
partners and with us we put out
a call or request for presenters
and so based on the different
topics
that we direct need to be
covered or should be covered.
They can submit their proposal
for a presentation and then that
is reviewed by the department
and by the New Mexico School
Board Association, then we would
select of those presenters, many
of them are PED staff. They
could be LESC staff, um,
depending on who really is the
expert in that area. It could be
a national expert as well and so
there's a process for selecting
that, um, as
uh, Mr. Vincent mentioned,
there's also online options and
then we also have the ability to
work with, uh, school districts
with superintendents and school
board members to identify other
options. So it may be a virtual
class that they do together on
site at the district with their
superintendent where they're
able to really uh dive into a
particular topic, um, and so
that's also an option for us
it's not just check
ing the box. I really want this
training to be meaningful and to
be provided by experts within
the areas.
OK.
Um, Mr. Chair, so yeah, that
maybe I'll talk a little bit
offline on that because as
master board members we had to
create a, we had to do a
presentation to earn our master
board members, um, so we'll kind
of talk about that and how that
works with New Mexico School
Board Association. So, um, and
then
and I do like the online
version, um, especially in rural
areas so that they are able to,
I mean, there are
a lot of, um
conferences they can go to.
There's a lot of ways them to
earn it, but, uh, as we know,
it's a non-paid position and
people do work, so that is a
little bit harder. I mean, I met
some people that didn't even
know they're legislators that
were school board members, which
was really surprising to me
because I thought you really
need to know who your
legislators are where a school
board member. So, um, Mr. Chair,
I think this is great. Um, and
again, that was my first
question, which you had
mentioned
is how are we holding them
accountable. I know that there's
school board members that don't
even attend school board
meetings and they can't even get
a quorum to be able to conduct
business in some parts of the
state. So it's a very
unfortunate that that is how it
is, but we do see that, um
and then, um, Mr. Chair, one of
the
I think he just laughed, but
Baca was mentioning about the
turnover rates, um, and I know
we talked about that with Sam
Browns is trying to use master
board members as mediators with
school districts, and I think
that's something that we need to
utilize more is that they're
trained up and they're people
that are very dedicated to
school boards and I think we
need to be able to utilize them
more on how to mediate between a
superintendent and their school
boards
as well as other training as
well. So, um, I'm glad to see um
that we're doing this. Um, I do
agree that we have to see about
there are, I mean, I've been
when I was a school board
member, we had a couple of
boards removed and then some of
them that didn't really do
anything that was wrong. Tried
to get back in. We do need to
look as a legislature of how to
be able to get out of those bad
actors that are not, that are
doing
some unethical things sometimes
and so that they can just be
removed versus the whole entire
board because that does make a
lot of changes, so we do need to
look at that. So thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation. So I,
I just have a really, I hope,
quick question and quick answer,
um, so we have laws in place,
existing laws such as the
multicultural Education Act
Indian Education Act, Hispanic
Education Act, um, so I'm
interested in knowing how um you
will measure whether these
existing laws are being
implemented
and associated with guiding the
vision because the vision is
pretty
broad but also specific because
it's talking about a better
supported policies, um, that
makes sense and that everyone
has a stronger chance to succeed
as we've already seen. We've
been struggling in that area and
governance is really important
because it provides not only
governance, oversight, but
accountability, and we've been
talking about accountability and
um so it's not just an
accountability on the part of
the school boards, but the
school boards hold
ing superintendents and others
accountable to upholding these
laws. So have you thought about
what measures are in place, how
are we going to measure the uh
outcomes of um of, of their
upholding the laws as they
exist, the laws are very
specific, and thank you for the
previous questions about
accountability because that's a,
that was another part of my
question, but um you've answered
it as best as you could to this
point, but I think we need a lot
more
room for, for improvement. So I
don't know who wants to answer
that.
Mr. Chair Representative Royal
Caballero. So I mean, first step
is clearly to say, these are the
things you should be.
um taking trainings on. These
are the topics and so we're very
clear. So those education acts
that you had mentioned, these,
these acts are things that we're
saying you need to receive
training on. I think um having
the department be a part of, you
know, upholding our
responsibility to implement the
training as the individuals that
oversee and implement these acts
is really important to them
being trained, um, you know, I,
I really welcome the
conversation related to
accountability across the board.
It's essential and so we have to
make sure that at all levels,
whether it's, you know, the PED,
our school boards, our
superintendents, our teachers,
our families, our legislature,
we have to have these
conversations of about
accountability. We have to have
ways of measuring it and, and
holding folks accountable and,
and again, you know, based on
what's allowed to us under state
law.
creating
a requirement in the school
accreditation process through
role was really the best way we
could address this idea or the
requirement of the training
aspect for school board members.
Um, thinking that, uh, Mr. Chair
and Madam Secretary, up to date,
to date, there's been lots of
evidence of noncompliance with
the laws. So it's, that's very
troubling. I know that early
when the presentation was being
made, I think I understood that
these are just at least 2 hours
on and then they select
if, if they're selecting from
this list
um, and it's not required to
um adhere to or to listen to or
be trained in the specifics of
the laws that are in place, then
the evidence will continue to
mount in the area of
noncompliance with the laws and
get us nowhere as it relates to
what we've been struggling with
for years in terms of why we had
to have a lawsuit. So it needs
to be, I think, structured in
a manner in which, um, the laws
that are in place must be
adhered to. There must be
oversight. There must be
measurable outcomes, and we have
to see changes
uh in order for us to be
following the guide of this
vision, so it's only a statement
you're not required to answer
that, but it needs to be a lot
firmer, I think, um, I know the
secretary said she has the
capacity to enforce, um, this is
one of those areas that I think
needs to be closely monitored
and we need to pull in, uh, as
you said, the Attorney general,
the auditor, whomever needs to
be pulled in to give you
additional support in
this area, but from a
legislative standpoint, I don't
think we can continue to afford
investing more money in
defending what's not defensible
if we don't show um the results
on record. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you and just kind of a
final comment from what I gather
from the committee, and I may be
wrong, it sounds like there is
concern about uh putting teeth
into enforcement of it, uh, do
you think that the governor
would put it a message if there
were a bill that would allow for
changing the statute to remove
individual board members who do
not refuse to get training
as board members, uh, because I
think we could probably gather
people that would be interested
in putting that legislation out
if the governor were to give a
message.
Mr. Chair, I will certainly take
that request to her. And what I
will say is that she was very
supportive of the last bill that
was, was um
ran and, and uh passed, and so
we at the department uh worked
alongside the LESC, um, to
really, um,
create that bill and get it
done, and it is important. This
is a very important for our
students. It's important for
education systems. It's
something that requires our
attention and so thank you for
your interest. Look forward if,
if, um, if it is determined, um,
that would look forward to
partnering once again.
Thank you. Um, and that kind of
concludes for today. Do we have
enough for a quorum or should we
do that tomorrow? Do we lose a
couple of the Quorum members
just stepped away.
They slipped away, so we'll try
and remember to do that tomorrow
when we do have the quorum. Uh,
we do have a reception back in
the room where we had lunch
today, uh, on
go through these doors and work
your way back through the maze
to where it was, but the
reception on the Martinez Yazi
lawsuit from 5 to 6:30, I think
that's and stuff, so, uh, we
