Painful. Most of the time we
don't have heavy time
constraints, but yesterday we
had kids waiting for us over to
do presentations and we want to
make sure we're respectful of
their time also. So if you all
can help me out with that, that
would be appreciated. Um, at
this point, first thing we have
is public comment, and I believe
we have 3 people on the list for
public comment and you have up
to 2 minutes each to address us.
So Bob Ippel, I think you are
first. If you would please, sir.
Yes, and, uh, push the little
button that it looks like a
little head on it and the red
light should come on.
Good morning.
Uh, thank you for allowing for
this public comment time. My
name is Bob Ippel, and I'm
formerly the executive director
of Rehoboth Christian School
here in Gallup, and now I serve
as the executive director of the
New Mexico Association of
Non-public Schools, and it has
been a privilege for me to get
to know, um, other other
non-private schools in nonpub
public schools in New Mexico and
I've been amazed at the
diversity within the non-public
schools of our state while some
are faith-based
and some are not, they all seek
to serve unique populations
whose needs are not being met
through other school options in
their area, whether that be
other private schools, charter
schools, public schools, or
whatever. They attempt to try to
serve a particular community
with a particular needs of
families as they seek to educate
their children in ways that is
best for them. And even in our
little corner of the world we
have the following schools that
are serving over 900 students,
and some of them have been
around for over 100 years. Saint
Bonaventure and Theroux
Sacred Heart here in Gallop,
Wilds Cat Academy, Hilltop
Christian Zuni Mission School,
Saint Anthony's and Zuni, Saint
Joseph Mission School in San
Fidel serving the Acoma Laguna
people of Saint Teresa School in
Grants and Rehoboth Christian
School and others. And many of
these schools have benefited
through the local LEAs which
have um really served a lot of
the needs of these schools. So
through the different titles and
IDEA, that type of stuff with
special education funding, and
I've
when I was the executive
director of Rehoboth, we were
even during that time getting uh
tax uh textbook money, um, that
was able to help some of the
students and, um, during COVID,
obviously there were monies that
came in that helped. And I guess
I just wanna encourage you to
continue to see non-public
schools as a legitimate
alternative for certain families
with certain needs. I hope that
you continue to think about how
you can support these non-public
schools who must think about
issues like
everybody else, like school
safety, mental health issues,
academic support, teacher
compensation. I hope that our
representatives and senators and
governors see the support of
non-public schools as a
bipartisan issue and that,
that's this is something that we
can work together on and I know
the mission statement is to
serve of the PED is to serve
all, all students, and we're
just hoping that we can be part
of that solution. Thank you.
Thank you, sir
Uh, then
Esther
Good morning and thanks for the
time today. My name is Dan
Meister. I'm currently the
executive director at Rehoboth
Christian School here in Gallup
and um wanted to echo some of
the comments that Bob made, but
expressed gratitude for the
funding that we get through our
title funds through the LEA that
we work with specifically here
Gallop McKinley Public Schools,
a community schools, and just
say that it's vital to the work
that we're doing and to give you
an example. We have about 420
students K through 12
at Rehobeth, 78 of those
students benefit from title fund
money that we get because they
have ISPs, special learning
needs, and so on. It's about
close to 20% of our student
population, and that's students
that we try to serve with that
money, but also that GMCS
doesn't have to work with and it
I'll save the public schools
money for us to work with those
students as well and so we're
grateful for those funds. The
thing that we would ask for in
the future is just to see a
little
bit more flexibility with the
way we use those funds. Um,
sometimes the needs of students
don't always fall directly in
line with things that
legislatures have laid out or
laws laid out and so on that
you, if you have some
flexibility in how you can use
those funds, whether the need is
a mental health need or a
learning need or a safety need
or anything like that. Sometimes
as basic as food and nutrition,
those kinds of things, um, it's
really helpful for us to be able
to do that, but thank you guys
for the work that you all do in
helping
education. We know it's a big, a
big deal here in New Mexico that
we're not exactly serving the
easiest population to work with
in terms of education, but it is
the silver bullet that can
change a lot of things and so I
appreciate your efforts on that
regard, just encourage you to
keep, uh, pursuing improvement
for our local schools. Thank
you.
Thank you. uh, Jean Strickland.
Good morning
Chair, members, thank you for
having this opportunity as well.
Gene Strickland, Superintendent
Hobbs Municipal Schools, and I
want to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the work that each
and every one of you do for our
kids.
Um, it does not go unnoticed
that the efforts and the
consistent conversation focused
around our children's future is
the future of New Mexico and we
heard yesterday
that we are making progress.
There are things that are
working and those funding
efforts are paying off, and I
would encourage you to continue
to press that envelope because
our future matters.
Uh, we, we say in Hobbs that
every child will have a career
not.
we want you to graduate
The diploma's the byproduct.
Every child will have a career
and I appreciate this body's
efforts of continuing to push
that envelope to find the things
and work on the things that
allow students to be successful
in that chosen career moving
forward.
I would give a couple
suggestions, and that is
continue to fund the things that
are working.
Continue to work with the
department
of funding models.
Most recently, we heard
yesterday about some uh
innovation zone and some other
funds, um
timing on some of those programs
is an issue
Um, school districts received
notices of their IE funds on
Friday last week.
Just for record, that was Hobbs
School's 18th day of school.
However, we had been asked to
apply, been encouraged to apply,
we applied and planned for those
funds based upon that
application process, um.
I believe that hop schools is a
high quality CTE model.
Yet those funds
are in jeopardy are actually
non-existent actually to force
us to continue to do that.
Healthy meals, um, I look
forward to this presentation.
Thank you, as we're still
operating in a deficit. Thank
you. Thank you.
Anyone else public comment.
Anyone else public comment.
OK, see
Sorry, my mic was
Not sure who's leading this, you
know.
if you would please go ahead,
Ryan, Ryan.
Well, good morning, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, thanks so much for having us
here today. My name is Doctor
Ryan Tolman, and I'm here with
my colleague Josh Chaffin. We
are a program evaluators with
the Legislative Finance
Committee, and we are here to
present our evaluation on New
Mexico's healthy universal
school meals program.
Uh, the report looks like this.
I think it's tab 12 for
committee members.
So before I begin, I just wanna
first thank Secretary Mariana
Padilla, Gregory Frosted, and
Laura Henry Hand, uh, and the
staff and the student success
and wellness bureau at the
Public Education Department, as
well as Kendall Chavez, uh,
policy advisor on this topic in
the office of the governor and
to the LESC for their close
collaboration on this report, as
well as all the district and
charter administrators, food
service managers.
and staff across the state who
welcomed us into their school
kitchens and contributed to
their insights to this report.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, if you will please
turn with me now to page one.
Uh, you will find the executive
summary, which outlines the
major findings of this
evaluation.
So prior to the state's
universal school meal program in
2023. Schools relied on tiered
federal reimbursement model in
which schools were reimbursed at
different rates based on
students' income eligibility
status and place much of the
burden on families, particularly
those who do not qualify.
In 2023, the legislature
unanimously passed the Healthy
University universal school
meals legislation.
The law now mandates free,
high-quality meals for all
public schools, school students,
regardless of income, and
includes ambitious goals for
improved meal quality, namely
scratch cooking, local food
sourcing and reducing food
waste.
This evaluation aims to provide
a status update of the program's
implementation of quality
provisions, analyze fiscal
trends of in costs of food
service, and look at potential
outcomes related to student
participation in nutrition
standards.
Overall our findings touch on a
couple of major themes. First,
regarding universal access.
Participation in school meals
has increased and consistent
with similar programs
implemented in other states,
participation gains were
greatest among less poor
students who would not have
previously qualified for free or
reduced meals.
Second, although the state has
started serving free meals in
2023. Improvements in meal
quality are unclear since PED
has not been tracking and
monitoring compliance with the
quality provisions.
but should start in the coming
school year, its first full year
of program implementation.
We find that charter schools in
smaller districts in particular
have faced challenges with food
program costs, kitchen
infrastructure, staffing, and
limited access to food vendors.
With PEDs starting to monitor
compliance and performance in
the coming school year. New
Mexico is poised to achieve its
quality standards and strengthen
its meal quality programs.
If you will now turn with me to
page 4.
I will discuss the background of
our state's healthy universal
school meal program.
I'll explain how school meal
programs work and how the
program mechanisms work,
highlight the various
organizations responsible for
implementing these programs and
touch on some of the initial
challenges that have led us to
conducting this evaluation.
So why are meal programs in
schools so important?
As shown there in chart 2 on
page 4. In 2023, 23% of children
in New Mexico experienced food
insecurity. Higher than 19%
nationally in one of the highest
in the nation.
For many students, school meals
are the most consistent and
nutritionally complete meals
they receive.
National research also shows
that school meal programs can
improve students' academic
performance, boost attendance,
and promote health outcomes.
Over on page 5
as you can see in figure 18
states have now made their
school meals programs
universally free to all
students.
In 2023, New Mexico joined these
other states by unanimously
passing healthy universal school
meals legislation.
If you will now turn with me to
page 6.
as you can see in figure 2,
some of the key features of the
of the law are highlighted,
primarily universal access, meal
quality standards like scratch
cooking, local ingredients, and
reduction in food waste.
Together, these features of the
program are more comprehensive
than other universal school meal
programs in other states.
After passage of the law
New Mexico started providing
free meals to all students
starting in fall 2023. However,
meal quality standards have not
been required until this
upcoming school year as rule is
not finalized until September
2024.
Next, over on page 7.
I will try to provide a quick
crash course on how school meal
programs are funded and how they
operate.
So New Mexico school meal
program is funded through a
blend of federal and state
dollars. As Figure 3 highlights,
most federal funding comes
through the USDA, which
administers the national school
lunch and school breakfast
programs, which reimburse
schools based on per meals
served.
State education agencies, in
this case PED distributes funds
to districts, schools, and
charters.
School food authorities and
entities such as the local
school district or charter
school are responsible for
administrative oversight and
compliance with federal and
state regulations, administering
meal service operations,
determining student eligibility
and tracking meal
reimbursements.
If you will turn with me over to
page 8
Table 1 highlights how federal
reimbursements are higher for
meals served depending on
eligibility. Primarily based on
family poverty level, to free or
reduced reimbursement rate that
you are likely familiar with.
With the Healthy universal
School Meals Act, the state is
essentially paying for students
who do not qualify for these
free or reduced reimbursement
rates.
Traditionally, student
eligibility would have been
determined by their parents or
guardian completing some kind of
family income application form,
and they're reimbursement rate
determined by their income
level.
However, the state law now
mandates that school food
authorities participate in
direct certification through the
community eligibility provision,
or CEP.
This process is summarized in
figure 4 where students are
directly certified through their
participation in programs like
Snap, TANF, or Medicaid.
If the identified student
population, or ISP in these
programs at the school meets a
minimum threshold of 25%, a
multiplier is applied and that
percent of students are
reimbursed at the free federal
rate, and then the state then
covers the remaining percentage
of students.
So in other words, if 50% of the
students at a particular school,
uh, qualify under this provision
after the multiplier, 80% of the
participating meals served are
reimbursed through federal
dollars and the remaining 20%
are then reimbursed by the
state.
If the school food Authority
does not meet the minimum of 25%
threshold. They're considered a
standard school and collect
family income applications for
reimbursement eligibility.
Over on page 9, chart 3
highlights that this mandate has
led New Mexico to lead the
nation in CEP participation at
around 99%.
If you will turn with me now to
page 10, I want to highlight
some of the agencies and
organizations who are
responsible for administering
the healthy universal school
meals program, which are
highlighted in figure 5.
Service can come in varied
forms, such as your on Skype on
site school-based kitchen,
central kitchen like APS which
delivers to multiple sites or
contracted food service
management companies which
handle operations.
Food can come from multiple
sources, mostly broadline
suppliers like Cisco or Lebot,
USDA commodities, and a smaller
percentage from local providers.
A particular note over on page
11 is PED's student success and
wellness Bureau, which oversees
2010 school food authorities
whose responsibilities includes
processing reimbursements,
monitors compliance, and
provides training and technical
assistance.
Turning now to page 12
Now that I've explained how the
program works. I want to touch
on some of the challenges with
funding and program costs.
New Mexico, like other early
adopter states overspent its
budget, prompting the
legislature to appropriate
supplemental funding as
highlighted over on page 13 in
chart 5.
As you can see
New Mexico legislature
appropriated 23 million in the
first year, but then required an
additional $20 million in
supplemental appropriation.
Finally, if you will please turn
with me to page 14.
I want to quickly highlight
implications of the recent 2025
Federal Budget reconciliation
bill to the Healthy universal
School meals program.
The federal budget
reconciliation could primarily
affect student eligibility to
receive federal reimbursement
through direct certification and
programs like SNAP and Medicaid.
Given our high rates of CEP
participation due to high rates
of students who participate in
these programs, LFC staff
analysis indicates that about 3%
of the student population could
be affected by these changes.
Reducing about 20 schools from
CEP participation eligibility
and reducing an additional 60
schools from full federal
reimbursement.
which could shift a small costs
to the state.
PED's work is working to direct
certified schools starting in
the upcoming school year for a
four-year period and that this
indicates that these changes are
unlikely to affect the school,
uh, the state until school year
2030.
Now, if you will please follow
along with me on page 15. I will
discuss our first finding
that increased investment in
healthy universal school meals
has led to modest gains in
participation.
So after the passage of the
Healthy universal School Meals
Act, the state increased its
investment in universal school
meals by 20% from a total of 206
million in school year 23 to 247
million in school year 24.
So what are we getting for this
investment?
As you can see in chart 7 on the
right.
since implementation,
participation has increased, and
participation rates are now
higher than the national
average.
Overall, we saw a participation
in lunches increased by 8.5%
points and breakfast by 8.3%
points.
turning over to page 16, as you
can see in chart 8s.
that the much largest increase
in participation was among
students who do not qualify for
free or reduced meals.
In fiscal year 25, we estimate
that the state spent 17.4
million on students who did not
qualify for free or reduced
meals.
We also see the participation
also increased amongst students
who do qualify for free meals,
which is the majority of our
students in the state.
Over on page 17
chart 9 shows that total
spending on food service
programs increased by 20.3% from
school year 23 to school year
24. While the number of students
participating only increased by
8.5% points, which indicates
that the increases in program
expenditures are in part driven
by increases in student
participation, but does not
fully account for overall
increases in total program
expenditures.
Table 5 there on the bottom of
the page highlights school
districts, which received the
highest allocation of state
funding.
which is driven by districts
with higher percentage of
students who do not qualify for
free or reduced meals, and
overall enrollment.
If you will please turn with me
over to page 18.
I want to highlight some of the
trends that we see in student
participation.
Chart 10 there on the left,
lists are 10 largest school
districts, which all experience
increases in student
participation, particularly
Albuquerque and Rio Rancho.
Chart 11, they're on the right,
highlights districts with the
highest percentage of students
who qualify for free or reduced
meals, which many already had
high rates of participation and
which still experience modest
increases in student
participation, indicating that
universal access for students is
increasing rates of meal
participation in communities
most in need.
So the state's investment is
leading to increased
participation, but we are also
seeing increased program
expenditures.
On the bottom of page 18
Overall program expenditures has
increased from 165 million in
school year 18 to 248 million in
school year 24.
Going to page 19 now, you can
see that in chart 12, that this
equates to approximately $4.61
per student per day.
The proportion spent on food has
increased from $1.03 in school
you're 18 to 71 cent per student
per day in 2024. An increase of
71%, which is outpaced, uh,
inflation.
during this time
On the bottom of page 19 in
chart 13, you can see that
although overall program
expenditures has increased. The
proportion spent on food has
remained about the same,
indicating that we have also
increased expenditures for staff
and operations as well.
So with rising program
expenditures, how are school
food authorities budgeting and
planning for meal services.
Turning over to page 2, chart 14
highlights that both federal and
state funding for food service
operations has increased since
the passage of the universal
school meals.
Going to page 21 now.
Table 6 shows that school food
authorities are budgeting more
in federally reimburse meal
programs, then they are
receiving or expending.
This seems to be a common
practice amongst school
districts to overproject
participation among federal
reimbursement categories for
budget authority.
Another thing we found here is
the use of SCG expenditures,
which typically would not be
budgeted for food service
operations. Although technically
allowed, the primary purpose for
SEG funds is to support
classroom instruction.
Turning over to page 22 now.
As you can see in chart 17,
at the bottom of the page, SEG
expenditures are small
percentage of overall food
service operation expenditures
but has been going on a while
and maybe increasing.
As you can see on in chart 16 on
the right.
uh charter schools tend to
disproportionately utilize SEG
funds per student.
Going to page 23 now. This might
be because many charter schools
lack kitchen infrastructure
prior to passage of the
universal school meals, uh,
legislation and have to contract
with food service management
companies to provide meal
services.
Chart 19 at the bottom of the
page highlights that many school
districts, particularly small
ones, have utilized SEG often to
supplement staffing or food at
events.
Thank you, and I will now turn
the presentation over to my
colleague, Mr. Chaffin to
discuss our next finding and key
recommendations.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, as Dr. Tolman
mentioned, the universal free
school meals program in New
Mexico goes beyond other states
in implementing strict meal
quality requirements. The state
started delivering free meals to
all kids immediately, and we
find that the program is still
working to overcome early
challenges in achieving and
measuring meal quality.
Let's start with scratch cooking
By PED's new rules, schools must
ensure that at least 50% of
weekly meal components,
excluding milk, are prepared
from scratch using whole
unprocessed ingredients. If you
look at chart 20 on page 29, an
informal survey that PED
conducted. This is not a perfect
sample, but it's one of the few
data points we have on meal
quality, suggests that most
school food authorities aren't
yet meeting that threshold
today.
Chart 21 on that same page shows
that the majority of schools are
increasing their efforts to cook
from scratch.
One of school's biggest barriers
to scratch cooking is outdated
kitchen infrastructure. The
legislature has allocated over
$24 million for equipment and
upgrades since 2023, and less
than a third of those funds have
been spent.
Most schools prepare meals
themselves on site. Some
districts, including
Albuquerque, use a central or a
shared kitchen between multiple
schools. About 87 of the state's
210 school food authorities,
especially charter schools, as
Dr. Tolman said, contract with
um food service management
companies. If you look at chart
22 on page 30, you see that just
a few companies dominate this
market.
Charter schools are twice as
likely as traditional districts
to use these companies to cook
their meals.
The concentration of vendors can
bring some efficiencies, but it
also may drive costs up,
especially among charter
schools, as it raises questions
about how well these vendors can
comply with the law's provisions
like scratch cooking and local
sourcing.
PED says they share these
concerns and the agency is
asking these companies to
reapply as vendors this year in
efforts to tighten the controls
there.
On the topic of local sourcing
of school food, the statute that
you, the legislature passed
directs PED to encourage greater
use of New Mexico-grown, raised
or processed food in school
meals. Local food may be fresher
than food sourced from further
away, and it could help students
understand where their food
comes from. And of course, it
supports local producers.
Neither the statute nor PED
rules require schools to source
local food, but schools can
receive grant money to do so,
buying directly from farmers and
ranchers who are on a list
approved by the state's New
Mexico grown Program.
NM Grown is small. It's funded
at about $1.7 million this year,
and it won't likely grow in
coming years without major
changes to the grant and program
structure.
PED points out that some unknown
amount of local food also comes
into the cafeteria outside of NM
Groom, but they don't have a
system for tracking that right
now. So looking at what we can
track. Last school year, school
spent about 2% of their total
food budgets on local products
through NM Grown. That's about
half the national average and
districts say they can't scale
up easily given a current
barriers.
These barriers include small
award sizes, the limited number
of local items that are eligible
to purchase and cost barriers,
as local food is often more
expensive for schools to buy.
UNM is embarking on an
evaluation of the NMGrown
program as we speak, PED and the
State Department of Agriculture
are supposed to report to the
legislature in November on their
plan to increase the amount of
local beef, cheese, and milk in
school meals.
Turning to the issue of food
waste, PED is requiring schools
to track food waste starting
this year. Right now, and again
this is from PED's informal
survey, but only about 25% of
schools reported tracking food
waste at all, and most of that
tracking is informal.
PED interprets this deficit as a
positive given that these food
waste reduction strategies were
not required until the current
school year.
One strategy for reducing waste
that's allowed under the rules
is to let students decline
certain components of a meal
that they don't intend to eat,
but this has to be monitored in
the cafeteria to make sure that
the meals still meet nutritional
requirements, and schools say
it's hard to do that well with
current staffing levels.
Speaking of staffing, all of the
above quality provisions require
qualified staff, of course, on
page 29, PED's survey found that
57% of schools are expanding
their training for scratch
cooking in response to the law,
but schools tell us that keeping
qualified kitchen staff is a
major challenge, especially in
rural districts.
Skills are another bottleneck to
getting to quality as the school
menu transitions toward more
scratch cooking.
To oversee all these changes,
PED is rightly focused on
whether schools have the menus
and the recipes, the invoices
and the feedback surveys to
verify compliance with the
quality standards. Some
districts conduct surveys of
students and families, but what
has been missing is a statewide
system for capturing student and
family feedback on taste,
freshness, satisfaction,
cultural relevance, as this
feedback could be an early
warning of participation trends
and a tool for improving menus.
Mr. Chair and members with some
of the strongest quality
provisions in the country, New
Mexico has a real opportunity to
contribute to the national
evidence base on universal free
school meals. By addressing
these gaps through a robust
state-level data collection and
ongoing evaluation, PED can
strengthen its own monitoring
and accountability systems while
informing best practices
nationwide.
We think that a focus on
outcomes is warranted in
addition to the outputs that the
department is statutorily
required to track outcuts,
outcomes such as effects on
hunger, attendance, health that
policymakers here and other
states are interested in.
If you'd now turn back to page 2
at the beginning of the report,
you'll see our key
recommendations listed.
First is for PED to provide
schools with guidance and
monitor the use of SEG funds
with special attention to
smaller districts and charter
schools?
PED should look at schools that
received less in federal funds
than they budgeted to determine
why this is happening.
They should launch a
standardized student
satisfaction survey to inform
meal quality improvement
efforts.
PED should work with DFA and LFC
to develop a statewide
performance monitoring system
that aligns with the
accountability in Government Act
to track expenditures and food
wastes, local food sourcing,
scratch cooking, participation
rates, uh, education and health
outcomes.
PED should expand its technical
assistance and training supports
for kitchen staff, particularly
in scratch cooking, food safety
and compliance, and PED should
require contracts between
schools and food service
companies to include
expectations for the new quality
standards discussed above.
In addition, the public school
Capital Outlay Council should
ensure that the disbursement of
kitchen infrastructure funds is
completed by the end of a fiscal
year to address some of the
equipment bottlenecks that
schools are facing.
And now Mr. Chair and members of
the committee, with your
permission, we'll turn over to
PED colleagues for a response
and then stand for any
questions.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Greg Frostad, Assistant
Secretary of Education at the
Public Education Department, and
it's a pleasure to speak with
you again this morning, uh,
especially on the topic of
health universal school meals,
which I believe is one of the
most significant accomplishments
of the legislature and the
executive from the last several
years. Uh the uh the agency has
been working on this initiative
since this administration, um
started and this initiative
really puts New Mexico as a
national leader in this area.
The program not only literally
feeds our children, but will
also increase educational
outcomes for students. There's
plenty of evidence and research
showing that students who are
well fed learn better than those
who are not.
The agency is pushing hard to
maximize federal funding. We
realize that it is an expensive
program and we want to make sure
that we get as much of the
federal funds as possible to
support the program. Uh, we, the
state funding has leveled off,
as you saw in the secretary's
budget requests on Wednesday,
uh, we are asking for flat
funding for fiscal year 27 in
the recurring section and uh as
the same as for FY 26, we
are also asking for $5 million
in non-recurring funding for
potential cost overruns.
Uh, and as Doctor Tolman
mentioned during his
presentation, changes to
eligibility in the SNAP program
through the big beautiful Bill
Act will likely reduce the
amount of federal
reimbursements, but the PED is
pushing schools to qualify
through the community
eligibility program in order to
stabilize the numbers for
qualified students over the
coming years.
We appreciate the work that
Doctor Tolman and Mr. Chafin and
LFC staff have done to study the
implementation of the Healthy
universal Meals Act, and we
accept most of the
recommendations. In fact, most
of those recommendations, most
of the recommendations in the
report are scheduled to be
addressed by the agency over the
coming year. Uh, it is this
coming year is the first year in
which the administrative rule
becomes effective. And with
that, I'd like to introduce
Laura Henry Hand from the
Student Success and Wellness
Bureau to direct
ly address some of the report's
recommendations. Thank you.
Good morning
I want to thank you for the
opportunity to be here today to
discuss the great work our staff
is doing to ensure schools have
the support to successfully
implement the Healthy universal
school meals program.
We are proud that New Mexico is
one of the states leading the
nation in addressing food
insecurity and childhood hunger
by being one of the first states
to implement universal free
meals for all.
Our department is committed to
ensuring every student has
access to nutritious, high
quality
high-quality meals during the
day so that they can focus, be
engaged in the classroom, and
ready to learn.
I want to thank the LFC for its
collaboration with our
department and taking the time
to learn about our very complex
program and for giving us the
opportunity to respond to their
evaluation report.
The letter enclosed includes our
response to the LFC
recommendations which are
addressing which we are
addressing this school year,
being that this is the first
year of full implementation.
I also want to thank the
legislature for prior
prioritizing ending childhood
hunger since 2019 and passing
into law healthy universal
school meals as one of the
strategies to do so.
Once it was signed into law, the
department was intentional in
building an in a transitional
period in the timeline for
schools to meet the requirements
and work very closely with LEAs
to develop a rule that would not
only address hunger, but would
also improve meal quality.
One thing we can all agree on is
that program evaluation is
important. However, the program
evaluation may be too early to
accurately assess the long-term
impacts of the program.
With the certification period
taking place in the spring of
2026. It will give the
department a true picture of
where the SFAs are and the
improvements, including scratch
uh including freshly prepared
meals, food waste reduction
strategies, the incorporation of
locally sourced foods, and how
they are using student voice in
their future menu planning.
Most SFAs are eager and well on
their way into meeting freshly
prepared requirements of the
rule. Many SFAs have reached out
to our department to ask staff
for feedback and review of their
menus to see if they are meeting
the requirements.
A great example of working with
Eli Elie's what LEA are doing is
student nutrition director
Debbie Trujillo at Bernalo
Public Schools, who has used
almost $2 million in school
kitchen infrastructure
improvement grants and funding
to purchase new equipment for
all schools that will ease and
assist in preparation of freshly
prepared meals.
Another program, important.
program component is for healthy
universal school meals is having
funding available for New Mexico
grown.
This year, there was no state
appropriation for New Mexico
grown. however, our department
recognizes the importance of its
of introducing and incorporating
locally grown and culturally
relevant foods into school meals
and therefore carved out $2
million from the Healthy
universal school meals to
continue supporting the program.
Another major success of the New
Mexico grown program this year.
is that the department has
awarded more schools than ever
before and has adjusted the
formula, increasing support for
schools that do not receive any
state reimbursements.
I would like to share a great
New Mexico grown story with you.
Carson Stark was a previous
student at Farmington Municipal
Schools, who was exposed to and
learned about the New Mexico
Grown program in school and has
become a farmer and is selling
produce to Bloomfield Schools.
The department continually
encourages schools to use their
state funding to purchase local
and some school districts like
Roswell use use only local beef
in their school meals and have
spent over $1 million in the
last year on on local beef.
This year, Bernnelio Public
Schools will also be using only
local dry beans in their meals
and farmington is committed to
using up to 10% of their total
food budget to purchase New
Mexico grown products.
These are just a few great
examples of the way schools are
going above and beyond for their
students.
The department is committed to
providing providing continued
training and support to all SFAs
to ensure students have equal
access to culturally relevant
and nutritious meals.
In the map in front of you, I
don't have it in here. It's, uh,
you will see
um, you can see the results from
the culinary trainings that were
provided to across the state by
our staff and coordination with
the Department of Health. Thank
you. And we will continue to
provide training to school
districts across the state.
We have also
for the first time this year,
our department is also hosting a
chef's symposium in October,
bringing together cafeteria,
staff, and New Mexico chefs for
hands-on training to create new
recipes together and learn
scratch cooking techniques that
can be immediately applied when
they return to their kitchens.
We also have on monthly online
Let's talk Tuesday meetings with
food service staff where we
cover a variety of school food
topics and provide technical
assistance.
Our healthy universal school
meals program manager has also
presented to Superintendents on
the PED monthly call in August
and shared the launch of our
program toolkit that includes
vast resources for schools to
share with students, teachers,
and community.
One of those resources includes
posters for school cafeterias.
promoting the program. All
posters and handouts, such as
the one that is on the back side
of the page in front of you has
an embedded QR code.
with a student and family
survey.
This survey will be distributed
widely across the state and the
department will be able to
provide school districts with
specific feedback based on the
results for their LEA.
For schools that have contracts
with food service management
companies that PED is working to
update all FSMC forms to ensure
vendors to meet the requirements
of the rule.
I also want to take the
opportunity to address the LFC's
recommendations on funding and
accountability. The department
will continue to provide funding
support and monitoring to school
food authorities to ensure they
align with the approved food
program operations, specifically
smaller schools and charter
schools who rely on other
sources of funding such as their
SCG to successfully implement
run their programs.
We are also tracking monthly
expenditures to ensure we are on
track with the yearly budget
projections, but I would like to
share an example of what our
budget would look like this year
if meal participation stayed the
same.
Because there was an increase in
USDA reimbursement rates. We are
looking at a 4% increase in
costs totaling close to $2
million even if our meal counts
stay the same.
Our department will continue to
do everything possible to
maximize federal dollars first,
but we ask you for your
continued support for our
program to ensure that all
students can start their school
day with a nutritious meal and
be ready to learn. Thank you.
Anything else, panel? If not,
we'll jump right into questions.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, thank you for the
work you do. Um, question, you
said you're going to
you have a flat line, but you're
also putting a set aside for
over costs.
Um, how did you come up with
that? Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So the
we don't
the number of students is going
down, uh, enrollment has been
going down, but the costs are
of, uh, meals go up about 4% per
year. Is that about right? And
so, um, we anticipate that the
cost will remain about the same.
We may see a little bit of
increased, uh, costs and
at the time that we're
requesting budget now, it's
difficult to know for sure what
that increase will be or how
this year will play out. So we
are asking for flat funding, um,
in the recurring area, but do
want to have the potential for
some additional funds in case we
run over so that we would not
have to come back for a
deficiency or a supplemental
request later.
And Mr. Chair, thank you for
that response, because
yesterday, um
listening to the A um
presentation up in the at the
Economicr Development Committee.
You know, the supply and demand,
especially for protein, um,
supply is very low because we
have our border closed on the
south end, uh, because of the
screw worm.
and so it's driving up costs,
but in that sense too with this
being kind of like a drought
season, I understand our ag
business, especially with the
cattle,
it
we don't have the um
the feed
which is also driving up the
cost, um, on that end to, to put
them into the feedlots and
stuff, so I, I, I really make
sure to, um, if we do have an
overrun to take some
consideration on the economic
conditions are, what is
happening, um, as those as we
import and export.
um
and I'm really wondering why we
haven't really taken this kind
of aspect too with
transportation.
How come we don't put a flat
line and then also have a
another pocket of money for over
cost that our schools can
instead of waiting till after
they're in trouble and
redlining, so please consider
that.
but as we see the labor costs
and in making this um increasing
equipment and everything. I just
want to caution too because we
do have our federal BIE schools
in the area and I hope we're not
gonna be poaching some of their
staff, um, which will cause a
short, you know, shortfall for
them to, um, especially with um
pay or any kind of disparity
that would cause them to to
change over from one school to
the other, especially in my
area. um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you for your presentation, very
thorough. I was able to cross
out about 7 questions that I
had.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, so my, my
questions are
based upon the number or the
increased participation, the
more meals we serve, is there a
correlation, the price may drive
down, is that?
is that the current situation is
if we were at 60% and we can get
70% participation, does it drive
down the overall cost.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
no, it will not significantly
change the, the price per meal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My next
question is about uh about
surveying and, and getting
feedback from families. What are
the timelines for that and, and
who will then have access to
that information so that we can
uh make sure we address that.
Mr. Chair, Representative, the
survey is ongoing and we hope to
collect feedback. Um, it's gonna
be shared out with our social
media campaign with resources
that are sent out to schools and
throughout the year we'll be
able to collect that information
periodically, um, so that we can
share it with the the individual
LEAs so that they can use it to
make improvements to their
schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
just I've got 3 kids in school
and I have not seen that survey,
so just know that, uh, Mr.
Chairman and the uh
committee.
staffing kitchen staff, is that,
has that been problematic? Is
that part of
the challenge that we have is to
meet the requirements for
scratch cooking and or staffing
our cafeterias.
Mr. Chair Representative, that
is one of the challenges, um.
after COVID there has been a
drop in staffing and school
kitchens and it is one of the
challenges.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We,
there have been efforts by
members of this committee to
actually increase salaries for
we, we did something for
educational assistants. We have
then attempted to address and
bring up salaries for other
support staff. Uh, my last
question, Mr. Chairman, and is
about the upgrading of the
kitchens. There was a number
that was given as far as our
money was set aside to upgrade
kitchens.
What, what is that real number
look like so that we can make
sure that we are able to and
will it affect the school's
rating as far as systems um
ranking for new schools or new
systems.
When the bill was being writ,
uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, when the bill was
being written, the governor's
office in PED did a survey and
found that about 31 million
would be needed for kitchen
infrastructure since FY 23, 24
million and in state and federal
funds have been allocated for
kitchen upgrades, um, and about
29% of that had been spent by, I
want to say April, um
and so that was like 10 out of
87 projects being completed
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
my questions.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, all of you for your diverse
roles. Doctor Tollman and Mr.
Chaplin, how many schools did
you visit to observe actual
lunch periods and breakfast
periods.
It's um, it was a mix. So we
went to a a 5 or 6 schools
individually of different sizes
and then we went to APS Central
Kitchen, and then it cruises, we
had a meeting with I probably
1012 schools, including
charters, and then, uh, and, and
public schools and then we
talked on the phone to many
other schools.
Um, I don't have the quantity of
schools in front of me right
now.
And Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, it should be important
to know whenever we do these
site visits, we do try and, uh,
capture a diverse kind of sample
across the state. So we try and
look at
the large metropolitan areas
like APS Reader Ranch, and we
also try and do small rural
districts like Des Moines, Wagon
Mound, Moscaro, and also look at
different types of
implementations, um, so
Albuquerque has a large central
kitchen that they can ship out
to multiple school sites. Uh, we
look at other schools like
charters and some other school
districts that use food service
management companies, others
with on on-site kitchens and so
really our strategy was to try
and capture a diverse range of
schools and food service
delivery systems.
Thank you, because Mr. Chara
somebody who did lunch duty for
3 years with 2nd and 3rd
graders. I'm putting it, and
there's many of us that have
done that, um, it's like how
does this measure up to the
realities of people, um, so my
first question is, in the
requirements for school lunches.
How does that apply to
elementary school, middle
school, and high school.
like because when I think of the
middle school where I served at
lunch duty, you know, kids ate
in a cafeteria. People could go
to a snack bar and buy food and
eat outside. Uh, how do those
factors play into this?
Mister Chair Representative, the
um, if I can ask a clarifying
question, was that in regards to
the rule requirements
Yeah, Mr. Chair, the rules
because I'm sitting here
thinking
um
kids who buy a hot dog and soda,
you know, are
are the requirements the same
for elementary school, middle
school,
and high school
Mr. Chair Representative, the
requirements are the same we
broke it down by component, and
so that means that 50% of the uh
me and meet alternate 50% of the
grain, 50% of the fruit and
vegetable have to be freshly
prepared or fresh every day per
per per lunch line so it doesn't
matter if you go to the snack
bar area or a grab and go, 50%
that way all students have equal
access to the requirements.
OK, thank you, because obviously
there's a lot of variety in
practice. Uh, Mr. Chair, um
my second question is I think
you kind of covered it as
are people having to fill out
all those forms. That's what you
asked, because I know at my
elementary school, it was a huge
task. We had 1150 kids
1100 families. So is there a
plan for that?
Mr. Chair Representative,
currently 99% of our schools do
not have to collect school lunch
applications so we only have a
few that do not meet the CEP uh
requirements and so only a
handful of schools still have to
complete those applications.
And, and, Mr. Chair and
Representative just to reiterate
too, we really are pushing all
schools to become, or, or to use
the community eligibility
provision or CEP so that not
only do they not have to
complete the forms, but also
their um
the eligibility of the families
is stays the same over multiple
years and so we, that will
reduce the, um, the
susceptibility of the state to
changes in federal, um, in
federal guidelines around SNAP
in the future.
Great. And Mr.
Chairman, obviously it saves a
heck of a lot of work for
schools.
Um, breakfast after the bill.
has that
played into anything? I mean,
the reality is we had to buy
carts and kids had to push them
over uneven thing where he put
the milk if you're in a portable
and they don't finish the milk,
you can't pour it down the sink
in the portable. I mean, there's
there's a lot of things that
we're not covering here but it
totally affects the reality. So
I just wanna mention that I will
say that a lot of teachers took
advantage of the program by
analyzing nutritional contents
of some really crappy food.
Anyway, and salsa that was
produced in Ohio, which as a
side note, do you talk to the
big food producers like Shamrock
and other people where they're
sourcing the stuff that our
schools buy, you know, just a
comment, um, and then my last
question
is simply um
when you look at charter
schools, I think APS has like 29
charters and then there's
charters in different districts.
Is there any difference? Our
charters and districts receiving
any more support for covering
food costs, or is that simply
they have to still operate
independently.
Mister Chair Representative,
charter schools, depending on
their CEP percentage, they will
receive, they could receive more
or less. It, it just, it just
depends on the identified
student percentage of what the
school is going to receive an
individually, but when we did
distribute the $20 million for
school kitchen infrastructure,
grant funding, we did, um, make
a specific application just for
charter schools because we
understand that they have a
higher need for uh kitchen
improve
ment s and so
over $5 million from the $20
million was set aside
specifically for charter
schools.
OK, and Mr. Chair and
Representative, again, I want to
emphasize one of the successes
of the Healthy universal Schools
meals program is to bring more
charters into the national
school lunch program as well.
And, and even a district that
was not formerly participating.
Good news.
Representative Representative
Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
all for your great presentation.
uh, very
I, I just love LFC
presentations, by the way,
because they're so factual and
you have so much information
here. So, uh, I mean, we could
spend a bunch of time talking
about what the bill did and
some of the
good parts and the bad parts.
But I guess my focus is just
gonna start with
current policymaking. I know the
governor just called her a
special session for the first,
and one of the items on there
was new investments in food
assistance for children. And I'm
just wondering if we're gonna
touch this program in any way
when it comes to this special
session. This might be one for
Mr. Frosted.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I have, this is
the first I've heard that that
will be discussed. So I'm, I, I
don't have any information.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chair. OK,
good to know or not know, right?
So then, Mr. Chair, I guess I'll
go into the presentation here
and just a few things that I was
wondering about on page 34 of
your LFC presentation.
talks about some regulatory red
tape that we have regarding
certain kinds of foods, such as
eggs.
statute likely prohibits the
sale of many locally produced
eggs in schools
and it also says fully cooked
meat is not a New Mexico grown
approved product. So I'm just
wondering if there are any other
recommendations that you all
have when it comes to
deregulatory frameworks
pertaining to food, Mister
Chairman.
Um
we didn't go Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, we didn't go
super deep into uh New Mexico
grown. This is a really
complicated area. UNM, like I
said, is um starting a, uh,
evaluation on this topic. I do
know that
um
this body passed a um
a Senate memorial last year
that's asking PED and I believe
UNM to um come up with a plan to
increase the amount of New
Mexico dairy and beef on the
school meal tray by 50%, and
that's due in November. Um, so,
yeah, these, these are great
questions and, and, um, there's
a, yeah, so there's a couple of
different efforts to kind of get
to the answers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much. And you know, I guess
with the, with the bill that we
passed, you know, I, I voted for
it and uh keeps me up at night,
honestly, because of
how uh what it's doing, how much
it's costing, right? The
hundreds of millions of dollars
because when I, I grew up here
in New Mexico and my family were
very poor, but we were just
above qualification. And so I
saw this as it's harder to claw
back
programs rather than expand them
to make them fair for people.
And so
you know, I'm glad people are
being treated equally now, but I
do think that the cost is
something that we really need to
be looking at, especially when
it comes to how much we're
paying for just the food itself
versus the labor. So I'm
wondering, is there any, any
recommendation? I know we said
it's gonna be a flat
recommendation, but is there any
recommendation to try to
streamline processes
to, I know we have requirements
50% or something to be fresh.
How do we streamline these
things, maybe district-wide,
potentially to lower costs so
that we can spend more money on
the kids themselves and not have
to worry about all the little
moving parts. So I don't know if
it's such a loaded question. I
apologize, but I don't know if
you have any insight on that,
madam, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chair,
um,
Representative
what we have done, we have
really tried to maximize federal
dollars as a department because
we understand that there is a
cost to the state. So the first
thing that we have done is
worked as soon as the USDA
dropped the CEP percentage
threshold from 40% to 25%, we
worked with schools to get them
certified for CEP because that
will reduce the cost to the
state and um again 99% of our
schools are now
CEP. The other things that we
have done is we've worked and so
the way that that the state
funding works, if I may, is um
the stage is making up the
difference between the free the
the paid meal rate and the free
meal rate. So the cost is just
making sure that all kids are
reimbursed at that free
reimbursement rate and so
there's no additional costs that
the department is providing for
meals or labor. It's just a, a
difference in the reimbursement
rates to uh make that meal
whole.
And those are Mr. Chair, those
are federal reimbursement rates.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. That's helpful.
And so when it comes to, I think
Representative Garrett touched
on the charter schools. I know
that like I went to a charter
school and it was based at a
community college.
and they had their own
food service, like a cafeteria
there. So I'm just wondering
when it comes to charter schools
themselves, if it's something
based like that kind of model,
how do we ensure that all these
qualifications
are met, or do they have to
bring in like a, like a food
truck that is.
that meets all your
requirements, so to speak. How
does that work? I, I guess I
would just wonder those very
non-traditional educational
settings, how do we tailor this
law to benefit them. Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Chair
Representative, like I mentioned
earlier, we have invested over
$5 million just for charter
schools, um, they are also
receiving the reimbursement
rates if they're eligible based
on their student percentages and
we're also providing
um we've also gone out as a
department to
train charter schools
individually on how they can
improve their program. Many of
them do work with the food
service management company and
so we're updating our
requirements for food service
management companies so that
they also have to meet the
requirements of the rule.
and we have also seen an
increase in um school
enrollments, uh, to participate
in the program and that like
Miss Assistant Secretary Frostad
mentioned it's a lot of the
charter schools are now wanting
to participate and so we have
seen an increase there as well.
Well, that's good to hear. So,
uh, thank you for that, and I, I
won't continue rattling on. I, I
will not preach because I
usually save that for the floor,
Mr. Mr. Chairman. So thank you
all so much. I really appreciate
it.
Representative, you always spend
your time asking questions
instead of uh preaching at it.
So thank you, I appreciate it.
Uh, Senator Brandt.
I'm pretty sure that comment was
directed at me, but I'll, I'll
forgive my friend. Oh, you
preached as well. Good. I'm glad
I'm not the only one.
So I, I actually only have one
question, um, it just caught my
attention, um, when, uh, was it
Laura Henry Hand, um, you were
talking about that one of the
programs wasn't funded
but you moved $2 million. Can
you go into that a little more
detail, please.
Sure.
Um, both Mr. Chair Represer
senator, before Health universal
school meals we would receive an
allocation for New Mexico grown
funding which supports schools
to purchase locally grown
produce and beef so that they
can incorporate those items into
their meals, um, we did not
receive an allocation carve out
last year for New Mexico grown
and so we did set aside $2
million for that from the
Healthy universal school meals
in order
to continue funding the program
because New Mexico grown is such
a key component of the Healthy
universal school meals. We're
asking schools to improve the
quality of meal and so we wanna
be able to provide the access
and resources of so that they
can do that and one of those um
great ways that they can do that
is using New Mexico grown
funding.
Um, do you know if there was a
bill, Mr. Chairman, and can I
call you Laura? Is that OK? Uh,
Laura, if there was a bill
brought to fund the New Mexico
grown last year.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I'm not sure
if there was a bill, but the New
Mexico grown um language is
included in Senate Bill 4, and
so, um, the requirements of the
role is that a schools that
receive New Mexico grown funding
will incorporate it into
improving their meal qualities
and so without that, um, we
decided to carve out $2 million
Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
traditionally New Mexico grown
has had a a separate line item
in the budget that hasn't been
funded.
ed through uh explicit bills or
legislation, but it, it has been
funded through line items in the
budget in the past.
Um, thank you. I appreciate
that, uh, director, um
so I'm just trying to figure out
that if we took $2 million out
of this program, and now we're
saying we're short.
Do you, do you see where I'm
going
Um
and, and I don't actually know
if, um, and maybe Ryan can help
me out with this, um, if you
know there's that authority is
there to move money from one
program to another when the
legislature, who is the
appropriators have put it
specifically in Budget one way.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator Brent,
uh
that I am the authority I am
actually unsure of, but we could
probably follow up with you, uh,
presumably it would have been
PED shifting those funds or
allocating those funds, which I
would assume that they would
have the budget authority, broad
budget authority to allocate
funds as needed, but
specifically I'm not aware.
And Foster, you, uh,
Mr. Chair and Senator, I would
just say that one of our
recommendations in our response
to the report is that there be a
aligned item specifically for
New Mexico grown in future years
as as it has been in the past.
OK, so I, I'm
I'm not aware of why that was
removed and the chair is not
here today, um.
honestly, you know, the way that
budgets put together, uh, we may
not know why it was removed. Um,
so
I, you know, I've always
supported the program but it
concerns me when we're saying
we're short.
but we moved $2 million out.
Does that make sense? And, and
if the schools are getting that
money, maybe that was the
thought process is that that
just was going through the food
program.
and yet we did it separately.
Now, when you're talking about
New Mexico grown, um, is that
going to a, a nonprofit directly
or how is that done?
New Mexico grow, uh, senator or
Mr. Chair and senator, the New
Mexico ground funding goes
directly to the schools. First,
they purchase, um, the producer
products that they would like to
incorporate into their menu and
then they submit uh uh
and a request for reimbursement
through OBMS. OK. And was the
full 2 million.
uh, Mr. Chairman and, uh, Lord
Tran.
spent on that
Mr. Chair, Senator, that was
recently the $2 million was
recently allocated and it's for
the use of this school year, so
it hasn't been completely spent.
Thank you. Appreciate it. That's
the only question I have, Mr.
Chair and Senator, I, I do want
to say that it is uh a really
successful program in supporting
agriculture around the state and
uh we uh
Laura did a great job of talking
about this, even a student who
became a producer in the
northwest part of the state and
uh also when we had a rule, we,
we had a rule about the New
Mexico Grown program, and we
typically don't get very many
people to come into our rule
hearings, but we had a lot of
interested people. It really is
something that it, um
that that has been a success
around the state. You know, my
concern is just that things are
funded properly through the
budget, um, and that we don't
start moving things around, um,
which we've seen.
happen with other programs like
CTE. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Grola.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that presentation. A lot
of information and many of my
questions have been answered, so
it should be short.
And forgive me, you already
answered this. You talk about
the school participation in
school meal has increased. Who
is actually good news.
as
do you have any indicator about
any other um improvement like
attendance academics through
after the program was
implemented.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, at
this time known, that's one of
our recommendations is to start
tracking those outcomes,
particularly, uh, being able to
do so at a student level, like
being able to track which
students are participating,
which are currently being
tracked through reimbursement of
meals. And so then you can begin
to tie that to student outcomes,
specifically things like
attendance, grades, um, test
scores, graduation rates, things
like that. And so, and even just
like then not the broader
community level, things like
food
insecurity, which can be
surveyed through like some of
the family surveys, and so
that's one of our
recommendations that come from
this report.
Thank you. Um, I, I have a mom
who approached me with some
questions and it has been in my
mind since now I'm aware of some
of the toxins in the plastics.
She was concerned about, um, she
saw the food of her kid being
warm and microwave or something
uh in a plastic container and
she wanted to know what were the
guidelines for that? So do you
have any information about that?
Mr. Chair Representative
I don't believe I've heard of
any guidelines about how food
um is being warmed in schools,
but typically when schools are
preparing meals, if they are
warming them, they have big
warmers and it's not in plastic
chase, so I don't know if what
this meal looked like or where
it was prepared.
Thank you. Maybe it was
individual uh individual case
and some we need to just look
into that, uh, and she was also
asking about how parent could
contribute to that either paying
for meals when they are able to
or helping uh what is a parent
involvement in in this in this
program.
Mr. Chair Representative, one of
the requirements of the program
is for schools to take feedback
from students and parents and so
we are gonna be looking at that
when we do the certification
process, um, in the spring of
this year, but we're also
assisting with a survey that um
is just being released and so we
hope to be able to share those
results from parents and
students with the school so that
they can improve and see their
individual feedbacks and from
from their families and
community
on how they can improve their
program, um, but we also welcome
them to have those conversations
with their their administrators
and school food service
directors, um, because they love
to get feedback from from their
family and see.
Thank you and that was one
question, but it was asked
several times about the
feedback.
survey feedback from the
students too about the food that
they are eating. um, I, one of
the things that I remember the
most being in the classroom and
in, in lunch duty was a waste of
the food, um.
and my students also mentioned
it a lot, uh, whatever is not
being used is being thrown away
and for some families who don't
have that's a big scandal for
them. It's like, wow, they're
throwing away so much food so.
I hoping that survey that is
taken into accountability how
much food is also wasted.
Mr. Chai Representative, that
is, we address all of the
requirements of the role in, in
the survey questions, um, but
because it is a requirement, um
I would like to give an example
of Hobbs Municipal schools, they
actually, uh, whatever food is
left over at the end of the day,
they package it and they either
freeze it and make it available
for students to take home and
they donate it to families.
We're also asking schools that
any food that is um left at the
end of the day they work with
their local organizations and
agencies to donate food. um,
another example is Las Cruces
Public schools at the end of the
school year when there's a lot
of milk leftover, things
like that, they donate it to the
to the local um community.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Sher,
those are my questions.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, first
of all, excellent report from
all of you. I appreciate the,
the feedback and input, um, most
of my questions have already
been asked and answered from uh
Representative Baca and just the
most recent one from, uh,
Representative Garra. So I, so
the question I had, one of the
remaining questions that I had
is with regards to the um
I think someone had mentioned, I
think it's on page 29 with
regards to the budget for the
infrastructure purchasing of uh
update the facilities that, that
uh only like 6% of the 20
million in Capital Oley had been
spent by the first year and only
14.6% by the second year, um, so
what, what's the problem with
why is it taking so long to get
these facilities upgraded? Is it
a procurement issue? Is it, uh,
what, what's, what's the, why is
it taking so long to get these
facilities upgraded?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton,
I think a lot of it is
just trying to get, having to
figure out what the needs of the
school are specifically and then
it just takes time to get the
money out the door to be able to
build the infrastructure,
identify the infrastructure. A
lot of this is gonna be like
kitchen equipment identifying
old outdated equipments and
bringing in new equipment is my
understanding of it, but
specifically, uh, it's gonna
vary district by district,
school by school, and so
and if I may as well, Mr. Chair
and Senator, it's
depending on how the school was
built, if it was not built for
scratch cooking, if the kitchen
was not initially built for
scratch cooking, it can be
difficult to retrograde. It's
not, it may not be as easy as
just removing old equipment and
bringing in new equipment, uh,
additional space or other, uh,
or other major renovations may
need to take place.
Thank you for that. I
I'm someone, I understand all of
that. I'm just concerned that if
there's a, if there's an issue
with our procurement processes
in general that maybe we need to
look at that side of the coin,
uh, but if it's an underst if
it's an understanding of what's
needed in the school at first
and the schools themselves need
to figure that out, then I can
understand the delay because
they're trying to figure out
what's what's
most required in order for us to
meet the needs of the kids, um
so the, the, my other issues
were with regards to the uh
scuda uh food disposal and I was
just curious, how did they go
about tracking plate waste and,
and food disposal. How do you,
how do you track that?
Mr. Chair, Senator
we asked the schools, um, in
order to read one of there are
different methods and strategies
we ask schools to operate in
order to reduce food waste, and
the first being giving the
students the choice um and
operating, implementing the
offer versus serve uh program
which is gives the students up
uh
option to choose three of the
five components. One of them has
to be a fruit or a vegetable,
and, um, that's the first place
where we can reduce food waste.
The second is, um, anything that
the student doesn't want to eat
that they have to take, for
example, a fruit that they had
to take and
didn't want to eat it. They can
put it on the share table so
that is a requirement we ask all
schools to have a share table
available where school where
students can put, um, meals that
meet the requirements to be
placed back and then we ask them
also to do food donations, but,
um, what I, what I've lost my
train of thought.
for food waste, we're also
working with them to do food
waste audits, um, we have a food
waste specialist in our
department who has worked with
schools, um, to do food waste
audits and work with them
individually, um, and improving
food waste reduction strategies.
Thank you for that, uh, Ms.
Hand, uh, Henry Han, um
so I was curious and I, and I
think you mentioned this earlier
that that one of you do
repurpose some of the food. In
other words, food that is not
used gets repurposed later and
either sent to other community
activities or other community
organizations and, and so that's
good.
Um
I, I know that leftovers, so
it's a big part of my meals when
I was growing up. And then so we
always appreciate having
leftovers, uh, but I wasn't sure
what the requirements were with
regards to that for school,
school meals that they can
repurpose them for future use
and things of that sort. Um
I, I understand that that's
gonna be a new rule that's being
implemented this year in terms
of tracking that waste and so
we'll have a better
understanding of how much food
is actually and, and, and
actually it says here you're
actually going to be doing a
student survey to figure out
which meals
what they actually are looking
for so that makes sure there's
less waste and that you're
preparing foods that they'll
actually eat as opposed to
something. I know if I was given
vegetables, I'm not gonna eat
them. And so I, I was just uh my
mother had to actually make
separate meals for me and the
rest of the children in our
family because I wouldn't eat
what she made. And so
I'm, I'm still here, so, uh, but
at the time, she should have
said starve, and I would have
been forced to eat it, but she
didn't. She actually made me a
separate meal because I was the
only son, so I was spoiled.
Thank you, thank you, Vidua.
That's all I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, our presenters. What an
excellent presentation. I love
all the data that you provided
and the maps.
um, all the visuals and all the
explanation, um, I've been
looking and I just have a couple
of questions. One follows along,
um, Senator Thornton's last
comment
about picky eaters.
or needing a special meal.
Um, I was at, uh, high school on
Friday during the lunch hour and
it was really interesting, um,
to watch that most of the kids
did not go for the cafeteria
food. Uh, I did not go and
inspect the cafeteria food or,
or the kitchen, um, but the
community member that I was with
said that that was very typical.
And um
as we were talking, this young
girl, uh, young woman walked by
with this gorgeous salad in a
bowl, and I thought, could that
be from the cafeteria, the
community members said that's
not from the cafeteria, is it?
And no, she had gone to a local
restaurant nearby, right across
the street, and brought back a
salad. Um, the young woman that
we had first started talking
with refused to go in the
cafeteria, get any food. She
appeared to
be low blood sugar, um, but she
was not going to eat that food,
so, um, I am really glad to hear
that you're gonna be reaching
out, that you have the scan
code, and you're gonna be
reaching out to students for
their input and to families for
their input in a survey. I'm
wondering if there's something
that could be done a little bit
sooner to get some input, um
I know you can't be doing this,
you know, every month across the
state, but I'm just wondering if
there's a way that um parents,
families, or students cause I'm
sure the parents don't know that
the girl didn't eat her lunch.
Um, I'm sure the parents don't
know that the other girl went
off to a nearby restaurant, um,
to, to get some lunch. Um, but
I'm just wondering, and, and I
don't have the answer, so like
I'm not trying to lecture, give
you an answer, Mr. Chair. Um,
but I would love to know if
you, if you could think about
how to get sooner input from the
families and from, from the
students. So that's one question
I have and I don't expect that
you have the answer for me
today. Um, but I, I would love
to hear back and check in and
see how you have, um, obtained
family input. Another question
that I have.
um, has to do with um
school gardens. They were
becoming very popular for a
while in Albuquerque, at least.
I know there was one of A Buren
and later at another high uh
that teacher moved to another
middle school and, and, um, the
kids really enjoyed eating that
food. Is there any reason, uh,
according to the code and state
regulations that some of that
couldn't be included in student
lunches.
I know there are strict
regulations on food. I'm just
wondering, is that something
that would be possible. I know
that at one of those particular
schools, they were getting foods
from a local garden and it was
very fresh and it was enticing
for the students and they loved
eating lunch it was fresh food
from someone that they know that
had grown up.
Um
so are there any regulations
against eating?
garden-grown foods, and this was
part of their ethnic studies
program at the school.
Mr. Chair Representative, that
is one of the best ways to get
students to eat fruits and
vegetables is um through
education and having them
growing their own, learning
about growing their own food,
um, and so we do have a lot of
schools around the state that
still have uh programs.
and, you know, like you
mentioned, it is sometimes
difficult when a teacher that is
in charge of overseeing the
garden, moves to a different
school. They do have to find a
replacement for that, um, but we
do.
we don't have a requirement
right now and, and the rule, um,
I, I believe in the first draft
there was a a requirement but it
would have been too hard. We
heard from the legislature and
um school food authorities that
would have been too hard to
require all of them to have
school gardens and incorporate
that into their school meals and
so it was removed, but it's
certainly something that we
continue to work with as a
department. We have a farm to
school in New Mexico grown
specialists, so we continue to
work with schools, um, in that
area.
Well, Mr. Chair, and I have one
last question. Um,
in terms of the regulations and
the food, it was really
interesting, uh, to hear, and
I'm glad uh Representative Block
that you brought up, what you
had found in the document that
we received so much information.
Um
my question has to do with a
particular pesticide that has or
spray that has been used by some
companies to keep the vegetables
fresh and I can't remember, but
I think the name is Appeal or
something, uh, I don't remember
the name of the, of the, of the
spray.
But in terms of like organic
produce versus
produce that has lots of
pesticides. How are we keeping
those foods healthy and more
organic for our students. Do we
have any regulations around
that?
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair, Representative, I,
I'm not familiar with any
regulations, um, but our New
Mexico grown program works
closely with the farmers in New
Mexico to ensure that they are
um providing safe and healthy
foods for schools. They go out
and, uh, work with each
individual farmer to ensure that
they have a certification to
meet the requirements to be able
to serve and provide meals to
schools, so at least locally I
know that our state is doing a
good job working um with the
Association New Mex
ic o Farmers Association to
ensure that those farmers do
have some metrics in place to
ensure that the foods are safe
and um
uh ready for students to eat,
but nationally I'm not aware of
any.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
just one last thing is I don't
want y'all to think I'm
complaining. I'm really happy to
see this happening for our
children and a lot of my friends
have worked really hard to see
this happen for our kids across
the state and they're really
glad that kids in all schools
are, uh, can get free lunch, uh,
just wanna think about how we
can continue to really monitor
and, and improve the quality so
that we do see those raised test
scores because I think that will
happen.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, and I have just a
couple of, of quick questions.
Um
on page 18 of the the report, it
indicates that the cost of daily
food has gone up from $1.03 to
$1.71 from 2018 to 20224. Why
did you choose 2018 as the start
cost, um, and
you know, that seems pretty
inexpensive overall for a cost
of a meal, but why the concern,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, what we were, uh,
you're right, um, what we were
tracking is trends in overall
program costs and trying to look
at where the overall costs were
going and so we're trying to
kind of at least isolate the
food costs to see if that was
going up in relation to the
overall program costs. So you're
right, it's not a lot of money
per meal, but it
does seem to have increased more
than general inflation during
that period of time. Uh, we
chose school year 18 simply
because that was.
uh, a year, a good year, uh,
give us a couple of years prior
to the pandemic to be able to
look at trends.
Thank you. Uh, lots of things
we're hearing nationally is the
cost of food is expected to go
up by read a report this
morning, 40% by the end of the
year. Um, is that being factored
into the estimates and
expectations of that there may
be an overrun this year as a
result.
Mr. Chair, the USDA
provides the USDA Federal
reimbursement rates. And so
those are usually um released on
July 1st of every year, so we
don't anticipate seeing an
increase in the reimbursement
rates mid-year, uh, for example,
but you never know.
And, and I think that's my
concern is the reimbursement
rate is set now.
but it looks like this is gonna
be one of the major areas of
inflation, and I think it was
Senator Pinto indicated right
now the cattle crossing down at
the border is closed due to the
screw worm where there were 1500
head of cattle a day coming in
that aren't the cost of beef in
particular is going up, and if
the rates set now, yet the
actual cost goes up, are we
going to be expecting an
overcost into the budget and I
guess both the pet food service
and finance committee, are we
prepared for
that?
And, and Mr. Chair, so this
would not necessarily change
the, the cost of the program,
but it does change the cost to
the schools, right? That's,
that's the key difference
because we reimbursement, we
reimburse on the federal rates,
but schools have to purchase the
food at whatever at whatever
cost that they incur. So, um, so
that would not necessarily
change our expenses, but it
would be an expense to the
schools directly.
Thank you and so I guess Stan,
uh,
Dean, you, are you all prepared
just or be prepared as to some
of the things that are coming
out about that. uh
kind of the last question is,
this is a fairly new program. It
was only 2 years ago, which
means only a little over a year
ago was it started
implementation.
If you all come back a year from
now, what are we going to see
that's different as far as both
meeting goals, concerns,
expectations, what, what's gonna
be different over this next
year? Where are we?
Mr. Chair, we are working on a
lot of really great things and
exciting things in our
department so we hope that when
we come back next year, we have
a lot of more information to
share with you all and results
of the program. We also are
gonna be providing more training
across the state, um, hands-on
scratch cooking training, and
again we have our chef
symposium, our state is also
hosting the National Farm to
School Conference. We're leading
in that as well and so we're
excited to bring back uh more
data and information, um, we
also hope to have the results of
the certification, which will
show exactly how many schools
are meeting their requirements
of the rule, how many schools
are, you know, doing the fresh
slip prepared, uh, food waste
reduction strategies and how
many schools are using New
Mexico grown. We're also gonna
be tracking the schools that are
going above and beyond and using
the allocation of New Mexico
grown to see how much of their
food um operations budget
they're using for locally
sourced meals
and so we have a lot of exciting
things coming and we will be
more than happy to share that
with you in the next coming
year.
Well, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I mean, we agree. I
mean, a lot of our
recommendations are based on
like the certification of the
school food Authority's meal
plans, and so being able to then
see which school food
authorities, districts, charters
are really adhering to the
quality provisions and then we
be able to start tracking
outcomes from that.
Thank you. I, I think it, the
whole program is a wonderful
program. Uh, I know feeding a
child breakfast doesn't, you
can't directly correlate to why
their math score went up, but
they certainly are all part of
the whole program that you have
to have kids that, that aren't
feeling an empty belly if you
expect them to be learning any
of the things we're teaching
and, and this just takes off all
of the stigmas as to whether
you're a full pay student or a
part pay student and, and all of
that that we're just going to
feed kids cause it's the right
thing. So
thank you all for what you do
We're now gonna transition to
our regular monthly update from
our wonderful financial uh guru
within the thing is uh.
so every month Daniel keeps
close track to what's happening
in Washington with the federal
funding, with, you know, how
that's going to affect the
budgets in New Mexico and the
budgets that the LESC is
presenting, always does a great
job
So Daniel, whenever you're
ready.
Mister Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Daniel and
I cover public school finance
for the LESC.
We're on tab 13 of your binder,
but you don't have a document
printed out for you, uh, in the
past, we found that things often
change considerably between the
time when we print the documents
and when we actually present it.
So today's just a verbal
overview from me on just one, I
think.
pretty big, broad, uh, budget
issue or consideration going on
in DC right now. So you heard
from Secretary Padilla, uh, was
it?
Wednesday that the Federal
funding has been released for
Title II, Title II, Title IV. So
that's great. Congress is now
going through its annual
appropriations process. So we
now have
two separate proposals in
Congress, one in the Senate and
one in the House for K-12
funding for the next fiscal
year.
The Senate version is overall
pretty flat in its
considerations for K-12 funding
for next fiscal year. They do
have a small increase in Title I
funding recommended. They do
have a small increase in idea,
but overall, the Senate version
of the K-12 bill rejects most of
the proposals from President
Trump around consolidating some
of those SF funding streams, uh,
eliminating Title II,
eliminating Title II.
So overall, the Senate version
seems to be pretty status quo.
Uh, that was passed out in July
from the Senate Finance
Committee. It's now pending on
the Senate floor. In the House,
the House has released their
version of the K-12 budget this
week.
uh, the House version sticks
pretty closely to President
Trump's proposals around K-12
funding, the House version would
eliminate funding for Title II.
So Title II is that professional
learning funding from
the federal government. It would
eliminate funding for Title III
entirely. Title II is that
English learner funding and one
thing that we thought was pretty
interesting is that the House
version would actually cut Title
I by about 20% uh in next fiscal
year. It would cut Title I by
20% next fiscal year, but also
rescind about 5% of Title I
funding for the current fiscal
year. So that was pretty
interesting in that President
Trump hadn't
requested a decrease in Title I
funding. They were actually
pretty adamant that they wanted
to preserve flat funding for
Title I, so that's, I think, one
of the bigger, I think,
surprises from the house
version.
I think it's important to note
that we don't expect either
version of the bills to pass
Congress. If you know about the
congressional Appropriations
process, you know that Congress
usually doesn't pass an actual
budget. They usually just pass
continuing resolutions from
every so months, so expect
toward the end of this month,
Congress to pass a continuing
resolution to extend funding
potentially into the end of the
calendar year or to enter a
shutdown, I'm not really sure
where they're going right now.
Um, but overall I think
I am only bringing that up to
you all because
that uncertainty that we're
seeing from DC where both
chambers of Congress can't agree
on a firm direction of where to
go for K-12 funding is, I think
inspiring a lot of uncertainty
in our local communities.
around whether or not they
should continue to rely on those
federal funds. So we're hearing
from some districts, a growing
reluctance to really rely
especially on Title II funding
for English learners. We're
seeing some movement away from
districts using that funding
intentionally for the long term
already and you even heard
during the superintendent panel
at this meeting, one of the
superintendents mentioning, uh,
questioning whether they
district is perhaps to rely on
federal funding and potentially
moving away from using that
federal funding.
in certain ways in the future.
And so that's just one concern
that I think we're seeing in our
communities that growing
reluctance or that growing
hesitancy to see federal funding
as a stable recurring source of
uh programming in the future.
So that's the update for federal
funding. One last point that I
needed to mention was on
Representative block's point
about the special session. You
all know there's a special
session that was called
yesterday for October 1st, uh,
K-12
funding policy wasn't included
in the call in any specific way
to represent a block's point,
there was a food assistance item
listed. We're not exactly sure
on the specificity of the topic,
but just wanted to mention to
you all that we'll be working
closely with LFC staff and the
executive staff, uh, in helping
in whatever way we can around
that food assistance for
children
space that may come up in the
special session.
And that's it for me. Thank you,
Mister Chair, Manager, woman.
Uh, thank you, Daniel. Questions
or comments?
None.
Zippo
how did that ever happen?
OK, well, we're just gonna have
to wait a few minutes for the
chair to come back cause he
didn't give me any instructions
after managed the questions.
OK, thank you, Representative
Garrett.
I just want to thank you for
keeping us updated. It's like
hour by hour. I mean, we'll
leave here
and we'll check the news and
there'll be a new executive
order about funding for
education, so I just wanna thank
you for keeping your finger,
your pulse on the pulse of the
ever changing stuff that
sometimes happens and then it
unhappens so thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, I just want to
mention something kind of funny,
uh, at my last update to you
all, I had an actual document
printed and I was going through
it around the freeze of those
federal funds, and I got up from
that chair and in that moment
they unfroze those funds. And so
that's one of the reasons why we
didn't print a document for you
all. We're literally operating
almost on a daily update cycle.
So thank you for your patience
and understanding on that.
OK. Any other comments or
questions?
Uh, seeing none, we will move on
to the director's report. Thank
you so much, Daniel.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members, are you gonna staff is
handing out uh a document that
was given to us, and I'm gonna
start there actually before I
get to the other uh items on the
agenda, uh, for those of you who
are able to, um, make it to
yesterday's site visit next
door. You may have heard that
Gallop McKinley County schools
also hosts more extended
versions of their experiential
site visits, and they provided
us this morning with this sheet,
uh, to
tell you a little bit about
those experiential site visits
on
the, the, the site of the sheet
that has the picture of the, the
two young ladies you'll see
above that, uh, Gallop McKinley
County Schools has provided free
registration for you all if
you'd like to, to be part of one
of those experiential site
visits in October, um, they did
ask us to mention that there
are, you have to get here and I
think you have to pay for your
own room, but otherwise you can
register for free and
participate in that experiential
site visit if you wanted to see
an extended version, uh, of the
programs that you saw
yesterday. So they provided us
with that this morning, so
that's there for you.
The next item on your agenda,
this is all behind tab 14 in
your binders. Thank you, uh, to
those of you who stuck around
for director support. Today I
know it's a long drive for folks
to get back home from Gallup,
but I'm, so I'll try to do my
best to make it worth your time,
um, the first thing that you'll
see there is our uh newsletter,
a regular newsletter.
uh, our chair's letter this
month was, is a, is a welcome
back to school. Obviously we
haven't met since July and so
we've, we haven't met since the
beginning of school, and so our
chair's letter there is
welcoming folks back to the
school year.
I did wanna, our first story,
uh, on, on this uh front page of
the uh newsletter about healthy
universal school meals. I did
want to point out something that
was sort of brought up, um, and
we, we wanted to provide a
little bit of additional
context. So at the at the bottom
of the first column, top of the
2nd column in that, in that
piece about universal school
meals. You heard that we do
spend quite a bit of money,
obviously providing
school meals to, to families
that do not.
qualify for free or reduced
funding. And uh I think there
was a reference to this earlier
about for those families who
don't qualify but are very close
to qualifying in the past, they
would still have to pay for
those meals. And so what we
included here is that we, we
thought it was important to note
that above average, uh, that
above average income is anything
about about $72,000 per year for
a family of 4.
And so that would be roughly
generating about $4700 a month
in annual income. I'm sorry,
monthly income.
The US Census Bureau is
indicating that the average New
Mexico household spent more than
$1200 per month.
on, on groceries.
And so when you take that as a
percentage, you're, you're
seeing families, a family of
four making about that amount of
money, which would not qualify
for free or reduced lunch, uh,
about 25% of their monthly
income on groceries, and so we
just wanted to provide that
additional context here that
that says yes, these folks do
not qualify, technically for
free or reduced lunches.
but that doesn't necessarily
mean that they that they don't
have a need for them.
Uh, on the back
I wanted to reemphasize a little
bit some of the work that Tim,
um, presented to you yesterday,
um, as you heard, we've been
funding, uh, what we're now
calling career connected
learning. There's a lot of
conflation between career
technical education and
work-based learning and
internships, all these sort of
connected pieces, um, but that
are not all captured when we
think about career and technical
education, so we've, we've
called this career connected
learning, um,
we're really proud of the work
that Tim did here and hopefully
will provide you with some
additional information as we
continue to study this topic
over the next interim to get to
a potential proposal for that
categorical sort of formulaic
funding that would take into
account the variables associated
with the different kinds of
career connected learning
specifically those cost
intensive, uh, career in
technical education programs, um
again, going back to some of
these materials just cost more
in order to hire qualified
staff. It costs more for some of
these programs and so as you all
consider the right way to fund
these, uh, programs that you've
all made a priority
It's gonna be important to take
those variables into account and
to have a system that
appropriately funds those those
programs at the right cost. So
that talks a little bit more
about that.
and then I'm gonna go right from
the bottom, you'll see uh a
a map
that that shows where all of
those regional Martinezai
convenings took place. I will
add, let's see, I think these
are all of them. Yes, um,
and I'm gonna roll right into
the update. So as you know, all
of these convenings have now
taken place, um
there have been
thousands of pieces of input and
feedback.
Um, and as you heard the other
night, um, PED is working with
West Ead and we're actually uh
gearing up to, to support with
with this process of
how do you take thousands of
pieces of community feedback and
input.
and incorporate them into
actions that either the
legislature, the PED, and
potentially even local districts
and schools will would be
responsible for if included in
that plan. And so I PED in
Westhead is now are now
transitioning from gathering
feedback to compiling
synthesizing, and being able to
um
turn those those pieces of
feedback.
into actual components of the
plan.
You heard that timeline from the
uh secretary the other night.
So that'll be coming soon
So that's our newsletter
slashmartinez Yazi motion
update.
It's, if it's OK, Mr. Chair,
before I get a personal update
personnel update, um, any
questions about those first two?
Very quick
On the bite sizes
um
for on July 21st, uh, proved a
new policy that lets school
districts update past project
awards to match larger building
sizes? Do they have to reapply
for that money?
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, I actually meant to
circle that in red so that I
would talk about it because this
is an important change that you
might hear about from your
school districts or um
last December, last January, I'm
gonna not get the exact date.
The public school capital Alay
Council, uh, approved new
adequacy standards. And so what
that did is it actually
increased the maximum allowable
square footage where school
districts can build larger
facilities based on those new
adequacy standards. What we saw
immediately following that, that
change was that some projects
that had already been approved,
school districts that already
had uh some projects approved
started to come
back to the council to say,
well, we'd actually like to have
the additional square footage
that is now allowed, even though
we were approved under previous
adequacy standards, and so, um,
the, the council did meet this
summer and approved this policy
that essentially says that as
long.
as you, if you come back and ask
for that additional square
footage by October 1st of this
year.
um, and you meet all other
requirements. You stay within
the maximum allowable square
footage. You don't go below
minimums in classroom size,
those kinds of things that the
council would approve those
projects. So school districts do
have um.
a timeline by which they have to
apply, um, we didn't wanna open
that up to projects. I mean, any
project can come back
but we want to be very conscious
of if someone got a project
approved 57 years ago, and for
whatever reason just has not
moved on those projects.
coming back at this point and
saying we want more square
footage, uh, so we wanted to put
a cap on that and ensure that
we're applying those standards
moving forward, but that we
weren't just opening sort of a
floodgate for everybody to come
back at some point, um, and, and
ask for, for additional square
footage.
Thanks and just one more quick
follow up on the middle one, the
college and high school alliance
grant.
So will that be carried out by
PED.
Um, actually, this is very
significant with the dual
enrollment costs and importance.
Do we know anything? Are they
gonna convene a panel, any other
facts about that.
That's a great question, Mr.
Chair. Representative Garrett. I
wish I knew more. It is being
administered by PED. We can
follow up with additional
details.
Other questions
OK, well, the last item here is
our personnel update, and you
all know about this one already,
but I'll mention it anyway. Oh,
that's scary. Uh.
um.
as you mentioned last night, uh,
our policy analyst Tim Bado is
leaving us today's his actual
last day at work.
He will be technically employed
by the LESC and the legislature
until next Friday, but
apparently he doesn't want to
come to work next week. I don't,
I
so he's gonna, he's gonna take
some time off before
transitioning to his new role.
Um, I do want to say publicly, I
know we've done this in a few
different settings, but I want
to see say for the record how
grateful we are to Tim Bado and
his service to the legislature
in the state of New Mexico.
Those of you who've been with us
for a while know that
uh Tim also worked at the Public
education department. He's
dedicated the last 8-9 years of
his life and career to serving
New Mexico and so we just want
to thank him publicly for that
work, um, and wish him the best
of luck in his new endeavor. So
thank you, Tim.
Um, and as much as I hate to say
it with him in the room, we have
to move on, and so we have
posted his job as an update to
you all and have gotten, uh,
actually upwards of 30
applicants for for this job, um.
we've been looking through them.
We have some pretty qualified
candidates. As you all know,
LESC is unique
uh, not just in New Mexico, but
in the country and so this
combination of uh education
expertise, policy expertise,
budget expertise, all sort of
culminates in, in, in what you
all ask us to do for you every
day. And so while we have some
really qualified candidates,
one, it'll be very hard to, uh,
well, it will be impossible to
replace Tim.
but, um, we're also looking for
that right fit, uh, for all of
the sort of combination of
skills and knowledge that we
need to do the job for you and
so we'll update you. Uh, we hope
to have interviews conducted in
the next couple of weeks, and if
we're lucky, maybe we'll have
someone to introduce to you, or
at least the that we are moving
on something by next month.
And with that, Mister Cherrell,
stand for any other questions.
Thank you. Questions of the
director.
See no questions. Thank you. Um,
I think this will conclude our
meeting then, uh, the next
meeting we'll probably see you
all in early October if you
hadn't heard, uh, up in Santa
Fe, uh, so.
I don't know that this
committee's going to have any
direct role in lots of that, and
so maybe we'll just have kind of
an informal little social
gathering of the LESC while
other people are discussing deep
budget issues and changes and I
don't know. Uh, our next meeting
of the LESC is going to be down
in Las Cruces around mid October
or so. Uh, we've got lots of
things planned down there. Uh,
I'm hoping that one of the days
will be out at my former high
school at Oregon Mountain High
School. They have
they have invited us to have one
of the meetings there. We'll
have some, it's October 15th to
17th, uh, we'll have it looks
like probably a day over at NMSU
talking about the teacher
preparation programs, one of the
evenings there'll be a reception
out at my hangar, uh, so you can
see some of the CTE things that
I'm doing out there, uh,
hopefully I'll, if the weather
permits, we'll have some flights
in small airplanes available for
people, depending on when we get
done with things. It's gonna be
more like a barbecue and more
much more informal, uh, but hope
to see you all down in Las
Cruces in October, the weather
usually in October Las Cruces is
glorious, you know, it's cooled
off a little bit. The evenings
are lovely and so hope to see
you all then. Lots of us have
traveled back home now, so safe
travels, everyone. Any other
questions, comments?
for people? Yes, Senator
Stewart.
Mr. Chairman, we didn't really
uh get together as a committee
and talk about uh what happened
yesterday at our tour, and I, I
just wanna make the comment that
I was just amazed and so
heartened by what we saw
yesterday with those
ambassadors, the students that
were so articulate and so
excited by these pathways, so,
um, I mean, I haven't seen
anything like that in a while,
so
I, I'm so glad that Gallup is
inviting people, other districts
and other folks to come and see
what they've done because
between the teachers and the
students, it was just stunning,
so, uh, we've done a good job
with CTE and it really showed
yesterday and this district has
really stepped up. So just want
us to say that before we leave
Gallup and encourage other
people to go to this uh
experiential site this at this,
this will be very great. So
thank you.
Yes, and thank you, the Gallup
District, who took such great
care of us, what incredible
breakfast they had set up,
wonderful lunches, great
hospitality, in all ways for us
and so very much appreciate
that. Uh, as I mentioned to some
of the staff this morning, it's
like, come back next year. And
so I don't know that we're gonna
get back next year with this
committee, but certainly this is
one that's on sort of the
general rotation for this
committee being one of the
larger communities up towards
the, the northwest part of the
state, so any other questions,
comments?
Not?
Yes, ma'am. Please go ahead
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
colleagues and staff, I just
wanted to thank you for hosting
your meeting here in Gallup. I
do live here in Gallup. I
represent East Gallop and 15
Navajo chapters, um,
between uh
Easter 491 and west of 371. So I
didn't get to spend very much
time with you, but I just want
you to know that I appreciate
you and I appreciate your work.
Thank you.
Thank you. With that, we will
close the meeting, have safe
travels.
