Titan and concise. So Tim, take
it away.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
afternoon members. Uh, I am
behind tab 9 on your, in your
binders.
and we are going to start our
conversation about career
connected learning, costs and
framework.
So you all have put a whole lot
of money into CTE over the past
few years, and that money goes
to support a variety of
initiatives, and we're gonna
talk a little bit about those
initiatives and then directly
after our panel, we're going to
go visit the high school just
across the way there and you're
gonna get to see some of the
schools of the Gallup was
talking about yesterday and put
a little bit of context to what
I'm about to present to you, uh,
in numbers. Uh, I'm joined today
by Alexandra Lutz from the
Public Education department and
Kim Lanois Sandoval
and Tony Montelleto from Future
Focused Education, uh, all
giving their, their unique, uh,
perspectives on CTE and the work
that's happening across the
state.
So we'll start with the staff
brief, and I'll turn you to page
2 of your staff brief, where
I've compiled a table for you of
common career-connected learning
terms. We're calling it career
connected learning. That's sort
of an umbrella term that refers
to a number of different
programs and initiatives that
are happening across schools in
New Mexico, uh, the first and
foremost of those is that
technical career and technical
education. Uh, there's a very
specific definition of what
constitutes career and technical
education
that I provided for you there
and sort of a synopsis of what's
in federal law under the Perkins
Act.
But you can see there that
definition includes a sequence
of courses, so at least 2
courses, uh, integration of
academic content alongside those
technical skills. Technical
skill proficiency and industry
recognized credential or
certificate or an associate's
degree at the end of that
program.
including uh a program that
includes competency-based
applied learning and results in
employability skills.
There, there must be
coordination between secondary
and post-secondary education
institutions
and may also include career
exploration, beginning as early
as middle school.
This is the federal definition
of career and technical
education, and that's the
definition that we follow here
in the state.
But in addition to career and
techno technical education,
something you might also hear a
lot about is work-based
learning. Work-based learning
are uh also defined in federal
law, sustained interactions with
industry or community
professionals in real workplace
settings or simulated
environments at an educational
institution
uh, the Foster in-depth
firsthand engagement with the
tasks given in a given career
field that are aligned to
curriculum instruction. So once
again demonstrating that
alignment between the academic
and the technical skills
involved in a workplace setting.
Sometimes those can be paid for
credit experiences or
internships, and it's also an
element of those high quality
CTE programs, but can also be
its own standalone kind of
thing.
The third thing on that table
that you'll see is innovation
zones. This is a program that
PED has created and this
definition comes straight out of
PED's materials. Uh, schools
that identify and reduce
barriers to college and career
readiness among historically
underserved student populations,
innovation schools
systematically implement
coordinated strategies driven by
a locally created graduate
profile to reduce gaps in
attendance and graduation rates,
increased participation in
work-based learning, community
capstone projects, or CTE
programs of studies. So once
again, you can see CTE is
as one of those recommended
elements of an innovation zone,
but not necessarily um
uh factor that has to be there
in play.
And then finally, you've got
electives, right? And those
electives are those standalone
courses that are not necessarily
aligned to greater academic
content standard standards, and
they're not necessarily aligned
in a coordinated career pathway
that'll result in an industry
certification or an associate's
degree or anything like that.
I've got some examples in that
third column for you as well to
peruse at your leisure.
On the third page, you'll see a
snapshot of career clusters that
are happening in CTE across the
state. This is from the advanced
CTE career clusters framework,
uh, and you'll see those groups
that you see in colors there.
Those are called cluster groups,
and the individual, uh, fields
within those groups are called
the career clusters. So there
are 14 career clusters among 6
cluster groups, and there's
specific industries within each
of those clusters. And you can
see on the next page, sort of
how that
maps out in New Mexico
So we took a look at the Nova
course manual and sort of, uh,
wanted to display for you
graphically of all of the
courses offered in New Mexico,
which of them are CTE courses
and which of them are, uh, not
considered CTE courses. So I
want to call your attention to a
few things. First, uh, you'll
take a look at social sciences
and history, mathematics,
English language and literature,
life and physical sciences.
You can see a large portion of
red on that chart that
demonstrates that those those
core academic subjects don't
have a whole lot of CTE courses
associated with them.
Conversely, if you look at
things like technology,
education, computer information
sciences, construction trades,
agriculture, healthcare
sciences, those are the types of
courses that are that have many,
many sort of CTE related courses
associated with them. All the
way at the bottom of that chart,
you can see education training.
There are only 4 courses
associated with education
training as a CTE course. Sort
of goes back to our discussion
that we were having last night.
Uh, CTE as uh mechanism to
prepare future educators and the
number of courses might not be
significant there. You might
actually really prioritize
having a few well aligned
courses that every teacher has
to take to prepare them, um, so
just, just sort of
context around that chart
We'll talk a little bit about
funding for career connected
learning.
On page, we're on page 5 now,
uh, you'll see a couple of
charts related to funding. Uh,
first is that overall
appropriation that you all have
made for career connected
learning programs within your
non-recurring funding. Uh, you
can see the big jump happened
from FY 23 to FY 24, where you
increase the investment from $10
million to 40 million for the
following year, and that 40
million level has been sustained
and increased every year after
that. So you can see 45 million
in total funding in FY 25 and 50
million
in total funding in FY 26, the
current fiscal year.
Uh, those, the funding within
that, that light blue is split
up between 3 programs or 3 sort
of buckets that PED manages. The
first is that NextGen CTE pilot
program. This is a statutory
pilot that you all created back
in 2019 that was supposed to be
for seven years. So if you do
the math on that, that 2019, uh
should end in 2026.
Uh, in FY 25 PED spent 13
million of the total
appropriation on the NextGen
program.
Innovation zones is the 2nd
biggest one. We talked about
that just a second ago. The PED
allocated 11. I believe it's
11.6 million. Is that correct? I
think you have, uh, a new number
in your slides. So PED will get
into the, the details about how
that funding was spent in their
presentation. The final sort of
bucket of funding is for all
other career connected learning
programs. This is things like
your CTSOs, your career
technical student organizations,
uh, there's a summer enrichment
internship program, a BPro, be
proud, mobile work
sh op that takes those
high-tech uh uh equipment to uh
schools across the state for
them to have sort of career days
with those, uh, near peer
tutoring, and then as well as
sort of general staff positions
at pub at the public education
department.
I also wanted to spend some time
doing some analysis of what,
what the changes to the
secondary factor that you all
did in House Bill 30, uh, was
the House Bill 30? That's right.
House Bill 63, uh, last year,
um, this, uh, chart is adjusted
for inflation. This is the per
student amount of funding, uh,
generated by secondary students
over time, you can see, uh, NFY
21 students were generating
about $6900 per student. The
first biggest jump was when you
all uh passed some calend
ar reforms in in 2023 and the
K-12 plus program that resulted
in a large jump in per student
funding for all students of
about 9%, the second biggest
jump is that most recent jump,
uh, when you all increase the
secondary factor from 1.045 for
uh sixth grade students and 1.25
for seventh through 12th grade
students to a single factor of
1.304 6th through 12th grade.
That change resulted in a 7%
increase of funding or about 600
dollars per student
The majority of the work that we
have done over the past month or
so, uh, has been focused around
this marginal cost of CTE
programs, uh, some work that
Jessica started for you all last
year, uh, resulted in a working
group. So we got together with
17 superintendents and school
leaders who all are, are, uh,
thought leaders in in career
technical education across the
state and we listened to them
and talked to them about
funding. We talked about the
effectiveness of CTE. We talked
about the sustainability of CTE
programs, uh,
a consistent theme that we heard
emerging from those CTE leaders
was that the there are hidden
costs in delivering CT
education, uh, those, uh, hidden
costs might manifest in sort of
a, uh, increased amount per
student that they have to spend,
uh, in addition to the startup
costs associated with general
CTE programs. Uh, we know that,
that when you have to buy
specialized equipment or
specialized consumable materials
for your CTE program that you
might end up paying more for
CTE.
Uh, we wanted to sort of do uh
as empirical of an analysis of
this, uh, anecdotal feedback as
we could.
And so we put together some
data, uh,
the public education department
sent us the number of
concentrators at each, uh,
school site in FY 24, and we
compared that to their
instructional operational
expenditures, uh, in the same
year. Uh, I did a little
crosscutting to determine on
average about 25% of your
students will be CTE
concentrators at a given school,
uh, I took that average and
looked at everybody who
was above that. So if you have
more than 25% of your students
at uh at a school or CTA
concentrators or you have a
total number of CTE
concentrators of at least 500. I
called you for the purposes of
this analysis, I called you a
CTE powerhouse. Um
if you look at the instructional
expenditures that those CTE
powerhouses on Fire 5, on page
7.
you can see that the, the
instructional expenditures at
those schools per student is
about $900 higher than other
high schools across the state,
and that's just an example, uh,
and when we do a uh test for
statistical significance on
that, we're approaching
statistical significance.
There's something going on there
that made me want to dig a
little bit deeper.
And so the second piece of the
analysis that I did is looked at
4 of those career clusters that,
uh, that theoretically have
higher costs associated with
them, and those 4 are on the
middle of page 7, agriculture,
food, and natural resources,
architecture and construction,
health sciences and
manufacturing. Those are what
I'm calling those high-cost
industry specialists. If you're,
if you've got 11% of your
students enrolled in these
programs, I sort of put you into
another, uh, grouping there.
And on page 8, you can see the
results of that analysis. Those
schools with those high cost
industries end up paying about
$1600 more per student than
other high schools.
and that is statistically
significant, uh, and that begins
sort of the conversation that we
have for you, uh, throughout the
rest of the brief.
Uh, the public education
department has taken steps to
begin adopting a high quality
CTE framework, and this is a
high quality CTE framework that
is from a national organization
called Advanced CTE.
I'm sorry, it's the Association
for Career Technical Education.
There's a lot of, uh, ACTEs in
this. Um
that that's, uh, framework is
found for you on page 9 of your
brief, and there are 12 elements
of it. I won't read them all for
you, um, but I, I will pick a
few out, uh, for you to take a
look at. First is that standards
align and integrated curriculum.
Remember from the beginning of
our conversation that those CTE
courses need to have both the
academic content and the
technical content to be
considered high quality.
Sequencing and articulation,
that means that the courses
build upon each other and that
they are leading, you know, on a
pathway towards a workforce.
Uh, number 4, I'll call out is
prepared and effective program
staff. So those are, those CTE
instructors, which we've heard,
uh, cost more to recruit and
retain those instructors because
they're making more money if
they're out in the fields doing
the work that they were trained
to do.
Uh, engaging instructional
strategies is number 5. some
others down near the bottom, um,
that are important to mention is
that career and technical
student organizations, those
CTSOs, uh, you might consider
those sort of separate from your
CTE programs and a high quality
CTE program. They're actually
embedded within your CTE
program. They are an element of
high quality CTE, uh, and then
finally, data and outcomes. So
the, the high quality framework
for career tech and technical
education requires you to
collect
and follow and track those
students, and it's not, we're
not just talking about
graduation data. We're talking
about data that can, uh, that
shows workforce outcomes that
shows employability and wages,
things like that.
So with the expiration of one
final note that I'll add at the
bottom of page 9, we've been
talking about CTE since I
started at LESC in 2016. Uh, CTE
is an element of no time to
lose. uh, this, uh, national
conference of State Legislatures
report is something that you all
have based a lot of your work on
and how to build a world-class
education system right here in
New Mexico. One of those pillars
is CTE, but the most important
part of that pillar in No Time
to Lose, is that that that the
CTE program is not
perceived as, as a separate
program for kids who don't know
how to do math. The CTE program
is a highly rigorous, highly
technical, uh, route for
students to take into the
workforce or into college.
All right
On page 10, we're starting a new
sort of discussion with you all,
um, that, that I think will, uh,
merit some good conversation for
uh during our question and
answering, um.
because of those nuanced cost
drivers because of those
elements that we've talked about
that require you to pay
attention to the quality of your
CTE program, uh, the argument
that we're making here is that
some, like a simple per student
factor for CTE is not enough to
guarantee that the funding that
you all are providing for CTE is
aligned to creating those high
quality programs. Uh, what we
have have laid out for you is
some sort of funding mechanism
that could be
tied to those individual costs
of individual industries and a
tiered approach that would allow
you to uh provide incentive
funding or provide additional
funding for those high quality
programs that are producing
certificates that are producing
strong outcomes and that are
meeting all of those 12 high
quality benchmarks.
Some of the considerations that
you should think about if you're
thinking about this sort of
aligned funding framework, uh,
are listed for you at the bottom
of page 10. So number um uh
before I start calling these
out, I'll, I'll draw an anecdote
to our transportation formula.
So our transportation formula is
a categorical program that you
all make an appropriation to
every year, and that
appropriation is split up based
on the characteristics of each
school district's transportation
program. So if you're running
more buses and you're traveling
more miles, you're getting
additional funding per bus,
additional funding per mile,
you're getting funding for the
students that ride on those
buses. Something like that is
analogous to what we're we're
thinking about for a CTE.
So if you think about those
factors that you might need to
consider in a formula like that.
You can think about base
funding. Everybody gets a base
amount to guarantee that some
level of equity among uh small
districts and large districts.
There are base costs associated
with starting a new CTE program.
There are those marginal per
student costs that we just
talked about. If you're doing,
uh, CTE, we know it costs about
$900 more per student, but if
you're doing those high-cost
industries, it costs about $1600
more
per student, and that's based on
our initial estimates on our
sort of rough analysis of those
costs.
Uh, you could think about
providing incentives for
credentialing. You could provide
additional funding that awards
those CTE programs that are
producing uh those industry
demanded credentials, and you
can see a table on the side of
uh page 10 there that lists
those top industry requested
credentials based on a survey
done by Advanced CTE. Those are
the credentials that our
workforce is asking for, uh, in
our graduates and so you could
provide additional incentive
funding for the programs that
produce those credentials.
You could think about tiered
funding for those specialized
costs. We know, we demonstrated
for you that there are some
industries that just cost more.
Uh, we could do some additional
analysis to figure out exactly
what those costs might look
like, and you could think about,
uh, funding those programs, uh,
in a, in a tiered way.
And then finally, you could
think about incentives for
program quality. So those 12
elements, if you can demonstrate
that you're meeting all 12
elements of that high-quality
CTE framework. Maybe you're
eligible for additional funding
aligned to that rubric as well.
There are some other benefits to
doing funding in this way, uh,
that all that I've listed for
you right there, um, but I'm
just gonna move on in the
interest of time so some final
policy considerations for you
all, uh, to think about as we're
moving forward and moving
towards the end of this CTE,
this next gen CTE pilot.
First, we're recommending that
you reconvene that working group
that we put together of those
17, uh, school leaders, so we
can start digging into those per
student costs in a more
meaningful way. We're doing an
analysis of statewide data and
of course, um there's always
gonna be issues when you look at
statewide data and, and, uh,
statewide expenditures. So the
more nitty gritty we can get
with the data and the more
context we can get from those
school leaders, the better that
analysis is gonna is gonna turn
out and the better the formula
will align to their actual
needs. We're recommending that
you work in partnership with PED
and New Mexico school districts
and charter schools to develop a
funding formula that
incorporates those relevant
metrics, those things that I
just list listed for you, uh,
that, that might be that base
funding per student multiplier
specialized costs, incentives
for high quality programs.
As the CTE pilot expires, you're
gonna need to consider some
statutory amendments to either
phase that program out, create a
new program, or
or to repurpose that existing
CTE fund that you all have tied
to this pilot uh to, to do
exactly the types of things that
we're recommending that in this
brief.
Uh, the next consideration for
you, continue analyzing all of
the available data that we have
on CT on program effectiveness,
uh, particularly we're, we're
interested in some graduation
figures that you're gonna see
and and figuring out exactly
what's going on within the data
there, uh, that's driving that
change in graduation rates.
And then, uh, obviously, the uh
funding that you all put into
the SEG was not just intended
for CTE programs. You intended
to create transformative
experiences at the middle and
high school level for all
students, not just CTE students.
And so as you think about
broader academic, uh, changes
that might be needed to ensure
engagement and uh to build
student proficiency in math, in
particular at the middle school
level
Uh, you might consider, uh,
where CTE fits in this broader
conversation about redesigning
the secondary school experience
for students.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair, I will
pass it over to our colleagues
from the public education
department.
Yeah
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee
My name is Alexandra Lutz, and I
am one of the managers of the
College and Career Readiness
Bureau.
at the Public Education
department. Thank you for the
opportunity
to, uh, speak with you today.
CTE can be expensive, uh, but we
do know that it represents an
incredible value as an
educational investment once
called vocational education.
CTE now encompasses high tech
in-demand careers and even in
more traditional programs.
Students are learning technical,
interpersonal, and
entrepreneurial skills to
develop their future careers.
In the interest of time, I might
consolidate, but I did want to
highlight a few aspects of an
article recently from The Wall
Street Journal.
Educators, policymakers,
families, businesses, and
community leaders have become
increasingly aware of CTE as a
proven strategy to prepare every
student for college and career
success and to uh provide an
opportunity for economic
prosperity.
as highlighted in this article
are students are increasingly
taking notice.
Some of the reasons that they're
giving for wanting to engage in
CTE factors like the rising cost
of college.
perceived job security and
trades, political preferences,
and the appeal of hands-on work
or entrepreneurial
opportunities.
However, despite the fact that
half of our high school students
are expressing interest in
pursuing careers that don't
require a four-year college
degree, just 15% of Gen Z
students said they actually
received information from their
high schools on any other
pathways.
We can change this
at the national level, it is
obvious that CTE works. So what
is it about career technical
education that makes students
and families more satisfied with
their educational experience. So
there's a lot of reasons we can
highlight. I'll look at 4 of
them.
First of all
high school students who take 2
or more CTE courses in a single
program. They're called
concentrators.
National data reveals that they
are more likely to complete a
certificate, a diploma.
and an associate's degree and
just as likely to complete a
bachelor's degree as non-CTE
students.
Associate's degrees in CTE
fields frequently out earn
bachelor's degrees in non-CTE
fields and specific
subpopulations of students are
much more likely.
to attend college than their
non-CTE peers.
Next, uh, students involved in
CTE are far less likely, oh
sorry, the next
check mark. Less likely to drop
out of high school than other
students and we'll look at those
numbers in New Mexico, but
nationwide that's estimated to
save the economy about $168
billion a year.
Third, there is a growing skills
gap in the United States. We
hear that everywhere we look in
the media, more than 50% of
business leaders don't think
that our traditional education
system is teaching the skills
that our students need in the
workplace.
and I can, uh, fast forward
through some of the details. You
do have the handouts in your
packets, but we're projected to
have 6 million job openings in
the CTE fields by 2032. So our
programs
provide a clear pipeline
for students to enter the
workforce in fields that
our nation needs. Uh, the final
um benefit that I could
highlight today, CTE offers a
significant return on
investment.
Now the only data I have is from
the state of Washington, finding
that every dollar invested in
CTE at the high school level
returns $26 in lifetime earnings
and employee benefits.
We look forward to, uh,
longitudinal data systems so
that New Mexico can begin to uh
gather this return on
investment.
So that's the promise of career
technical education, but we
can't expect exalts like that if
we are relying on outdated
concepts of
Votech and a frequent model of
student interest-driven elective
classes. So what does it look
like in a high quality model.
that you were just introduced
to.
at the national level
um, as, um, he described for
you, there are 14 career
clusters, occupational clusters,
and those represent fields such
as advanced manufacturing or
digital technology, broad.
buckets of occupations.
These clusters form the
organizational structure for all
CTE.
They're further divided into
subclusters, so an example of
that might be construction has 4
subclusters. Those are skilled
trades, architecture and civil
engineering, for example, those
are two of them. These
subclusters also form the name
and the direction of all of our
CTE approved programs of study
in our state.
The emphasis, um,
on
programs of study if we can just
pause for a moment is that um
grant participants are required
to use state and local label
labor market information to
identify their economic
priorities within those
clusters.
and this emphasis on the labor
market helps underscore one of
the major differences between a
CTE program, which could be like
media production and
broadcasting, um, versus an
elective.
like jazz band
and that does help students, um,
explore personal and academic
interests, but it doesn't
intentionally align them to a
career like CTE does.
As was discussed briefly, so I
won't go back through it, um.
there are
within that structure of career
clusters, um
there are 12 components of a
high quality CTE program and
there are definitions of what
CTE is, what work-based learning
is, etc. so taking a federal
definition from Perkins Law,
taking a state definitions out
of NMAC and out of our state
plan, consolidate, there's some
things that all programs have in
common.
One of those, um, important
aspects of high quality CTE is
that it must include a sequence
of courses that meets several
qualifications, and those were
highlighted earlier. The college
and Career Readiness Bureau has
followed federal law by
identifying course sequences for
approved programs of study. You
can see one example of a course
sequence here this is for
physical health program that
lays the groundwork for a career
path in nursing.
So we're talking about
highlighting key differences
between CTE and other types of
electives or old models of
vocational education is an
emphasis on academic
proficiency.
um, and requiring that even high
school programs are aligned
directly to post-secondary
programs
So that can be the difference
between an individual elective
class or uh a life skills class,
so you could look at like
painting and drawing, which does
add technical skill, but doesn't
necessarily emphasize the
academic rigor and alignment to
post-secondary.
So all secondary CTE programs
must also
include
the components listed here. High
school students can get a job
without CTE.
Jobs require basic skills and
knowledge. They offer little
upward growth, and they meet
short-term financial needs for
students like paying for their
car insurance.
CTE is different because federal
law requires an emphasis on
career advisement and programs
focus on identifying on ramps
into high wage, high skill,
growing in demand careers.
CTE gets students into the work,
not just learning about it.
And these distinctions again
helped us uh make the difference
between CTE and elective. So
consider the difference between
uh students work a class where
students improve their
basketball skill, uh, versus,
uh,
a class where students are
earning their first automotive
service excellence, uh,
certification that you see
hanging on your mechanic's wall.
When implemented well, high
quality CTE offers students a
path out of poverty.
So the association for Career
and Technical Education on the
next slide shows the 12
components of high-quality CTE
that were highlighted in our, in
your packets already.
Um, what we can see and, and
I'll maybe just draw attention
um to the fact that these aren't
simple addition. If you do one
and another one, you don't just
get to a lot of these are
exponential and their growth and
um our superintendents, some who
are here today, can, can speak
to this. Let's say if, if you
are, um, investing in a
teacher's professional
development, um
you get classrooms that are more
engaging. You get teachers that
can offer student assessment to,
to get those certifications.
You, um, help them learn how to
better engage uh business and
community partnerships.
So we increased the success of
students who most need a hand
up.
when we invest in more and more
components framework.
So we've examined the standards
for high-quality CTE. I want to
take a moment to look at CTE in
New Mexico.
We, we do need to move things
along quickly. We have about
half an hour till we need to
make sure that we're able to get
on a bus and we will have lots
of questions. Indeed, thank you.
So you can see the increase
um in the investments in New
Mexico, um, Perkins rep the
second one represents federal
investments, the others are
state investments, and you can
see where the legislative
appropriations have done over
the course of time, um,
representing between, uh, fiscal
year 2020 and uh
fiscal year 25.
Here you can see the grants that
um have been awarded. um, all of
them are guided by the 4-year
Perkins State Plan.
It's a snapshot reflects just
total flow through and spend
down.
This graph, interestingly
though, however, this is
generated from actual requests
for reimbursement rather than
how Eli's budgeted their CTE
grant funding. So Perkins on the
left is federal funding, um, has
a little bit more restrictions,
but for the most part they're
they're reflective of each
other. NextGen is the state CTE
flow through, um, that's about
13 million.
One of the things that I want to
highlight, for example, general
supplies down there in yellow
near the bottom, um, general
supplies are absolutely
inallowable and understandable
CTE expense, and they're
accounting for about 25% of all
of our expenditures, which can
end up nickel and diming, uh,
grant funds, um, into items that
often help teachers maintain the
status quo, rather than pushing
programs ahead and offering new
opportunities. It's not that
it's not
allowable, and we would continue
to allow it, but if we could um
look at ways to value CTE, um,
helping our, our schools find
other ways to um invest their
money, maybe we can.
add some higher quality
components of CTE
We'd also look at the blue
category of salaries on there
for a moment, salaries and
benefits are representing a huge
component of grants, um, that
maybe
we could help find a way to uh
move these instructors into more
permanent funding sources and
show that we value this as um a
long term investment in our
students.
We can move along. So here's a
snapshot of our secondary CTE
enrollment in New Mexico, um,
the pie charts represents the
demographics of our CTE
concentrators, and it actually
pretty closely mirrors our
student population in our state,
which we're really proud to see
that equity in access, um,
similarly on the left, um, you
can see a comparison between all
students and CTE concentrators,
um among special populations
which are identified federally
and those are also pretty
closely mirrored.
All right. Outcomes in our
state, the, uh, we're pretty
proud of the graduation chart
there on the left, and many of
you have seen this. In 2023, all
students in the federally
identified uh populations.
between the 60 and 70% and you
can see that when their CTE
concentrators, every one of them
is above 93 375%.
um, and another highlight there
was the science proficiency
where they're exceeding the
state average by about 10%.
all right
Does this look familiar
Bottles of high-quality CTE
implementation. We do see it in
our state and we see many
districts doing many things
well. So one exemplar here from
Hobbs is the uh the CEC facility
offering 11 programs of study
partnering closely with their
local industry, um
seeing a lot of student outcomes
in terms of certifications, etc.
Rio Rancho is hoping to see
similar outcomes as well at
their new Riotech facility, but
you don't need a $50 million
facility to plan high-quality
programming and create a
pipeline that opens new doors
for students, and we've seen
schools as tiny as Hamas
Mountain.
uh, to the big players up in
Farmington.
being very intentional right
here in Gallup creating very
deliberate pathways for student
engagement in CTE.
OK, so while our concentrators
are far exceeding the state's
overall graduation rates and
outperforming their statewide
peers in science. We are not
seeing the same achievements in
math, in English language arts.
and unfortunately, all three of
our reported academic
proficiency rates, uh, lag well
behind national averages.
Just over half of our CTE
concentrators enroll in college
immediately following high
school, far below conservative
national estimates of 3 out of
4.
We're also lagging behind
student outcomes related to dual
credit, as seen on this screen.
so a further opportunity is
within the data itself. Um, if
we don't have a systematic means
of determining industry
credentials earned statewide,
for example. So these are all
opportunities where we have for
improvement so that our state
CTE programs can start to match
what we're seeing nationally in
that promise.
How can we do better
We bring us back to the
beginning.
High-quality CTE can be a game
changer.
breaking the cycle of poverty,
providing a talent pool that
helps businesses grow.
But we have a ways to go in
optimizing our available
resources to implement all 12
indicators of a high quality CTE
program. We believe we can do
more to increase outcomes for
our students that resemble those
seen nationally.
And while federal law
sets the parameters for federal
grants. We have the opportunity
right here to prioritize high
quality programs using state CTE
funds.
and just a few levers for
consideration could be um by um
what you see on the screen, a
three-tiered perhaps structure
for implementation, a funding
system
um, phasing out funding for
established programs rather than
building new ones, um, if
they're not
reflecting high quality, uh,
reducing allowances for
non-priority programs, which
right now is about 5.
um, enforcing maximum
allocations within certain
budget categories, perhaps
limiting amounts spent on
certain items, um, and
incentivizing opportunity gap
reduction so that the students
who most need a hand up.
are able to
to achieve it rather than
students who are already likely
to succeed, um, continuing to do
so. So by incentivizing these
components of the framework, we
can hope and expect to increase
student engagements, create
pathways to economic success,
fill the skills gap and see a
return on our investment.
similar to the national model
and I will turn it over to my
colleagues from FFE.
Good afternoon
I'm the director of the
Instituto del Puente, which is
the policy arm of future-focused
education. Thanks for having us.
I'm excited to be here and I'll
walk you through just a couple
of big ideas, um, since we're
short on time, but I think, um,
I hope you'll hold on to as you
go forward thinking about your
policy agenda in the next
legislative session coming up.
If you go to the next slide,
please.
What I want you to know is that
we spent about 2 years
in different communities around
New Mexico. We visited, we
probably visited about 16
communities by now. We gathered
comments from 2000 comments from
young people from all over the
state in, um, discussions with
them about what they want for
their future
what they want from school now
and what they want from their
future. And 3 things came out,
um, as themes from those
comments from young people. The
first thing that they want is
learning with purpose.
Some relevancy, some reason to
come to school.
um, and some meaning in their,
in their education.
The second thing that they want
is somebody to care about them
themselves.
their own well-being. What is it
that they, um, need to be
successful. And then third, and
which was really heartening to
me. The third thing that they
talked about was they're looking
for mentorship.
and they're looking for
mentorship from all different
places. They're looking at from
the people in their schools, but
they're also looking at from
people in their own community.
And when we put those three
themes together, what we, um,
considered was what are the
policy objectives that will get
at these three things that young
people are looking for.
And Kim and I are going to talk
to you about one thing that we
care deeply about that we think
is a really um valuable
solution, and that's work-based
learning, paid internships for
young people on the impact that
that will have.
So we're, um, we believe in
these three, principles that
young people are asking for, and
we believe the paid internship
strategy is the way to get us
there.
OK, next slide. Thank you. These
are some comments from both the
employers, so folks who hosted
interns, and then, um, the young
people themselves. So
if you look at the 4th bullet
um, one of our employer partners
said, it's easy to underestimate
their abilities and their
impact, the young people that
is.
My views have been strengthened
by this experience. So the
understanding that young people
have more to offer than they
might have thought before they
started working with them.
So it's breaking down
misconceptions about young
people. It's opening up new
opportunities for young people.
It's creating relationships
between adults and young people,
which is one of the things that
young people care mostly about.
Then if you look at the second
or uh yeah, the 2nd bullet, um,
under the students
this program has solidified my
desire to pursue current
medicine.
So young people actually getting
experience that helps inform
what they want to do later.
Critical, and it's missing from
most high school experiences,
um, that our students have in
the state.
So we go to the next slide.
next slide
Thank you. So, um,
future-focused education
facilitated the statewide
innovation zones over the last 3
years.
And what we have seen in the, in
the innovation zone work is that
there's been that 94% of the of
the districts that and charter
schools that, um, participate in
the innovation zones
um, offer.
uh, paid internships
that it's one of the key
strategies for a redesign in the
high schools in this state. at
least through the innovation
zones.
That is an increase of 336% over
the past three years, so there's
demand increasing demand at the
district level, at the school
level, and from young people,
um, for paid internships.
88% of internships were paid.
That's up
from 70%, um, in the second
year.
And then finally, um, 79% of
internships used innovation zone
funding. So that's what's
fueling the growth and the
internship, um, internships
around the state right now is
the innovation zone funding.
Let's go to the next slide,
please.
If you look at this chart here
on the left, um, what you'll see
is the growth over time in the
number of paid internships
across these 47 um LEAs.
So we went from, um, about 500
or 600 in year one to, man, what
is that? 2400, 2500 in year two
to up to um
2700 in year 3. And if you
could, as you notice, the paid
portion of those internships is
growing as well. So in green,
what you've got is more and more
districts using their funding to
actually sup supplement the
experience that kids are having
by paying them.
Um, yeah, thank you. You can go
to the next slide. Thanks.
Here what you have is survey
results from young people about,
um, their opinions of
internships. And what you see is
that what would get them to
participate more, it's being
paid.
That's the majority of the
responses from the young people.
The second thing is more
flexibility in the school day to
let them get off campus. And we
think that's a great signal
about the value of the of the um
new graduation requirements that
now students can graduate with
an internship Capstone project,
things that happen off campus.
And so getting the schools to
redesign the school day that
would let young people off
campus is a really important
next step.
Next slide, please
Next, I want to show you the
list of school districts that
we've been working with to
develop this policy proposal. As
you can see from this list,
we've got, um, school districts
from all over the state.
all different kinds of school
districts that are all leaders
in the internship space. So
everything from Zuni, where you
would think, how many
internships, um, opportunities
could there be in ZUI?
All the way to Albuquerque,
Hobbs, all of those school
districts are figuring out how
to run paid internship programs.
And the cool thing about what's
going on in these districts is
that they're building out the
structures in the building.
that get kids ready for the
placement.
So they're redesigning their
school day, they're doing
classes differently. Teachers
are doing, are teaching
differently to get young people
ready so that when you actually
place them, um, they're having a
good experience out in the
field.
Next slide please
So here are the recommendations
that come from the districts
that were on the prior page. So
the prior page Zuni, um, CTech,
Albuquerque, they came up with a
set of recommendations that they
think, um, would be valuable in
building out a sustainable
funding system for paid
internships. First, that it's a
recurring funding source so that
if they build an internship
preparation program, there's
actually, they know there's
funding at the end to be able to
place the young person.
Second, that there's incentives
for employers to pay.
We future-focused education
operates a paid internship
program. We've placed over 2000
we had over 2000 placements, 200
different employers.
um
I don't know, it's a lot. We've
placed a lot of young people. We
have a lot of employer partners
and all of the employers pay.
and they play the full amount,
$6000 a year, or a semester.
to place those young people.
We think that that's a huge
opportunity in the state to be
able to tap into employers with
a public-private partnership to
be able to support the placement
of young people, um, in their
paid internships, and we think
that there's a way to do this
through a sliding scale where
you have where you have smaller
communities, smaller employers,
more rural communities paying
less possibly bigger employers
and bigger communities paying
more.
We think that we, we would need
to have quality standards, and
we think that those districts
that we showed you on the last
page would be perfectly capable
of helping determine what
quality standards would look
like for a paid internship
placement.
And we need some administrative
backbone in rural communities,
particularly that um could be
overwhelmed by the costs of
running an internship program.
So the New Mexico Community
Trust has already started
working with small districts
like Lake Arthur and some other
districts to handle the
backbone um financial
requirements.
I'll finish with just saying
that Representative Parajon,
who, who you all, um, know, will
be um carrying legislation this
session to um create a funding
source for this paid internship,
public-private partnership,
collaboration, um, that we're
imagining between employers and
uh
and uh the state
So with that, I'll turn it over
to my colleague Kim to talk
about the, um, next phase of our
work.
Hello, I'm Kim Lanois Sandoval.
I'm the executive director at
Future Focused Education. Thank
you for having us here. I wanna
say, um, the thing I get to talk
about is really exciting to me
as a mom of a 17 year old and a
13-year-old. These are really
important programs. I think you
have to have a lot of different
on-ramps for engagement for
young people. You can't just
have one way of engaging a young
person, but having a spectrum of
ways to engage. So this was a
program
we did in partnership with the
Public Education department and
it's called the graduation
re-engagement internship
program. If you go to the next
slide.
So there is a lot of information
out there about
engaging young people about it,
we can do all kinds of things
for young people in our schools,
if they are in our schools. A
lot of our young people don't
want to go to school, and as I'm
telling you that as a mom, and
then my kids go to great
schools, but what we can, what
we do know about absenteeism,
this is from um an article that
just came out on the Hill is
that the cause of it is they're
falling behind already.
So once they're behind, they're
like, uh, I'm already behind.
Maybe a GED is a better option
for me, and they're, they feel
defeated and schools don't
understand how to catch them up
without a boring online program,
and students engaging that way
through credit recovery, or
they're bored and disengaged.
It's not relevant, um, quoting
my 17 year old, she tells me we
aren't lazy, it just has to mean
something to us. And I think
that this generation of young
people really feel that way. It
has to
be relevant and meaningful and
connected to something to get
them to want to go to school.
And then there's illness, home
issues, and then a lot of
misconceptions. I was talking to
Superintendent of APS about this
misconception with family and
students about when you miss
school, what does that mean and
how it gets you behind quickly.
If you can go to the next slide.
So in this grit program that was
funded, we identified students
at risk of not graduating across
19 high schools in New Mexico,
and we didn't get enough time to
um on board as many students as
we want or recruit as many
students as we wanted, but we
did meet 79% of the proposed
target of 435 students, getting
343 students part of this
program and what we did was we
worked with schools and gave
professional
development and did credit
recovery instead of online
credit recovery. They did credit
recovery through service
learning hands-on
community-based projects to earn
their credits back.
and we paid the students who
participated and connected it to
the goals after high school. But
what this gave students an
opportunity was to really
embrace what their passions,
talents, and gifts were, and to
see themselves in community to
get those credits back.
Uh, you can see that the
students who participated 99%
were economically disadvantaged,
29% English language learners
and 21% were students with
disabilities.
You can go to the next
Out of these quotes, I love the
one, there is the one bold about
the lack of time, that's the
challenge and that we could do a
lot more if we had more um of an
on ramp, but that it is the
overall overall idea of the
program allowing students to
reach out to the community and
be more hands-on in real world
experience to recover certain
amounts of credits. So that was
um a big win for us in doing
this project. If you can go next
This comes through the
intendance initiative and
really, I want to say again that
idea of we can do everything for
students while they're in our
schools, but they have to want
to be in the schools and so what
we saw with this program was
that 69% of the students
participating in GRIP showed a
significant improvement in their
attendance. We got to sit with
them and they came and spoke
with PED during our instituto
convening and the students said
this meant everything.
that all of a sudden they wanted
to be in school. They wanted to
come to school and do credit
recovery, and I don't, I'm also
an educator as a middle school
special education teacher.
That's unheard of to say, I want
to come to school to do credit
recovery, and it's exciting to
me. So this program, just that
alone, I think is significant.
The credit recovery across New
Mexico 471 credits were earned
through this program. Each
student averaging 1.
6 credits. And then educators
77% of educators say this was
enough to get kids back on
track. So these were kids who
were off track or not going to
graduate on time. We were able
through this program to graduate
them on time, but not only just
to say here, good luck, but
actually give them an experience
that connected them to
experiences in their community
and work-based learning
opportunities in their community
and in a lot of cases connected
them to a positive adult
mentor after
You can go to the next one.
Thank you.
Um, here's some charts about the
attendance that we saw an
increase in attendance. Also
that students said that they
wanted to graduate on time and
that was the motivation, the
main motivation for them to be
part of this program and then
also the stipend money helped.
If you can go to the next
um, here's some of the
qualitative information about
them wanting to be more
motivated to come to school.
next
I mean, you guys have the chart.
I don't have to read this for
you. Um, but I do think figure 7
like I said, as a mom and
educator is really important to
me compared to the original
class, this credit recovery
program, you can see how many
students between a little better
and much better said. This was a
much better way to receive an
educational experience.
All right.
He is um a subgroup from our
cohort.
We worked really closely with
pro-parents reaching out and
giving professional development
about that transition plan for
students with IEPs and students
with IEPs being able to
participate in this program as
well and receive the same type
of work-based learning
opportunities as their peers.
and go to the net. Oh
can you go back one
Another figure tins also
important because it's the
students who met 92% of the core
competencies, so getting the
core credits as well.
You go next
So our recommendation is
in New Mexico, we have uh many
students who are off track to
graduate, and we have many
students who are feeling
disengaged or so they're either
physically disengaged, they've
left the school, and I always
say that's a choice they make.
They're voting with their feet
about the education experience.
So we have students who have
left physically and we have
students who've checked out
mentally. And so our
recommendation is to open this
up and expand this, give more
time first off, and then expand
this
experience so we can get more
students because we saw that it
was really successful in getting
students graduated and connected
in their communities to broaden
this to um attract more students
to this program, and you can see
in 2026, getting 2000 students
and then 4000 students and then
to 8000 students, but what this
can become is not only an
intervention as it is right now
to graduation, but it it becomes
school
transformation. Um, and it can
become real school
transformation of giving
educators the opportunity and
the um
the ability to do something and
offer it in a different way. So,
thank you
Stanford questions, Mr. Chair
Thank you, Jim. I have on the
list, uh, Senator Brandt first.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and,
and
you know, I, I've only been
working on this for
13 years
Um
and so it's, it's good to
finally see some numbers. Tim,
thank you for your work on this,
and Jessica, really appreciate
it. um.
you know,
you're, you're the last
presentation where you talked
about bringing kids back in and
I know we need to get those kids
back in, but if we do this on
the front side
and actually have these programs
available, we're not gonna lose
them in the first place.
and so we don't need to recover
them.
In my opinion, that should be a
very short term program.
um, for maybe 3 or 4 years.
but we need to get these
programs put in place, the CTE
programs, the high quality ones,
and I think that's one of the
things we've got to focus on is
a high quality and so I'm glad
to see that Pet is, has finally
come around. I'm sorry, I'm
gonna say finally because it's
been 13 years
and um
you know, we've given money to
CTE and then it's been used for
other things.
from PE.
And so uh we need to make sure
that we're funding these
programs, they work. We see the
graduation rates, it's almost
100%. You tell me anything else
that gives us almost 100%.
We'll have it.
now, you know, we're gonna see
how that program in Rear Rancho
works, which is my community,
um, and so you could say I've
been actually working on this
for 16 years because I worked on
this when I was on the school
board in Rear Rancho.
and it took Catherine coming on
the school board in Rear Rancho,
who took my place to actually
get it pushed through.
and so
this is, you know, we, we know
that only 65%, or I mean 65%
never go to college.
of our graduates in New Mexico.
and we we built our system for
the 35%.
And out of that 35%, half of
them will not graduate.
so we really built our system
for 17% of our students.
It's time to change the system
It's time to relook at how we're
doing middle school and up
especially
and trying to make help young
people get into careers
that they don't come out of with
$50,000 of debt or more at
college.
and make $50,000 a year.
that they come out with no
debts.
and make $700 or $80,000 a year.
I think that's the better plan.
and they also get to do what
they love.
because they get to try out some
of these different things and I
know the, the, the way rear
ranch is gonna work is they're
going to let these young people
try different things and then
they're gonna pick what they
want to stay in.
and that's gonna help them to be
able to figure out a career that
they get very interested. Then
when I talked to the, the
employers
you know, they're, they're like,
get him that first.
certificate
We'll pay for the rest
They're a good employee, we will
pay for all the other
certificates that they need.
So, you know, that's where the
employers are coming on board.
There's like, we'll, we'll hire
young people who have their ASE
certification. I only did the
first one.
and then we'll send them
to school
to get the rest of their, their
certificates that they need.
there's 8 levels in that
Let the industry pay for the
other 7. Let's get them ready on
the number 1.
Let's teach them how to work
Let's teach them how they can
actually go and make good money
without selling drugs?
Sorry, I'm just being honest
Let's keep him out of the gangs
by engaging them
We, we talked about it some
yesterday engaging the students
is how you're gonna keep them
in.
You get someone like I was.
Yeah, no, the only reason I
graduated is because they, they
had.
vocational classes
that I really wanted to take.
Then I went in the military,
really weird.
but they didn't have any classes
in that.
But, but the, the, the exciting
thing and the thing we've got to
focus on and I'm, I'm glad the
chair of LFC is here, of Senate
Finances here because the thing
we really need to focus on is
that they're high quality
programs, not
certificates and and things that
we don't need in New Mexico.
That's why there's got to be a
coordination between the
business industry, what do you
need?
Cause what, what we don't want
to do is get them a certificate
that we don't have any jobs in
in New Mexico and they got to
move to Oklahoma to get a job.
We want him to stay here
We want to fill our needs
you know, electricians,
plumbers.
uh automotive
automotive mechanics.
man, it is really hard to find
them anymore.
I talked to every, every shop in
Rear Rancho and the west side
wants more
They can't find them
So this is why it's important
96, 97% graduation rate?
But if we're not doing a quality
job, then forget about it. Let's
just not do it at all.
We need to do quality
and that's gonna take some
investment
but the return
is huge
for our economic growth and the
growth of our state. So Mr.
Chairman, I really don't have
any questions. I just want to
preach a little bit since I've
been preaching on this for 13
years. It's glad to see that,
that, you know, someone finally
found Jesus and, and, and came
forward on this, so thank you.
Senator, uh Representative
Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and again,
probably, uh, I will keep it
very short. I promise that, and
it's kind of just piggybacking
on Censure Brants, um, one thing
we, we talked about last night
is the Martinez Yay lawsuit and
having to where we have robust
CTE programs, how we, this could
actually help, especially in the
rural areas. So I will tell you,
I, it's gonna age me. I
graduated in 1990 from high
school in Colorado Springs,
Colorado.
and we had vocational programs.
Moved here in 2002 and I was
shocked.
that we did not have these
programs in a lot of our schools
we are so far behind. I think at
one time we might have, but then
we moved away and everybody go
to a four-year college.
Get your bachelor's and that we
just know that that that wasn't
realistic, so we are so far
behind and it took so many years
to get where we are now and
believe me, it was a lot it's
like shedding tears some days
when it frustration of the
pushback that I got about CTE in
the state. I've gone to Ped
meetings years ago while I was
on school board. Let's try to
figure out what we need to do
CTE and look, we're still really
not making the headway that we
should be in this state.
We're talking about dual credit,
we're behind there internships,
2015, Martinez Martinez
administration was out there
trying to get the portal put
together for the college
internship, so we was trying to
work with the Workforce
Solutions on how we could do
that for our high school
students while I was in high
school, my senior year, I went
to school half day, worked, got
credit for working, and I got
paid to work
So I mean, we are not everybody
wants to go to a 4 year and it's
a step, maybe they will go into
get their certificate programs
and then go on to a 4 year.
There's a lot of different
pathways, but unfortunately, we
are so behind and we're
continuing I'm like.
OK, now we're just looking at
funding where we need this.
You know how many years I keep
hearing this, but it's like it's
such baby steps and it is
frustrating, and we need to fund
this.
We know the graduation rates are
there. We know it will help
absenteeism, we know that.
I could tell you that when I was
in school, there's people that I
know that went to school because
of the automotive programs that
they were able to, I know people
who came out and built a
business off of that.
made a ton of money and auto
body.
and sold his business. We,
there's pathways, I know I'll
keep it short.
Love to talk to you guys a
little afterwards, but again,
this is, we not only looking at
the big districts, we need to
have this
completely in all the schools,
uh, in having opportunities for
all of our students and we have
to be able to fund it and it's
extremely expensive to fund
this. Riotech is going is an
unusual partnership with
we did it with the community
college. We did it with CNM.
It said different one, a
different type of thing, but
they'll come out with their
certificates, so we need to make
these opportunities again we are
behind, we're behind on funding.
We need to look at the dual
credit. We need to be looking at
the internships, job
opportunities, those type of
things. So thank you, Mr. Chen.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Guola.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
Shen, thank you for the
presentation. Um, let me clarify
a couple of, well, some things
that I heard in your
presentation.
So the students
right now it's a recovery
program. They failed a class.
for a semester they go and work
in a with an employer and get
paid for the work that they do.
You think it will change if um
the participation it didn't get
paid.
Why would it be important for
them to to be paid.
OK.
Um, Mr. Chairman and, uh,
Representative Coola, they,
there are two incentives
and they're about equal. One is
I need to graduate
and I'm going to do this project
because it's gonna help me
graduate.
The second one is I need to get
paid.
in order to not work.
otherwise
right? Like work is bringing
young people away from school.
They need to work. And so
providing this work opportunity
for young people and earning
credits is what's, um, critical
and that it's a combination.
that makes sense. So that, that,
that's an incentive to stay
there like is is I had to work,
um.
what about small communities,
rural communities, will they
have the same opportunity for,
for the work the employee will
have the same opportunity to
offer positions to the students.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Garola, yes, we've been
deliberate about working with
small rural communities. Cuba
ZUI
Espanola, Lake Arthur, all of
those small communities we've
been really deliberate about
building out, um, work
experiences that happen with
local employers that are
typically small that need to be
subsidized.
um, in order to provide those,
um, experiences, but it's been
um
super successful. I'm, I'm
really excited about it. We, I
could give you another example
in Cuba, we have young people
that go from Cuba to Rio Rancho
to work at the, um, Sandoval
Regional, um, hospital. We have
young people that go, they spend
a full day, one day a week in a
paid internship at Sandoval
Regional, and it's a large
number of young people. It's
like 40, 40 young people that
are in that, that get that
experience. And so, figuring out
transportation.
close relationships with local
employers, all those kinds of
things open those opportunities
up.
Thank you. Uh, and this is a
commitment for a semester. So if
any of the students find that
this is a place where they want
to continue developing a career,
can they stay it's an
opportunity for them to grow
there.
Oh, I'm going to keep going, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Gorola. Yes. So one of the
things that, um, Future Focus
has done is build out what we
call our next program, which is
a transition after you finish
your high school internship, we
stay with you, keep you
employed, and transition you
into a college program for so
you can earn your certificates
or your degree, um, but that
works for apprenticeship as
well. So our goal is to not have
you fall off the cliff after you
finish your high school
internship, but we hold on to
you
stay, you're staying employed or
staying internning while you
transition to the next step,
whatever that is, certificate,
college, whatever the um next
step in your career is.
Thank you. And Mr. Sheldon, I, I
hear uh already people sharing
about um this not being a
recovery program, but hopefully
will be offered to all the
students who wants to take
credit instead of a of a class
and I think we talk in the
previous session about that, um,
I'm a little bit
confused about in the reporting
about uh how map
it doesn't have that city
strength as a math teacher, I
think it's everywhere. So I
think that's, um, I would love
to see students in high school
taking a credit class.
in the new high school, um
requirements instead of taking
one of the classes that um they
are not interested. So how can
this program grow, transform our
school if um this program will
be offered throughout the year.
And again, we can keep things
really short. We've got about 30
students are waiting for us to
finish cause we are about half
an hour behind, so please, the
last question, very short
answers, last two, questioners,
please. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Roll, I'll be quick. So the we
offer professional development
in assessment for the teachers
that are teaching these courses.
And so they're able to evaluate
what the learning has been
through other means other than
traditional means and young
people are able to earn those
credits, but teachers have to be
trained on how to do that.
Thank you. Thank you for the
response. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Munoz.
Thank you and and very
interesting because you know
you're gonna tour Miami High
School, which was supposed to be
our votech school.
and certain some administration
they decided both to have two
regular high schools, but this
was originally designed as a
Votech high school, split the
school district and say, OK, if
you want educational value, you
want vote tech, come here. And
then it changed, who knows why
it's some superintendent down
the road or prior. I, I don't
remember, but the GRP program is
very interesting to me because I
used to do this all the time,
higher high school kids, right?
and bring them in. I never asked
for a subsidy or or anything,
and if you keep those kids
connected, right?
It, it either pushed them to
finish or it pushed them further
on, um, because when you make a
kid go out there and dig a ditch
or cut weeds for a day, they
really think about their career
choices and it changes. The
problem that I think we have
right now is we can't just do a
paintbrush with CTE.
You have to figure out how to
get in this area welding is an
enormous thing, right? The lot,
there's a lot that happens at
UNM. A lot happens with dull
credit at UNM and in the welding
and carpentry, but you can't
just create CTE credits for
everything across the board in
every school district. They're
gonna have to get a little more
focused, so they're targeted
into what.
areas they need to be in, not
every kid's gonna want to be a
welder or a carpenter, a plumber
or electrician or what however
you wanna do it, but it keeps
them connected. The other
problem is, as an employer, you
have two other issues. One is
getting them insurance.
right?
Because if you send them to the
lumberyard to pick up a box of
screws and, you know, they gotta
take it to a job site if they
get in a wreck and they're under
16, you're not insured.
And so you want them to have
insurance in case something
happens, liability wise, and
they're on, they're uninsurable
then.
The the other thing is we're
competing on, on, and this came
from the.
a city council meeting where
they're going into, into the
state and they're gathering this
workforce money and hiring
people during the summer.
and it's not really creating the
jobs.
you know, you hire somebody at
City Hall, maybe to file and
what's a kid really gonna learn
that they really want to be a
filer.
right?
Or or what they're gonna learn
in city or county government
doing this. If they're not gonna
learn much, they need the life
experience, whether it's.
maybe a lifeguard, maybe maybe
they get into their parks and
wreck and become the parts and
wreck, but you have to target
those, but, but that's the other
thing, but the grip thing is
really interesting to me because
the 6th through 8th, 6 through
12 that we added the credits to.
That's the biggest dropout rate
we have, and we have to gather
that back, right?
trying to think back to this
study out of 2400 students that
they tracked that they
re-engaged 300 graduated, but
the 2 other.
2100 never graduated, and that's
the biggest dropout from the 6th
through the 9th grade to to
engage them, right?
But the problem in the workforce
is
you know, anything could happen.
They could smash their hand in
the door.
and that you're gonna have a
worker's comp claim or a
lawsuit.
And so you got to figure out how
you're gonna handle that, uh, I
don't think you need additional
money, I think you just need to
reappropriate the money uh from
Workforce solutions and make it
competitive for those people
that want to do it and not let.
city and county governments that
have a tax base.
take away from the private
sector creating the the
workforce.
and the private sector has to
create that workforce.
um.
the other thing is, on, on some
of the requests of Kanising. It,
it's very interesting to me, I
mean, the, to see a pest
pesticide applicator's license
is one of the requested
credentials, right? I actually
have one. I'm taking my CU CUEs
to renew my license, right?
That's very interesting, but um.
I, I figured there would be a
lot more into AI in this study.
Uh, I, I didn't think you
reached your target goals of
100%. You only got to 79% of the
students. I don't know the
reasoning why
The other thing with Zuni it's
really odd to me that he chose
Zuni, cause Zuni doesn't really
have a
a retail base to get a workforce
out other than a couple of
grocery stores and restaurants.
unless they're working for the
Pueblo, maybe feeding the eagles
down there or something, I don't
know, but, but Zuni's a small
market that I, I wouldn't even
even pick because you don't have
the retail or the economic base
to get them a wide variety, but
you can go to
there's engineers in town that
have done this, and now those
kids came back and working in
here. There's contractors in
town that have tried to build
this space at UNM and UNM has
never really got it done.
And and there's other people
that do it all the time to, to,
to engage these kids and, but it
makes a difference in their life
because if you get them and you
get connected to that kid,
right?
Whether he's sweeping the shop
floor or like I do, make take
them sometimes to legislative
meeting and make them drive and
make them sit there and learn
about government, and and I'm
paying them.
right?
It engaged them in life, it
changes the way they want to
move forward, and that's what I
think you gotta kind of get to,
but you've got some.
some issues to get through
uh, on how you do that and and
the younger the workforce, the
younger you engage them, the
better off, but for the
employers, it's an insurance and
the and the question of
something happens, who's gonna
take the liability? That's the
big issue so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Last, last for a very
short question, Representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you. Uh, Mr. Chair, I just
have uh 12 things real quick. On
page 9, Mr. Monfilero's handout.
Uh, I just wanna make sure that
I understand the appropriation
for $10 million. Is it where,
what is that money for? Is it
for the bullets in above?
the request? Is that what it's
for specifically?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
it's the appropriation will be
to workforce solutions, and it
will be to um match employer
contributions.
And, and, um, so the employer
con the employer will have to
qualify. They'll be eligibility
requirements because I just
find it a little bit difficult
to, to handle how we will be um
subsidizing, in my view, um,
employer participation. So that
was one question and then for um
the next report, if we can get
clarification on the um brief,
which
connects career pathways to
closing achievement gaps.
Obviously, that's where we're
headed. So I, I'd like to in the
next report somewhere, um,
understand how these programs
are specifically designed to
meet the Yazi Martinez
requirements for native English
learners, low income students,
and then how will those outcomes
be measured. It doesn't need to
be answered, but if you can kind
of focus the next um
continuation of these reports in
that arena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's it
Thank you. I think that
concludes for this time. We do
have kids waiting outside. Uh,
this is the last 4 today, which
means we are back here then
tomorrow, I believe we can leave
all the papers and everything.
We're gonna be the same place.
Uh, we're back here public
comment at 9 o'clock tomorrow
morning. Uh, don't forget the
reception at the El Rancho.
at 5:30
