welcome to our penultimates mfa
oversight meeting
I will let's go ahead and begin
with committee introductions
senator brand you want to kick
us off
thank you
and chair on the track brand
rear rancho sentence for you
hello everybody here
representative we're back a dow
I have sacro sierra and the
northern part of donator
good morning share good morning
online senator in a call to buy
a thin north use to albuquergist
on the other side the highway.
There you go
so I she really I think stop
i'm very math use the state
representative for a I portion
of the senators history or so on
the other side of the freeway in
the northeast highs about you.
Good morning everybody
eliminated travels I represent
our house district twenty six
which is the west side of albert
kurkin also includes the party
the mess and the south poly.
When as yes i'm sending a versed
extended percent a district nine
sandable and bringing the
accounties
good morning no
state senator roberto bobby when
sellers district six switching
companies as them part of the
seller most really wasn't affair
and tough
good morning everyone I am a
state representative kathleen
kays from district forty four
which is all of course parts of
rear ranchel and the northern
part of the albuquerque and the
unincorporated area of all
meter.
I'm good morning everyone i'm
representative something a
borago I represent the northwest
may so about kirki I just made a
chair if I may
I just wanted to ask that we
take a moment to reflect on the
earthquakes that struck
pakistan in afghanistan
over eight hundred and twelve
people were killed two thousand
five hundred were in injured and
I would just love to reflect on
them thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
as a committee those in the
audience and those viewing my
name is but the receipt worry
about coming yet on a represent
house history thirteen the far
as southwest quadrant about the
cookie thank you.
A good morning madam chair isn't
and and if a folks
represent a rodman toyota from
someone county district one glad
to be here
thank you very much committee
members I am your chair
representative general for a
house district nineteen that's
the paragraphs of the
international district thank you
very much representative berego
for highlighting those tragedies
and it should really just helps
us keep in mind how important
and sometimes fragile and
precarious housing situations
can be for everybody as we begin
this work for the people of new
mexico
um and with that mr remembers if
you'd like to go ahead and begin
thank you very much
good morning madame chair and
members of the committee and
those in the audience good to
see all of you um but i'm gonna
do today as i'm gonna give you a
and some of you that have been
around and some of the events
we've had that the last few
months this was very familiar
will be very familiar to you but
i'm gonna give you some
highlights of our fiftieth
anniversary which were
celebrated on your long uh in
the number give you some updates
on the housing trust fund uh in
some programmatic updates on our
new development that we have
going on with multi family and
uh some single family in the
knowledge close out with that a
summary of what we covered so
far this year in the two
meetings we've had in what will
cover this this morning so this
is our fiftieth anniversary this
year we're created and april
tenth of a nineteen seventy five
we started out with one program
which was our first time home by
your program
this is for mortgages for
working families or their work
force that continues to be or
a program that we administer and
it is our more significant
program that we have in the
organization
since that does start of that
one program we've grown to
administration over forty
programs actually were at forty
five programs right now from
forty four different funding
sources that cover the full
spectrum of housing from home is
this to home ownership and some
people call it the full spectrum
of housing.
We have a staff of one twenty
here in the house in new mexico
uh in a july of last year we
rebranded from the mortgage
finance authority which were
still our legally we rebranded
to housing new mexico as we
believe it are better describes
what we do is an organization
based on what I just mentioned
with the full scope of housing
that we do
in the fifty years that we've
been in existence we've been
able to assist over five hundred
and five thousand families
with the programs that we have
the first mortgage revenue
wanted that we did was in a july
of nineteen seventy eight and
that was a sixty one million
dollars mortgage driving you
bond two date we were shoot a
hundred and sixty five different
barns totally just under eight
billion dollars
the organization started with
four staff and we have now
ground to
as I mentioned earlier of a very
capable of team here at house in
new mexico some of those
individuals started over thirty
years ago
we have a great infrastructure
across the state towards our
partners uh which is our
business model is working to
partners to provide the services
at the local level we started
out with four lenders to help us
issue that sixty one million
dollars a bond that we have
should become nineteen seventy
eight it was called alone to
lender program we now have close
to four hundred partners across
the state and they are the key
to our success in the delivery
services at the local level as I
mentioned financially
or strength we started out by
borrowing money to make payroll
had a line of credit for many
many years
actually the first agenda item
for the fresh board meeting that
they head back and now july of
nineteen seventy five the one
agenda item the head on there
was how to finance the
authorities operations until the
authority is self sustaining and
proud to report that we are very
strong financially and have over
thirty years.
Of unmodified on its in her
housing opportunity fund which
is funded from a general fund
revenues here
that going to it we funded over
two hundred and fifty million
and loans from that fund.
No i'm gonna give you a little
bit of an update on uh the
housing trust and if you go
behind tab one you will see some
slide and some highlights on the
new mexico housing trust fund is
most of you are aware cynical
one thirty four that allocates
two and a half percent to the
separate bond by severance tax
bond capacity annually to that
you mexico housing trust fund
was enacted we received the
first delegation of funds
which was thirty seven and a
half million dollars in twenty
july of twenty twenty three
the second delegation was thirty
four point six million in july
of twenty four
and then in a twenty four we
also received fifty million
dollars of a special
appropriation in that became
available july first of twenty
four and then the most recent
allocation was just under forty
five million dollars and there
was in july of this year if you
flip the page you'll see some
charger little give you some
highlights on how we're doing
uhm with their program and I
will mention that we continue to
exceed the incumbents and
leverage requirements set out by
the act so you'll see their
the hundred percent ah
encumbered across all funding
sources that I just mentioned
the awarded amount on the first
two uh certain funds that we
received at a hundred percent
eighty six percent for the
twenty five allocation and forty
nine percent of the service tax
bond delegation that we just
received a couple of months ago
for a total
awarded of a hundred and thirty
seven million out of the hundred
and sixty six million on the
expended side that takes a
little bit longer as we do not
release of funds as soon as we
award the programs or make the
awards and close we wait till
the developments are under
construction and they come and
make draws based on the
percentage of construction that
uh they've progressed through so
currently where after you know
where the first front of money
back in twenty twenty three
where after.
Sixty seven percent and you can
see their on the fight for a
right hand site for a total of
thirty four percent expenditure
the chart underneath that uh.
You'll see the various colors
they're indicating where those
monies have been allocated you
can see that the vast majority
of the funds has been in the
development side with both
single family multi family and
the down payment assistance
which is where the priorities
for us in that and what the
board has established and I
believe that uh
goes well with the priorities
that the the governor has as
well
if you go on to the next page
you'll see a map
something that we're very proud
of it shows that the the monies
and this is I apologize because
I I was having a hard time
reading it as well we can give
you more details on it here but
numbers are very light but
you'll the highlight from this
is that every single county in
the state has been assisted with
the funds here's not just going
to the urban areas of the bigger
cities is going across the state
to every location or every
county
that we have in the state so
that is the housing trust fund
update a couple of other
programmatic updates that are
mentioned here
we currently have on the rental
side we have fifty six different
multi family
projects or developments that
are active forty one of those
are in construction
that's just under fifty two
hundred units uh that we made
awards to their under
construction they're located in
twenty different municipalities
and fourteen counties a total
combined funding of four hundred
and fifteen million dollars in
the eventual economic impact
that we don't mention often
enough is over a one point three
six billion in local income will
be generated by those
developments and over sixteen
thousand actually just under
seventeen thousand jobs it's
created by those developments on
the single family side we
continue to gain some more
traction with developers there
we currently have nine different
single family developments that
are active representing our over
two hundred and fifty units
total funding of over thirteen
point seven million dollars in
nine separate locations and we
recently launched a program to
help incentivise more entry
level.
Homes to be built
something that I hesitate to
mention here but I I do have it
on my my sheet here to mention a
little bit
we had the housing summit coming
up here on september that
seventeenth of the nineteenth at
hotel rocker key unfortunately
we are sold out the capacity is
a five hundred for the hotel and
we're approaching six hundred we
had to cut it off and we've had
a lot of calls here the last
couple of days people still
trying to get in but we just
don't have any room to
accommodate any more fox or
maybe in a couple years from now
when we do it again we'll have
to look for a venue that can
accommodate more than that than
the five hundred we are
expecting obviously a lot of
folks some national speakers and
over fifty different sessions in
a lot of great networking
that'll happen there
are just a quick summary for
those of you that may not have
made their first couple of
meetings in the first meeting
that we had we went over the
reference manual over big
overview of the organization and
I played on the housing trust
fund and then we can highlight
it some of the housing session
outcomes from the legislative
session not this last year that
just passed in the second
meeting that we had in so
quarrel we had staff present the
house in needs assessment a lot
of good information there had
some presenters on planning
zoning in an administrative
efficiencies to advance a
housing development we had us
some builders that provided us
with their builders perspective
and development and then we did
a tour of eastern so coral which
is a rental development turn so
quarrel that has some set of
sites for permanent support of
housing
today we have some presenter
shows some of them will be
virtual they'll go over our
bond's financial strategy and
market updates uh the regional
housing nah annual report also a
presentation on home rehability
whether is atian program and
then homeless and housing
stability programs and madam
chair with apple stand for any
questions you may have
thank you very much for that
update is he right now I have
representative matthews.
The.
Thank you
and insure and thank you uh is
it for a great report
you mentioned there were fifty
two hundred units and under
construction as a result of the
funding and i'm i'm curious
could you translate that into
how many people that's likely to
provide housing for.
Madam chair and representative
matthews just under fifty two
hundred units are.
You know it'll be at least one
person in each of those units
are to think or our average
family size or household size
and new mexicors about
is it at two point four from the
might that so if you kind of
double that so it'll be a ten
thousand eleven thousand
families that'll be assisted on
an annual basis and hopefully as
they graduate to home ownership
delay some unions will become
vacant and they'll continue to
fill them so these units will be
available for hopefully our
lifetime here and continue to
help thousands and thousands of
families
thank you manager is
there's a number of innovative
ideas out there these days
about.
The kind of dorm room units and
all kinds of things in order to
provide housing because we have
so many people on house not
necessarily only in new mexico
but elsewhere so we're talking
about similar national efforts
and i'm just wondering if
we're looking at as we fund
these these facilities are we
encouraging people to be
innovative than
come up with some ideas about
how we can increase capacity.
Madame chairman representative
matthews
yes we are thank you for that
question we have a I mentioned
like forty five programs that
are very specific to quite fits
within the program parameters in
the funding sources that fund
those we recently actually maybe
should start saying recently
because I think it worked but
probably approaching two years
that we launched a housing
innovation program uh that the
enables a partners out there
that if there's a need in the
community that isn't being
matter is an address by one of
those forty five programs that
we have that they can apply
under a housing innovations a
program and we have gotten some
great applications and funded
some great applications uh to
some agencies to do some
innovative stuff some of a
include not add big scale but
some of them could be conversion
or renovation of some existing
properties some examples that
will give you there is one work
force integration program that
funds an agency to rehab some
some home since an apartment to
house people that are coming out
of the corrections facilities
and reintegrating back into the
society we recently funded
certain arm which was an agency
that provides a a apartment uh
units for a families single
parent households get some too
you know.
Get some training get their gd
or get back get their associates
there are two years in there in
their success rate is extremely
high it's in the cost to the
eighty percent they just do a
tremendous job so that's just
two of about fifteen different
awards that we made under the
innovations program.
Thank you and manager is he just
one last question you know i'm
very interested in manufactured
housing and
i'm kind of assuming that none
of these programs had been
funded recently have involved
manufactured housing but i'd
certainly would encourage you to
think about how because it's
affective affordable housing how
we could do better
in expanding that as a housing
option for people thank you
thank you madam chairman
representative matters I I will
a couple of quick highlights
here under our first time home
by your program just under about
ten percent of our loans are
made on manufactured housing and
here recently we did ah make an
award to developer out of the
hobs area for a manufactured
house development
where there'll be
to win the infrastructure
putting some manufactured homes
on and in selling those homes so
there's some work being done in
that area but I agree a lot of
potential to do more there.
Great I had forgotten the
harvest project thank you so
much for remaining me
very much represented batthews
representative
and think amount of chair thank
you very much for your
presentation.
I I just want to
restate your fifty years of
unmodified addeds I want to see
that outside again is out what
you just is in your report
madam chair and representative
cater it's a thirty years of and
modified on it thirty plus years
a month of a modified impressive
amount of decades thank you very
much
I I want to talk a little bit
about um
on your slide
regarding your reabilitation.
Investments I understand that
mfa is a lender but you are
known for your partnership with
either other developers or
program developing programs to
have a social mission to it such
as capitalities or a habitat
for.
Ah humanity
two any digits the program
managers of the rehabilitation
are they familiar with all the
different funding
mechanisms that a person or
developer could reach out to
make sure that their maximizing
their dollar even outside of m f
such as medicaid allows a
certain amount of
money for individuals to put
like grab bars and eighty eight
toilets and
wheel chair ramps they have a
small but nonetheless budget
that will help and medicate that
I want to make sure that we're
conveying that.
Madam chairman representative
cater
I think that there are likely
some funding sources after that
we're not aware of so we'd like
to sit down with you after this
and maybe pick your brain a
little bit and I make sure that
we if we don't already have a
listed that we get that
information so we can leverage
our sources with funding sources
with others that may be
available
thank you very much as I
interest also the mf as a linder
um
a single family home or even a
commercial property is a more
collateralised
investment for a lending
possibility in rehabilitation
is
most certainly will help the
stay as in it keeps individual
safely in their homes rather
than in assistant living
programs to you feel that
that program currently is
adequately funded and
my second question would be.
How many applicants you have for
those services that we are not
able to find or don't need the
criteria and on an average year
and you can give me a
percentage.
Madame chairman representative
caters I I do not have a
percentage for you but I won't
tell you that there is a great
need for for rehab across the
state more so than we have
funding available there are
waiting at least you know it
just so happens at behind me
here I have a master bill bedal
in in john with us from the
habitat for humanities here that
recently received some awards to
do we have for veterans and
seniors
here in this area and there's a
great need on tribal land that
their big users of our rehab
program we use home moneys we
use some of the
uh innovations program money
that dimensioned earlier some
weatherisation money to help
with that but definitely a lot
more need than that there are
resources available.
Thank you very much thinking
manager.
Thank you very much
representative case
representative robot cover yet
think you madam chair and thank
you mister nantas for your
report
i'm glad you brought up the
summer offstar without real
quickly I just looked at the
website and earlier last week
actually and silent very
impressive list of sponsors I
mean it went on pages and pages
of sponsors and I meant ours
this question last year and I
forgot I wanted to know how how
many scholarships do you all
provide for the general public
or those that are um
recipients of or help you know
the assistance that you've been
granting throughout the years is
there an effort to
inform them keep them educated
and i'll keep them in engaged
perhaps in powered with the best
knowledge that's going to be
offered it and is has been
offered in the summit i'm just
curious thank you.
Metamature representative royal
ball coming yet all the
focus of this conferences with
our partners that we have I
mentioned we have a four hundred
plus partners across the state
we generally do not advertise
that not that we would
discourage foregs from attending
but the regular recipients of
our program are generally not
the ones that are attending with
regard to scholarships we have
provided in staff all the help
me here with the numbers here
but a little bit of money for
scholarships and this is for the
smaller non profit agencies and
normally in the homeless arena
that may not have enough funding
to be able to to pay the full
membership so we give a
discounted registration i'm
sorry not membership
registration and then there's
some scholarships for those are
smaller agencies that I don't
have the the funding to be able
to assist with that
thank you up
my thank you madame chairman my
philosophy always is to arm
broaden the knowledge that we
have so it and as you explore
expanding the location app to
have more space in the future I
you know there's nothing wrong
with
in fact it's known to be better
in the housing afford especially
the portable housing arena to
have arm those are to our
to gauge our general public and
those that have been receiving
assistance and to keep them
engaged so that they can
continue to help their
communities and also it's a
another way of increasing the
marketing
efforts which brings me to the
next question and that is how
what are the marketing efforts
to the general public
around the
vast amount of programs that you
have to make sure that those are
need actually know that they can
s.
Seek assistance either in in the
multitude of your programs.
Madame chairman representative
cabinet cover yet robot coverage
we can definitely do more in
that area highlight some of the
things that were doing here
so we have a marketing
department that uh does a great
job with all the social media
platforms i've not tried a name
of multi because they don't not
familiar with all of them are
also
some advertising in various
publications across the state so
we do all of that
we do some interviews with the
the media sometimes radio
sometimes tv
and then we also rely on those
four hundred partners that we
have across the state that
administer see the rehair
program or the first time home
by your program that they
advertise and try to get the
clients in the potential
recipients to come to them
we have a in addition to our
marketing department we have a a
few folks that are a
specifically
the responsibilities to go
around the state and talk to
realtors lenders and developers
and builders to tell them about
our programs are missing a whole
lot here and maybe at the next
meeting we can kind of give you
an overview even if if we just
include in the packet of our or
media currently media updates
that we give to our board so you
can see the vast work that are
marketing departments doing to
try to spread the word but that
we definitel.
Get to
a non profit agency they're not
connected to anybody in
particular then that those are
the individuals for example
posting in in
notices or information pieces
are running tags are in.
The public housing officers or
wherever or in the management
houses we're trying to get
people from
rentals into single family
housing I think that's our
ultimate goal affordable and so
however we if we can previous
provide that list madam chair
that would be wonderful that way
we can get a better idea of how
we are marketing our efforts and
making sure that we're doing the
best that we can I know
improvements are always
important but I really
spend a lot of my time and
I don't mind informing my area
and so I am just based on what
i'm getting the feedback madam
chair they're not getting
anything from their partners and
from the partners and then
impeels not non profit so that
would be very helpful to me
the other one final question.
And it has to deal with um
veterans programs.
The.
Can you
not sure you covered it oh how
do you work in collaboration and
partnership with the arm
better into administration to
ensure that for example the
housing that we are building
are completely ada accommodated
including the wheel chair ramps
and and other types of things
that are necessary and it's a
generic question for all the
housing as well but in
particular for veterans housing
we have found I have found that
the veterans administration has
had to come in after the fact.
And put in an install
the ramps because they will do
that but what can you do at the
front end of the development and
construction process to ensure
that they are accommodated so
that we don't have to they don't
have to wait they're already
accommodated and then.
What was if you can answer that
question thank you matter.
At madam chair no representative
royal couple year.
We are have started working out
more closely with the new mexico
department of veterans services
here and all kind of use have a
temperature humanity folks that
are behind me here they came to
the table with us by six months
or so go with some money from
the legislature that the veteran
services had received in one of
some put in an application to be
where a systems veterans uh in
leverage or resources that we
had here available to do some of
that
with regard to adah compliance
and having the homes maybe
initially built to be would
accommodate
you know the retrofit they may
need in the future we haven't
done a whole lot of that day as
folks that by their homes are
you know coming to us with a an
application to reserve those
funds for you know we don't get
involved early on with the
construction of the homes other
than the single family
development that I mentioned a
little earlier so something for
us to look into I will say that
we do help veterans under our
first time home buyer program
under our rehab program we
actually have a veterans at
money from from heard verends
rehab pilot program that we're
also using mentioned at us
funding the habitat for humanity
we also have a year under
innovations program we funded
new mexico ramps project which
is uh done with the funding that
we provided over two hundred and
fifty homes that they put rams
in across the state and I just
hear in the metro area I believe
we have another application from
them that were considering to
continue to expand that program
so some of this is going on also
some mail retrofits under home
program where we are
accommodated for those folks at
when a agent place and be able
to uh.
Be able to rehab their homes and
make a more accessible so where
we're doing some of that but
definitely a a big need out
there and something for us to
continue to do.
Thank you manager and just find
leaves and you mentioned habitat
for humanity several times
I know i'm familiar with habitat
for many many years
i'm wondering if how it didn't
this doesn't need to be answered
right now which is something
that may be in the next meeting
i'd like to have a snow a little
bit more about how the
partnership would have a tap for
a humanity will be working
directly
with our round providing a
fordable and I keep using the
word affordable I don't think in
my book that four or five
hundred thousand dollar homes or
even three hundred thousand
dollars are affordable for the
income that i'm looking at the
working poor that are moving
from trying to transition from
rental housing to single family
housing so it's incredibly
important for us to ensure as
part of our oversight
responsibilities that the
affordable remains principle in
in everything that we do so if
you could provide that if you
don't have that right now but
providing the future thank you
matter that's it
thank you very much
representative mobile cable and
representative rego.
Think about her thank you is he
for your presentation and glad
that a representative mobile
coverage coverage at all right
up the issue of affordable and
how we.
Sort of create an is he some
time ago is private a couple of
years now
you and rather than I had a
conversation in the hallway if
you remember that another
conference on housing
credit policy that actually
creates kind of a step latter
then I don't know what other
term to use but sort of that
step latter for people till
level up from
and in this policy would be
something that would encourage
manager
and i've been thinking about
this for a long time that
encourages a housing program
that actually creates a step
latter from homelessness to
maybe some sort of assisted
living to
apartments.
Uh maybe condos.
And town houses two single
family that would actually
create a program.
That would help people.
Sort of have that dream I guess
of because I and I understand
now.
Maybe single family homes are
not the dream and we talked
about this if you remember robin
maybe that's not everybody's
dream anymore I don't know I
mean that is ultimately what
people want but.
Because of land constraints
manager and sort that sort of
thing it's hard sometimes for
everybody to have a single
family home but there are.
Other possibilities as a
representative matthews
mentioned
you know mobile homes are
manufactured homes.
And incouraging or zone codes to
sort of appreciate that I know
all the tricky's zone code madam
chair.
It's very hard to put a single
family home in the city of
albert
because you have to be part of
sort of a larger subdivision in
order to do that
so.
It's not encouraging that sort
of development anymore uhm and
also even the county I think the
county still has some um
I mean there's still a little
bit more welcome meaning than
the city of albuquerque but.
Even in the rural areas if
you're driving to sound fee
everybody is on the outskirts
all the mobile homes are on the
outskirts so you know with the
right kind of
sort of incentives um you know
make insurer that it's on a
solid foundation doing some
landscape and I mean there's a
lot of things that could
incourage that but.
I think I think I don't want to
get into that part of it but I
think if we.
Kind of encouraged a policy from
this committee
that.
You know the ultimate dream of
the step ladder so that people
have something to.
Hang on to I guess you could
stay once they get a leave
homelessness and get a job and
you know try to get into it
maybe an apartment and then
eventually some sort of a home.
That is there's.
So I just I mean I I say that
sort of.
Just because i've been thinking
about it for a long time and I
have talked with is the end of
robin about it and i'm chair
just throwing out the idea thank
you very much represented
briggle and I believe our staff
assistant christina baskets is
going to be in touch with you
and we did here a presentation
about zoning at our last meeting
but I don't think you were
available to hear that so we do
have some information that we
can get to you more specifically
about was owning issues thank
you very much for those
questions committee members as
we get ready for the next
presentation we've had some new
arrivals representative and et
cetera tricky if you go ahead
and introduce yourselves please.
Good morning madame share good
morning everyone apologies for
being late at the doctor's
appointment this morning but it
nice to be here it's good to see
you thank you linda he senate
district twenty four i'm still
not here
good morning committee members
enter representative terrible I
represent house sick forty eight
I too had a medical claim today
so i'm happy to be here and
this is a this is a great
committee so happy to be here in
participate thank you
thank you committee members
guess apple day get your check
up
and we will go ahead and begin
our next presentation reports on
bonds issued.
Good morning madam chairman and
all the committee members my
name is our daddy bows and I am
the careful for the housing new
mexico so today we will have
i'll just take you through a
quick journey off our bond
statistics and then we will have
two external partners who will
join us virtually to make a
presentation so we divert a
little bit from the program side
that we were talking so far to
the bond statistics and we are
very proud to say that two date
we have about eight billion
dollars in bonds issued mortgage
revenue bonds and a hundred and
sixty seven issues the last
issue we closed is on august
twenty seventh it's a hundred
million dollars
now as all if you are aware the
state of new mexico has the
private activity born volume cap
where we go to state board of a
finance in santa fe and we asked
for that cap and we understand
that it's a very valuable
limited resource so we try to
optimise it to spread it make it
elastic to use of taxable bonds
to use of replacement refundings
as irs proposals and based on
that we have done we have done
an analysis and for fiscal year
twenty six we are thinking that
we will have a total bond issue
of almost four hundred and
seventy four million dollars but
will be only using volume cap
for about two hundred fourteen
so that remained their balance
we will be using from tax of
advance as well as replacement
when market owners prepared
their mortgages if it's within
the ten year rule we can have
those recycled and issue more
bonds on that same dax exempt
basis the bond insurance process
for us is a very cumbersome and
complicated process it has
various business partners that
are related we have a financial
advisor's different kinds of
lawyers bond attorneys general
council we have the underwriters
and the managers we have the
rating agencies.
Currently we use moody's we used
to use snp before and then we
have the trustee of them we have
two external factors online with
us today i'll just introduce
them one is minute you she is
the managing director for rbc
capital markets based off of san
francisco and she's our
investment banker and she's in
the municipal housing finance
banker with rbc capital markets
over thirty years and she works
with various housing finance
authorities throughout the
nation and she is a part of our
bond issue and a team in some
capacity from two thousand
eleven and they have issued
about three billion dollars of
bonds under her leadership the
other person who will be
presenting to you is david jones
he is the cfo for csg advisors
based off of atlanta georgia
david is out with been with the
municipal advisors with the
seven a series seventy
qualification twenty plus years
of experience leading financial
advisory services to many local
housing finance agencies
specialising in strategic
planning and public finance he
is the cpa and a but at a master
of accounting and he will
provide some presentation on the
different housing markets with
that alternative meaner for her
presentation
thank you early darie and david
is it okay for me to go first.
Actually made out i've had to I
have to probably present and
then be offset if you don't mind
up I go first and then you can
follow that be great yes that's
fine.
Okay super.
And there's no presentation text
great
thank you madame chair and
members of the committee for
allowing the united speak to you
today we we've had the pleasure
to do this annually for
several years now and look
forward to the dialog we really
want to share some transit and
challenges that we see across
our state interfere clients as
far as I described I work that
see as to advisors and were
minismal advisors to a number of
state and local housing finance
agencies across the country
so
want to share what we've seen
with you as well as kind of how
housing new mexico is navigated
the the recent years and changes
and interest rates and all sorts
of housing policy and then
successful doing that
the slide I just want to kind of
hit some of the highlights
somebody's i'm sure you'll be
well aware of in terms of
challenges of the housing market
right now certainly mortgage
rates continue to remain
elevated they've come down a
little bit from some of their
peaks of seven percent plus over
the last twelve to eighteen
months but still very
challenging for bar worst to to
to qualify with you know six
percent of six fifty mortgage
rate so that certainly still
challenge.
The the house price appreciation
is also reduced to supply of
affordable housing stock and
we've seen that that only
nationally but certainly across
the state of new mexico
you always want
you know good housing prices but
certainly as they've appreciated
as they have the last five years
that makes it very challenging.
We have seen some kind maybe
good signs of increased supply
the last say six to twelve
months with a little bit more
homes on the market and his
buyers are kind of waiting for
lower rates but that's still to
be seen a far if if that kind of
shifts on with more supply.
I'm point three
one things I think that housing
mexico's certainly very proud of
were very proud of as a as their
initial advisor is is that
the authorities been able to
offer lower mortgage rates to
first and all buyers stay in the
market historically I just put a
couple of bullets there on this
page to show you
what housing the mexico's faj
first home will rates have been
of last couple of years twenty
four months ago they had a six
percent mortgage rate that was
over one percent lower than
other
comparable rates in the state
are nationally twelve months ago
had a five seventy five rate in
a below six that was tremendous
that was probably a quarter to
fifty basis points lower than
other alenders two weeks ago at
six and eight
slightly higher some of the bode
rates have been higher in terms
of how they borrow money it sits
up and aid flower than other
rate comps it's been much
tighter or hoping to be able to
continue to push that lower and
provide a a larger benefit but
it is for reasons we'll describe
here
including what aren't I
described before needing to
issue more tax will be skidded.
The use of volume cap as part of
reason the mortgage right
difference hasn't been quite as
quite as highs and years past
which sleeps about fourth point
in this page that private
activity buy him cap is in such
high demand it used to be there
only a couple of states that had
very high demand for productive
evidence activity volume cap now
it's virtually every statement
country including new mexico for
sure
two thousand twenty five limited
about three eighty eight million
and volume cap and that's needed
for not only single family
bodies she wants that as in the
mexico uses but also of course
multi family bode issues as well
so
that's the reason why I was in
mexico's use tax lines for some
of its single family lending and
funding to allow more taxes
empty cap for multi family
issues as well as some of its
single family activity there are
some good news in the resent
legislative bill the the big
beautiful bill that may help
reduce demand for cap or at
least allow cap to go further
so that that is on the hot
horizon.
The.
On my next slide want to just go
through really quickly some of
the resources that housing to
mexico uses for funding it's
affordable bounds the primary
method the historical method is
issuing taxes and bines that
certainly provides a lower cost
of funds that then it can take
and then provide lower rate
mortgages to its to its home
buyers.
Investors bid bear aggressively
for
the authorities behind them and
excellent reputation the market
and they have managed their
redemptions quite well
over time.
The second way that they fund
their loans is to package those
loans into mortgage back
securities and sell those
securities out into the into the
financial markets it's called
the the tba market stands for
two be announced and that's how
you know billions of dollars of
loans that lenders make the
package them and sell them their
fan you're freddy out of two
investors all across the world
at times that the market is more
advantageous to housing and max
ago at times tax and binds is
more advantagious I will look at
that a little bit more but
there's the two primary methods
of funds itself.
And i'm third later down payment
assistance that it provided
sells for bar was that's huge
and really is kind of the
internet way that
really drives bars to housing
mexicans
home program
that's the biggest obscure first
on all buyers and just over the
last seven years thousand
mexico's funded you know
approximately not in million
dollars of dpa second mortgages
so huge huge impact there.
The.
This slide is a graph of the
annual amount of single family
production that the authority
has died over the last twelve
plus years and you can see and
general from left to write these
bars increasing
cut out through the twenty
twenty eight twenty twenty one
kind of coverage you know huge
all buying.
Period some drops in twenty two
and twenty three as rights
really started to ratch it
higher than a more challenging
for bars to qualify and then two
thousand twenty four was a great
year and it looks like twenty
thousand twenty five with.
Are projections through
september thirty look very
strong or so.
We also shaded his bars so that
you can see in the blue portion
on the bottom or kind of
purpolish that's the matter
loans that were funded with the
tba market where they took the
loans packages and saw them and
in the top portion the green is
the amount of loans funded with
parts and so you can kind of see
every year that it kind of
fortunates in some markets like
such as two thousand sixteen two
thousand seventeen those are
better years to sell via tba
other years like twenty nineteen
in the last two years twenty
four and twenty five have been
very advantageous for as in the
mexico and other stated based
issue bonds and put those loans
on their balance you so you know
it's really kind of
weird that help them evaluate
you know
multiple times throughout the
year and even ever the week on a
on a conference call to see what
market sir what are you what are
they doing and what's providing
the best rate for its its
borrowers.
This next light shows are
the amount of revenue streams
that has new mexico's generated
from both its tba production
that's the chart on the left.
And the longterm revenue streams
it's generated by funding with
bonds it's on the right.
You can see that seen again as I
mentioned some years are more
advantageous for tba and you can
see you know better revenue
there and then the bonds kind of
create this long term maduity
revenue stream of her time that.
Really is nice and that it
provides revenue even if
production there's higher lower
fluctuates in the future
the point of this really isn't
how much it generated but it's
really just to say that the
authorities been very flexible
and shifted as it's needed to
you know and whatever market is
is working best for funding its
long so it like to show the
slide just in terms of showing
that flexibility of how they how
they do that.
But in this line is really just
making the point that that's
really the actively monitoring
interest rates is what's crucial
to to their success we we do
this like and said
weekly and have a call every
other week now to discuss that
and look and see what would have
bothers you in the current
market you know generate in
terms of a mortgage rate to its
home buyers what would the t b a
market allow it for its home for
program was as a program for a
non first time I wire don't
qualify for the taxes and
program so you know do the
staffed as a great job of
providing and so to track the
pipeline and and see what the
rates are within the loan
pipeline to know kind of when
when to access the capital
market and when it needs fine so
that's kind of just a real quick
synopsis of that process.
This is next slide here is
another way to see kind of the
profitability of bins versus the
tba market over a period of time
the kind of daughtered red line
is the probability of funding
loans with the tba market and in
the kind of blue line and light
blue line are the
present value of funding loans
with bins and you gotta see that
tba has had some times when it
been more attractive
really two thousand twenty two
window when the fed really had
to start hiking interest rates
with
worries of inflation that the
tba market really took out too
good dive in terms of its
ability to provide profit and
provide attractive mortgage
rates it's really going to
remain in that place in the last
so three years and said some
improvement of last six or eight
mins but still not as not as
advantageous by and so this is
something every transaction we
we put together and and just
confirm you know what what's the
best way for house new mexico
access to the market.
The.
One was slight here and then
just a summary that this is just
a but slide a show how the
authorities viewed by the rating
agency is clearly as crucial and
very important for maintaining
its bid ratings and getting very
good pricing as it sells binds
that it has both an issue of
credit rating
as well as a rating on its
single family bonded interest
that's got a double a three
rating with the movies for its
issue for a credit rating can
see some strength that movies
noted and their latest right up
terms of high quality asset
portfolio
low risk that provide
well service risk management
policies and sound oversight
management the only credit
challenge was lower
profitability than its peers
this was a couple a couple years
ago however profitability has
improved of late
so that's that's a good sign.
The
single family denture
historically been rated triple a
because if it's it's backed by.
A jenny may spanny may and
freddy mac mortgages back
securities which have either
director and direct guarantees
by the US government do you
movies did downgrade to a
government early this year
probably wear that lower from
way to a one rating and when
that happened
in a face or housing to mexico
single family denturer as well
as other stage devays
several of them were downgraded
as a result of that tie to the
US government sovereign rating
so double a winds that now
rating stable we've seen no
impact in with bond investors
and buying bines that's you know
well it was well.
Projected that moodies would
probably do that at some point
and that that took place over
this year.
So really in summary and the
mean is going to talk a little
bit more about
some general trends but the
chance is an opportunity in a
continued existing
we walked through those in terms
of supply rates and buying cap
you do the regulator
environments to something
watching for the the recent
talks of maybe privatising fan
freddy would still uncertain on
what that would look like
but there's some in a working
group's even among stated she
phased that are discussing how
to try to get ahead of that or
to help way in one perhaps if
that's like what happens what
how that could look
in an opportunities I mean
housing mexico has been
tremendous in terms of catching
market share in the mortgage
market state factor was a point
I think thirty four percent of
the faj loans made in the state
of mexico are housing new mexico
ones that that's not one and
three
but just pretty phenomenal I
don't I don't work with the
other state to be clients to
have that much of a market share
so I think that speaks to their
success of their program.
Just uh continue to offer
competitive mortgage rates and
we see them well position
financially to continue to
and act on its mission so
i'm gonna stop there let me know
present and I think after that
we should have time for night.
Thank you very much mister jones
missus two or you ready.
Yes I am and thank you for going
back to my presentation thank
you for inviting us to present
today and so is a privilege to
work with housing new mexico and
congratulations on the fifty
years of success serving it new
mexicans if I can start on the
first page came to get us
started as a recap
stayed housing finance eastern
seas like housing new mexico's
are able to borrow cost
effectively by issuing tax
exempt bonds represented by the
bottom grade line mmd
in that could be used to
purchase below market mortgages
to first time home buyers the
top red line represents the
freddy mac or market mortgage
rates in the loans may need it
by hasing new mexico's are being
low that red line and borrowed
at the grain line and that
thirty year monthly mortgage
receipts are then used to repay
back the bands plus a spread
which is david mentioned is like
a thirty year annuality for the
issuer after many years of the
fed quantitated easing program
that started after the two
thousand eight financial crisis
that kept interest rates
compressed and we finally saw
rates increase in the beginning
of twenty two when the fed
started raising fed funds rates
again.
We mentioned last year when
rates are high that's when her
phase can be more impactful to
the home buyers face a programs
are more powerful when mortgage
rates are closer to seven
percent versus three percent in
age face are doing very well by
issuing bonds the increase in
rates pretty much maxed out by
the end of twenty twenty three
since then we've seen a lot of
volatility on a daily or weekly
basis but not necessarily a
discernable trend that we saw
in twenty two and twenty three
they have been surges up and
down but it's been within a wide
demand for example when we start
we did say a sharp spike on
april second tariff liberation
day and then it moderated
although there has been a lot of
short term concern over tariffs
budget deficits tax reform
geopolitical escalations or even
the mouth moody's downgrade of
US government debt after an
initial shop value the market
becomes maybe a little bit
desensitize and it reverts back
to the me.
Okay if we can go back to the
next line please thank you this
graph reflects the historical
mortgage rates over the past
fifty plus years once again
after the financial crisis of
two thousand and eight we were
at historically low ramp levels
until inflationary pressures
drove the fed to start
increasing rates at the
beginning of twenty two.
The fed started lowing rates a a
era goal but then paused in
twenty twenty five due to an
inspected increase in inflation
and then
they are waiting for the effect
of the tariffs mortgage rates
are currently admit six is which
is a far cry from the eighteen
percent highs of nineteen eighty
one and more than a full point
below the historical average of
seven seventy one next page
please.
Okay great housing financial
agencies are thriving this graph
represents historical issues of
municipal single family mortgage
bonds nationwide as a whole
since two thousand seven last
year's volume as an industry of
over twenty twenty five point
four billion broke all prior
year records
and now we are untracked to
exceed then it showings amount
this year in twenty five but
please note we only exceed it
the two thousand seven levels
because of a significant
increase of taxable balance we
actually issued more tax exempt
bands as an industry back in two
thousand seven
hf's need private activity
volume cap to issue tax exempt
debt and it is a very limited
invaluable resource tax exempt
bonds are taxable bonds actually
represent almost forty percent
of all mortgage revenue bonds
issued this year and in fact
housing new mexico issued its
first taxable bonds in the
beginning of twenty four I do
too long production levels out
pacing volume cap available.
And if we can go down the next
page please.
Okay and housing bonds actually
made up thirty nine percent of
all taxable muni bonds in
general issue total this year
this is actually a staggering
percentage considering that
housing barns only represent
less than five percent of all
tax example muni bonds as a
whole so housing bonds are
generally a tiny portion of the
general muni market because we
are limited by volume cap and
hfa's we don't issue billion
dollar deal bands like some
other states in any case because
there are so many housing
taxable housing bonds coming to
market the taxable bond
investors are actually starting
to get a little bit more picky
and demanding and because it's
not a retail product we are at
the mercy of a smaller pool of
institutional investors so we
are trying to expand that in a
university of investors
and as mentioned previously
housing new mexico started
issuing taxable bonus last year
to leverage cap and since then
we have issued six series of
taxable bands totalling more
than two hundred thirty four
million k next page please.
The.
Okay this is a graph of housing
new mexico's historical single
family bond balances starting
from two thousand seven after
years of pre payments in
refinancing's outpacing new
production and bond issues is
post the crack but a financial
crisis outing new mexico has
rebuilt their bond and long or
follow bigger than ever with now
over two billion dollars worth
of bonds outstanding some of
that is a tributable to home
price
for example housing new mexico's
average loan size used to be
about a hundred six thousand in
twenty fourteen and now it is at
two hundred forty two thousand
in it just takes more bonds to
help the the same number of bar
worse because of price
appreciation.
Because all monitors are not
prepaying or refinancing housing
new mexico is able to build up
their balance sheet keep loans
in bands outstanding longer and
that is the whole lock in effect
this allows housing new mexico
to retain their spread longer
over the thirty year horizon and
be more economically beneficial
and financially sound next page
please.
Okay the next couple of skies
are on the most new resent bond
insurance twenty twenty five
series e and f sixty million
dollars of tax exempt blended
with forty million of taxable
series which made approximately
a hundred two million available
to acquire new mortgages to
first time moderate income home
buyers within the state.
Okay next page please
so the tax exempt series had
fourteen institutional investors
in twenty six percent of the
deal went to retail investors
including almost seven million
to instant new mexico retail
investors there was an unsold
balance of a little over two
point one million which rbc took
into inventory on this taxable
side we had twenty four separate
institutional investors without
much overlap between the two tax
exempt and taxable series one
new investor was freddy mac who
we had been looing all of last
year they finally bought housing
barns for the first time this
year since they went into
conservation in two thousand
eight
and they have since put in an
order it's of each of the three
housing new mexico taxable
series this year and we are very
excited and proud of that new
relationship.
Okay the last line please.
Okay this last page I normally
put at the end it is a list of
muni bonds issued in the state
of new mexico so far this year
and where you stand in terms of
volume compared to our prior
years you had a very productive
issue instead of twenty five
primarily due to the seven
hundred eighty one million
municipal energy acquisition
authority
and that is the end of my
presentation and I would be
happy to open it up to any
questions.
Thank you very much misses ju
for that presentation I will
take questions from the
committee
given that we are running a bit
behind scheduled committee
members I will hear you for up
to four minutes each and will
begin with representative.
Thinking about
since we have some experts.
Since we have some some experts
online I actually have my
question is about um if if
if the tax increases on
commercial properties in
bernelio county could have an
impact on I mean everything that
we're trying to deal to create
affordable housing and to put
these developers in a commitment
of
lower rates a certain percentage
for low and moderate income but
yet they're facing these
dramatically just I think
outrageous increases and
commercial property putting the
pressure on them do is there a
risk of a repeat of like two
thousand eight and anything that
you're seeing and what we're
doing with state policies and
the drop in a two a from a three
a rating.
Um I am not sure if
david jones is online but
I would agree that there's
international wide affordability
crisis and inflation
wage increases are not keeping
up with all the inflation party
inflationary pressures on daily
goods in products and services
as well as home appreciation.
It will we have another
crises experience in two
thousand and eight
we would think that we are wiser
now with no longer thought some
prime lending that we saw back
prior to those days I think
both banks and borrowers are
like r b more judicious or banks
and especially in terms of their
lending
I think some of the issues are
more federal versus state issues
we are looking at for example
the issue of properties of ****
and freddy which could hurt the
mortgage market but there are a
lot of issues I believe that at
hand in the future.
Don't thank you thank you madam
chair and thank you for their
answer and I know it's not
exactly what the presentations
about but are we holding an
issue may have to answer this
are we using um stronger lending
standards than before or i'm I
wonder if folks are at risk of
over financing and not having
the ability to keep up with.
Um.
What we're allowing them to
borrow.
One thing that I would note is
that has a new mexico has never
engaged in some prime lending
and in fact because of the irish
regulations
we
agree require three years of irs
documentation of income so we
never engaged in what used to be
called liar alone's where
where bars never had to document
their income and that is
something that hfa's are
actually very careful about
because my irish regulations
they
need to provide three years of
documentation so
some standards are
less restrictive because we give
for example **** and freddy i'll
in jenny may allow special
dispensation for state hf's
for possible eat lower credit
scores that number one it is
guaranteed by for any or freddy
so
housing to mexico doesn't take
any real estate risk but
secondly generally stay housing
finance agencies tend to have
better deal linguistic scores or
rates because they many offer
home buyer education prior to
getting alone so.
Think thank you for that think
you managed her my last question
I I mean I mean there's over
forty programs that housing new
mexico so maybe mixing these up
a little bit but if you do look
at the graph across the state
the big bulk of the projects I
mean I think it was over almost
forty million dollars
the biggest amount of the
projects are in berlio and
butterly it seems to be driving
a lot of the market cost it's
kind of an explainable some of
the cost of holmes across new
mexico right now that before you
probably have to pay someone to
take and now their very
expensive and so i'm just i'm a
little bit concerned about our
developers that have entered
into an agreement under one set
of terms which housing new
mexico is honoring and then now
being faced with rapidly rising
intr a taxes on these commercial
investments when they've already
meet these agreements on certain
costs to the the residents and
to have a certain percentage for
low and moderate income whether
these are rentals or for
purchase and now being screamed
screens that the county level on
taxes and just hoping that this
pans out because it it's the
cost of real estate has doubled
in the state in the last four
years and we cannot allow that
to continue to happen thank you
madame chair
thank you very much
representative down i'm
representative luhan for four
minutes
thank you I mean desert those
are some good questions and then
got me thinking more but but on
just to continue that
conversation in where we are
with what housing new mexico is
doing in the lower risk.
Assessment can can you give us
some.
Some background to how you how
that.
You mentioned it earlier keeping
the brands longivity over thirty
years and such as that part of
your your your lower risk and
for your portfolio mountain.
The.
I and i'm sorry with that
question directed to me yes
manager I think you're you're
the only present or online
okay I see my apologies so
it in terms of
keeping the thirty years loans
in bands outstanding longer
there is a e grader list risk of
a fee payments as we see
then is expected to lower rates
a short term rates at least
sometime this year probably
starting this month later this
month at their september board
meeting that affects short term
rates directly it may turn goal
to mortgage rates and we may end
up getting lower rates which you
will which may sperk refinancing
we don't necessarily think it'll
go back to the three percent
levels that we saw a post
post pendemic
but we are aware that that is a
risk
but we have survived that long
rate environment post financial
prices
and we have experience
you know that lock in effect
that we mentioned where people
are not moving or refinancing in
that may change the dynamics a
little bit but our finance team
is aware of the situation and we
are ready to adapt with
different strategies to
mitigate those types of risks.
Thinking mountain out I really
appreciate that I think that
just goes to show that you with
your all the.
That you are all tasked with you
are looking at all things and
and the market is due to change
with all the the changes from
the from the ven from the
federal government at hand so
i'm able to keep keep i'm asking
these questions and see how
things can but yeah that that
will be an interesting change if
it does happen out here the
other thing I really just wanted
to.
Uhm go back a little bit is that
you said we don't engage in in
the the g bonds or go on.
Um.
And can you just.
Give us a little bit more
background why not and if we is
it a possibility to
participate or put with that
forward.
And I guess that would have to
be yeah just a little bit more
background on that mountain.
Apologize could you repeat the
question what types of bonds and
you know you
that you we don't participate or
the state and using gba gopons
that does all general obligation
better with our
item not is familiar with what
the state of new mexico and does
but in terms of
issuing large general obligation
bonds we in the housing new
mexico are taxed with
issuing mortgage revenue bonds
to finance the single family
mortgage program and that is
governed by
what we're allowed to do is
governed by the private activity
cap available and that's why
we're issuing taxable bands to
all men bad or stretch that
capacity
I am not as familiar with what
the state of in the state
government does on their go
programs.
Thank you I think measure I
don't is if you want it i'll
talk later cos I don't have
limited time but it's just to
see what if there is a
leveraging effect
go without or how how that could
possibly help us when we are
looking at.
The shift and risk in
investments across the board
across the market thank you
am I I will note there are some
other states that fun different
programs through state
appropriations
for example
california housing finance
agency they monitor a program
for
program called california dream
for all
and it is a twenty percent down
payment assistance program that
is funded by the state
washington state has a I believe
it's a seventy five dollar
recording tax that is assessed
state why to also find their
down payment assistance program
called the cover near the
program also twenty percent up
to maximum of a hundred fifty
thousand so there are certain
programs that are
certain states fund through
state budget appropriations are
tax for
for down payment assistance
thank you mention
thank you and represent a rule
high and mischew for those
answers we will move on to
representative of a yet all.
Think you madam chealing my
questions are directed towards
my spots.
Thank you.
And
so and thank you for all before
me my some of my questions were
are.
Were asked already so
again going back to potential.
Raising interest rates are bond
suffer softening what
contingency plans exist right
now um what strategies plans are
if.
The interest rates continue to
are elevate or if market demand
for ziban's softened that's my
question number one and keep in
mind we only have four minutes
so figured thank you
thank you so we have we have
been in a sustained rising rate
in the excuse me over the class
miss two the question was
directed to miss bows you're
you're off the whole i'm sorry
thank you.
Madame chairman madam cover
so we always take into
consideration the two different
scenarios of rising interest
rates are following interest
rates and also if interest rates
are stable and that's what
mister was mentioning we choose
the option between whether we
are going to go bond financing
or whether we are going to go
tbe so what happens with the
bond financing is when the
market interest rates are
favorable to us then we go
through that because you showing
the tax exam bond we can have a
lower interest rate for our
borrowers and it is beneficial
for the organization because as
these bonds keep on overstaying
in their thirty year bonds of
course they don't live for
thirty years as people prepare
usually average life is about
twelve years but what we do is
when restructured the bond
issues we do very extreme setups
we say well if the if everybody
prepares at a five hundred
percent preparing what will be
our cash flow and if nobody
prepares then what the situation
will be so based on those two
ranges that interest rates are
then determined and that's why
the reason why we blend in the
taxables is it's great to have
one percent interest rate below
the market to benefit affordable
housing but if we can't sustain
it then we have given to ten
people and we're out of funds so
we try to prolong it so we make
some little bit of taxable so
yes the rate differential one be
one percentage point but it may
be five or maybe fifty but you
are you affect much more
population of new mexico so you
extended so usually in our
structuring calls we consider
which option we are going to go
there are various models that
are run based on the interest
rate scenarios and based on that
we also have some kind of an
admin fee from the bonds that we
are generating but we tried to
see the maximum benefit that
began.
Think a madam chair and think
very much and we have to make
sure that we do not create a
scenario of for closures as
we've seen in the past so I just
want to make sure that and thank
you for your response that we
have all these contingency plans
and models in place so that you
can then
predict or project so I
appreciate that and that's also
i'm also concerned about the
fact that new mexico housing
classrising faster of course
than wages and so you mentioned
earlier on the uh.
Yeah.
Loan dumped down payment
assistance and other programs
that could be affected by
these raising us so I just want
to make sure that we're
monitoring that to the best of
our ability so you answered that
thank you and the other question
I have has to do with and again
I want to make sure that are
affordability factors or
principle in all the models in
all the plans affordability
based on the rising costs and
the lower minute the wages so
wages are not rising costs are
but so there models have to
predict that differentiate
madame chair can I have one more
question don't my final question
I have
the final question has to do
with tribal entities based on a
report that was given to us in
the inaffairs committee so at
some point off line we need to
address the questions that they
raised to us on housing thinking
thank you I will move on to
representative i'm thinking man
chair I just wanted to clarify
my statement from earlier in it
really does relate back to what
representative of mobile cover
yet of said
I wasn't talking about the
zoning person about I didn't
ring that up but I what I was
referring to was a step latter
for affordability for the state
of new mexico to encourage that
throughout um
our cities and counties
and just really encouraged that
steplater model
in it and that may be a policy
that we need to create amongst
the legislature that the state
is really.
Encouraging
those step steps for
affordability and that's that's
really what I just wanted to
clarify that
thank you thank you very much
representative borigle as
senator gonzalez.
Thank you all madame chair thank
you to our percentage.
Then probably on this boost is
the best to respond to this.
At the room beginning now you
mention them the board of
finance.
Anna so those do they all have
to go through the board of
financial transactions.
Madam chair senator gonzalez we
have to always go to the state
board of finance to ask for
volume cap.
So every year we go and there
are two different aspects in
november we go and ask for the
volume gap their federal
government are iris gives the
stage of new mexico a specific
amount of volume cap and there
are different competing entities
that go and request for it we
have to put our request we have
to justify a request and they
give us an amount based on that
in the meeting we have to go and
present and that is called the
direct allocation and that
direct allocation actually
expires on june thirtieth so we
have to use it up a forty
percent of it has to be used
otherwise we go back and ask for
an extension and then also we
have a carry forward which lasts
for three years so it's kind of
a rolling average so when we are
discussing on our bond issues
and structuring them be
considered these due sources how
much carry forward do we have
and is it going to expire how
much direct allocation we get a
get and then we have to decide
on a method of both five four
and life so that we don't use
which is first in first time and
last in first out so that we
don't leave any cap on the table
but yes sir we do have to go to
stateboard or finance to ask for
that gap and only when they give
us that gap then we can go and
issue the mortgage revenue.
Very well thank you on the last
question I have manager of some.
I feel that I saw committee and
we always see what is being
looked at and being issued.
But we never see what mature
sell out except.
So you know like whatever
started.
Twenty years ago whatever what
has been paid off or need
mentioned also that some repeat
offer are much earlier than I
think a cell that would help us
you know in scene.
You know the effects of it.
Madam chair and sender gonzalez
we do keep detail record of that
because we are required
regulatory ways on irish what is
speed off and then also there
are very stringent rules on
which bond scan be called with
preparements because i'm then
they investors be as a higher
interest rate and those bonds
are protected from the calls
even if that preparements come
in so we cannot randomly of all
the bonds so we do have very
detailed reports and if we want
you know going forward we can
have some kind of a reporting on
that and every time the issue
are bond we do have a temporary
reporting and the governor's
signs it to make sure you know
what we have done how much would
be shoot how much volume gap
will be shoot how much is in
replacement refundings so we do
have all that record and if you
would like weekend going forward
kind of give it to you on a
summarized version what was
originally outstanding maybe
over the last four years what is
outstanding now and what we
project
madam chair.
Oh thank you for that and and I
really don't mean like having
names you know but just seem
like you know we had a so many
series that were repeated often
just to give us a a better feel
for it and I always remember off
an article that was on the
sanity numerous and several
years ago about this man that
mentioned that he had he had
been paying for the sweeney gm
for the last sixty years.
Because every time it goes up it
refinances are it sold and I
need spand issue again and
sometimes I feel like i'll like
we all that to the public.
And many times you know where
no.
Entities go out for one because
they say it's not going to cost
you anymore it is gonna cost you
even if it's the same read but
if it's expanded do you know on
a refinance you know just being
truthful with her with a public
you know then
that so I think that it would
help you know in some parts to.
To see that we do have so many
new ones but we do also accent
so many per year.
And thank you manager thank you
thank you thank you very much
senator if that is everyone for
this portion we will move on to
the next item on the agenda
thank you very much again to
miss mrperiod jones and mister
for that really detailed
presentation.
Are going on to regional housing
authority twenty twenty five
annual reports mr garcia take it
away.
The.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee my name
is john garcia and the assistant
director of community
development here housing new
mexico um this morning I would
be presenting the regional
housing authority twenty twenty
four annual report as mandated
by the regional housing
authority act this report
includes operational and fiscal
activities for eastern western
in northern regional housing
authorities from july first
twenty twenty three to june
thirtieth twenty twenty four.
The.
This next slide shows a map of
the regional housing regional
territories the light blue area
represents eastern regional
territory which covers twelve
counties.
The green section is northern
regional territory and covers
ten counties and the gold is
western regional territory and
covers eight counties.
The light coloured areas in the
center or the independent urban
agencies.
In the state.
Excellent.
Yeah.
Background the two thousand nine
legislative session amended the
regional housing a lot to
redefine the activities of the
regional housing authorities
which included a mandate that
housing new mexico provide
oversight of certain activities
to include the submission of an
annual report to the legislative
oversight committee legislative
finance committee and the
department of finance and
administration.
Housing in mexico does not
receive any funding for this
oversight and we do not find any
of the housing regional housing
authorities.
Oversight duties and their part
of housing and urban development
phones it provides oversight for
all operational activities
including approval of budgets
and procurements housing new
mexico is in a role of limited
oversight and is responsible for
the following items.
Review of regional housing
authority operational budget.
Approval of regional housing
authority board of
commissioners.
Approval of new regional housing
authority and executive
directors.
Approval of articles of
incorporation in biolas of any
nonprofit entities created by
the regional housing authority.
Approval of contracts in moves
with the value greater than one
hundred thousand dollars.
Approval of transfer sales like
liquidations or any real or
personal property with the value
greater than one hundred
thousand dollars.
And review of regional housing
authorities external financial
audience.
Operational budget each fiscal
year the regional housing
authorities are required to
provide housing new mexico with
the final operating budget for
review the information located
in the table reflects each
approved regional housing
authorities low income rent
subsidy and section he voucher
subsidy.
The.
A board of commissioners.
The rust the rosters listed in
these tables reflect the most up
to date status.
The regional housing law states
that regional housing authority
boards must consist of at least
seven members.
Eastern regional has five active
members in two vacancies
northern regional has four
active members in three
vacancies.
And western regional has five
active members and two vacancies
and I would just like to mention
that we are presenting a
candidate for eastern regional
at our september board meeting.
Executive directors chris
herbert is the executive
director of eastern regional
housing authority and has been
since two thousand six.
Natasha martinez was promoted
from assistant director to
executive director of northern
regional.
And sonya florida's was promoted
from assistant director to
executive director for western
regional and they were both
approved by the housing new
mexico board on december
eighteenth twenty twenty four.
The.
Creation in a solution of not a
profit entities.
Eastern regional housing
authority form the eastern
regional housing authority
housing development corporation
a non profit organization to
provide construction and
maintenance of low income in a
formal housing projects located
in the jurisdiction of eastern
regional.
This non profit was proved by
the housing new mexico board on
october eighteenth twenty twenty
three.
There was no activity for
northern or western regional
housing authorities for this
item during this review period.
Approval of contracts and mouse
greater than one hundred
thousand dollars.
On april thirtieth twenty twenty
four the housing in mexico board
approved eastern regional
contract with the state of new
mexico in the amount of three
million dollars to rehabilitate
von public housing.
With this funding eastern
regional was able to upgrade or
replace the electrical systems
on twenty one units.
In star lead lighting.
Replace water heaters for new
sidewalks in ede ramps and
replaced a hundred and eighty
seven windows.
On may twenty eighth twenty
twenty four northern regional
received post approval from the
housing and mexico policy
committee for six contracts
exceeding one hundred thousand
dollars.
Funding was used to rehabilitate
four units in ping osco
redesignate one unit in las
vegas.
Reabilitate sixteen units in
towers semi gal and coffects
counties.
Mall debate meant on four units
in tows county.
Replace a water waste water
treatment system in panyosco
that serves seventeen families.
Western regional housing
authority do not report any
contracts exceeding one hundred
thousand dollars during this
reporting period.
The next slide
review of a regional health
authority external audit eastern
regional received an unmodified
opinion of their fiscal year and
in june thirtieth twenty twenty
four audit.
They resolved nine prior year
findings and had no repeat
findings there was one finding
related to p r a reporting.
Western regional received an
unmodified opinion on their
fiscal years june thirtieth
twenty twenty four audit there
were four total findings two
related to fighting at financial
statements and too related to
new mexico state statute.
There were four prior you're
findings that were resolved in
zero reoccurring.
Northern regional has not
submitted a financial audit
since twenty twenty one and has
been in trouble to status with
heard because of this.
The twenty twenty twenty one
article in a modified opinion
with fifteen findings and was
included in the twenty twenty
two regional housing authority
report.
Nor the regional has been
working with the office of the
state auditor and heard.
And acquired in the counting
firm to complete in the review
of their outstanding audit.
The auto firm was hired unfair
february seventh twenty twenty
five and has made significant
progress in completing the
twenty twenty two audit and it's
positioned to begin work on the
twenty twenty three and the
twenty twenty four on it.
This concludes my presentation
and they'll be able for any
question to me thank you very
much mister garcia so far I have
representatives down and
matthews anybody okay mobile
cover you comes oh okay alright.
Did I miss any.
Yeah.
Representative down kick it off
thank you thank you for madame
chair and thank you for the
presentation i'm is there any
consequences for or what what
what the.
Result of northern regional
housing authority not being a
part so they last funding.
Madam chair representative down
had overseas the they found the
housing authorities and they did
with all funds from northern
regional but then they gave them
back to them so that they could
fund their.
Um.
Their housing projects
but as far as housing new mexico
we don't have any leverage to
provide any time
punitive actions against them
think thinking manager uhm and
how how are the reimbursements
to the land owners being
adjusted with the rising cost of
rant in mexico.
Or the the compensation for
renting.
Outside of a housing authority
do you do the section eight
vouchers to private properties
are they being increased
madame share representative i'm
sorry III don't have the
expertise answer that question
thank you madame charity may not
have the answer to this question
either but I it's my
understanding that there are
folk there are housing
authorities in new mexico
writing very large checks out of
state someone entered housing in
new mexico and then transferred
out of state do you know what
i'm talking about.
Madam chair representative I I
okay thank you very much
thank you very much
representative and
representative matthews
thank you and thank you mr
garcia for your report.
So i'm just trying to understand
the structure of looking at the.
Materials you provided burner
leo and san fey.
Are not part of the are
they
are they a regional housing
authority themselves.
Or are they separate I would not
part of this at all madam sure a
representative matthews yes they
they receive their own funding
and they are regional house
authority within themselves okay
and thank you and madame share
mr garcia so it is the same true
adonion accounting.
The map yes madam chair
representative matthews yes.
The man share me to her see it
is there any
my let me ask a question this
way the the city of average
within the last week two weeks
has announced about eighty
million dollars worth of new
projects.
Is there any coordination or any
interaction between.
The housing authority and the
city of albert in terms of those
kinds of projects
madam chair representative
matthews we are aware of of the
funding to all kirky but
I I can't speak to what
collaboration that they are
housing authorities are
man chair mr o c I c
aid has come to your.
Matt user.
So to make sure
we gave you the correct
information on the your question
with regard to the other housing
authorities similar to
electricity housing authority
and messy a value public house
in authority they are not
regional housing authorities
so they receive direct funding
from hudden they're not covered
under the regional housing act
so we don't have any oversight
over those others in the three
that that john presented on.
With regard to the eighty
million dollars that was awarded
recently to burn your county and
now record
some of those out we don't have
all other details yet on where
that money has been allocated
some initial indications are
that some of the
developments that may be funded
with that don't do contain some
funding from us whether it's tax
credits for some other car
financing with regard to how
they are coordinating with some
of the public housing
authorities uh say albert he has
an authority
I know that some of the units
that or developments that we
funded to have some vouchers uh
projected forums so i'm assuming
that there is a gonna be some of
those developments potentially
covered or may have some
vouchers in him awarded under
the local housing authorities.
Um
ma'am sure i've
issued i'm just curious whether
or not it is the best use of
money and talent to not
what i'm sure you say is that
there is no statewide housing
plan that is
sort of looking at all the
things that are going on and am
I misunderstanding how housing
is managed in the state from a
government's standpoint
metamaturing representative are
matt user I would say at this
stage here it is uh
a little fractured on house
housing has been delivered and I
think it's a you know we
honestly as a state housing
agents who we oversee forty plus
programs across the continue you
have public housing authorities
I think we're john netanof it's
twenty three different public
housing authorities are close to
that number.
That we don't have any oversight
unreceived direct funding from
hudden do the wrong thing we're
aware of what they do which is
mostly public housing in the
section eight vouchers you have
some local jurisdictions that
receive direct funding from had
from home and to do some housing
you have a usda that does some
stuff as well you have under the
veterans administration some
money that goes out so that
they're a lot of different
funders if you will for
affordable housing and now with
the the officer housing in the
hundred and ten hundred and
twenty million dollars has just
yet another agency that
doing some housing or has
funding for that data and the
creates are definitely another
structure out there to do that
and in some cases potentially
complicates things or at least
create some confusion with where
the money's coming from and
whose
has access to it and how it gets
underwritten and
those type of things shop
I hope that answers your
question and chair thank you yes
that answers the question it's
it just seems like this is such
an important
category of service and such an
important issue since we have so
many unhouse people in the state
that I i'm a little
I I would dented there would be
some kind of a
overall projection
overall supervision to be sure
that we weren't duplicating
effort to debt we were omitting
places that needed help in
services
it just seems like a kind of a
and it and this is not a
reflection on the m f a where
anybody or any of the regionals
and I understand some of that is
federal but
this is such an important.
Field it just seems like there
should be somebody with some
coordination among the top folks
being sure that we weren't
duplicating beach being sure we
weren't omitting important parts
of the state in providing help
with housing so just just made
two sands based on
the money that's being spent and
the n.
Thank you very much
representative math is and
representative
think you made insurance thank
you both for your presentation I
am
a little bit
and have a question about why we
got so far behind why northern
regional that so far behind it I
see
the twenty twenty one was
recently completed as per your
report so that's one major
question how do we get given the
oversight responsibilities and
given what mr
just mentioned about the many
funding sources surely there's a
way that we are keeping track of
all these funds sources as part
of the oversight responsibility
monitoring them evaluating them
whatever so question one had it
get so far behind number one and
what correct of measures are in
place in order to bring northern
regional into compliance and
then what risks does this pose
to funding streams if any all
correlate it if you could please
suck thinkingly within our
foreminutes thank you madame
chair representative of welcome
to europe the reason northern
got behind was they had trouble
obtaining a
an auditor to look at their
their books there they've had
some issues with their books and
they were they've had a very
hard time obtaining
an audit firm that would take on
unmadam chair can introduce
based on that response what is
your what is our role in helping
them and assisting them in
getting an auditor.
Mancher representative royball
comma
we've attempted to assist them
with
I don't we haven't specifically
attempted to help them with to
obtain
we've helped him in other areas
with their board
we've offered assistance by
facilitating contracts with
other regionals to help to
assist them
with managing their
their funds.
Madame chair in representative
royal ball cover yet aware on a
tough situation the way the
regional housing act is written
we have responsibilities to
oversee those functions that
john pointed out early in the
presentation but we don't have a
whole lot of tease to have
either the director or the board
taking actions I will say that
they we've assisted him with a
procurement having them you have
other individuals or public has
in authorities help and with
several functions.
The state auditor finally did
step in to a system and get in a
not at the previous saturday
that they had that did not
complete the added I did not
want to turn over the work
that had been done previously
think the state auditor forced
to that to come about so they
are now hopefully here on the
right track to do that the
funding comes directly from
heard and so how does watching
and very closely I think john
mentioned that they're in
trouble status which has several
implications with had but that
funding is not coming from us
and there's no state funds in
that and at this stage in the
game map you know we're just
trying to assist them to
complete their articles which
will get him hopefully out of
that trouble status along with a
couple of other things that are
they need to take of they've had
some staff turnover they have a
new executive director now that
uh has been there for a while so
we're hopeful that they can turn
it around here pretty quick
thank you in and even though
there's no state funding them
off their population is involved
because are population is
receiving services that we have
to keep that closely monitored
so the other part of the
question was what correct of
measures are in place to bring
them into compliance and then
what risks if any does this post
to funding streams
that questions are.
Madam chair and representative
robot cover yet all they r
the funding streams that as I
mentioned come directly from her
mainly of what they're doing is
for the public housing units
actual structures that they have
uh some money that is coming
from how to make sure that those
continue to be maintained and
then the the housing vouchers
indications that we have is that
they're doing well it's spending
all their capital out the money
or the capital money that comes
in for the public housing and
that the second eight vouchers
are being used and hudders
monitoring that very closely
thank you out of chair thank you
thank you very much
representative i'm senator goods
are.
Thank you manager thank you john
pretty much so in line of
little excuse me of what
representative ever has
addressed.
Metal I guess though what I was
going to say or so
is there any part that are
congressional can be monday to
assist with trying to bring
closer to
that part in the regional where
the northern part.
Madame chair and senator goes
all they say I I think this is
all really like I don't know
that there are any issues with
had where we would need to bring
the federal delegation into
assist I think that is a doing
what they need to do to try to
get him back in line and
continuing to fund them until
they can get their feedback
under him I think it's up it's
just gonna take a little bit of
time for those audits to to get
completed here hopefully before
the the end of this year they
can get cut up with a one or two
more audits in that really
assistant and hopefully digging
them selves out of the whole
letter
insurer now
no
I think also part of the spinal
quite a change over on the
administration part you know on
the directors
and there so I return that
happens it just brings another
wave of time part better it
would be here
to see that are complete and
just to move forward because
some
right now as far as though as I
know I think
though
paperwork and everything is
going to the so coral offers
from regional
eight form section eight.
So that has to be a hard on on
that region too you know a vower
load so it would be
better anyway home just it seems
like it's gone for a long time
the the next barbara madam
cherry is some
on the vacancies on the
commissioners is that strictly
well first do we have applicants
to for this positions and is
that strictly coming from the
governor's office.
The matter of chair senator
the the applicants come from
from the area from the community
we we've we've assisted and
sending out a email blasts to
our partners in the areas where
there are vacancy used to solve
the center interested parties
and and so far we've had we have
one candidate that we're
presenting
this month at this month housing
new mexico or meeting from for
eastern
I have been notified by the
executive director of western
that they have a potential
candidate and northern also has
a potential cabinet so we we are
moving forward and getting those
are commissioner positions
field.
Oh
matter
direct answer to your question
is once our board bets in a
process make sure that they meet
the qualifications that outlined
in the act then we do send them
to the officer the board and
commission's office of the
governor and they've been fairly
timely at approving those once I
think the
the challenges getting the
applicants in that meet the
qualifications but I want if
they do we forward him in the
governor's office has been doing
a good job of approving them
pretty quickly
thank you for that at all
just a far too that we all
represent different parts of the
state then if you look at our
the vacancies you know maybe
this is one place where we could
assist in some million names
to to assist with their per
going back to the northern
regional that has three
vacancies one more and you would
have a more than fifty percent
of the commission and this is
the one that needs to the most
assistance
so
you know let us know when you
know i'd be more than glad to
work on trying to get some names
thank you mountain
thank you very much senator i'm
senator another
thinking madam chair think izzie
and mr garcia for being here.
I'm if you notes just
specifically in regards to
northern
regional and the compliance
issue I find it interesting
specifically because that
somebody who came from heard
um I always heard that capacity
was an issue in the state of new
mexico when it comes to housing
and I asked a million times why
we don't get the funds in the
format that other states do
there are similar to new mexico
and the response was always
compliance and capacity so now
seeing it from the side it's
ironically you know and it's
unfortunate that I could that
we're seeing it here but I want
to ask you in terms of
additional funding is the or mr
garcia has mf managed additional
fee or it funds for look for
towns or tribal and like starvan
governments who lack the
capacity to manage these
programs.
Madam chair and as soon as
november the
quick answer is not we are do
not receive cdb funds arrives.
Yes that one
we do not receive those are we
have not served as fiscal agents
for them I will say that
obviously this is this agency is
not doing well we have two
others that are doing very well
and I think the public housing
authorities I can't speak to
that but you're not dated
reporter i've seen the vast
majority of all the public
housing authorities are doing
very well so this one obviously
isn't it is an outliar and I
don't think there's many of them
like them out there
quick radio I think you is he I
appreciate that because I think
ultimately the.
The reality is the
accountability is of new mexico
and it's not the federal
government once those phones are
out the door from hide it we're
done and I let and if they're
not in compliance right then
those funds are at risk and it's
I think it's a the benefit of
the people of new mexico that we
that we ensure that those things
are done and they're held
accountable and in terms of
additional funding to you all
and a fee have additional c
finding or youth home was a
demonstration programs or
healthy home screens
madam chairman I sent or not but
we do have a long list of other
funding sources that we've been
successful some of those
competitive funding sources that
we go out to now procure the clc
moneys do not come to us
directly where part of the panel
that helps evaluate the
applications as I go in but the
coalition to enharmlesness ends
up some idea now are helping
with that application process we
do provide some match funding
that to help me with a mattress
parliament's of clc we receive
some other
funding from from head like the
veterans pilot program is
the rhp is another one so
there's several others out there
that we are pretty aggressive at
pursuing funding to help me to
need that we have in the state.
Thank you madame charley thank
you is he arm and just last no
or question given just a the
changes in terms of funding and
resources are from hide has
there been any shift in the
funding coming down to you all.
As of this new administration.
Madam chair and a sunitor nava
to date no
you heard a little bit that
earlier I think the bond
presentation but the positive
news on the long compounding tax
credits and how
there's been an increase there
with regard to the other hard
funding that we receive
our understanding is that
there's a bill still being
evaluated and once it goes to
the whole process on the senate
side world see if there is any
implications on either home
estimate how poor funding that
we get a right now the
indications were getting is that
i'll be level or increase a
little bit
so well just have to wait and
see how that process goes up in
dc over the next couple of
months too find out how we fear
thank you madame chair thank
using
thank you very much senator
another next I have look at that
time next they have
representative keys I think you
madam chair and and thank you
very much and thank you for
coming the table I appreciate
your insight
I am gonna a lot of my questions
were answered by my
uhm
very smart colleague senator
nava in in ganzas but just to
re iterate there are three
vacancies unsandable and an and
I was reasonably going to ask
you I understand that we mean I
have the leverage there's not a
tricker in and that's something
that we can look at.
Um by as a state representative
of one of these counties in the
northern region I want to know
so I am going to respectfully as
mfa is if they're out of
compliance with out their audits
I I want to know that and as
soon as guns are
the vacancies I want to know so
I can't speak for all of my
representatives and senators in
the area but i'm guessing that
many of us are going to be like
that
I and I do appreciate it a just
for
some clarification the three
counties that are not part of a
regional housing authority make
up almost exactly half of our
states population
so that means these three
regions are only fifty percent
of our state's population.
Spread out amongst thirty
counties.
So
on your report there are some
things that I would like to be
added to this report on slide
for when you put how many units
and how many vouchers have been
used what is the population in
each one of those regions and
what is the percentage of
qualified affordable housing
individuals one of those
some regions it might be
appropriate to only have.
Six hundred and forty four units
and some regions may not and I
won't understand that whether or
not we are hitting those scores
unless I can see the population
or the percentage.
Of qualified affordable housing
and then on your vacancy i'd
like to see how long have they
been vacancies.
How long we we know now how many
years.
That they have not been
compliant with addicts in the
northern region but I would like
to have the
in the time for vacancy rates I
am pleased that the board has to
review three possible applicants
one from each region but as a
single guns all this pointed out
there's three vacancies in north
region and only one candidate so
i'd like to know how long those
vacancies have been open as well
and and I think that just like
the senator said as the
representative we might be able
to assist we know few people
would know somebody we might be
able to bring it to their
attention in my happen
but either which way we we want
to understand what is going on
there I very much appreciate
your
your presentation but I think I
think the centers are captured
most of my concern so thank you
all right thank you very much
representing kids also ahead of
schedule we will move on to vice
church thank you madame chair
thank you for the presentation I
just want to clarify on page
five arm on the second line it
mentioned supports and
commission's department there
really is no such thing and
there is a board and i'm not
even sure that it's important
commission's offers as much as
it's a group of staff that are
hired and work out of the
governor's office.
Um and so and and it does see in
the statute that these members
are governor appointed so thank
you for clarifying that you guys
are trying to give some names
and an opportunity I am
wondering have have you all
reached out to the county
commissions in each of these
regions because I noticed that
they're not on the list of who
gets the annual report but that
seems like it would be an
important
entity to notify and to notify
that these audits are out of
compliance I think county
commissioners can be of help to
my question is what's the
operating funds who gives them
operating funds for their staffy
for their building for it so is
that all coming from home
all of it that see is the
shaking has had medicare center
number or employees single true
here yes all of that money is
coming from had some of the
other some regional housing
authorities mainly eastern right
now does come to us refunding
for a development of some multi
family but are the others don't
and the vast majority of not all
of their funding comes from had
you madam chair and so I I just
I think in I
said her nava that's a
compliment because I could be
her mom
I I do think that there's a
couple of inter entities that
need to be added to the list of
who gets an annual report and I
think the state auditor is
probably i'm kind of surprised
at the state article hadn't
gotten involved in this years
ago
I know in my own city um we have
been unable to get funding from
the state for a number of years
because of the same challenges
so it's interesting to me that
this is kind of flown in under
the radar
on page nine though and and is
he maybe you can answer this
because I remember last meeting
I think it was it could be the
f.
First meeting that we learned
that the housing new mexico
staff are not eligible for
period but I see eastern
regional housing authority may
be
that correct
madame charina singer true here
we are not out we're a quasi
governmental entity we are not
eligible for para
the regional housing authorities
in the public housing
authorities are under a separate
act of the necessal act in the
regional housing authority act
don't know personally if I am
assuming they do receive that
actually I know because there
were some findings on para so
that they are eligible for a the
state's retirement that they
have madam chair is you though
they're eligible because they're
through the municipal.
Madam chair and singer to hear
what have to find out the exact
link I just know they're
eligible like I don't know the
specifics on how to connect all
those dots thank you madame
chair thank you is the I really
would like to know
and if they're eligible through
them you miss support I guess
i'm trying to figure out who has
authority over them locally is
that the county because it seems
to be divided up I county or is
it municipalities that are
involved in this cause maybe
it's both counties and
municipalities that need to be
notified of these annual reports
madam chair and sender to hear
so there's a distinct difference
between the public housing
authorities which I believe do
have commissioners
and
maybe counselors on there are
board and there's about twenty
or so of those municipal ones
and so they have their own
vouchers in their own section a
kind of address and maybe a
prior question on the population
and number of outresistence
captures are regional the
regionals have within the region
that these regional have there
are public housing authorities
local housing authorities that
have their own vouchers and
their own public housing this is
just anything outside of those
that the regions cover or in
summarious where they might
emerge with the regionals.
So the oversight of the public
housing authorities is really
the board and the board does
make up some commissioners or
some counselors are on the
regional housing authorities
they don't they are not
necessarily commissioners or
counselors there are different
individuals that have certain
criteria that the media and
housing
business are banking etcetera
that they have to meet to be
able to be on that pork thank
you madame chair thank you is
the just throughout their one
last time because I heard my
beeper go off in addition to i'd
like to know how many of those
section eight vouchers go.
Thank you madame.
Thank you very much bye to
health and we will move on to
representative montoya
i'm thank you madame chair
not really a question for his
just director's chair
I don't know that it's a really
it doesn't appear as if the infa
has any authority over the
northern housing authority so I
am seems like replacing some
things on family do have any
authority to get information on
I think it'd be more appropriate
for issue if you can provide
information to the chair
contact information with that
northern housing authority
because the problem with the
audits the vacancy is whether or
not the vouchers are getting out
I think that'd be more
appropriate for this committee
to ask for that information
directly r.
We don't have authority either
but we are legislators in the
state and so it just seems like
we're asking mfa to do something
completely asked.
Thank you very much for the
I think actually placed comments
representative monthly we will
go onto
representative looking
thank you very much here thank
you for that.
Great questions I think I am
checking off on my question it's
conversation today you mentioned
that
it is either there are twenty
three housing authorities and I
just kind of google my.
My county sound of a county and
you know there's they problem so
without amount of
housing authorities plus the
regional housing stories plus
the three counties who are
classic counties that have and
it they're their independence
authority
and i'm gonna go back to it
representative of me out to use
talking about where is the worst
the coordination because without
this type of planning
coordination then we do get
we get into all this other money
going
to the office of housing which
you know I don't disagree with
that right completely other than
there isn't a plan and there is
I don't know how we're how we're
gauging things quite honestly
and I think there needs to be a
better gauge in a better
prioritization you know he got a
text message saying your sanity
has the worst problem in the
entire state for affordable
housing just because our costs
you know that it's it's just non
existent rate so
I I do have questions and I I
don't know mountain chair this
is the right
is where the oversight for am a
fabric direct community to
really kind of address that when
one county is getting eighty
million dollars out of hundred
and twenty million dollars madam
chair and the residual of that
going to
another county I don't know
where it's all going is my
question and I need to know that
and I think
some of the big questions I had
since that announcement was made
and also as someone that sits on
house appropriations I I really
want to know how that has been
prioritised we have all these
working entities that are buying
for finding I know in in my own
county my my house and authority
is looking for some of that
funding and now it doesn't seem
like we're gonna get any of that
madam chair so i'm just
questioning you can we
can we look at this committee as
we are the oversight and we are
taking these deep dives
is there a better plan a better
mechanism and who would be
responsible.
For that in really connecting
all these is entities because
that's a lot of money and it's
going to one county and I have
not got i've asked questions I
haven't gotten any responses
manager and i'd like that you
know I understand the need here
in bernaly county i've lived
here probably most of my life
but I need to know more I just
wanted to prosect to the
committee and maybe if anyone
wants to answer thank you.
Madame chair not represented
about luhani I can't cannot
speak to the
eighty million or the hundred
and ten million dollars in the
other they were desperate in
what entities are going to
directly or developments I can
tell you that sure at housing
new mexico we developed the
state white housing strategy a
few years ago that secondly been
a updated here with some new
data that we should have
hopefully by that by the end of
the year that gives you an
indication of all the needs the
resources on what the gap saw
and then some priorities in
action steps
tell you that when we get the
applications here to find
something we do we look at we
underwrite the development to
see all the funding sources that
are in their making sure that
there's no gaps that are gonna
create that development to not
be able to be completed and then
we also make sure it's not over
subsidised and has too much
subsidy in their
so those are the things that we
do here I I can say that some of
the federal funding sources that
come in and senator now I knows
from had over for very specific
activities like public housing
they're gonna devast majority is
going to be for section eight
vouchers in a particular
jurisdiction and then for the
public housing that they own
simply with how usda funds are
things or the federal funding
sources that are come in kind of
muddy the waters a little bit at
the for a very specific car
you're activities and
developments that they they fund
throughout the state so but it
is a factored system that is
kind of hard to put your arm
around here everything that's
available out there and now deep
with our housing strategy at
takes a establish you will try
and consolidate all of that data
so that we are aware of the need
the resources that and then the
gaps
are you enter.
Thank you very much and
represent the luhan and iz for
those answers lastly we have
represent breggle.
The.
Thank you now insurance hoping
that you didn't forget the
um
I wanted to thank you guys both
busy and mysterious here for
your presentation
a lot of things that were raised
already
answered a lot of my questions I
just wanted to um remind
the legislators that last year
we passed house bill for ninety
three which was my bill so
public accountability bill and
I think the legislature
representatives for about ninety
percent voted in favor of it and
then about of the I
representatives our house
our legislature supported a
hundred percent and that was
really for public agencies and
reporting and audits and trying
to get arab agencies into
compliance i'm not sure that
this particular
especially northern new mexico
falls under their support agency
bill of but it was signed by the
governor um I think in me so
probably went into effect in
july
I was thinking as I was
listening to this conversation
that it might be
and an I remark I remind us that
when the auditor presented he
said that he was he had a lack
of staff specially auditors
but what are the things in that
particular bill is it creates.
Sort of up program management
for
agencies that are out of
compliance from my audits
downpoint and
i'm not sure if this falls until
under that bill or not but I
think it's important that we
know that auditor important and
they're an important halfway to
creating a good the solid agency
it's not like a negative it is
concerning when
funding could be on the on the
cutting board but I think that
it's really important that maybe
madame chair somehow we talk
with the state auditor and see
what where the group is
I think they're still
responsible whether it's an
agency or not if it's a program
that they and it may be homework
actually to ask the auditor to
come in and talk about this
program and what sort of pathway
there working on with northern
new mexico to get them in
combine we may not have them
here but it'd be nice if we knew
a little bit more information
about where we're out and how
we're going to meet these
deadlines so that we don't lose
any funding so
I just wanted to mention that
manager thank you thank you very
much representative what and we
will go back to representative
down very briefly down book ends
I see representative math is
also hazard hand raised so I
will please emphasize to my
colleagues that we are running
quite behind scheduled this
point and just be my full time
representative down thank you
thank you madame chair and since
he didn't have answers to my
questions before I didn't even
use a minute but I did get third
party help thank you and so this
is what I was referencing.
So each of these housing
authorities and and maybe
senator now that can can clarify
on this if we need to but there
is limited housing vouchers for
each of the housing authorities
and over the last couple of
years those housing vouchers
were being used to place people
from all over so what whoever
the original housing
housing authority is they become
responsible for that ten it's
not tied to their apartment so
when they leave the housing
authority including the state so
they came in two housing through
new mexico but transferred out
of state um they are the
original housing authority is
still paying somewhere else and
so I I got a call a couple of
months ago from one of the
housing authorities in my
district sending eighty nine
thousand dollars a month out of
state people who never intended
to live in new mexico were never
new mexico citizens and they are
paying the voucher out of state
okay now
okay so this is ten hundreds of
thousands of dollars a month i'd
like a report on it because
they're leaving the local
housing authority and that
leaves fewer vouchers in the
housing authority for us to use
for people who call new mexico
home for people who never
intended to live here long term
core now using those vouchers
and taking up those vouchers and
the reason I know it's a problem
is because I have citizens
senior citizens still waiting
for a slat no slots are taken up
and I I don't know but it's
something that we need to
understand and apparently it's a
federal issue but we are writing
huge cheques from every housing
authority out of state now thank
you voucher
madame cherro if I may real
quicker so representative now
you're correct I don't know if
this is the technical term but
the way I know it is portable
vouchers so somebody moved
somewhere they continue to have
be eligible for that router and
they get paid
we can now get that information
around the regional st.
Provide that to us potentially
even the public housing
authorities that are not part of
the regionals to have see if
they have that dead available
we are
I had another point I was gonna
make and and the same issue I
think they're I think in the
state we likely have people that
moved from other states came
here that are their vouchers are
being paid for from other
because they're just portable
vouchers all across the nation
but I I don't know that that
that with that we can capture
but you're correct on the
portable vouchers madam chair
ulstatistics would say that
people are leaving new mexico
more than they're coming in and
we have people waiting for a
vouchers I think it's worth a
conversation thank you madame
chair for the second absolutely
thinking very much
representative out i'm
representative matthews
thank you madame chair
the only
as we talked about
excuse me as we talked about all
these different housing
authorities I would just note
that we also created new one in
the last session regarding the
state fair
and what's going to happen with
that and
you know which seemed we seem to
continue to multiply or
non creating a coherent
oversight of house
that's it
thank you represent matthews a
lot of really good discussion I
knew this was going to be one of
our length your presentations
and a lot of very passionate
questions to represent him on
toys point about the scope that
mfa has I believe there's a bit
of a reaction by everyone
certainly the emails that I get
from constituents and other
members are like
to treat mf as the overall is
the end of the housing authority
in the state umm and I certainly
understand that instinct but I
think
in this committee I think our
number one goal is to really
hold the focus.
That were talking about funding
housing projects and the state
while very important
not necessarily the committee is
not necessarily the catch all it
was certainly don't expect you
guys to have every answer to
every question but we do
appreciate that a discussion
that you're willing to have
about housing at a as a as a
greater scope in the state so I
just want to thank you very much
for the answers thank you for
the discussion and thank you for
being willing to seek out the
answers to our questions that
you might not necessarily have
on hand so thank you very much
mister garcia and mister for the
discussion we will move on to a
gender item number four
home rehabilitation and whether
I was in programs.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee i'm
done in my assistant reason i'm
the chief housing officer
housing new mexico and with me
is kelly tillerson and she is
the director of our community
development department
we are going to present housing
mess codes rehabilitation and
weatherization programs
next slide.
So housing new mexico's programs
that preserve existing housing
stock or whether is which
provides energy savings measures
and repairs at no costs to
eligible residents.
Um the homeowner rehabilitation
program which is home repairs
and improvements for low and
moderate income homeowners and
the restoring our communities or
rock program which funds the
acquisition rehab and resell a
single family homes next site
the programs provide housing
affordability and stability a
lower costs for residents due to
reducing utility bills rehabing
older homes avoids displacement
and prevents housing supply loss
and their own environmental
benefits to weatherization and
rehabbing these older homes.
I'm energy efficiency and waste
reduction health and safety
benefits of improved indoor
error quality and removing
hazards like lead based paint
especials in fixing electrical
instructional problems and
housing stock is preserved in
neighborhoods are strengthened
next slide
kelly will now talk about or
where the reservation program.
Good morning madam sure
so are weatherization program is
a program that allows our
partners throughout the state to
work with low income and home
orders to increase their energy
efficiency and reduce their
energy cost burden so housingly
mexico's program was called the
energy smart weather's asian
assistance program and it
provides energy saving rego for
it gets and home modifications
to reduce energy cast by
increasing the energy efficiency
of homes i'll also ensuring
health and safety households
with the disabled member
children seniors and those that
have high interview burden our
priorities on the weight lists.
And then interview smart
programmers in ministering with
a combination of federal state
and private utility company
funding totalling about ten
point six million dollars and
serving around nine hundred.
On this late you can see that
the measures provided through
the program
fallen to four main categories
being mechanical health and
safety building shell and
electric bay slowed the
mechanical measures include
things like repairing a
replacing heating and cooling
systems and stalling ducked and
pipe installation preparing or
replacing water heaters and
installing solar water heat.
Do they help them see the safety
measures this includes.
Repairs like completing
combustion appliance safety
testing repairing a replacing
venolation systems assessing
buyer hazards and evaluating
mold and waste your needs or
issues
under the building share measure
and building shell measures
things like installing
installation performing error
ceiling repairing a replacing
windows or doors if indicated
and an energy added and
replacing roof or while leaks
repairing roof or while leaks
prior doing th.
And then for the electric
baseline measures this includes
and starling efficient light
sources and were motor controls
and replacing refrigerators and
freezers with energy efficiency
energy efficient models.
Yeah.
The.
The us department of energy
requires that a structured
energy on it be conducted to
determine which measures are
installed to ensure maximum
impact to the family served
while priorities in effective
use of the funding based on the
results of the energy on it and
savings to an investment ratio
or sign or test is conducted to
ensure the cost of the measures
installed will result in
expected energy savings at least
equal to or exceeding the cost
of the installation even if some
measures don't pass their sir
test certain health and safety
measures like carbon monoxide
detectors then alliation are
combustion of plans issues
must be performed to ensure safe
occupancy.
So less restrictive state
funding is critical to the
success of the weather program
by utilizing the mexico housing
trustphone our service providers
are able to conduct
weatherization ready measures to
bring homes up to a standard
that makes them safe enough to
perform the needed whether is
asian services there's and they
should have benefits the
horizony mexicans who are living
in the most severe housing
conditions.
On this slide you can see and
that the entire state is able to
receive whether is the services
through partnerships with three
service providers
central new mexico housing
corporation covers the northern
part of the state while
southwest regional housing and
community development service
primarily the southern part and
then read feather development
group focuses on the naval
nation and they do want to point
out this year's weather is asian
day which will be october
thirtieth will be hosted by red
feather at a home and fruitland
which is located in san one
county
house affected on it
thank you kelly so on slide
seven this is in overview of our
home owner rehabilitation
program eligible homeowners must
earn eighty percent area meeting
income or less and the rehab is
focused on could compliance
health and safety issues
substandard conditions
structural issues and ada
improvements assistance per home
ranges from about sixty thousand
to two hundred thousand
depending on the necessary
repairs are the funding for this
program is federal home funds
annually five point five million
assist forty five for homeowners
next site.
Oh we have two different program
models for home owner we have
program the first model is a
traditional program where
nonprofits tribes local
governments and other
organizations are awarded funds
through an open notice of
funding availability and they
administer all aspects of the
program and because these are
federal funds there are light of
requirements
for instance there is
eligibility determination
environmental reviews scope of
work assessments and valuation
of the home before and after the
rehub
the second model is our direct
service program which is fairly
new so housing new mexico wanted
to ensure the home owner we have
program was available statewide
so we are providing services
directly in house to the
counties that do not have
service providers in this case
we procure the contractors and
do all the administrative work
and those counties are mckinley
real reba sound union harding
que and quite a little bit
and there we are in the next
slide so this slide shows the
map of our stateway coverage and
the green counties are the ones
that I just mentioned otherwise
the rest of the state are
covered by various providers.
So next thing
so here you will see
before and after photos of a
home that was rehabed in union
county so before we re have this
home through our direct service
program there was not a
functioning bathroom as you can
see there was just a toilet and
the family would shower a
different neighbor's homes
while the work was being done a
hidden gas leak was discovered
so we replaced the gas lines and
found out that the family was
having to persistent headaches
and they were unaware of what
was causing it.
And alternate or right.
Another program that we
administer is the restoring our
communities or rock program and
it provides funding for the
acquisition and rehabilitation
and resale of signal family
properties with a goal to
increase home ownership for low
to moderate in middle income
households
whose income is out of below one
hundred fifty percent of the
area median income.
Rock helps meet new mexico's
need for affordable housing
units while assisting
communities and reducing vacant
and abandoned property is that
reduced values within the
community.
Rock has funded the solely with
new mexico housing trust find
funding in the amount of about
five point five million and to
on average as serving thirty
families annually this is a new
program so
we're still building it up next
slide.
This slide kind of shows the
process well of how rock
operates so it's designed to
that our service providers can
first acquire real property or
real estate and then reabilitate
it to improve the homes
deteriorated or substandard
conditions which can vary from
extensive reconstruction to the
cure of accumulated different
maintenance and then finally the
service provider resells the
property to an income eligible
home buyer and then all the
proceeds from the sales that are
then reinvested back into the
program so we can cont.
And this is our restoring our
community service provider map
right now we are working with
four different providers and for
different counties however we do
have an open no for agencies to
apply to help facilitate the
program and other parts of the
state.
And on this slide you can see
some before and after pictures
of a home and albuquerque that
was vacant then band and home
wise service provider agencies
purchased rehabbed and resold
the property to a first time
home buyer it had been saving
for years to purchase their.
Pass.
I signed slide fifteen you'll
see the annual impact of the
weather is a shanned home
rehabilitation in rock programs
so twenty one point six four
million and that assisted nine
hundred and seventy five
families and next slide we will
be happy to answer any questions
thank you very much for that
presentation so far on the list
I have senator to buy a son is
there anybody else
representative of keys
any barely anybody
sorry representative of
key center travice and go ahead
thank you madame chair
on the first program and whether
is the
you mention that it's for a lot
of mid income families or how
monitors can you tell us what
that ranges of income what
constitutes who slow in middle
income.
Manager
I believe the income if it's
okay i've got my weather is
issued like frontline staff here
to answer all these questions if
you're okay with that can they
bring them up and great david
gutierras and the metro floor is
here
but I believe madam chair and
senator to buy a sin that it's
two hundred percent or less of
the
federal poverty limit
sorry if I could have you come
up and speak into the microphone
to so you can get you on there
on the webcast as well that is
correct on.
Thank you and
madam sure I think maybe I am
answering my own question here
it's on the last slides where
you serve nine hundred families
a year or at least last year in
that program
that is correct okay and do you
use all ten million it shows
funding in all these categories
but do you exast all that
funding in all these programs
yeah madam chair center who to
buy a sin we we do there is a a
much greater need than there is
funding so yes we are always i'm
using up the funding and towards
the end of the program year if
one of the service providers
hasn't spent down their funds
another service provider might
be able to use the funds so it's
very often we really keep funds
towards the end of the program
you are to ensure that the the
funds will be spent
in
madam chair you said
now i'm I don't know what page I
didn't mark the page but there
was a sixty to two hundred
thousand dollars to remember
what that was referring to yes
and madam chair sended your
expires in so that is for our
home owner rehab program and
that's the range and it and it's
a a big range and so some homes
may be just need let's say ada
upgrade so they they might put
in rams and
bars or things like that whereas
other homes like for example the
one in union county once they go
into a home and start opening
things up the like discovered a
gas leak so that that is kind of
the range of the the money that
would be spent on a single home
okay makes sense and then
manager I have question is based
off about so is there a cut off
amount is far as do you use some
kind of formula or something
when you go into a home to
determine.
Is it worth putting two hundred
thousand dollars into and could
we better could we serve more
family is by having some kind of
cut off i'm thinking of like
fema in particular where if you
have more than fifty percent of
your home that's dmh you know
they don't they won't pay out
because basically they consider
it a loss at that point so do
you use some kind of formula
like that madam chair senator to
buy us and yes so part of
administering the program is to
go into the home and do a scope
of work and that is just for the
issues like code compliance
health and safety the maximum is
two hundred thousand but the
majority of the homes use a lot
less
funding but we will not do
anything and that's cosmetic in
nature it's all related to like
health and safety ada called
compliance those types of things
in each homers is different to
sell so that's part of
administering the program in
doing a really good job
in mansion thank you for that so
too i'm just thinking two
hundred thousand is a light in
the average new mexican rate I
mean I that's a significant
amount so does it can it then go
over fifty percent of the you
know perceived value of the home
is there not a cut up I mean I
know you have the two hundred
thousand dollar cut off but what
if you're talking about a home
that's on the market if it were
in sheep would maybe be two
hundred and twenty five or two
hundred and fifty thousand
and it's you're not doing the
cosmetic rate you're doing all
these other things but we're
talking roof foundation mold
remediation i'm a unlike all
these things is there a cut off
of that and there is a
part of the requirement is that
we can not do more than ninety
five percent so.
So we evaluate the the home like
a praise the home before the
work and after the rehab work is
completed it cannot go over
ninety five percent of the value
of the home so that's kind of
the federal requirement but but
we wouldn't go over the two
hundred thousand ok thinking and
they most homes and most homes
are a lot less just okay thank
you
thank you very much senator
representative kits
thank you madame chair and and
and thank you very much for your
presentation
I
I on any of your weatherisation
rehab restoring our communities
is there a minimal amount for I
only i'm trying to pick the most
I just need weather stripping
everywhere like the most middle
more is there a minimal floor of
like that's too low over project
for this program.
Madam sharing and representative
kits so it did
at bear minimum there are basic
weather is the same measures
that will be installed so
they're doing error raters are
doing
founds in the bathrooms are
doing weather scripping that's
kind of like the bare minimum so
if a home or a property needs
that you know obviously they'll
they'll go in and do those those
minimalistic things they don't
have to have a full rehab by any
means not thinking man chair and
I do understand that I
understand the difference
between those three programs
are the
and I understand that what you
your process of figuring out how
they qualify is what is the need
of weathering how are we having
we're measuring the airflow or
measuring the heat there that
the cold that's coming in I I
get that I was wondering if
there was a financial minimal so
you're seeing the minimal is
still
maybe night more than weather
sips vents and there's so that's
a couple of thousand dollars I
just like to bring to the
attention that the annual impact
that they
write to us is a total of twenty
one million dollars and where
the
applied services for nine
hundred and seventy five
families assisted this is an
average of slightly over twenty
two thousand dollars per project
now obviously whether is station
is really only about eleven
thousand eight hundred were
rehab the average is a hundred
and twenty two but these are
pretty significant numbers when
you think of twenty two thousand
dollars
the utilities what it would cost
for rent for a year what it
would cost for
assistant living program for a
three or four months
it is a small investment to keep
new mexican.
With you it is.
Thank you very much
representative keeps
representative or a barcoming
think you may insure and thank
you for your presentation i'm
going to focus on your annual
impact page fifteen
so
starting with a rehabilitation
column I see that we have a five
million five hundred thousand
our funding and that it covers
forty five families where
assistant which is about a sixty
thousand two maybe two hundred
thousand cost per unit so i'm
wondering how
the agency is insuring that we
maintain equitable access
in rehabilitation funding across
urban rule and tribal
communities number one given the
limited reach of the providers
as has been mentioned in
previous meetings and years and
currently can you answer that
that's one and then I have one
of the question thank you and
keep in mind or time frame okay
thank you madam chair and
represent it right back
we do have statewide coverage
with our home owner
rehabilitation program and so
the different service providers
they actually take in the
applications and some of them
have a weight list and then the
counties where we don't have
providers we are are doing that
in house
and so we we are providing
steep weight coverage and I
would say the majority of the
homes are in rural areas
so I know not that answers your
question completely in yes it
does sort of but not what i'm
looking for but if you can
provide us park I think what we
be helpful is a chart where
those district where that
distribution is in the areas in
the to distinguished urban rural
tribal communities.
And
to so that we can
equate that forty five to a need
and also waiting less numbers as
well that would help us with
that in future report the second
question I have is if you look
collectively to all three of
these programs are they are
serving
I guess close to a thousand
slightly under a thousand
families annually.
While we know we're hearing it
around the state that the need
is
tens of thousands I guess what
we can project so whether or the
plans for scaling these programs
and then what do you need from
us legislatively what additional
things do you need for most
legislative fully or budgetarily
are in terms of being able to
address the scaling of these
programs thank you madame chair
representative road by cover so
I would say what we would need
with be more funding
so there are whether is program
the bulk of the funding or
federal funds that come from
department of energy and then
there is like heap funding
we also add new mex causing
trust funds as kelly mentioned
but I would say we could
definitely serve more people
with more funding same thing
with their home owner rehab
program data that that's federal
home funds and about five point
five million is
the new mexico states allocation
based on population but again if
we had other funding that
program could be expanded
are a restoring our communities
is a brand new program and
you'll see we don't quite have
statewide coverage
so that is something we're just
ramping up
so again I I think definitely we
could serve more people with
more funding that so madam share
part of the response to
justifying the accountability
that we have that's why we need
as much information
as possible from you because
it's going to be a hard cell to
see the numbers just the way
they're laid out here and
justify additional funding isn't
fact you see where i'm going
with that so it all these helps
in our ability to represent what
you're needs are but more
importantly the needs of our
populations in order to see how
best.
Our investments are going to the
most number of individuals
possible also final point madam
chair I see on page three your
various funding sources and
seed finally as included in here
and i'm happy to
have indoors that support it and
then a sponsor of that
legislation I wonder in courage
your monitoring and your
evaluating constantly of
renewable energy sources that
can be used in all of these
efforts if we do not begin to
arm
invest in and include renewable
energy sources then what we're
doing is continuing a disservice
to our populations in terms of
affordability in the long term
and we also are doing the
disservice manager if we don't
do this because we don't want to
have family's face forced out
because of their inability to
afford utility costs or
expensive other costs where we
could have been able to mitigate
those class at the frontier
rather than at the end of the
lose there affordable the
affordability factors that must
keep them in their homes to
avoid homelessness and that
cycle that we've been seeing
unfolding in the recent year so
thank you madame chair that's
all please keep please hear
though that those
recommendations thank you think
you representative and we will
definitely get the information
for you cause we do track it we
do monitor all these programs so
we would be able to show you
exactly worth these these homes
are located.
Thank you very much
representative moving on to
representative down
thank you madame chair and think
you don't for the presentation
and I I want to talk i'm so glad
that you haven't opened
application for service
providers and madam chair and
and and I I keep sending people
who I know have non profits to
apply and they keep call me back
and telling me that they don't
have the adequate experience let
me tell you why the service
provider in my area
they do a great job but they
also cover if you look on page
nine look at all the counties
that they're covering and their
programs are first come first
serve so it's the yellow section
so their first come first serve
which means you know I don't I
don't know how many homes you
did and see you accounting that
that not very many or sacro
maybe in northern donator
because they do have a strong
presence in northern donanna but
I I want more service providers
in my area because is that still
the case madam chair they have
to do first come first
and madam chair and
representative dow
yes it is first come first serve
for the eligible home owners but
recently I believe it was maybe
in february of this year we
amended are no further notice of
funding availability and so we
used to have sat territories for
the service providers and we no
longer have that so currently
these providers are covering
these areas but it is open so we
can get other service providers
in the same area so that was
something that that we we made
the change to hopefully
serve more people thank you
manager and so I know that one
of the people who applied is a
couple that do flips and
one of the spouses as a relative
and so there they have some
about any manage properties
property managers and they I
guess were turned down saying
that they didn't have the right
type of experience we haven't
followed out but
what what are the qualifications
you're looking for in a service
provider.
The.
A madam chair representative dow
I will have to find out
specifically but definitely we
want experience with rehabing
construction and I believe I
know who you're talking about
david and I don't recall his
wasting but we we did meet with
them and we went over the
program but I was not aware that
they actually applied
and so I will look into that and
find out what happened if if
they did in fact formally apply
and if there was an issue or if
they have not yet but I will
definitely follow up with you
thank you thank you manager and
the other provider that I was
thinking about is more along the
lines of with a serve and I was
thinking about our senior mail
site which is a non profit I
know they've done simple little
weatherisation and simple like
eighty a projects but but I
don't they don't do direct they
don't do direct construction
although they do mill delivery
for people who could benefit
from this the most word someone
like a senior mill site as mills
on wheels type non profit be
eligible
national representatives out I
believe they would be eligible
if they had the experience so
they would have to have some
sort of construction experience
or oversight of construction and
then a higher their own
contractors to do the work so
madam madame chair I thought
that the service provider could
hire third party contractors
okay so manager and donna so if
the senior mill site they have
experience working with the type
of client or you know the
person who would be the
recipient of these services they
could hire a qualified person
with this type of experience
maybe someone who's retired from
I mean i'm totally making us up
it retired from over from being
like facilities manager at a
president hospital new mexico
tacker next co veterans home
yeah madam cher representative
down.
The
they would have to do some sort
of procurement and then yes they
could hire somebody to actually
do that construction work
manager what i'm asking though
is it if the service provider
hasn't directly done rehabs or
whether is attention but they
hire someone who has but instead
their experience is working with
the population you're targeting
with that but that non profit be
eligible
I believe so and again what i'll
do is i'll get the details okay
thank you i'm asking cause if
anybody goes down this road
where i've been it will help
these my colleagues to be able
to navigate this but I am
determined to get providers thus
projects in my district thank
you
thank you very much
representatives out
representative luham
should thank you very quickly I
just this is one of the best
programs are one of the things
you know with investment that
the they're getting the job done
I got to visit with the the home
the home owner and the crew that
they did the weather is action
project one of them here and and
albecricky last year and it was
just.
I mean it was just incredible
and to be able to experience
that and knowing there are
federal arm delegation
participates in making sure you
know and following up with this
program as well and one question
is in that regard with the
federal funding portion have
they have even notified or do
you know that there can be any
kind of cuts to I miss like
close to eight point five
million dollars that they're or
increases or anything manager
madame chair representative
luhin is so at this time we we
don't know so the department of
energy funding which I believe
is like two point eight million
annually for us is in an energy
bill that has not been presented
yet I know they just came back
from recent recess federally and
and there's lihe money which is
about two point five million a
year that we receive and that is
in like a health and human
services bill which also has not
been heard so at this point we
were not sure but definitely
that would would affect the
program ma'am churchill you're
seeing those dozen items in
their industry in those bills
those budget bills you're seeing
that they're still actively in
included in those federal bills
is that correct correct and
they'll end those haven't been
heard yet
keep us keep us briefed in and
thank you thank you for all
you're doing thank you
represented.
On authority thank you very much
representative lun I have a
couple questions myself if I
could take it back to page eight
looking at the service provider
versus direct services model can
you tell me roughly how many
service providers
are currently involved in the
pro in the rehability
rehabilitation program
madam chair let's see there is
one two three four five six I
believe it so six plus
direct service model so but i'm
looking at slide eight and said
that it says here that the
nonprofits
administer everything including
eligibility determination for
applicants so that's
seven is that seven different
metrices for determining
eligibility I just want to know
if there's any stand like
standardization process for
determining who would be
eligible for these projects and
who wouldn't be
yeah madam chair so they're
there is a long list of
eligibility items and one is
their income would have to be
less than eighty percent area
meeting income and they would
have to own their own home if
they still have a mortgage they
would have to provide insurance
that they have insurance for the
home and again we do the
assessment where we look at the
value of the home before and
after rehab
their
there is a long history of
requirements because it is a
federal program and so the
service providers they will do
all that administrative work
everything is sent to us and
reviewed and so and there's also
the environmental review so
anybody that's in a flood zone
unfortunately would not be
eligible for the federal funding
so they're the application comes
in from the provider and then
our program manager would have
like a checklist that kind of
checks these eligibility.
Um items off okay great I just
wanted to make sure that we were
talking about
non profits and the direct
service
model determining eligibility
that there is the
standardization of at
everybody's using the same
metrics on that certain
homeowners might aren't getting
disqualified because of where
they are in the state thank you
very much for those questions
and I think that's that's it for
me so thank you very much for
that presentation lately.
Okay so less and definitely not
least we have homelessness and
housing stability programs and
funding
amount of things
matter to your members of the
committee so now kelling I will
give you a summary of our
homeless and housing stability
programs so next late I guess
she's there low income residents
face challenges to secure
affordable housing so in some
cases serious mental illness and
doors substance use disorders
create barriers to find and
secure housing
housing new mexico as several
programs that serve new mexico's
most vulnerable population.
Programs are funded with state
and federal funds and they
assist these new mexicans to
exit or prevent homelessness and
support long term stability
the programs include homeless
shelter operations and emergency
assistance recovery housing from
substance abuse disorders
federal and state funded housing
vouchers rental assistance and
landlord incentive programs next
slide
so housing new mexico's homeless
shelter operations and emergency
assistance programs are funded
with emergency solutions grant
which are federal funds state
homeless assistant funds and a
steep allocation that is
specifically for espenially
pathway shelter and the funds
total one point one six million
and the assist four thousand
people annually activities that
are eligible for the funding are
listed included our shelter
operations case management legal
services mental health services
and transportation
next slide.
So you can see on the mount that
there is a state that there is
statewide coverage for all these
programs the name of the service
providers are listed as well.
And i'll turn it over to
california.
So in addition to the emergency
shelter programs that don't have
talked about we also have an
array of rental assistance
programs throughout the state
that provides short and medium
turn rental assistance it will
pay for rental of rears utility
payments and deposits security
deposits application fees and
housing stability case
management services to the
eligible households
the these programs are funded
with both state and federal
funding totalling just over four
point five million dollars and
assist almost thirty three
hundred people annually looks
like.
As you can see here or rental
assistance programs are offered
throughout the state things to
our extensive network of service
provider partnerships while the
counties and provider names
are listed there for you.
Next slide this lied highlights
the recovery housing program
we're all referred to it is p to
keep the insurance
which provides funds to develop
or maintain housing and recovery
services for individuals
impacted by the substance use
this order.
Eligible uses at the federal of
this federal funding include
things such as acquisition of
real property lease rent and
utilities rehabilitation and
reconstruction of both single
and multinet residential
buildings along with a few other
things.
The orhp funds are currently
allocated to four service
provider agencies that are
serving the albuquerque and
galloped areas in when we
receive about one point four
five million dollars annually
for this program this is another
program that we do have an open
no for four the um available
online for additional providers
to apply for
to help facility.
Next slide.
We'll talk about our state
funded housing voucher program
which is known as the linkages
it is steep funded permanent
support of housing their
provides rental assistance and
supportive services to
individuals with a serious
mental illness diagnosis and who
are homeless or at risk of being
homeless the program is in
partnership with the new mexico
healthcare authorities
behavioral health services
division and housing new mexico
along with numerous housing and
support of service agencies
throughout the state
this year the legislature almost
doubled the funding for linkages
from five point two to ten point
two million dollars which added
an additional about a hundred
and fifty vouchers to the
program in so there is a total
of actually it says fifty but
it's five fifty three voucher is
available.
Next slate.
And this is our provider maps so
this is the.
Seven of front housing
administrator eighteen seasons
that we contract with to provide
the housing piece the voucher
peace our housing administrators
are the ones that do the move in
and without inspections and
annual certification that it is
habitable for our voucher
holders to live there
right now we are serving a levin
counties and because of the
increase and funding we did
expand the program to both
chavez and sound of all counties
this year.
This one I encourage you to
watch the video testimony I
heard we're not going to get to
play it today but am when you
have time take a look at it and
you'll be able to hear the full
story of andrea and how she had
lived in motels and and friends
couches for years before getting
connected with the barrett
foundation which is one of our
housing administrator agencies
to get a linkage as voucher so
now at this point she and her
grandchildren are now stable
housed in their own apartment
receiving support services from
a local non profit and they are
so grateful for the assistance
if they received so please check
it out when you have to.
I page ten that shows are
federally funded housing
vouchers so housing new mexico
is the contract administrator
for head section eight project
base vouchers so these are had
properties that are completely
allocated for section eight
thing and the entire building
heard requires the residents pay
thirty percent of their income
towards rent and then the
voucher covers the difference
so there are eighty four section
eight properties in our
portfolio and that's a total of
about five thousand two hundred
and twenty units annual funding
is approximately thirty seven
million
housing new mexico is not
involved in the section eight
vouchers that travel with the
tenant that that was brought up
in the last presentation those
are all overseen by those
regional and public housing
authority so we only oversee the
vouchers that are linked to the
specific project.
Um housing new mexico is also
the head grantee for the section
eight eleven project base rental
assistance program in new mexico
so this program targets
extremely low income people with
disabilities it is similar to
section to sectionate as the
resident pays thirty percent of
their income towards rent and
the voucher covers the
difference qualified households
must be under thirty percent of
the area meeting income and
receive longterm disability
services through medicare
there are currently about forty
section eat eleven vouchers in
various properties throughout
the state with an annual funding
of four hundred and twenty one
thousand our next line so this
map shows the number of section
and section eight eleven project
based vouchers in each county I
know it's kind of small but
but those are numbers based on
the different arm buildings that
have these vouchers
next site.
So we currently have four
landlord incentive programs with
refunding sources totalling two
million dollars and
approximately three hundred
claims our processed annually.
So it's a difficult to find
landlords willing to rent to
voucher holders so this program
is like an insurance to
landlords so it encourages
landlords across a state to rent
to voucher holders by offering
financial incentives.
Umm which this helps create new
rental options and preserves
existing ones so the program
will pay for damages above the
security deposit they can see
lasts and deposits to name a
few.
We also have a brand new program
which is called rehab to rental
where landlords can receive
twenty five thousand to fifty
thousand dollars to re have
their unit if they commit to
renting to a voucher holder for
five years so this is creating
new opportunities for voucher
holders and if they don't
rent to the voucher holder for
five years then they'll have to
pay back the funding
I next slide.
I so the annual impact of the
programs that we just presented
is fifty five point four seven
million and thirteen thousand
three hundred and eighty four
individuals or families have
been assisted next site.
The.
Annual kelly and I will stand
requ.
Okay thank you very much for
their presentation we will go to
representative
line
thinking about her thank you for
the presentation it's all
encompassing and just bring this
altogether
even as you know sitting on
house it's helpful to see how.
You know the finding that we
appropriate then how it's
channel down into these programs
and you know just how efficient
and effective these programs are
but you're working with multiple
entities you're working with
local governments you're working
with with the state government
with hca with
what is
children you can see why after
and and and others and so
in getting so my my issue my
question is uhm
is there a more direct way maybe
this is a finance criticism i'm
sure but is there a more direct
way of like since your hosting
the program right these other
user under mfa rate so is there
is there a better way of doing
assuring that those funding to
get directly to you since you're
the one you're the host you're
getting these finding these
funds out manager
madam chair and representative
lou hunt so the federal funds
the esg funds
they come directly to us it and
statute to sell so we we get
those allocations from head
every year as far as the state
funding we do have a contract
with behavioral health arms so
again they we get those funds
directly there hasn't been any
issues and we run the housing
side of the program there also
is the case managers which day
overseas so in order to for us
to find housing in a county they
have to have a keys manager or
you know that system in place so
sometimes that limits some of
the areas but there hasn't been
any issues with with us
receiving this funding that's
great and I I can see that
that's not the issue but that
they give putting that peace and
in there but yeah so
so they are mouse essentially or
they're just.
You're just contracted directly
with the agencies mountain madam
chair representative so some are
moves I believe it's an mo with
cyfdum I think we have a
contract with the city of alba
kirky for their landlord program
um we have a contract with
the state behavioral health so
it it's it's different they're
they're different that that i'm
just looking at the finance
board making you know that's
what catch captures mean is i'm
very interested in the
behavioral health in the whole
concept of the housing around
out in the substance use
disorder programs that we
already have in place and how
that is all coming together and
and i'm just i'm i'm very happy
by by this presentation and what
i'm seeing here mountain and
this is just I just there's
never enough money but again and
keep us updated as is as we're
looking at those federal budgets
and how they're being decided in
this next month and down I just
look for the next update and see
how things are moving and where
this the states can have to
really address some of these
issues if it all now made him
cher representative thank you
very much and just am also
needed to to add that the
recovery housing program is
funded with
citibg finds that comes through
df so we are kind of the
subgranting of that particular
program that's great also amount
chair I just wanted to say with
the pathways in a spineller
there you know it's come to
their local government as an
issue whether that they're going
to keep that place are open so
I don't know that you can answer
that but I just wanted to if you
have anything to add their
amount
managed here representative
luhan are there was a meeting I
believe with their city council
and they did not approve their
permit to so they're they're
still
in operation but they're going
to I guess.
Appeal that decision
they're funded with legislative
funds the legislators directly
allocated funds and were kind of
the fiscal agent for that they
do own that building and they do
on the complex and they are
doing good work so were hopeful
that that they can have that
permit are issued at some point
thank you for the update.
Representative kits
think you mad and chair and and
thank you
good work done and kelly really
know your programs and it's a
quagmire programs and so I would
appreciate it
I have a series of links with
little questions on slight ten
vouchers section eight eleven
project base vouchers how do we
get more this.
Yeah.
Madame chair representative case
did did you ask how are we how
do we get more of those how are
you getting more than forty
vouchers and we actually have
capacity for I want to see
another twenty some eat eleven
vouchers the issue is we need an
existing multi family property
to kind of take the vouchers
there is a little bit of it
administrative burden on the
property so we have put that in
our qualified allocation plan so
when they were developers come
and asked for the low income
housing tax credits which is and
the most popular source of
development for multi family
they they get extra points to
ask for these so we're slowly
filling those but but it it but
it is slow so thank you so much
so we do have them we have the
funding now we need to have a
property is willing to take them
and so now on page twenty one
your landlord incentive programs
does appropriate a manager or
somebody from these programs the
landlord incentive programs to
they do presentations on an
annual basis with ah now from or
the apartment association.
Madame care representative kids
yes we've got
in any house landlord leaves on
that is working with the dfa
financed program and then are
fiscal address on their side for
the city of albuquerquency way
fd programs they present all
over the state they'd need very
in very close touch with alamos
the apartment association they
present to any providers in
public housing authority is
anyone that is touching vouchers
pretty much statewide so yes so
thank you very much the agencies
that you just mention our quite.
Service agencies with the
government hand let's say so i'm
asking if you do one of the
national association of
residential property managers
and you do one of the apartment
association these are private
sector property managers
matter of chair and
representative cates we we have
not done that but it's certainly
something we can do so as I
mention their there's kind of
the the three landlord incentive
programs that p four damages and
and all these other things and
and one of them is funded by
cyfd and it's for youth that are
exiting foster care they're
funding when specifically go to
that population
the city of albert then hence
funding for their voucher
holders so anybody that has an
alba cookie voucher holder
they're funding applies to that
and then we just recently
received the money for the state
wired program we just opened
that stateway program and we had
a a training where we sent out
an email plus to kind of anyone
involved because we do know a
lot of the property managers
that are linked with their asset
management program and I believe
we had over eighty different
people on entities that that
kind of listen to the program
thinking manager and thank you
done i'm more than willing to
sit down and talk with you and
also if the you'd like to do it
I just would like I love the
fact that you're very focused on
service oriented I think that's
wonderful I also want you to be
have the availability to speak
with the property managers and
they're not service providers
they're not there but for them
to understand that there is a
way that they can mitigate their
risk.
Might be worth the being in the
training I have one last
question madam chair and and
it's a general code and is you
may be you'll have to answer it
offline but I need a vacant line
how many houses how many place
doors let's call them doors
because we don't know if their
houses are apartment answer or
beds how many doors do we need
and twenty twenty two to meter
needs how many doors do we need
this year and how many doors do
you think that we need and
twenty twenty six.
III need this for a variety
reasons like we all deal by we
did give several
presentations earlier today
about interest rates and things
like that and and we all know
that the housing crisis will we
talk about uh.
Access to building materials and
land and zoning and the cost of
construction but we're not
talking about supplying demand
and supplied in man actually is
the biggest driver for housing
costs and housing availability
so understanding what that
housing need is your projections
what they were in the past new
projections might also help and
form us as we try to create
policy that will help support
that and thank you very much for
today's presentation i'm madam
chair and representative keith
just kind of let you know I
think is he mentioned that we
did arm do a statewide housing
plan
and I believe that was in twenty
twenty two so we do have that
data and then we are in the
process of updating that
currently we've kind of hired
the consultant so we will have
all of that the new data shortly
and that's something that I
believe we we will be presenting
to the.
Manager representative I don't
know that it'll be a completed
by our next meeting in october
but definitely by the
legislative sessions.
I think you so much and you you
guys are are so accessible and
professional I very much
appreciate you thank you for
your indulgence madam chair I
just want to bring to this
committee my concern it's been
ween on me for the issue for a
while we are talking about
passible lower interest rates
for next year and if if there is
lower interest rates and if
there has been a pool of buyers
that had been waiting for the
interest rates
my question is have we met the
need heavily built enough homes
because if we have not then we
are going to create even a
bigger housing prices because
people wall
the price of houses will start
to go up because there would be
more of a demand and we will go
back to where we were in twenty
one twenty two and an I do know
we are building more I just
don't know if it's enough and so
that's what i'm trying to
and in that sustainable general
concern for mine thank you
thank you very much
representative keeps
representative chavers
thank you
chair and so I have some
questions on the section of on
rental assistance um you have
listed several
agencies and bernardio county
that provider anal assistance to
i'm assuming individuals and
families
is that correct.
I'm sure and representative shop
is yes it's correct.
So can you tell me and I know
that you have a chart here on
page four that has the funding
sources and the total funding
total annual funding
is there how much goes to short
term renewal assistance if you
know
how much how much how much of
the funding what amount of
funding is allocated for the
short term rental assistance not
insurer and representative
travel so the state homeless
assistance funding that's listed
here that three hundred seventy
five that is for primarily for
wrap of rehousing and homeless
prevention which is that short
term up to three months it can
go beyond them that you know
after three months is that at
first cut off and then there's
three hundred fifty nine
thousand listed under the
emergency solutions ground is
also dedicated to that rapid
rehousing and the homework
funding as well okay thank you
thank you for that so under the
so how does it work in your kick
and kind of like walk me through
it so all the agencies are
looking at bring the account to
specifically so do they each get
the same amount of funding arm
and is that funding like does it
come to them quarterly or do
they get all of them funding up
front at the beginning of the
physical how does that work some
matter here and representative
others so all of the programs
that we administer are on a
reimbursement so no one gets a
part of money up front and then
drives down from days of meant
monthly or quarterly invoices
depending on the program so are
the clc matter to continue my
care match money that we
provided at steep funding but we
administer the funds they
invoice unaccordingly basis and
they must provide back up
documentation showing how
they're using that money as it
and complaints with their
federal coc eligible activities
and then we are able to provide
that match.
Seem for the youth homelessness
demonstration program they
invoice on a monthly basis but
seem thing we want to see that
they're spending our phones and
complaints with their federal
regulations regulations
and no not each provider gives
the same amount of for the esg
and essentially they're the
cease that continue of match and
why htp match programs were
using four million grants to
look at that based on population
based on county served now tell
that money is allocated to the
providers and their awarded
funding on an annual basis they
get an award for months but
again they're doing monthly or
quarterly dr.
And then better chair my left
question on on that same section
is so each of these entities
kind of has a specific
population that they serve.
So okay so for example
healthcare for the homeless
without the lost need yours arm
in last second on data your are
they restricted to only serving
those populations that that
particular clantel that they
that they serve throughout the
year manager
madam current representative.
The only restrictions are that
they have to be eligible for for
the program's funding initially
rates or some of its
state as long as they're
eligible they can serve whomever
I know that in last year for
example they only serve their
program model is only to serve
domestic violence victims so
they don't serve outside of that
population healthcare for the
homeless on the other hand or
not just serving homeless
individuals people that have
been house I believe they will
serve plantel up to two years
after they've been house so
there's there's still some
assistance and support offered
through those elencies and I do
want to point out on this mount
not everyone in each county is
receiving the same funding so
some of those are are continued
with care matt recipients some
are the rapidly housing
providers some are the help work
you know the housing
opportunities for people with
aids providers so it they're all
kind of lumped into one maps I
do want to make sure that you
understand that thank you
manager than my last question is
on page eleven burnerly or
county what's the number there
we can't see it.
I think it's dark
or did you see that manager so I
was able to squint very very
carefully and the number I I saw
is sixteen fifty nine for burner
county
thank you manager.
Okay thank you very much
representative travels and
representative it was like with
okay thank representative robot
government
thinking man insurance thank you
again for your presentation I
have a few questions i'll start
with page two
on page two we have a one point
one six million dollars in total
funding serving four thousand.
Are individuals or people
assistant so how are the
shelters managing both and
managing to meet both the
operational services and the
demand and then can you identify
any gaps and then I have two
more questions off weekend can I
get through this before my time
runs after thank you.
Madame representative right ball
copy so the
service provider agencies that
we work with the funding that
they're using is primarily
operations data day they're
taking care of the fox coming in
so managing the operations
paying stuff salary providing
the food and services medical
you know everything that they
offer out their shelters
it didn't didn't band is
obviously high they have a lot
of people people are counted
through the shelters on how many
things they can come and stay
for a week and leave and then
come back again so that that we
we do see no increase numbers
that that happens with
it did that answer what you were
asked
no madam chair of their
addresses a gap of services
because
based on what you were saying
but if our goal ultimately is
arm to
end homelessness ultimately
then howard how are you
measuring what are your outcome
your measuring outcomes beyond
beds filled and
how do we measure ending long
term homelessness with what we
do I know funding is attractive
to keep organizations agencies
services in place but but they
cannot just be about funding the
operations how are these
stopping or going to end long
term homelessness and then
remember I have another question
madame chair representative
robot cover your so because
these shelters receive federal
esg funds they are required to
use the homeless management
information system or hmis
system gatabase so every every
person that comes in and out of
their shelter is tracked and
where they go to when they exit.
That shelter is tracked in the
start of base so all of our
providers
must supply us with when we call
their apr the annual
comeding reports are hope my
mind is blank at this point
performance report annual
performance report and so were
able to see how many people have
come in how many of exited to
permanent housing how many
people have exited to other
institutions or temporary
housing with family so we are
able to track that with these
providers on an annual basis on
monthly basis honestly is what
they give it to us
and so
part of what they need to do is
they're they're getting people
connected to the coordinated
increased system which is
another system that is used in
it pretty much every state
throughout the country to
manage who qualifies for what
housing programs are available
so the new mexico coalition and
homelessness manages that
coordinated entry system and is
able to connect people to
vouchers and other housing
opportunities as they're exiting
the emergency shelter that they
were connected with income
madame chairman can we have
access to those reports and how
their accumulated the cumulative
reports that would be very
helpful thank you the other
question I have is on page
that again because we want to be
in the position to measure those
outcomes as well and to look at
how effective we are becoming or
your are we but we're doing is
effect on page for you have a
total amount of fourth four
million five hundred and fifty
five.
Thousand dollars serving three
thousand two hundred and seventy
so
are you what what strategies are
in place to prioritise that
those most at risk of becoming
homelessness comeless are being
served.
Madam current representative for
about cavalier the part of the
coordinated injury system is
that everyone that is entered
into that system completes what
they call of the ice for that
it's a vulnerability index
assessment to find to figure out
in the the use and algorithm to
get to a score but based on how
someone scores on that
vulnerability index is where
they're placed on a weight list
for who gets housed first so the
more volable someone or a
household is the quicker they
will get house they're higher
than go on that week less that
statewide court needed less than
we have thank you in madame
chance can we request the chart
that shows that somehow of
course just that that
demonstrates
where we can have a visual thank
you my last question has to do
with page thirteen
all this information is
extremely helpful to us and
being able to formulate
things that we need to do on our
end to assist so on page
thirteen you have let's see
I told number of thirteen
thousand three hundred and
eighty four families assessed
with over fifty five million
dollars so we're seeing honest
news increase rather than
decrease so given the scale of
homelessness in new mexico what
percentage would you say of arm
and then need there is or hump
or what percentage of are we
meeting in these numbers of the
total homelessness and can you
project because given the
economy given the federal the
mood to put it in a different
manner
what can we do i'm looking at
ways in which we can.
Assist in that long term those
most vulnerable and addressing
the end of unlessness within all
these other things that were
facing right now so what is the
percentage of the need that we
can realistically be meeting and
then what would be the project
projected near the unmet need
mountain madame chair and
representative roper royball
combat era and the need is
immense and definitely
homelessness has been increasing
I would not be able to give you
kind of a percentage I believe
once we do a stateway strategy
will have more data on that and
then we can kind of compare what
the amount of people were
serving with that the money that
we're spending and what the need
is so I I believe it that point
which is you mention maybe it
will be completed early next
year I think then we can have a
better idea and be able to come
back and tell you what
percentage were actually helping
how much more we need but I
think the.
Um the success would be to get
these people in to various
programs whether it's short term
rental assistance to get them up
the street or some of them have
substance use disorders than to
get them in a program and the
linkages program that kelly
mentioned is for people that are
homeless with severe mental
illness which is I believe a
third about a third of the
population of almost people so
that those vouchers were just
increased this year that's a
very successful program because
it does have that case manager
piece which which helps them get
on medication stay on medication
and become more functioning so
think a matter of chair and so
if you were to conclude all the
questions that we've asked that
required data into that
statewide strategy that want
that requires graphing data
projections all of that that
would be extremely helpful as we
enter into the policy year of
sixty days session or anything
that we can do are if you
provide that data but in the
thirty day session that would be
greatly appreciated thank you
out of chairman finished thank
you very much representative
unless you're to heal
thinking out on chair i'll try
to be quick I know we're losing
members here
thank you for the presentation I
I just want to clarify a couple
of things trying to connect the
dot here and I appreciate all
the questions that have already
been answered on page three
the list of homeless shelter
operations in emergency
assistance it's not all
inclusive of al.
I mean I know there's some
instant correctly madam chair
vice chair these are the
organizations that that has a
new mexican funds and we
certainly don't fund on all of
the shelters thank you madame
chair until the next thing i'm
wondering is of those that are
listed on page three that the
money is going to it would be
helpful to know what is the
percentage cause I don't think
this is the only funding that
they receive
imagine that these shelters are
funded by other ways whether it
find raising or local I would be
interested to know what's the
percentage that the
housing new mexico is providing
for their operational funding
that would be really helpful
madam chair and voice cherry
that's something we can
definitely that would be contact
the shelters and try to chart
that out thank you and I
recognize that that'll be like a
year behind rate so we won't get
it in real time it'll be after
their.
Kind of roll up and it may be
annual january through december
or it may be.
I don't know but you guys I
would love to have that
information either way um so
then looking at page thirteen um
I noticed that the total has a
dollar signed I think
representative robert already
figured out that that is a
number not a dollar
I thought I was trying to do the
numbers and adding and I think I
had figured that out so
with that said though um under
the housing recovery housing
program it says for projects do
we know how many people are
served in those projects cause
it seems or so you may be under
counting it
madam chair and vice church for
here that program most of the
allocations have been for
acquisition and rehub I think
one of the providers has
operational funds
so we we do have the number and
that is something that we can
get to you some of these arm.
Programs are like in the rehab
process so they will be serving
a lot more people
so this is kind of fairly new
funding and is just kind of
getting off the ground so that
definitely is something that we
can add next time is the actual
number of people served okay
thank you madame share so
and then looking at the other
numbers trying to figure out
like deared those
homeless shelter operations in
emergency services is that the
total number of people that they
serve or is that just the
percentage of the money that we
gave them that they count
towards those people
madam chair and senator to heo
so that these are the numbers of
people they serve with our
funding that's what I was
wondering thank you and that
would be the case in all of
these others thank you.
Thank you very much for you and
less but not least we have sent
another
thank you madame I think you
must let us does I just want to
drive us back to the federal
funding and regulations
situation right now
and it is you or have mentioned
mf has limited oversight over
the housing authority the
regional housing authorities
rate
and on that note what role if
any will mf plea in oversight
and implementation of hudd's new
rules around eligibility for
certain non citizens essentially
puts it out legal residents as a
qualifiers and in terms of
ineligible
classifications that include
starker
new visa and perhaps make sense
families which are not illegal
or documented there are just a
type of legal status that is no
longer eligible right
so I wanted to understand what
you all will do because we know
that if they are non compliant
we will fees a a threatening
situation with federal funding
and then also has there been an
analysis on the number of
individuals and new mexico who
will be impacted and may not
qualify under the new
requirements.
A madam chair centered another
i'm going to let is tick the
sweat.
Manager no cynical number thank
you donna we do not yet have any
clear guidance from had on what
the requirements will be so
right now we are doing business
as usual one source requirements
come
think you know is this is going
to be we don't want to
jeopardize the funding that we
receive so we're going to comply
with the guidance that had gives
us we have not done an analysis
I don't think we don't know how
many people we currently serve
with those programs that may not
fit the criteria that with the
new regulation would impose on
us
kellies for one of you having
the idea of how many may be
undocumented I think we did a
very preliminary analysis not to
long her
but i'm sure in seven hundred
now that yes we did.
When the chatter started
happening in february we did
reach out to her cut contracted
service providers to get a
generalite the ad at least
through our funded programs this
is not including section eight
this is within community
development
and there were about fifty
families throughout the state
that are providers were working
with that they said yesterday
we've got we've got undocumented
families and so we just wanted
to kind of have an idea of what
may be coming down the pike I do
know that through some other
programs that coc federal coc
programs in the state
there they have gotten new
contracts they have got new
language from her saying very
very vaguely stating that folks
can
no longer qualify so I do know
that our linkages program has
absorbed a handful of families
into a state funded program that
obviously does not have that
federal regulation tied to it
I don't know how much of that
can happen you know it it some.
Linkages does require that
several illness to hagnosis sell
you know I did specialize
population but just for our
programs that how many week kind
of figured out back in february
at this point.
Thank you madame chair think
you're both in terms of
undocumented though do you
understand sort of the the sort
of breakdown of those on
documented families that they
they the averaged out because
that's one thing to be a
document and it's another thing
to have temporary protected
status doctor they are not
undocumented so what I really
think it's going to it's going
to be really important as that
we have an understanding of what
that population looks like i'm
assuming it's not very high
just because of our population
in new mexico and knowing what I
know from the feds
but I think it's going to be
important to understand who will
be left out sort of you know in
once there's these things are
implemented because they are
very specific on the regulations
of who will qualify and who will
not and I think it'll be
extremely important and that
legislators understand the
difference between who's being
fundamental who is not because
it's already complicated in
terms of the legality of this
the legal status right which is
already complex in itself so
I appreciate you enquiring about
that and if you all do have I
think specifics on that moving
forward we it would be extremely
beneficial for us to have.
That's.
Okay I think that wraps it up I
want to think the committee
members for really excellent and
sightful questions I want to
think mf and are all our
presenters today for putting
together really really detailed
presentations for us to spark
those questions and that the
excellent discussion that we've
had on a wider rate of topics
are final or next and final
meeting of mfa will be october
third I believe we'll hear some
other presentations
and as well as
bills being considered for
endorsement by the committee and
I look forward to single then
and with that we are adjourned.
The.
