Good morning everybody. Are we
set up on the web?
I wanted to personally thank um
our members Valley Medical
Center staff for providing the
best all men pastry that I've
had in a long time and uh they
provided breakfast today, so
this is Duke Young. He's a CEO
of Membros Valley Medical
Center, and Tamara Han, who's
the director of marketing. I
just asked him to say a couple
of words about their medical
work here before we start with
our agenda
There we go. I just want to say
thank you. It's an honor to, uh,
serve y'all breakfast. We're
glad to have you all down in
the, the Demming area in the
southwest part of New Mexico if
there's anything that we can do
for you, we'd be glad to do that
and we just hope that y'all have
a, a good meeting, uh, as we
said, I'm Duke Young, CEO of the
hospital in Tara Hand, our
director of business and
government relations and all
that. So thank you all for your
time and hope y'all have a good
meeting.
And I'm sure you'll keep your
senator and representative
informed of the needs financial
ma'am. Yeah, that's how we
actually found out about this
meeting was last week.
So.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Appreciate the opportunity to
just welcome you all and uh and
say how proud I am of Mes
Memorial Hospital. Membris is
the only hospital in my
district, Hidalgo, Luna, and,
well, I guess.
my part of Donana, they can go
to Cruises if they want to, but,
but you serve a huge area of
Southwest New Mexico, a big
region, and even from across the
border as well. So, so, um, much
appreciated with the work you
do, uh, the, the hospital's 25
beds, critical access,
um,
have a expansion, hopes for
expansion in the future, um, are
going to, um, navigate the
federal not cuts, but
drawback of funding in the
future. I think that you're in a
good position to do that, which
we really appreciate this, um,
this group brought our hospital
out of a really bad, bad
situation a few years ago, um,
a, a year at a time. And so
we're really proud of the work
that you do and, and looking
forward to working with you in
the future. So thanks for the
good breakfast too. We
appreciate you. Yes, and I also
would like to say, um, I'd like
to recognize city manager Aaron
Serra. Aaron, yeah, and, um, did
a great job of
of providing us all that we
needed for these meetings and
breakfast yesterday and just
have been really accommodating
and I thank you for that
teamwork that we all have here
in Southwest New Mexico. So
thank you Madam Chair.
and a few more very brief kudos.
Uh,
thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and I'd also want to
thank uh Nimbus Valley Medical
Center and director and uh for
everything that they do they're
keeping us updated on uh
multiple things that they've got
going on at the hospital. I
really think that, uh, we've got
a great crew that's heading us
all in the right direction. um,
thank you for sharing your, your
future, your future plans with
us and hopefully we can make it
a reality and, and, uh, work
hard together to, to keep uh
providing our, uh, the
needs of, of Luna County. Um, I
do have two hospitals in in my
district and, uh, bar none this
I believe this hospital's doing
a lot better than than the one
that I've got in Silver City,
although they're working really
hard over there too but we live
in a time where, where, uh,
running hospitals is is really
uh uh chess match and and uh it
seems like, like you're a very
good chess player now and uh and
uh we just got to keep you all
going and, and try and get you
as much funding as we can to to
help you all out so thank you so
much again
for everything that you do and
taking care of our people here
in LUNA and Hidalgo and Grant
County because I know a lot of
people do come here from the
different, uh, different areas.
So thank you very much for what
you do.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
again without repeating
everything that's been said, I
know that firsthand that you
take care of not just the people
of Luna County and the
surrounding areas, but we get
people from coming in from
Mexico that you take care of and
and then there's people on the
interstate. There's a lot of uh
of of work that you do there as
a local businessman that works
with you guys, um, you know,
your staff is very kind,
respectful, nice, and I, I can
say that, uh, you know, our
family has gone through the
hospital many, many, many, many
times, and we appreciate the new
uh the new administration, what
you guys are doing. Thank you
very much.
Thank y'all for your time.
And thank you again for the
delicious breakfast and for all
that you do for New Mexicans.
Yeah, you can
quickly
So sorry, thank you, Madam
Chair, for your indulgence. Um,
this is very impressive. Thank
you so much for providing this.
This is a lot of great
information. I wanted to thank
you. Um
it is so many things that are
impressive about it. So
you have about 80,000 visits a
year.
Is that typical of needing 43
physicians, active physicians,
do you need 60 for 80,000? What,
what is your vacancy rate
because you seem to be, and
you're recruiting some pretty
impressive, uh
uh medical providers as well,
and I'm trying to get an idea in
a rural areas what they need to
be able to
to accommodate the, the, the
community. Thank you.
Well, the 43 active medical
providers are here in the
community. Uh, we also have
contracts with additional
providers that do things
remotely like X-ray reads, uh,
pathology is out of Albuquerque,
those type things.
We kind of look at, uh, when we
changed our name from Memorial
Hospital to a medical center. We
kind of look at ourselves as the
regional healthcare provider,
uh, with Hidalgo County not
having a hospital. We're the
only one for about 150 miles to
the west and about 250 miles to
the south, so we are the nearest
hospital in Lifeline for some of
those uh residents in those
communities, should they run
into
a serious health concerns or
serious medical conditions.
So, um, last year as we started,
uh, our strategic plan
uh, our, uh, process was built
around developing 24/7 service
lines in the major specialty
areas that we need to cover the
community cardiology,
orthopedics, OBGYN, you know,
those are some of our major
service lines, uh, that we cover
and see patients coming through,
uh, we've get, we get a ton of
EMS visits, uh, like you
mentioned, uh, Representative
Terassas mentioned uh I-10.
We get a ton of traffic coming
from Arizona. We get it coming
from, uh, Las Cruces. I think
last uh fall we had a
20 car pileup in one of the dust
storms right here on I-10, and
we had 30 people in the hospital
just from that accident in a
matter of 6 to 12 hours. So we
have taken the approach that we
are a regional provider to this
area of the state and these
residents of the state. And so
that's, that's been our goal has
been to recruit and build the
service lines that'll service
that community, and we're now
looking at 2026 and how
we further expand that and get
those services in this area for
the residents of the state.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'll reach out for my
other questions. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you again for being here
for serving us breakfast and for
everything you do. I appreciate
it.
Thank you
With that, we'll move to our
childcare facility Loan Acton
Update.
which will
be
John
OK,
all three. So we have our CEO
Marquita Russell. We have our
deputy director Fernando
Martinez Junior. and we have a
long time NMFA, uh, person, John
Brooks, and we're going to give
you each your own mic.
So just be sure to turn them off
when you're not talking.
So Madam Chair, yesterday you
asked us about those programs
that sit on our statutes, uh,
that, that we don't utilize, and
this is one of those programs
that was a sleeper program when
it was created 20 something
years ago, um, finance authority
didn't even know that the bill
was being passed until it got
signed. So we were a different
organization then and the, the
hope there was to just help some
small childcare centers to
expand.
We ultimately got about $250,000
of federal funds, and because of
the way the law was structured,
we weren't very able to use
those money. So we made one
loan. We had several applicants
get pretty far down the line,
but the requirements were pretty
rigorous for very small
childcare providers. We made one
loan to a small childcare center
in, uh, home-based childcare
center in Las Cruces, and it
worked beautifully. And then it
went away. The program really
sat there unused, uh, the money,
the additional monies had been
reverted for so
l v ency and so we had this on
this uh books until we
recommended to the legislature
that you take this off our books
and that's when it kind of drew
the attention of several people
that said, oh wait, this might
work for us still. And so we are
now newly partnered with the,
um, Education child care EECD.
childcare department. Um, and I
gotta say it's a, it's a much
different program. The changes
that were made a couple of years
ago through Senate Bill 423 and
the ones that made this past
session have really, it's a
different program and we're
really excited to present work
that's been done to date in the
application that's about to open
shortly. So with that,
I'll turn it over, Mr. Brooks
Good morning, Madam Chair. Um,
and, and members, thank you for
allowing us to talk about the
childcare, um, program. I'm
gonna pick up from where
Marquita ended in terms of the,
the legislation that was passed
last year. That legislation, uh,
one, it funded $10 million into
the program. So it made the
program more viable. It too, it
did a couple other things. It
allowed us to not only work with
existing uh providers, but
it allowed for us to uh be able
to work with new providers and,
and also to do, uh, working
capital and um expansion and
equipment. So it, it made it a
full functioning loan program
that we typically would see at
the finance Authority. And so
the way that this program is set
up and I'll, I'll dive into the
terms and some of the, the ways
that that this is set up. Number
one,
EC
C D is gonna be the party that's
gonna be responsible for
prioritizing the projects and
making sure that the entity
that's applying is an eligible
entity. So it starts there. So
once the, the application is
submitted, they get prioritized.
They are determined as uh a
prioritized project and an
eligible uh entity, then it
comes over to the Finance
Authority for the underwriting
and loan uh loan administration.
And so the way, if you look at
um, on page two, the, the terms
of the program and how this is
going to be set up. So
the, the original program was
set up with a 10-year term and
now it's expanded to a 20-year
term.
We are gonna allow for, uh,
interest only period for two
years. So that will allow for
either um a construction period
to take place so to expand the
facility or to um um build a new
facility. In addition, in that,
uh, interest only period if
they're um applying for working
capital, they could use that as
working capital and stabilize
their organization and therefore
start pay pitable in interest
payments after
um, after the two years. So
it's, we, we've done a lot to
really make this uh program more
accessible and user friendly for
childcare providers. Um, the
operating line is set up for
term loans up to 18 months, and
then, uh, there's a period of 6
intervals of 6 months in which
they could check back with the
finance authority to see if they
can get an extension or or if
we're going to permmaile. The
loan amounts, um
between 100,000 to $2.5 million.
Now that we have real capital in
the program. Now we can make
bigger loans and, and not just
uh cap it at $50,000 which was
the earlier program that uh
Marquita described before.
Uh, the loans may not exceed 20%
of the total capital that's in
the program. So that is, that's
henceforth, that's why at $2.5
million the number that we start
with, um, in terms of the amount
of funds. The interest rate um
is at 2%, and so we lowered the
interest rate from 3%, um, I,
you know, a 1% reduction is a
lot um to these providers, and
it will be important for them to
be able to stabilize their
operations
as a result, um, the loans can
be prepaid, so there is no
prepayment penalty for um for uh
paying off the loans and there's
no additional cost to the bar as
a result, so they could take out
a loan, they're doing well. The
facility is very profitable.
They could pay off the loan and
then we could relend that money
to another, uh, um, provider
that may need the funds. The
borrower does have to bring
equity, so they
need to have skin in the game
and they, they have to bring up
to a 10% equity requirement, and
that gives us a loan to value of
90 90%. There are gonna be per
uh personal guarantees and we do
require collateral. So, uh, this
is not, uh, unsecured uh loan
in, in that respect. So
a little bit about the
objectives and, and eligibility
of the program. Again, this,
this program is to uh primarily
to increase the quality of child
care throughout New Mexico, um,
specifically, you know,
everybody is aware that New
Mexico is a one big child care
desert, and, I mean, every,
every, uh, every county in the
state has a childcare desert,
and there is a need for child
care throughout
the um the throughout the state,
and we hope that this particular
program will address those
issues. Also, under eligible
applicants and who is eligible
to apply, so you can uh be a
private owned, um, facility
that, you know, that is ran by
yourself. You could be a
homeowner organization, you
could be a nonprofit
organization, uh, it could be
located on tribal lands or
managed by tribal governments,
or it can also be um,
an employer-based childcare fac
um programs. So those employers
that wanna offer um benefits to
their um employees has, has far
as child care provi um services,
they can, uh, also apply to this
particular program as well. Um,
as long as you are in good
standing with the ED ECCD
licensure, then you can apply,
um, and then you gotta make sure
that you're, you know, in good
standing with all
uh, the regulatory agencies
through federal, state, and
local law. So that is terms of
if you're eligible applicant,
the eligible projects. So what
are we looking for in terms of
projects and how, uh, uh how
we're gonna use these funds. Uh,
number one, improvements to a
childcare facility. You know, we
want to um be able to help
providers provi provide um safe
um
safe uh facilities also um make
sure that they have adequate uh
facilities in terms of space,
if they want to do any type of
repairs or uh maintenance
expansion or even operational
costs. These are the things that
are eligible under the program.
Um, one of the things that we,
what we're seeing in the old
program that hindered a lot of
uh um
um, providers to apply with
their capital, the operational
capital and, and what we think
with this particular change in
the legislation and the program,
we can now now help out those,
those providers and, and
stabilize their organizations
and to continue to uh provide
the necessary services.
Um, the next page on page 4
is contract for Services.
Um, contract for services is
something that we have provided
in, in two other programs that
we have at the Finance
Authority. The behavioral
healthcare, uh, uh, program in
the primary care uh facilities
program. Those two programs at
is a model for what we see here
and, and what they did in, in
those instances provided a 20%
reduction of principal interest
for services provided to
indigent patients. In this case,
what we did in working with
ECECD is determined that uh the
contract for services between,
uh, the finance authority,
ECECD, and the childcare
provider is providing a specific
number uh
spots for childcare assistance
from ECECD and and um
and adequate legal consideration
for a loan, so they, so if you
provide adequate services for
your, uh, your in your community
and, and a number of specified
child care slots that is agreed
upon all three bodies. Then you
can get up to a, a principle
forgive interest forgiveness and
how this is gonna be worked in
terms of eligibility is number
one, you,
as I stated, you must be
designating a childcare desert
in New Mexico. So everybody
is pretty much a qualifier
there.
And #2, provide non-traditional
hours, so that's hours, you
know, you know, after work hours
or before work hours.
Number 3, demonstrate at least
50% of the children, um, serve,
uh, receive childcare
assistance. So that is
assistance that is provided
through ECECD.
um
Number 4, demonstrate a number
of children or uh served or
increased by 10%, so they have
to increase their number of of
students as a result of this,
this funding, and then, um,
numbers of see, I can't count
these bullets. Number 5.
Number 5, provide um the
providers must meet all uh all
of these criteria for 36 months
of the 1st 48 months following
the completion of the project.
So once they've completed a, an
expansion or uh once they have
built the new facility that we
start the clock once, you know,
once they get their uh
certificate and occupancy, and
36 months, they need to meet all
four of the previous
requirements and within the 1st
48 months
so it's, they have 3 years to to
do that in a four-year time
period.
So the mechanisms, how this is
gonna work and how we're going
to do this. Um, ECCD will, um,
uh, provide, wait, the provider
will certify to ECECD, um, that
they met all their criteria, um,
and ECECD will evaluate, uh, to
ensure that they met all those
criteria. At that time, once
that is, that is um evaluation
has been conducted NMFA will
abate 25% of the princip
al uh payments that they have,
um, that they have outstanding
is it outstanding or front of
the oh yeah, OK, of the project
costs, sorry. 25% of the project
costs, and we will modify the
debt service schedule after
that. They also qualify for an
additional 10% of their project
amount, at least if at least 50%
of their expanded childcare
facility, um, is filled with
infants and toddlers. So you get
a, an additional 10% kicker as a
result if you provide another
10%, I mean, another 50% for
expanded.
uh, infant care and toddler
care.
The maximum amount of the
abatement is up to $77,750,000
and then operating capital is
not uh eligible for a contract
for services, so, uh, those who
are applying for just operating
capitals to stabilize their
business. They do not qualify
because typically those amounts
are a lot smaller than what um
the building facilities or
equipment needs are
And then lastly, on the
application process and process
and how we, uh, this is gonna
work. Um, NMFA is currently
working on the application and
uh we'll have a standard
application system that um
providers will be able to apply
to that along uh application
will be on the ECCD website and
temporarily on our website just
to get the program up and
running, and then once it's up
and running, it will, it
will be housed on the ECCD uh
website. Um, ECCD will provide
all the material and information
on their website about the
facility revolving fund and uh
we will provide, uh, um,
a version control on our side to
make sure that everything is
consistent
Um, borrowers will submit their
application and all the
requirements to, uh, um, for the
uh the program to ECECD. They
will do their prioritization
process and evaluate the
application and determine if the
project and applicant is
eligible.
And then once that determination
has been made and prioritized in
NMFA will begin our underwriting
process and go through our
process to make sure that they
can meet the terms that are
described before, um, you know,
our underwrited team, our credit
analysts and lending team are a
really outstanding team, and
they will do a good job that to
ensure that our the borrowers
are not put in a position of, of
taking out a bad loan but in a
position
to strengthen their operations
and strengthen um the ability to
uh provide services for, uh, uh,
childcare throughout the state
of Mexico. And then once we um
have a finalized package, we
will take that to the NMFA board
for approval and once that uh
approval, um, um, takes place.
The hard part is now closing the
loan, um, working with our legal
counsel and, and, and making
sure
that the loan is closed and
then, and then the loans would
be administered by the Finance
Authority staff.
So with that, uh, Madam Chair, I
don't know if you have any
comments.
So uh
So, Madam Chair, again, the
highlights of the changes, um,
can't be underscored in terms of
their importance. It's, it's so,
um, it's vital that you
understand that we went from a
program that could only do very
small expansions to programs
where you can actually now
create new centers, and that's
what the need was 20 years ago,
but the law did not provide for
it. So there are several changes
here. The fact that the ECECD
can now not only, uh, we can
make qualified their existing
providers, but those that have
qualified for their
provisional licenses, that is an
incredibly important point
because now a new childcare, uh,
provider can enter into the
program. So it's allowing for an
expansion of the number of um
entities that are able to apply
for the program. As John
mentioned earlier, with actual
real capital, um, there was 10
million appropriated this past
year, 1.75 million the year
before that, and the finance
Authority has put in an
additional $1 million into that
program. We can now actually
fund real expansions or real,
uh, uh,
start-up facilities. Um, the
working capital, once you've
built the building, you have to
be able to staff it. That's an
incredibly important part of
that. Um, and so, again, the,
and the contract for services,
which then provides an
additional incentive for
childcare providers to increase
capacity for infants and
toddlers in particular. That's
really, that's the, that's the
tough margin business,
childcare, um, as you all know,
there's a teacher to a child
ratio and the younger
the child, the smaller that
ratio. And so it's a much more
expensive, um, provision of care
than, for instance, 3 to 5 year
olds. And so the program is
tailored to really support and
increase that kind of care
across the state. And I think
with that, I think we're all
I'm happy to answer your
questions. Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys for the presentation.
So,
I guess I'm just kind of
floored, honestly, that we're
spending this kind of money.
because in my opinion
we already have $9 billion in
the early childhood trust fund.
And it's my understanding, Madam
Chair, that those funds are
going directly to providers. So
are we saying that currently
we're not giving enough.
of a reimbursement to providers
through that trust fund?
with this program
Madam Chair, I think that the,
the, um, statement I would make
is that there are not enough
providers to take advantage of
the, um, the, the assistance
that's being provided. There's
still such a need for childcare
out there, um, and that, I think
this is intended to incentivize
more either increases of slots
or for new um participants into
the childcare world.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair,
because I know that this
includes operations
and I know that if we open the
childcare center, then each
child gets
whatever the reimbursement is
per child. It's kind of like the
um like the funding formula,
maybe in a certain way.
Uh, so I guess my question is
I mean, we, we rated the fund by
$250 million a year
and that was for this reason, to
be able to expand to more rural
areas. So I guess are we, I just
don't understand how $10 million
or 1, 1.5 or whatever we're
putting in annually is going to
make such a substantial
difference because it doesn't
sound like a lot of projects, in
my opinion. Madam Chair, I think
that's right. I think this
isn't, this isn't going to solve
New Mexico's child care, uh,
provider issues, um, but it's
gonna make some significant
impact in certain communities.
We have, for instance, already
made a loan to a center in
Tucumerry. They had started
their project, um, it got
sidetracked for a while, um,
because it's a small business
and life happens and so, um, in,
in the intervening time between
when the momentum of the project
stopped and when she picked up
the thread to expand to create a
new childcare center. Her costs
had doubled. And so what we were
able to do was come in and help
provide the completion of that
project so that she could open
the slot up. It doubled the
amount
of childcare available in
Toamarri as a result of that
project. So, we're not gonna
make a macro difference with
this program. We are gonna make,
however, some significant
microdifferences. Um, there are
going to be communities that
are, uh, impacted in a pretty
profound way as a result of one
or two centers being opened up
in their areas
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Marquita. So
then are we the lender of last
resort.
Do they, is there a requirement
you must show that you cannot
get a loan anywhere else.
Madam Chair, um, childcare
centers are difficult to lend to
to start with because of the
very tight margins required. Um,
so it, they're, they're
difficult loan to start with.
Uh, we are not requiring this to
be the lender of last resort.
It's intended to be a carrot to
provide more um centers and
more, uh, capacity for children
across the state. I think if we
required that lender of last
resort, we, we wouldn't
substantially dip into the
number of applicants that would
qualify. It's a hard thing
for banks to do. If you're an
existing childcare present uh
provider. I don't think you're
gonna have any problem getting
loans. We've made loans to
childcare centers through our
commercial lending program. If
they're existing, they'll
probably have a pretty good, um,
chance at it, but if they are a
new provider, that's gonna be a
much more difficult thing. And
so low-cost loans, low cost
capital for those kinds of
businesses are really critical
for the, for the entrepreneur to
decide whether to start a new
childcare center or expand a new
childcare center or not
It could make the difference of
the facility.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And
well, it's not low cost, it's
basically free in my opinion,
because it's 2%, which is
unheard of for a loan, and then
how are we measuring this, the
specifics when it comes to
projected income. If it doesn't
exist, are we projecting the
state's reimbursement? Are we,
how, how are we
figuring out all the different
underwriting criteria for the
center if they are not currently
active, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, so yes, it is
below market, uh, finance
Authority offers below market
financing in its programs.
That's one of the reasons we
exist. Um, and this is not to
say that they don't have to
provide business plans that
they, you know, they have to be
able to show that they can
operate the capacity. This is a
true business loan. Everything
you would need to start to take
to a bank, you would need to
bring to us as well. So it
doesn't take away from their
need to do their homework, to
figure out how they're gonna
operate it. We're gonna look to
see that they've got
management depth that they have,
you know, keeping childcare
providers, um, instructors, very
difficult world. And so we need
to know what their staffing
plans are, where they plan to
get their staff from. This is
all part of the existing
underwriting process. It just
makes it, once they get through
those hurdles, it makes it, um,
much more beneficial to them.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
then I guess I, I would just ask
when it comes to your portfolio
at the finance Authority.
excluding COVID era plans and
COVID era funds. Do we ever
completely just dissolve debt
35% is a lot, and that's
potential of a certain facility
with this. Is that something
that's standard because it's not
my understanding that it is when
it comes to these kinds of
funds.
Madam Chair, it is standard in
our primary care capital fund
since 1995. That's been a
standard practice, um, with our
behavior health capital fund,
and then this contract for
services was explicitly added
to, uh, the law or to the, to
the statute last part of as part
of this past session through
Senate Bill 175. So the criteria
that you see in terms of the 4
bullets that you have to mat
meet um on page
on page 4, those top 4
demonstrate that they're located
in a, a designated childcare
desert and provide care during
non-traditional hours and
demonstrate at least 50% of the
children receive childcare
assistance and demonstrate that
the number of children increased
by 10%. That's all statutory.
There's not anything there that
we added differently. The
combination of all those things,
cause it's not meet one of, it's
meet all of. It, it's unlikely
that it's going to, that a lot
of providers are going to be
able
to qualify. The non-traditional
hours in particular will make
this a difficult thing to get a
to get the abatement for. So,
the overnight care, the weekend
care, all the things that some,
you know, uh, laborers need, um,
is not really readily available
in addition to just having fewer
slots, that kind of care in
particular is very difficult to
get. So we think it's not gonna
be a huge amount, but it will
make a difference, uh, to for a
provider to decide whether to do
that or not.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. And
so I guess my, sorry for all the
questions, but when it comes to
non-traditional, so
is that defined very clearly it
has to be weekends as well. It
has to be holidays, etc. Can you
just go a little deeper into
that for me, because it's, it's
a lot of criteria, but it seems
like if you just say, OK, well,
we're open on Saturday from 8
a.m. to 3 p.m. or something that
could qualify. So I just want to
see would that actually be
something that could qualify or
would it have to be regular
kinds of business hours.
all the time, sort of.
Madam Chair, eligibility is
determined by the ECECD. So
those are questions I'd have to
follow up on, um, but my
understanding is that it has to
be available, um, well, I, I,
I'm not gonna answer for ECECD.
I, I can't give you that answer.
I totally understand. You're not
Secretary Greginsky. Uh, maybe
she's listening today. I don't
know. But, uh, good to know. So,
OK, it just seems like
I don't know, I, I'm not very
supportive of this idea. It
seems, yeah, it's been here for
a million years on the books,
and we just found it and said,
yay, let's do this. But then I
also kind of have a, a problem
when it comes to the expansion
that we've heard about in the
last few days about what this
fund could be, which would be
free daycare, which is the whole
argument that we all made years
ago when they tried to pass
this, and they passed it. So
now we know that's exactly what
they wanted to do. And so would
that also potentially qualify
if, because I know we, we talked
a little about 3 year olds to
5-year-olds, which is pre-K, but
does this also include earlier
than that? Could that, Madam
Chair.
So, Madam Chair, yes, and, and
in particular, um, as John
mentioned that they can get
another 10% abatement if the
expansion, if the majority of
the expansion benefits toddlers
and infants. Um, that's again
because the program is targeted
to, uh,
increase capacity at that area.
But every area is different.
There may be areas in which
aftercare is very important to
the community and is needed. So,
you know, it's, I think they're,
uh, ECECD again, I don't want to
speak for them, but they were
reticent to put a blanket policy
on what was important because
each community is very
different. Some have more Head
Start programs than others. Um,
you know, so it's gonna differ
very much uh from community to
community.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
uh
hopefully the last question,
when it comes to the
eligibility, it says located in
healthcare desert, I'm sorry, a
childcare desert. And from what
I heard a little earlier ago, it
sounds like pretty much the
whole state qualifies except
maybe Albuquerque, Santa Fe,
Crus maybe. So what is it pretty
loosely defined, is my
understanding, Madam Chair, that
is a, that's an industry
standard term for childcare, um,
and there's actually a website
you can go to to determine that,
um, and Albuquerque
uh, has, I think, I think
virtually the whole area.
There's a couple of areas where
there is, where they have
adequate childcare by census
track, but just a couple, uh,
Santa Fe is a childcare desert,
um, there's a number at Las
Cruces is a child care desert,
virtually the whole state, with
the exception of maybe some
portions of the north side of
Albuquerque.
Some portions
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. OK, well
we heard about this like what, 2
years ago, a couple of years
ago, and you, I think you guys
said.
you had to report to us, and I
believe you have to report to us
annually or or something on this
specific fund and then I think
that's how we had the impetus to
continue the program? Is that my
understanding? Because I know
that it wasn't big a few years
ago and now it's a lot of money
Madam Chair, I think what I
would, um, loosely say as it was
on our hit list of things to
take off the statutes.
So there are about 4 programs
that we said we haven't done
anything with this for 20 years,
and we're not going to do
anything with it, and we
recommend you just strike it
from the statute. And that, that
conversation. So we're required
to report to you on
implementation and things that
we do, as well as some regular
required reports on the PPRF and
economic development revolving
Fund. We include this because we
think it's an important thing
that NFA is doing right now. So
everything that's in
implementation, we try to report
to this committee on.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I know I
saw it on a, on a presentation
and it was on a hit list which
unfortunately it's not dead
right now, but
unfortunate, sad. Thank you,
Madam Chair
Thank you. And I'll, I'll remind
everybody that EC ECD is
relatively new and so it didn't
occur to people to use this
because they were new. Uh, next
is Representative Roy Ball
Caballero and then
Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
uh
OK, thank you. Uh, for your
presentation, this is really
exciting. It's been a long time
in the works and actually, um
thank you, Madam Chair, for
making that statement because uh
we need to be grateful for the
creation of the, um, early
childhood education and care
department because it was that
creation of that department and
that commitment, that investment
that actually opened up um the
opportunity, access and the
opportunity that we've been
looking for in terms of
providing a very much unneeded,
uh, I mean, uh, unmet need in
the state and it's been growing.
and growing, so we've never been
able to cap.
that need. And also I might
mention that we are empowering,
uh, providers, these childcare
providers to function as small
businesses, which is really cool
because as we're empower
providing an unmet need, we're
providing and building a small
business. They're small business
capacity to be able to continue
for the long term and they're
all the safeguards in place. So
I, I just wanted to, to mention
that because
that's part of the reason why
our answer to why we haven't,
um, it took whatever you said,
Maquita, 20 years or so to get
to this point. So, um, I am
very, very excited having
administered um in-home
childcare.
uh programs for
with uh 56 small business
providers
and impacted
thousands of lives. Um, I, I was
proud to be the administrator of
those programs. So I'm excited.
So on page 2, I'm gonna, I have
a few questions. On page 2, at
the very bottom, it talks, one
of the bullet says borrower,
equity, personal guarantees, and
collateral are required.
So could these have you thought
about whether these requirements
could unintentionally exclude
smaller providers or nonprofits,
uh, precisely the ones that are
serving low income families and
if so, are there options to be
more flexible?
John
Uh, Madam Chair, at the end of
the day, these are loans. We
want the money back to make
loans to other entities. Uh, we
have a general philosophy that
if we are providing support, you
know, quasi-state support, uh,
that we want to see equal
support from our underlying
borrowers. So we require
personal guarantees on our
programs from, from business
owners. Um, the borrower equity,
I think John was going to
mention that. I'll let him talk
about that, but, and collateral,
these are, these are loans. We
need to make certain that if
the, uh, entity is
not successful, that we have
mechanisms in place to make the
fund whole so that we can lend
the money again and provide the
impact that was expected, but
John, you want to talk about the
uh, the equity.
Yeah, so the, the equity
requirement of 10% is less than
what we normally would for any
other programs, some, some
programs require 20%, some, uh,
15%, but the 10% is a fair
amount for a small business
owner to, uh, provide, uh, money
to the project that they're
they're seeking now. The, would
it also does because of their
equity, it it also uh uh helps
out their collate
ral position, right? So the, the
collateral that they that there
it's required so a building or
equipment, um, it helps out with
the value of that and and so
therefore they don't have to
have as much collateral to get
the loan, um, completed. The,
the, uh, the only, the only, uh
type of business that you
mentioned like a nonprofit,
nonprofit, um, obviously would
not have a personal guarantee
because they're they're not set
up as a business, but
nonprofits, uh, do, uh, is, uh,
avoid the personal guarantees.
Um, also we allowed in, in-kind
uh equity and also uh allow uh
uh in-kind contributions or uh
yeah, yeah, yeah.
So that's if they've donated
land or equipment, they, that's
part of their equity
requirement.
Thank you. I just wanted you to
go into a little bit more detail
about that, and that's what
makes this very exciting because
that is the flexibility, um,
that you mentioned because
having them be able to be in a
better position collateral wise
and then allowing for in-kind is
also a very creative uh way to
do this and then ultimately,
it's a revolving loan and that's
what we have to keep in mind,
the benefits of it. I have a
couple of more questions. I'll
keep moving on.
On page 5
um
let's see, it
you page 5 talks about the
application process and the
portal, um, being hosted through
ECCD EC ECD. I always forget the
E. um
how will NMFA ensure that
smaller providers, um
who we know may lack technical
assistance or grant writing
experience can successfully
navigate the process and not be
passed over by larger applicants
and also if you could address
the language access, uh,
reference to the portal, and I
say this because in my
communities, it's all Spanish
speaking, um, that are so happy
to have this. We'll be
applicants lining up and they're
all Spanish speaking and they
serve Spanish speaking uh
children and families.
I'll take a, a quick stab at
that and then maybe um Marquita
Fernandao helped out. But in
terms of the portal, there's
gonna be two aspects of, of the
portal. So once they apply the
ECCD or NFA staff could provide
technical assistance, uh, to the
providers, right? So as long as
they're in the in the portal and
have begun their application
process. uh, we can help out,
um, as they, uh, go through
the application process, either,
uh, through their staff or our
staff at Defiance Authority. Um,
ECCD will provide all the
information regarding the
program and eligibility
requirements and things of that
nature, while the Finance
Authority staff will help out
with the financial terms, of, of
the, of the application process.
In terms of a uh
Spanish-speaking portal. I, I, I
think the ECCD may have staff
that
um, that is fluid in Spanish and
that can help out to navigate
them through, uh, the, the, the
portal we NMFA staff have 1 or 2
members that are a fluent in
Spanish and maybe we can tap
them if we, if, if necessary,
uh, but I think I, for, for a.
you know, we, we'll figure that
out as that comes. Madam Chair,
if I could just add one thing.
So the application, um, itself
will be in English, um,
initially, we'll, we're still
kind of figuring out whether or
not a Spanish version is
necessary because there is a
translate, so you can, uh,
function, so you can translate
the, um, English application
into other languages. So there
is, if, you know, if it's not
Spanish or it's Vietnamese or
it's, um, you know, some other
language. There is a translation
function that we're hoping to
rely on because we think it
might be more universal than
having a Spanish version, um,
and so we, that's, that's the
goal of our program is to have
it be as universal as possible.
So we're looking at
that specifically. ECECD, um,
has underscored to us how
important it is to have at least
this available in Spanish, so
we're working through how to
make certain that they, um, that
we've got covered, uh, our basis
on, on helping Spanish speakers.
So Madam Chair, it's, uh, I
mentioned Spanish because that's
particular to my district, but
there are multiple languages in
the state, so we need to make
sure that we're addressing, uh,
because we have a language
access law in place and part of
measuring whether we're in
compliance or not will be
looking at these type of systems
that we're setting up. And if
the general public who needs to
access is not getting through
because of language, um,
impediments in the system, then
we need to do something about
it, but it's better to do it
upfront. And so that prompts my
question. The the follow up
question and that is the thing
that I've noticed that's
um not done well by our state
agencies is that even when you
enter into the system either by
phone or online. It doesn't
immediately prompt you in the
language, so you have to
kind of listen to certain types
of prompts in order to get
to where you need to be. So the
prompts themselves
as soon as you
pick up the phone, need to be in
those languages as uh
I don't know how you, I think
there are systems that during
the language access discussions,
uh, Act, um, there are, we, they
revealed multiple systems. So I
just want us to be
absolutely sure that we're
complying, but that it is excess
because access leads to
opportunity, and if we're not
doing that, then we're break
breaking down. My final
question, um, Madam Chair, is
that, um
so now that the fund has been
recapitalized, right, with the
10 million as per, what is it,
SB 175, um
what are NMFA's measurable goals
for the next year, say.
Um, for example, number of
facilities funded, geographic
areas served increase in
childcare slots.
how, what have you set up to be
your measurable goals and how
they're fitting with
the application process in this.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Because
we don't actually select the
providers similar to virtually
all of our programs, water trust
board projects, you know, are
selected by the trust board
Colonus, they've suck those
primary care comes from
Department of Health. We are
not, um, our job is to not focus
on the impacts. We will track
them, but the impacts are
decided by our policy partners.
We provide the financing that
our policy partners aren't able
to do efficiently. So we will,
um, we will take their lead on
the impact they, they want to,
um, achieve with the funding,
the mission that they've set out
will help track those mission
impacts and report them out, but
they are decided upon by our
policy partner. Our job, we'll
be tracking our loan payments,
project milestones, um, uh,
success of the underlying loan
because that's what we've been
brought into the process for, is
our expertise in project
development and lending. So
that's what we do is that side
and we'll report on those
as well. Those are our metrics
on this program, but ECECD has
clear metrics. Um, they're very
focused on particularly
expanding childcare, but
particularly for those infants
and toddlers, because without
that, many parents can't reenter
the workforce.
So, madam
um
just wanted to emphasize
uh
the, you, you're correct in
terms of the responsibility of
NMFA. However, all of you
and, and, um, including the
early childhood department, um
are charged with those
responsibilities. So somehow
within that and we know that
access to capital and funding
and financing has been a
barrier.
um, and has impacted the policy
decisions that we make.
So somehow between those
departments, uh, we need to make
more assurances, a checklist to
affect
um whether we're meeting, uh,
the eligibility and, and we're
meeting what our goals are, and
that's why the goals are so very
important for both entities. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, um, and I want to remind
everybody that we do need to
finish by 11 and we still have
another major presentation, uh,
Representative Kates and then
Representative Tarasas.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and thank you for all your
questions. I am so impressive
that you, um, were not even
aware of the spill, and you've
been able to resurrect this
ancient program and be able to
get it up and moving.
Um, that is very impressive. I
do understand you are the
lender, you are not the
provider, um, but there are loan
criterias which includes that
10% increase of children serve
so in the future when you're
making your reports, that is
something that we would be
interested in seeing, um, I for
one very much appreciate uh this
going on, you know, as the
governor just announced this
week, an increase of, um, being
able to provide childcare, which
is re
vol ut ion ary compared to the
rest of the states around the
the country um
it's essential that we feel that
childcare desert, um, I just
had, uh, a county commissioner,
a professional, an educated
family.
uh, speak to me about how it's
killing them. They're making
decisions very difficult
decisions because of paying for
childcare, um, uh, it is very
expensive and to be able to
participate in the workforce,
um, essential and so I, I'm very
pleased with that. In my
district, I have um
several child care facilities
that are looking to expand, and
this will qualify them. What,
uh, for an initial childcare,
they first have to go through
the licensing process to show
that they are capable before
they go in for a loan for bricks
and mortar through inimFA. Is
that correct?
Madam Chair, Representative,
that is correct. So the when
they submit the application, the
first part of the application
deals with eligibility and then
they will get prioritized once
the ECCD evaluates that and
makes sure that they uh meet all
those requirements, then it
comes over to the finance
Authority and then the finance
authority will evaluate it for
uh the, the ability to take on a
loan. Thank you. And Madam
Chair, we just note that again,
the key difference here
is that we now included in the
ECECD rules, the process for
provisional license. So if you
are not a currently licensed,
um, provider that doesn't mean
that you can't access the
program. You would have to
qualify through ECECD for their
provisional licensure in order
to then apply for the funding,
but that, that is, that's
revolutionary for this program
to be able to expand it to
entities that are interested and
would otherwise meet the
criteria except that they don't
yet have the building. Um,
so it's, there's that chicken
and egg and the ECECD has, has
solved for that issue. They've
been incredible partners in the
implementation of this program.
Now, thank you very much. Um, I
mean, it's, uh, we're not just
providing a, a social service.
This is an economic driver, uh,
a business, a small business
driver as well. And so I very
much appreciate that. Um, just
as a side note, I don't believe
does do it, do your, uh, uh, is
do it provide IT services for
NMFA. I don't believe they do,
No, Madam Chair, we have our own
IT top-notch IT staff. I, and,
and I've heard to the grape
grapevine, they are top-notch,
but I have to say, um, let's
make sure that things are
accessible, um, when April of
2026, we have a federal law
coming that our state, um,
websites and technology meet
accessibility. I really
appreciate the representative
talking about language barriers.
I'm looking for
sight.
and uh and and audible as well,
especially as we um expand our
child care facilities. We're
gonna expand the type of
services and so we really wanna
make sure that we're doing a
blanketed, um, outreach. So
thank you again.
Thank you and our final very
brief questioning is coming from
Representative Terasas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much.
Um
some of the things that, um,
Representative Kes brought up
is, is very valid that uh there
these childcare centers are
needed and stuff to balance, you
know, some of the need out there
and I think there are some some
Madam Chair, I think there are
some child care centers that are
smaller, small business ones
that are struggling due to
competition with the government
we'll just put it, you know,
with the new, um
uh,
government provided child care.
and so um
so some of this stuff could
probably help clean up and
straighten out and make them
competitive or whatever so a
couple questions just on the
alone because I wanna, uh, out
of respect to the chair, I wanna
hurry here. Is that 10% um
is it just collateralized or is
it cash or how does it have to
be, let me just run through a
few things so that I don't go
back and forth and we can just
run through this quick and, and
so is that collateralized
through cash or just or or or.
other collateral that can be
used and do you guys have any
piggyback loans because with the
cost of construction today, uh,
is very expensive and your
average loan we'll just start
with that average loan piggyback
participation
uh, and, and how it's
collateralized.
Madam Chair, Representatives,
uh, those are good questions.
So, number one, in terms of the
collateral, the collateral could
be
land, building, you know,
equipment and so that's that,
that's how they, they can use it
in terms of uh the, the equity
that they could bring in as, as
we mentioned, it could be cash
equity. It could be land that
they contribute uh for the
building or part of the, the
building as equity to, to the
project as they expand their
facility. Additionally, uh, to
your, to your latter point, um,
in regards to
uh participations or use it, uh,
looking at the capital stack of,
of, of a financing. Um, in some
mystics, there could be, you
know, a bake.
or a CDFI evolved into
transaction and we would work
with them and, and, and provide
the the remaining gap of the
financing and have a complete
project. So there's, there's
options to get this done and,
and, and no way is gonna be uh
perfect but you know we, we have
the flexibility with this
program to do all that. And and
Madam Chair, if I could just
encapsulate one thing about the
finance authority. Our goal is
to get projects completed. And
so the things that you'll note
in all of our
programs is that there's an
equity requirement, there's a
personal guarantee requirement.
We will subordinate to federally
insured financial institutions
and will partner side by side
Peri Pasu with other
mission-based lenders. Um, so
those are the things that those
are characteristics of our
programs across the board.
So basically to for people that
may not quite understand that
what you're telling me is you'll
take the last position
you'll take that last position
of, uh, uh, with lean position
it it it might
Madam Chair, if it's a federally
insured financial institution.
If it's another if it's another
mission-based lender, if it's
another, you know, uh, program,
we won't, but for banks,
basically, we will subordinate
to banks because we know that if
they could do the whole thing,
they likely would. It's rare for
a bank to pull back because they
don't like the project. So we'll
subordinate to a bank. That's
Madam Chair, that's why I was
asking because I was just
listening to the the project
that you had in Tucumerry and
that
tells me there was it it was a
new construction, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, it was a facility
renovation, and there was not a
bank involved. The provider had
never received a bank loan
before. And so was, had been
cash funding the acquisition and
the renovation. And again, if
that momentum had not been
disrupted, would likely have
finished it earlier. So, Madam
Chair, I'm sure you use that as
a as their as their as their
cash injection as their
participation. OK, so you, you
do participate
that's important because I'm
with the cost of construction,
I, I don't know what, and I
didn't, I'm sorry, I, I got
interrupted and I didn't know
what was your average loan at
this point, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, we did a $50,000 loan in
2006, and then, you know, we've
done about a $1.5 million dollar
loan. So, I, you know, I don't
know that those are worth
averaging because they're
different programs and Madam
Chair, that means, but that's
out of the $10 million that
we're the of of funds that you
have to work with.
Madam Chair, I think we could
characterize, we've received
from the legislature 11.75 and
then the Finance Authority
contributed a million dollars.
So we're, we're almost at 13.
OK, that's good. So, and then
the other question let's see
here um.
I think what I was looking for
is, is there anything with with
cash flow as you're coming along
that can disrupt that and and
put you in a or are you just
more interested because
conventional loans you have to
have a cash flow statement that
meets their requirements and
sometimes, Madam Chair, they
require those yearly to just see
how your cash flowing the bank
might say, hey, you know what,
uh, or when they especially if
they call your note, right, it's
gonna mature but
are you are they doing any cash
flow statements for you or are
you not worrying about that as
long as they're meeting their uh
financial obligations of
payments.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, we will evaluate their, uh,
cash flow statements on uh a
quarterly or annual basis
depending on how we work that
out with the borrower. Um, we,
you know, our goal is, you know,
obviously not to uh
to own a childcare facility, but
our goal is to make sure that
childcare facility is successful
and moving forward and we, you
know, our goal is to ensure that
these funds are also repaid back
and can be used for other
facilities. So yeah, we will
evaluate, um, the their cash
flow statements, their balance
sheets, and, and everything that
they have and and continue to
work with them. This is not
uh, where if they, you know, did
something wrong, we, we were
bring the hammer down, but we
would work with them
So Madam Chair,
quick question. So you go from
construction to permanent but it
stays at at the 2% the whole
time, so there's no conversion
it just stays and you just work
through it and OK, so Madam
Chair, the other thing is, you
know, when I started, I mean I
was people, you know, cringe
with what they're paying with
interest rates now. I started
with 1011, 12, 13% when I
started even up to 18%,
especially as a new business,
right? A person without a
track record what you described
earlier and so I, I know how
tough that is. That's a killer
for cash flow. I mean, your
interest rate obviously makes a
big difference. I just started
just
trying to throw some numbers. I
advertised out half a million
dollars, so people get an
understanding of what it is real
numbers, half a million dollars,
that's a half a million dollars
if you borrowed it for a 20
year, that's what you guys have
20 years
at a Goin, which is a great rate
right now commercial is 9%.
That's a good rate.
and in, in the commercial world,
that's a $4500 payment.
You guys are offering that same
thing for $2500 and then on top
of that interest only in the
first two years. Interest only
on 9% is 3750%. Interest only on
a 2% loan is $833.
That is huge
I mean, that's, so I mean I'm
almost ready to ask you if
you're lending for mortuaries
because I
And I just wanted to make you
smile. This is just very
helpful. I'm just being silly
and stuff, but truthfully this
is a no brainer for people to
get in. I mean, and I'm sure I
would imagine that you're gonna
have a lot of applicants at
these type of rates and so I
don't think, I don't think we
should be competing necessarily
with um your community banks per
se but I would say, Madam Chair,
that there are gaps
where people need
some help and can then establish
themselves and this is something
that I'd like to see get people
started getting getting them on
their feet and then they go off
then and go onto uh whatever
national, uh, community bank
whatever and and grow from
there. I don't think we should
be continuing this, this trend.
They build the first thing and
then get another deal. I think
this would be a starting point
to get people on their feet and,
and I love that. I, I, I think
there has to be a, uh, sometimes
you gotta plug those
little holes. I've been there. I
know how it was when I, when I
first started. So this, this is
great thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, and with that we will
change hats
um, so we're now going into the
local solar access fund update.
and the proposed local solar
access rules for consideration
Does that mean Marquita, that
we're looking at rules that we
will approve at the next
meeting.
Yes, sir. Madam Chair, good
morning and good morning
committee members and so, you
know, first of all make sure
that everyone's got the
presentation and uh
draft copy of the rules.
I, I do wanna say, you know,
right off the bat that the
sponsors and the legislative
members did a really good job
with House Bill 128. I know
there was a number of amendments
going out through that process
that ended up with a, a really
good bill for for creating the
local solar access fund in the
New Mexico Finance Authority and
providing uh grants for solar
energy systems and
giving us a lot of guide
guidance for how we're gonna
establish these rules and then
of course getting us the $20
million appropriation uh
associated with that, but in
answer to your question, uh,
Madam Chair, yes, we're
providing an advanced copy of
the rules right now so that it,
it'll be probably in November
that that we're looking at in
terms of um getting approval of
these, but we wanted to get
these to you sooner so that you
have them ahead of time.
and really appreciate the
efforts on on the House Bill 128
because it really made uh the
getting the draft rules together
and the the policies that we're
working on now, uh, much simpler
with, with all the guidance in
there, um, but as I stated this
amended the New Mexico Finance
Authority Act to create the
local solar access fund and, and
there is a $20 million
appropriation that goes into
that to create two types of
grants, um, the first one is, is
a project grant and that's for
planning and
designing and constructing or
purchasing or installing uh
solar energy systems, and the
second part is for a technical
assistant grant, and that's to
help like communities that don't
have um the resources available
to apply for other funds that
they can leverage using this so
it could be for federal funds.
It could be help with getting,
uh, one of these grants as well,
um, but, but it does provide
assistance in those two areas.
Um, it also House Bill 120 also
does allow for us to just, uh,
re
co up our administrative costs
that we're going to incur with
implementation of the program.
um, but most importantly in, in
part of this is just how we're
gonna evaluate these
applications and how we're gonna
prioritize them and another
thing that the bill did was just
require that the New Mexico
Finance Authority consult with
the Energy Minerals and Natural
Resources Department in this.
Um, so we're working with
policies for how we're gonna
evaluate these applications and
then, uh, developing some
metrics for how we're going to
prioritize the, the solar energy
systems.
Um, so, so those are two big
things that we're doing at some
of the amendments that came in
through the process during
the legislative process is also
allowing for energy storage
systems as, as being a part of
the solar energy system and, and
that's a really important
component to it, um, because
that storage piece is real
crucial to having one of these
systems in place, especially if
you're trying to uh get a solar
energy system in a rural or
underserved part of New Mexico
and there's an emergency, um,
this could help essential
services keep the power on or or
a community center where where
people are, are being
housed temporarily if, if
there's energy storage, it you
could have, you know, 8 hours of
extra energy that you otherwise
wouldn't have and that could
make a, a tremendous difference.
Um, so those are some of the
things that, that, that were
done in that, um, one of the
other key things that the
statute does is set out some
missing, uh, fun mission
objectives, and those are very
clear in the statutes you'll
find that those are also going
to be in the rules very clear,
but this is all about, uh,
getting solar energy systems
into underserved or rural, uh,
communities throughout New
Mexico. It's really meant to
reduce the energy burden and for
low income households and for
community service providers.
and we also have some provisions
in there that are gonna
hopefully support local
workforce development in their
in the renewable energy sector,
so hiring local is one of the
key things, um, that, that's
part of the statute and the
rules in our, and the draft
policies that we're working on
and and at the end of it we are
trying to get some enhanced grid
resiliency, um, so this
uh, statute and rules does allow
for interconnection equipment as
well to get onto the grid and
it'll help with the resiliency
in these communities and, and
then of course the, you know, as
I mentioned a little bit
earlier, it's also to help
leverage with other funding
sources whether they're federal
funds or other things so you can
really maximize the project
impact, so those are some of the
key things that it's gonna do um
with regards to who's eligible
um for for this grant, um, we
have counties, munic
ip al ities school districts,
um, uh, New Mexico land grant
Merceds and Indian nations
tribes or or pueblos located
wholly or partially in New
Mexico, um, so that's for the
project granted in terms of the,
the solar axis technical grant
that I mentioned where, you
know, we can assist with
communities needing help with
the resources they need to get
some of these funds or get a, a
direct build system built or
they need help with engineering
or permitting or things. We have
that available
and one of the amendments is
this was going through the
process was also to not only
include those eligible entities
that I just mentioned, but also
in New Mexico Council of
Governments, um, can also apply
for that funding as well.
Um, with regards to the
applications and what we're
looking in is, is this really a
detailed scope of work in here.
Um, it's, it's really standard
for any of these systems that
you're, you know, get your
project size, your location,
and, and the goal for this,
this.
uh solar energy system project
we're gonna have technical
specifications of the actual
system that we'll be working
with the energy, minerals and
natural resources department on,
on those types of things for,
for ensuring that these are good
quality systems that are gonna
meet the the life of the
project. Um, we do want to
ensure that all state and local
or federal requirements are met,
uh, that those environmental
considerations are really
important in, in terms of doing
that. We also want to see
an implementation plan that
these projects can be um
planned, designed and built in a
very timely manner and within
certain time frames, um, so
those are all important things
that are gonna be part of this
application.
uh, as far as like the technical
assistance grant application.
uh, that's one of the things
that, you know, we mentioned we
can help communities get some
money so they can help leverage
other funding or, or if they
need help with permitting or
engineering services, they can
apply for that. So that's a,
that's a fairly straightforward
process with that.
Uh, in terms of how we're gonna
like allocate this across the
state. It's got to have some
geographical diversity and there
are requirements like you can't
have more than 25% of the fund
that that's gonna be in any one
county, um, so that we're
ensuring that it's going out
there. We're also going to be
ensuring that, um, 60% of it
goes to rural areas as well.
and so those are really key
things, um, that, that we're
gonna be doing there in terms of
how much is available for a
project grant to actually
implement a solar energy system,
um, the, the max amount is gonna
be 16 million
dollars available for that out
of the $20 million. No project
can be more than 4 million, and
again, you know, we, we don't
want to have like 4 big projects
of 4 million and it eats up all
the 16 million so we're gonna
also just ensure that we do get
diversity of system sizes as
well when we're looking at the,
the criteria and the metrics for
how we're prioritizing the
projects, um, with regards to
the technical assistance grants
we're setting aside $2 million
with uh no more than 200
00 $0 that can be, uh, granted
to any one project
and so that, that's how we're
looking at doing it statewide,
um, in terms of, of what at the
end of it, what we're going to
really be looking at it and
focused on when we're gonna be
approving the selected projects
is can they complete this
project and the scope of work
described in the in the time
frame that we're hoping to get.
Um, is it gonna lead to
community resilience? Is there
gonna be geographical diversity?
Is it gonna be rural, non-rural?
We're gonna be looking at all of
those, but at the end of it it's
really all about the community
benefits that we're hoping to
achieve out of this and, and
that really is about uh uh
cost savings in, in terms of the
house energy, uh, low income
house energy, uh, burdens and
things like that that we're
gonna be looking at like
long-term energy cost
reductions. How does this
benefit the local community or
emergency shelter providers, um,
is their energy storage
integration and, and of course
is if are the local workforces,
uh, being utilized in terms of
putting this together.
um, in terms of when we want to
stand up this program and open
it up for applications, um, I
think the latest is gonna be
early 2026, but we're doing some
things right now that I think
we're hopeful we can hopefully
open this program up for
applications in December. Uh,
this is the first step with,
with getting you some of the
program objectives before you
today and uh the draft rules so
that you have some time to look
at it prior to the next meeting
and, and see if there's any
comments in the meantime.
we will be continuing to work
with the energy, minerals and
natural resources department on
getting the
the whole, um, policies in place
for this and and the criteria in
place so that, that we're
working well together in
consultation on that and that we
get some really good systems
that can have a really good good
life and and really benefit
communities so um we got a few
steps to go through. This is the
first one is getting before you
then we're gonna be working with
our board on
on the rules and uh and also on
the policies that we're gonna be
developing and then uh.
we'll be in the meantime,
building the applications
internally so that we have a
really good system so that when
we open it up that hopefully
it's a really straightforward
process and we and we have a
really good um
client experience for them so
it's not too difficult, but like
I said, you did a really good
job with the statute and, and
laying it out. So it's really
easy to put together the draft
rules and policies. So again,
commend you all for, for doing
that. I think it was a really
good, good bill that was, uh,
passed and signed by the
governor, and with that I can
stand for questions.
Madam Chair, if I could just
mention one other thing again
subject to, um, like the NMFA
sorry.
um, pursuant to the NMFA Act,
this is one of those sets of
rules that both the oversight
committee and the NMFA have to
adopt. And so our process is
laid out, as you mentioned
earlier, reviewed this month.
Our board will then review and
approve and then we'll bring it
back to you. And we're hoping to
get that all done by your
November meeting so that we can
open the application up. The
statute requires that we have
those in place by the end of
December. So there's a little
bit of pressure on both of us to
make sure that we have a quorum
in November. Um, and just one
other thing, uh, the
rules are internal, the policies
are external, so the policies
are the ones that are intended
to make certain that the clients
know how they're going to be
treated and how the things, how
the projects will be
prioritized. These put the
frameworks and guardrails around
what those policies will
contain, and, um, just section
11, there is an editing error
that I wanted to highlight
before Representative Block, uh,
asked a question, um, which is
that the rules may be repealed
at any time by the finance
authority and may be amended by
the finance authority only with
the prior approval of the NMF
A oversight committee. So, um,
this, there was a slight editing
error, I just wanted to make
certain you knew that the
Finance Authority could repeal
these rules, but we can't amend
them without your approval after
the after the initial approval.
OK, and I want everybody to know
like just ECCD was involved with
the other one.
uh.
Energy, minerals, natural
resources department is also
involved in this. Madam Chair,
we partner with the E
departments. We have programs
with the Economic development
department, the Environment
department, early education
department, and now Energy,
minerals and Natural Resources.
I don't know that we've
partnered with anyone that
didn't start with an E, oddly.
Education.
OK,
our first question is from
Representative Tarazas, and our
second is from Royal Caballero,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
so on these rules, thank you
very much for the presentation.
Um, I was looking on page 5
Um, you have
um, the criteria
for solar energy systems.
and this is just my opinion,
Madam Chair
I think there's a lot more
opportunity in, in the urban
areas.
and this is just gonna, is this
gonna, because this is it says
rule and non rule.
Shouldn't it just be for rural
communities aren't they more of
at a disadvantage than
Las Cruces, Albuquerque
uh, Santa Fe.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Terazas, yeah, that's one of the
things that that we've done in
the rule and in, in uh the
policies that we're working on
is that 60% of the total
available funds for a project
grant go to rural communities,
so that's roughly about $11
million will go to rural
communities so that it's just
not all going to the big urban
centers like that, uh, but we're
really trying to focus on the
underserved in the rural
communities to the extent that
we can, and that will be a
consideration in
terms of.
uh, the criteria that and the
metrics that we're going to be
using to prioritize the
projects. I appreciate that,
Madam Chair, Sir, and I, I just,
I'd like to see that number
increase significantly, um, I
know you're saying 60%, but
I, I think it should be 100%
personally being that there's
just so much they have just, I
mean, look, there's just a huge
disadvantage of being a r in a
rural community. It just, we
just don't, we, we can't
compete.
and I mean it's just the truth.
It doesn't matter if you're in a
small business, it doesn't
matter if it's a municipality
where we are always last when it
comes to any government dollars
and, and, and basically because
and it's economics it's I get it
but you know I, I, I personally
uh, would like to see that
amended to, you know
for that entire fund to be used
in in rural communities, um, and
that's just and I'd like to, is
there a definition here of rural
and, and I didn't understand
what non rule is that that
basically urban uh Madam Chair,
Madam Chair Representative
Terazas, yeah, there, it's for
60,000 or less in population.
is considered rural
OK
and and non-rule is anything
over 60,000. OK, so, um
I just, I, I, that's I strongly
feel that's important to us, um,
also another thing on that I
didn't see here.
um that I think is important to
me, um, is
reclamation requirements
I think they need to have a
reclamation requirements just
like anyone else when you're,
when you're disrupting the
landscape, right? solar farms or
big footprints in our, in our,
uh, environmental landscapes.
New Mexico is known as a such a
beautiful state, um, and it, I
believe that some of that stuff
has has a life, a shape uh the
shelf life, right? We have seen
in the past, Madam Chair, uh,
solar companies go under.
and have, you know, the, you
know, it's, it's kind of a
kind of shaky and I, I think
just like we require other um
extraction right? we're
extracting technically that's
what we're doing it might be
from the from the from the sky,
but we're extracting basically
um some of our natural resources
here and I believe that we
should have some reclamation
requirements, uh, where they pay
maybe into the reclamation fund
and, and this is very raw
because I just, I was kind of
reading the rules, uh, uh, that
you're proposing, but I believe
that we should have some recla
m ation um, requirements for
they they pay into a fund so
that we don't find ourselves
with a solar farm that's just
left
left there or you know
businesses struggle, madam chair
and you know what if we find
some of these huge, uh, uh, wind
turbines. I know the blades have
a lifespan also imagine all the
all the glass from the from the
solar panels themselves where do
those go? How do they dispose of
them, um, and, and where we're
being cognitive cognitive of our
environment and being safe. I
also think that we should
protect ourselves from imagine I
mean I've driven through, uh, I
don't know what it's
12000 pounds or whatever. I
don't coming out of California
and you see how much of the
landscape it takes, that's not
unrealistic to me, uh, Madam
Chair for us to see this in the
future and imagine if some of
those
you know, they struggle, they
can't repair one, replace 23,
they finally go under and then
now we have this solar farm
that's just sitting there they
could. What are your thoughts
about that, Madam Chair? Um,
Madam Chair and Representative
Tarazos, that's a really good
point and that's one thing that
I dealt with for many, many
years in, in terms of what
happens when
the useful life of this project
ends and you're left with all
this infrastructure there that
gets abandoned.
um, in, in previous jobs that
I've had, we'd we'd handle that
usually through landowner
agreements on what was going to
happen with returning those
lands back to some sort of
beneficial use after the life of
the project, um, and you know,
in some local
communities there, there are
some
um, I, I guess
requirements that that they also
clean up like within certain
counties, but, but it's not like
a statewide requirement and it
is a really good point because
they do have a shelf life and at
the end of it, sometimes you can
be left with that, but sometimes
the local ordinances do require
it. Um, I don't think there's a
statewide requirement to do that
like there would be for the
extractive industries that you,
you know, you're going to be
required to meet all state and
environmental laws with regards
to that and returning the land
to a beneficial use. We don't
have anything like that, but I
think in this
case the eligible entities are,
are typically gonna be
governmental entities, you know,
so hopefully they're gonna be
accounting for that when that
project ends that they're gonna
have something in there for, for
removal of that equipment or
repurposing or whatever it is of
the land that they're going to
be using up. Um, I don't know
how we can do that with this
program because we don't have
any reclamation requirements in
the statute, but what we do have
is that they do have to meet all
the environmental considerations
that we have. So in other words,
they have to meet all state and
local laws that is going to be
one of the requirements before
we issue a grant. It's just
whether or not some of those
requirements are going to exist
in law and so that might be a, a
whole separate thing that we'd
have to address at a later time.
you know, Madam Chair, I think
we could establish some rules
because I don't, I, I, I think
it's
I don't think it's right for
them to say, oh yeah, you know
what, let's let the counties or
the and and without with no
disrespect, please, madam Chair.
I, I think that we need to have
something a little with more
teeth where they do have some
bonding. They can, they can do
bonding, they can do some sort
of bonding capacity to do that.
They can also, you know, uh, put
some money in the reclamation
fund. I, I don't, I think it's
geared more toward oil and gas
and toward uh mining right? but
I don't see why they couldn't
participate in that.
and, and we know that, OK, let's
just say even if it is uh a
municipality that does that,
municipalities struggle to come
up with 5000 bucks to fix their
library.
so
I would say, Madam Chair, that
we need something a little more
with a little more bite that and
I'd ask, you know, our
colleagues here to take into
consideration where, where we
are gonna, we, this is, this
does have a shelf life.
and it is, it, it sounds good
right now and everything's great
and we hope that they continue
this this will ensure that
they'll continue to keep the
main the proper maintenance
removal of any
non-working equipment.
and not just dispose of it just
you know, environmentally safe.
I think this is something where
we can all come together as, uh,
you know, bipartisanly and see
that we recognize that this is
also something that growing
industry that can have a big
footprint in on New Mexico's,
uh, beautiful environmental
landscapes and I believe that we
should be focusing on protecting
that like we have like we're and
we're we're one of the states
that are known for doing that
and so I don't believe that this
should be any different than
anything else. Uh, I, I, so I'd
like to see some requirements,
uh, added here, um, where
there's some bonding or or
requirements and it it probably
will take it up a little bit
more of a discussion but um it I
think to me, Madam Chair, it's
very, very important. I know a
lot of, uh, my colleagues feel
the same.
Madam Chair, thank you for that
feedback, and we will, we'll
talk with the Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources about
appropriate practices here,
because again, what we want to
do, um, we want to make certain
that our policy partners who
have the most experience in this
area outside of Fernando we're
lucky to have him, uh, but we
typically just do the financing
part. So we'll talk to them
about what we think are
appropriate levels and what they
might have in other programs so
that we can have some
consistency because it will be
more likely to be, um, uh,
accepted if
it's really consistent with
other program requirements, and
I think, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, Marquis, I don't think
there is any existing language
that I could find, uh,
concerning this, um, I could be
corrected on that, but I don't
believe there is anything to
line yourself up, but at the end
of the day, uh, it's got a shelf
life and we need to treat it
that way and so there aren't any
I think NMFA can come up and be
the leader in producing some
rules and requirements.
Hey, look, we just want you to
have a bond money capacity, a
little bit of a, uh, a
reclamation reserve to be
started and then hopefully this
will take off from there. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I just want to
remind everybody that we're
dealing with the rules that came
out of this bill.
So if we're talking about a
whole another thing we may need
you may need to run legislation.
We have oil rigs, we have uh
turbines
We have a lot of the just, just
to note that
everything that you're talking
about is important, but they're
doing the rules based on 128.
That's Adam Chair and I believe
without reading the, the uh
you know, having the bill in
front of me, I don't think it
gave that's what rules are for,
to fill in the gaps.
and so I see this in in my
industry and others, uh, it's
something that it's important
that should be, it's again,
it's, it's a gap filler, right?
because, and if the legislature
does not feel that they that
we're positioned or want a
requirement require reclamation
requirements, and they need to
pass a statute that says that,
which I would not see happening,
but we're right now we're, we're
following rules criteria for
evalu evaluating, uh, solar
energy
systems. I don't want to see
people getting
grandfathered in. Well, that was
before, you know, I put it in
and sorry those are new
requirements. I think we need to
be careful and, and, and be more
cognizant of that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. We have 19 minutes
and we have um
Senator Ramos, uh,
Representative, oh wait, am I in
the right list?
Senator Ramos, Representative
Kates and Representative uh Roy
Ball Caballero.
I have two dueling lists.
You're on it, right, Kate?
Yeah, no, it's Ramos, Kate's
Royal Caviero.
and keep it remember we have 19
minutes, we're stopping at 11.
period
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, and you know, we, we do, I
truly feel that uh
solar and wind is very important
to my communities. Uh, we, we
have a lot of uh solar panels
and, and different uh wind
turbines throughout.
And I also feel the way uh of Te
Rasa stated, we need to do
something. We know new
technologies are going to come
out. I think smaller panels are
going to come out. I, I think
we're gonna have smaller wind
turbines with the new
technologies that are coming
out. And what are we gonna do to
keep our, our beautiful
landscapes that we have now. I
mean, personally, I think, uh,
our landscapes are, are gorgeous
and, and we've really
messed things up by putting some
of these, uh, systems where they
are today. Um, but, um, they are
important to our community, so
I, I really feel that, that
that's uh uh an important issue
for us, but I really, I really
think that bonding, uh like a
reclamation would be something
that, uh, that would be very
important to us, um, in order to
keep those, those uh, those
beautiful landscapes.
On cue
I believe it's Q.
page 2 on section 2Q.
What, why are we excluding class
H counties. I mean, that would
exclude like Harding County and
a few of these others that, uh,
uh, like Los Alamos, um.
and that's population's less
than 60,000 and, and I, I just
want to make sure that
when we, when we're talking
rural, we're really talking
rural, we're not talking, you
know, what we, there was a rule
caucus in Las Cruces wanted to
be included in our rural caucus,
and it just we have to define
exactly what we're going to mean
when it comes to rule and uh to
me Las Cruces is not a rule.
It's a, that's huge and so.
I really think that we need to
be specific when it comes to
rural eligibility or eligible
entities and uh why would we
exclude class H counties.
Madam Chair and Senator Ramos,
I, I believe that language came
directly out of the statute, if
I recall. I don't have the
statute in front of me. I had
printer problems and couldn't do
it, but um, but I believe it was
in the statute, so it just
carried over to the rules, so
I'm not sure why those
exclusions were in there for
Class H counties, but I will
look into that and verify that
that's correct. And, and if it's
not, we can, we can go back and
revisit that if that's not in
the statute, and we can look at
that in
the rules again and, and see if
we can address your concern.
That's basically all I have. Uh,
I, but I, I do truly feel that
some kind of bonding for
reclamation needs to be
included. It might not be in
these rules, but we need to make
sure that we work together. I
think the our colleagues on the
right would agree that we want
those landscapes to go back to
the way they were before they
were, um, utilized. So thank you
very much, Madam Chair you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator. Representative Caseman,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
presentation. The rules that you
presented today, these are rules
as they pertain to NMFA and for
the loan. They're not program
rules, correct?
Madam Chair, Representative Kate
said that that's, that's
correct. I, I mean, I think the
only thing that the statute
requires that we do in
consultation with, with energy,
minerals and natural resources
department that we work on the
prioritization and the metrics,
um, that sort of thing so that
we can just get the prioritized
projects in place, but yeah,
this is really how uh NMFA is
going to implement the program
on this and the policies will
get in a lot more detail when
we're done with those. So thank
you very much. And so E energy
mineral
and natural resources, um, that
would be the agency that we
would, um, uh, be able to
present um my colleague
Representative Tarasso's idea of
making sure that um companies
that are putting up any kind of
energy infrastructure, which
means solar windmills, oil and
gas rigs that they would be
required a bonding and a remo
val to keep our natural state,
but we could present that bill
to that agency EMFA is only
concerned about the lending
portion of this process is that
not an adequate statement.
Madam Chair, Representative
Kates, yes, I, I mean, that's
really what we are is the, the
lending institution and as far
as like the technical or the
regulatory arm of government
that that really is in the
purview of Environment
Department, Energy, minerals and
natural resources. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I don't
want my chair to yell at me for
time, so I'm sorry to interrupt
you, but thank you very much.
Um, I would just like to
probably say I would love to
support that billresentative, if
you'd like to put it together, I
most certainly
would most certainly would
consider it. I just like to
bring to the listeners'
attention that sometimes we may,
we all know this, but we may
think we may not remember it.
Bernal Leo, Donna, Anna, and
Santa Fe County make almost
exactly 50% of our total
population in this state, which
means there are 30 counties that
make up the other 50% of our
population. So
your definition of rule is
60,000 and under a represented
the senator is correct. There,
there are too many definitions
about rule as far as I'm
concerned. But we don't want to
forget about either 50% of the
population. And so I do
appreciate that you understand
that there are rule committed
communities, especially because
they're so spread out amongst 30
do deserve this program, and I
understand with the bill, I
appreciate with the
d ra ft ers of this bill,
understanding that rural
communities are at a
disadvantage and uh giving them
more than 50% of the
opportunity, um, for this
program and I just wanted to
make sure that everybody awares
where our population is in our
state. Thank you.
Oh, thank you, Representative
Roybal Cavero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
having to modify, um, some of
the questions that I had due to
um
time constraints
Anyway, um
I, um
thank you for the rules have
been following the progress as a
sponsor of HB 125, 128. I'm
really happy that you're here
and that presenting these rules,
I think that also um in response
to one of the colleagues, um,
statements, I think it's
important to note that if any
if there were any entities that
are more conscious of
environmental um constraints and
environmental um issues that are
associated with
um installing implementation and
and all of the above systems, it
would be renewable energy.
They're very conscientious of
what uh protection and
conservation means in terms of
our environment. So I'm very
happy with the Energy department
being involved. I'm very happy
with the fact that um we
delineate it. I pulled up the,
the HP 128 to make sure, but I
couldn't find the answer to
your, what you were, uh, what
you were asked for before. So I
want to also mention, um, going
back to representative Rasa's
mention about the rules
requiring at least 60% of
funding to go to rural entities
and then it caps the county
allocation at 25%. Well, I'm
interested in knowing how NMFA
will monitor and enforce these
limits, um, and if there are
specific strategies in place,
uh, if you get an um a dispro
port ion ate amount of stronger,
uh, applications clustered in
one particular region. How are
you going to handle that? That's
one question and then I have
just, um, one, maybe two others.
OK, um, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, really how
we handle those situations is
the development through our
policies that we're going to be
working through with energy,
minerals and natural resources
department in getting approved
by our board as well. And, and
so that is a very valid concern,
and, and I think the statute did
a pretty good job of of the
limitations and making sure
there's geographical diversity.
Um, so as, as we develop those
policies, we're gonna be keeping
that in mind for how we're
if we get clusters of really
good high scoring projects in
one area and, and really making
sure how we're going to monitor
that, you know, no county can
get more, more than 25% of the
total fund. So we want to keep
it fair. So like even if it is a
really good project on paper and
they
Sees John, I don't know if you
have anything to add.
man representative, uh, we have
a, uh, department called our
public programs department and
and within there there are we
have program managers. Those
program managers will oversee,
uh, this particular, uh, program
and to and to ensure that the,
the rules and the policies are,
are, are complied with and also
they will make.
if we, you know, hit that
threshold, they will communicate
with the management and also uh
EMNRD that the that we're, we're
bumping up against thresholds.
So we do have systems in place
to do that. They, those
ministries at the.
Thank you very much. I just
wanna make sure that it's a
point that's gonna be addressed
and um, so I'll move on. Um, we
were very intentional about
including our Indian nations,
tribes and pueblos, and they are
explicitly um named as eligible
applicants.
So, um, I'm interested in
knowing what specific outreach
and technical assistance
strategies.
ensure that these, the tribal
governments are fully aware of
the opportunity and our
positioned to apply when the
application portal.
later this year and then part of
that also is on page, um, I'm
trying to find it, um
I think page
3, Rule 2.
um.
Indian nations tried to, OK, so
I did refer to it. Anyway,
that's my one question and then
I have one more follow-up after
that.
OK, yeah, um, Madam Chair, and
Representative.
the first thing that, that we do
like when we stand up a program
is we work very closely with our
uh public information officer at
the New Mexico Finance Authority
and with also with energy,
minerals and natural resources
department to just ensure that
we have information because
we're both statewide agencies
that were out and about and we
always discuss all our programs
wherever we go, energy,
minerals, and natural resources
does the same between.
and
during the when there were a
number of
um very actively in it, and
we've been keeping in constant
contact with those stakeholders.
We've had a lot of inquiries,
um, a lot of people are mailing
lists, you know, for updates on
this program. And so there's
already a
uh.
diversity of, of entities that
have already reached out with
interest in it and um we'll,
we'll just make sure that we, we
do a really good job reaching
out to the the the tribes and
the pueblos and, and, and the
nations in terms of making sure
they're also aware of, of the
availability of it, but there's
many counties that have already
reached out and many
stakeholders that are going to
be helping us spread the word.
They've made that commitment to
us as well. So, and, and they're
gonna also be involved in, in
commenting on these rules and,
and
policies as well. So, so I think
that they have the systems in
place to ensure, and not just
we'll see, but the systems
