The presenter will actually be
uh Mayor Michelle Mickey
Shillitto, but before she
starts, we'll have legislators
introduce themselves, but before
we introduce ourselves I wanna
really thank Senator Ramos and
Representative Jones for doing
a great job on making, making
sure we're fit. I believe if you
feed people they're happy if you
walk into one of these meetings
and there's no coffee, you
really start out wrong. So could
you guys, uh, talk about who
provided the food today.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. um,
the county provided food today,
um, from Starmax, right? and uh
and I didn't know they were
doing that, so I also brought
more coffee. We have so much
coffee. You guys drink up, we'll
be awake for about a week, but
yes, really appreciate the
county for feeding us this
morning.
Oh,
I'm sorry, the county is Chris
Bryce, county manager. Thank
you, Chris, and, and county
commissioner, yes, Christianne
Harvey.
and the person who set it up you
do a lot and,
and, uh,
I don't know who set it up.
I think, oh, Cassie helped, yes,
Cassie helped. Erin helped.
Yeah, we had a real team effort
this morning getting ready, so
but we do appreciate all of you
all being here. Thank you.
And it's always better to have
too much.
especially when
Ma'am, thank you so much. I, I,
we, I'd like to welcome everyone
for being here. Welcome to my
district. um, this is one of my
favorite places to be here in
Demming and uh we do have a
dinner this evening and it's
provided by Freeport McMorran,
Tony Trujillo, and, uh, they
provided the funding for that.
They also, they, uh, also send
their regards they could be here
today because they have the
mining association meeting in
Albuquerque and lunch, uh,
tomorrow will be provided by New
Mexico Tech which is uh uh David
Manzano and uh Carlos Romero uh
Carlos will be joining us late
this evening and and also
tomorrow but welcome everyone
and thank you very much for, for
the hospitality as always this
is one of the greatest places to
be. Thank you.
OK, and with that, we'll start
with introductions of the
committee, um, Kathleen Cates,
can you start?
Thank you, Chair. I'm
Representative Kathleen Kates.
Uh, thank you. It's such a
welcoming mayor of Demming, and
thank you very much, um, you're
a great host, Representative
Jones, always about Demming, um,
I represent District 44, which
is Corrales of parts of Rio
Rancho, the unincorporated area
of Alameda in northern
Albuquerque. Thanks.
And we can go, Representative
Mahi, if you can start and then
we'll go this way.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everybody. Thank you
for the hos hospitality. I'm
Angelita Mejia, representative,
uh, from District 58 Chavez
County
Glad to be here. Thanks.
Good morning, Madam Chair. John
Blockhouse District 51 State
Representative and beautiful
Otero County in Alamogordo, and
it's great to be here. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, Gabriel Ramos, senator for
District 28, which is Luna
Hidalgo in Grant County. And now
that, uh, I really wish that we
had one more person here because
I was gonna make a motion to
close down the border since we
outnumber you all this time for
once. Thank you so much
I, I just thought that'd be a
good icebreaker, Madam Chair.
Wow, I, uh, Madam Chair.
I love my primo uh Senator
Ramos. I was like.
that's good. Anyway, uh,
Luiserrazas, uh, state
representative district 39 Grant
Hidalgo in Katherine County, uh,
uh, glad to be here. Uh, this is
uh one of my, basically my
hometown, right? My, my
grandmother lives here still. My
dad was raised here, graduated
here, um, and I have a lot of
family here and, and I'm a local
businessman here, but, uh, this
is a wonderful community, a
great
these are good, good people and
so I'm glad to be here. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and other
committee members, welcome to
all of you. Welcome to the
audience as well. Uh, I'm
Jennifer Jones, and this is my
district, District 32. It's, um,
district spans all the way to
Arizona and and to the Mexican
border, um, Hidalgo County,
Luna, and part of Donana so I
appreciate all of you that drove
a long way to be here, um, down
here in the corner. I know we
try to have these meetings kind
of down south kind of later in
the season, interim season, so
that it's not so hot. I apo
log ize we couldn't change the
weather. The forecast is
97 today, so please forgive, but
no, we, we really appreciate
having all of you and um
I hope that while you're here
you have, you just have a
wonderful time and see that um
the potential that we have here
in our community, I feel like,
and I know, I know that with
strategic investment in in this
area we, we could be of great
value to the state and really uh
flourish so thanks for being
here appreciate um
all of you and what we're about
to do today and tomorrow.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
a Senator Michael Padilla, vice
chairman of this committee, been
a voting member of this
committee for 13 years and I
always enjoy coming to this
community. You are always so
hospitable, madam, uh, Mayor,
thank you and to the community
members, um, I, I do have to
comment. I do have to comment on
the green chili that was in the
burritos this morning holy cow,
I love hot chili and let me tell
you what, it just, uh, no more
sinus issues, no nothing. I've
got to come down here more
often, Madam Chair. um, but
again, I am also the Senate
majority
whip and I, I enjoy my time, um,
you know, seeing the beautiful
parts of New Mexico and this is
obviously one of them. Thank you
for having us and thank you for
being so hospitable all the
time. Thank you.
And I'm, uh, the chair of the
committee, Joy Garrett. I
represent the West side of
Albuquerque. If you've flown
over or visited the Petroglyph
National Monument and its
volcanoes that is what I call
the spiritual and physical
center of my district so I'm
very, very blessed. I was down
here, it seems like it was last
week with the transportation
committee and um
because it's transportation, I
can tell you more about the
roads down here than you can
even imagine, but I'm very
excited because Representative
Jones has told me about crossing
the border, so I brought my
husband down, also to help
drive, but we're really looking
forward to going into the
Mexican community. That's the
sister community um
with Columbus and uh if you look
on your agenda you'll see we're
actually gonna um go to the
ribbon cutting tomorrow and
we're gonna go to this port of
entry so we have a very, very,
uh, busy schedule and with that
I'd like to ask Sabina Gaynor
from, uh, our legislative
council service to introduce
yourself and your team.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Sabina Gaynor.
I'm a staff attorney at the
Legislative counsel Service, and
I'm assisted by Martin Fisher
and Sean Dolan, who are both
also staff attorneys and Roberto
Sanchez, who is our web
contractor webcast, and I can't
tell you enough how important
the web contractors are so we
can webcast this to the world,
um, and with that we'll start.
I'm very excited to welcome
Michelle, also known as Mickey.
Philly, uh
I practiced shiitto because I
was saying is that Shioto, you
know what language is it? It's
Welsh, so in case you were
wondering, and with no further
ado, Mayor, if you can, uh,
welcome us to your city.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the New Mexico
Finance Authority Oversight
Committee.
On behalf of the city of
Demming, it's my honor to
welcome you and thank you for
choosing Demming to have this
important meeting.
as introduced on Mickey Shilito,
mayor of Demming, and let me add
the first woman mayor of the
city, Demming.
We face many challenges here,
but we also enjoy remarkable
strengths.
We are a friendly, hardworking
border community.
blessed with committed public
servants and neighbors who cared
deeply for one another, and I
truly believe this is the town
where love thy neighbor began.
Please know we've added the New
Mexico Finance Oversight
Committee to our neighbor list.
for all the infrastructure,
financial support that we have
received from you and most
recently, and I'd like to just
mention this.
We had, we've been given a $1.2
million bond to secure financing
for a fire truck
that is needed to uphold the
integrity of emergency services
here in Demming and in Luna
County.
The strategy behind this project
lifts the cost burden off of one
single generation and spreads it
across the multiple generations
that will be reaping the benefit
of this new truck.
Our fire chief thanks you. Our
citizens, thank you, and so do
I.
Having the opportunity to host
you here face to face means a
great deal to us. We stand ready
to support you in any way we
can.
Thanks again for the important
work you do for communities
across New Mexico.
Please come back again
and next time leave some room to
visit our museum.
our two wineries, I think many
of you have been visited the
wineries already, but the two
wineries are trees Lake, which
is talked about all over the
state.
Our new golf course, well, it's
not new, but it's being
refurbished and it's beautiful
and it's gonna be a really nice
place to play golf.
and you don't wanna miss the
beautiful sunrises and sunsets
they're fantastic.
Thanks again for being here and
allowing me to address you.
Have a great meeting
Thank you, Mayor and the mayor
was raised on the East Coast.
She's lived on the west coast,
and she was telling me this
morning how friendly Demine is,
and I would add Mexico, New
Mexico. So thank you so much for
serving. Did anybody have any
questions?
OK
actually then we are right on
schedule.
So with that we'll have our
10:30 report from the Spaceport
Authority and Virgin Galactic
and if you can come up
uh we'll have Scott McLaughlin,
who's the executive director,
Mike Moses, who's the president
of Virgin Galactic, uh,
Christopher Eriksson, who's the
interim department head and
professor of the Department of
Economics at M NMSU and Art
Trujillo and art when you speak
you can tell us what you're
doing.
No,
when you tell us when you speak.
Madam Chair, I'm the chief
financial officer for Spaceport.
I'll be presenting the financial
status of Spaceport.
and I see one more person, so
just introduce yourself before
we speak so both the panel and
our large listening public on
the web knows who you are.
so please start
All right, Madam Chair, thank
you very much. Um, we're very
pleased to be here, um, we kind
of brought a big team because
you would, somebody had implied
in an email. You wanted lots of
detailed information, so, um,
we're here to provide as much as
we can. So I'm, I wanted to, uh,
go quickly, so, uh, Virgin
Galacti can, could go quickly.
And so, uh, Ced folks from
Seabed can be here. So I'm gonna
read a quick statement that I
prepared and then just a couple
of highlights from the
PowerPoint. So hopefully you
have um the PowerPoint
OK, uh, do you have this one?
Yeah
OK, so, uh, I'll just I'll go
with that one very quickly with
just a couple of pages, but
first I'll read a quick
statement, kind of a summary
where we are at the state of the
spaceport, if you will.
So
uh Spaceport is an active site
with many customers of various
locations. It has taken a while,
but in the last several years
we've seen a breakthrough in
acceptance by the greater
aerospace industry of New Mexico
Spaceport as a valuable and
valuable, a viable and valuable
place for aerospace testing and
operations. We are also now well
known in the commercial
spaceport sector as a successful
inland commercial spaceport for
active aerospace testing. The
spaceport islowly, slowly,
solidly beginning to
fulfill its original mission as
an economic engine for the
state.
Virgin Galactic has flown 10
times to space from New Mexico.
A lot of people don't know that.
With 7 being commercial flights
and with 37 new humans having
visited space. Late last year,
Virgin Galactic, uh, elected to
pause the new space fights while
they design and manufactured
their new Delta class
spaceships, Mr. Mag Moses,
President, Spaceline will
discuss VG status in a few
minutes.
Last year we sponsored an
economic impact report through
the New Mexico State University
Arrowhead Park Center for Border
Economic Development, Seed,
which covers the calendar years
2019 to 2024. The report shows
significant money and jobs added
to the regional economy. Doctor
Kramer Winningham and Chris, um
sorry
Eriksson are here to discuss
that apologies from Seabed.
According to many financial and
industry sources, the space
economy is growing steadily at
about 8% year over year and is
projected to reach a marketplace
size of $1 trillion by 2032.
The cost to carry mass to orbit
has dropped nearly 2 orders of
magnitude since 1980. There are
at least 4 private space
stations under development, with
several companies working on
manufacturing in space. Every
year the record for the total
number of orbital launches in
the world is broken with Florida
now hosting an orbital launch
every 3 to 4 days. There has
never been a more active time in
the space sector.
As at the spaceport, we are in
various stages of discussions
with over 30 prospects which now
include large defense
contractors. This last detail
shows that we have gained
significant traction as some of
the big companies we are
discussing, multi-decade
commitments to the site with us.
That is permanent buildings and
employees for developing their
aerospace systems.
We are busy, but let me talk to
you about the significant
process of getting even a short
term client operating that's a
spaceport. It starts with NMSA
attending exhibitions and trade
shows and conducting various
marketing efforts which draw
prospects to us. Then there is
intake screening, initial
meetings and the creation of,
uh, many documents. These
include documents for the US
Army Whites Sands missile range
for the FAA. Safety analysis and
written and approved procedures,
diagrams, and finally a contract
with us as well as detailed
operational plans. If the
customer wants to lease land
from us to build a facility, we
also must work through
documentation with the New
Mexico State Land Office and
many other parties that involve
environmental concerns to
eventually get a building in
place. And once they are a
customer, there is significant
ongoing project management that
occurs. Also, I must mention
that our on-site work uh that
the on-site work involves our
facilities personnel who do
support all of our customers
from refueling Virgin Galactic's
airplanes to foreign object
uh detection sweeps on the
runway to forklift operations.
We have gotten good at this, but
when I say we are busy, I just
don't mean at the site. I mean
the very significant back of the
housework needed to allow any
customer to operate the
spaceport, including accounting,
facilities, maintenance, legal
and contractual matters,
procurements, you adherence to
regulations and overall customer
management, but the spaceport
still faces many challenges. One
of our biggest challenges is the
negativity that often comes
about from the space about the
spaceport from our stakeholders.
Every time a stakeholder says we
should sell the spaceport or
something
similar. They set us back in the
space industry since what our
customers and our competitors
here is that New Mexico does not
support the spaceport, and we
are not a dependable place for
long-term commitments.
We should remember what Warren
Buffett said. It takes 20 years
to build a reputation, and 5
minutes to ruin it. If you think
about that, you'll do things
differently.
Another very direct challenge is
competition from other states,
especially those adjacent to us.
Texas, Arizona, Colorado, and
Oklahoma are all aggressively
working to further build and
attract aerospace companies,
including supporting launch
locations at the state level,
they have created or realigned
and funded agencies specifically
targeted building their space
economy.
For example, in 2023, the Texas
legislature gave $200 million to
Texas A&M University to create a
space institute, and they also
created a brand new agency
called the Texas Space
Commission with an original
tranche of $150 million to
invest.
With less restrictive rules than
New Mexico's anti-donation
clause. They have made many
awards to private companies as
well as counties, economic
development organizations and
nonprofits. In 2025, the Texas
legislature committed another
$300 million in grants to the
Texas Space commission, as well
as $131 million for the
Department of Transportation to
improve road roadway
infrastructure specifically for
the needs of the space industry.
Another significant challenge
for the Spaceport is being site
ready for our customers. This
means having enough
infrastructure in place to allow
an aerospace company to quickly
start its operations or build a
building.
Besides the risk that this might
not happen, they simply cannot
wait 2 or 3 years for NMSA to
pave roads and install utilities
at various locations.
For any of you that have not
been to the site, you should
also understand we are a small
town. We must maintain a water
system, electrical distribution,
wastewater, IT infrastructure,
buildings, roads, the runway,
and 24/7 security, firefighting
and EMAs, EMS. The spaceport has
many fixed costs, but these are
necessary for the success of our
customers.
Compared to other states, New
Mexico is well positioned to
take advantage of the growing
space sector and mostly uniquely
we have a spaceport that can
handle new innovative and risky
technologies and like any
transportation hub similar to
other projects built for the
public goods such as roads and
bridges.
We are a gateway that attracts
business. It is not that
dissimilar from the senator of
border crossing or an airport.
We have recently signed a lease
for a new tenant, Sirius
Technologies, which will learn
to fly a prototype vertical
rocket system, reading it for
reusability and orbital launch.
We should also see leap space
fly regular suborbital payloads
from the spaceport. Other
companies are finding various
activities including hypersonic
tests, rocket and rocket tests,
and aviation tests. The next
year will be very busy at the
spaceport, and
that's not even including what
Virgin Galactic is about to
restart.
We're also working on several
capital improvement efforts.
These include two new buildings,
a hangar near the runway, and a
reception and IT center near the
front entrance. We are
installing new roads and
utilities to be site ready, and
the gateway to space building is
also getting to need a new roof.
Besides supporting Virgin
Galactic's increased operations.
We are continuing to work to
attract other companies,
especially those that want to
operate in a more remote
location, which makes us
somewhat unique. We're also
working to obtain an orbital
reentry license as well as
update to our environmental
impact statements so we can
increase the type of activities
at the site.
Long term, we are working with
partners to facilitate orbital
launch, and important premise to
the site such as a train spur,
more paved roads, and utilities
in more places.
We're also continuing our STEM
and workforce development
outreach efforts, hosting
numerous visits to the spaceport
and participating in STEM events
and school visits. Additionally,
we are collaborating with local
universities on engineering
capstone projects and building a
relationships to help them
become key partners with our
customers.
Spaceport America is no longer
just a remote facility in the
desert. It is becoming a hub for
advanced technologies and
helping build the space
ecosystem for New Mexico in the
region. It is bringing new
investments to the area as well
as creating high paying jobs
with continuing support New
Mexico can become a vital part
of the states and nations' space
infrastructure.
So thank you, um, I'll just skim
over the report so I leave
enough time for questions. um
so, uh
one thing I wanted to highlight
on page 2 is we're having our,
uh, I think this will be our 3rd
open house, but that's on
September 21st. That's a Sunday
from 9 a.m. to 20 p.m. uh,
Virgin Galactic is gonna show,
uh, have the hanger open, so
they're going to show part of
the, I don't know if it's White
Knight 2 or the Spaceship or
both, but they'll be there, uh,
right now we have about 33
community, uh, vendors and, and
partners STEM and everything
else, uh, they'll have booths,
plus we'll have some static
displays, we'll have an MQ-9,
which is the UAV that's
used by DOD, um, hopefully we'll
have the hot air balloon there
if it's, uh, if it's, um, and
the weather's good, but anyway,
that's, that last year we had
about 1800 people and this year
we're hoping to get about 2500
people.
Um, I'll uh pictures to the
customers speak for themselves.
um, all that virgin Galactic
talk about uh what they're gonna
do. I will mention that in the
lower right of page 4, we, I
just did some quick math about
what happens when they start to
get an operations and their
operations that they forecasted
are higher than what is on page
4. This is in the, um, my
PowerPoint, but if we do 100
flights, if they do 100 flights
per year with 6 private
astronauts and uh and they bring
their friends and family that
equals about 12,000 unique
visitors
to the area and about 60,000
room nights. So I think one of
the things as a local community,
Demi Almogordo, Carlsbad, Santa
Fe, you know, we need to know
what we're gonna do with all
those people who are gonna
visiting the state.
Page 5 is a picture of Sirius
and uh and leap space if you
have any questions about that
on page 6, just the capital
projects that are underway, it's
about $40 million worth of
projects right now, um, most of
that is, is, uh, money that has,
that it's taken a while to
spend. I, I'm sure you're well
aware that by the time we get,
um, through the GSD process
which is designed to be fair and
equitable to all parties. It is
somewhat of a long process, but,
uh, we currently have 40 million
projects underway, and there's
pictures of that on page 7.
Um, one of the buildings we're
gonna build, the Stark building,
the Space Technology reception
Center will be a very good
building in about 18 months for
a meeting like this, so we hope
to see other committees there.
um
page 9 has our ICIP and plan,
so, uh, we've, we've got that
filled out till 2030. Um, I'll
be presenting the top 5, I think
next month, so, um, I hope I'll
get support for those
Page 10, I've got a list of the
most recent STEM and outreach
that's an effort we've really
ramped up in terms of getting
kids to the spaceport and also
visiting um schools in the
region that it does include El
Paso.
um
so let me, uh, go through the
budget on page 12, just a couple
of comments about the budget.
Um, right now our budget is is
down a little bit. We're at
about $12 million a year. That's
due to the revenue that
decreased when Virgin Galacticu
fine, so our, our agreement with
Virgin Galactic is we, there's a
lease agreement basically for
the facilities and then there's
a user agreement for um space
flights. So when they stop
flying to space, there was a
portion of our budget that we no
longer got. So, um, you'll see a
decrease in our budget in
terms of revenue from customers
and, and what we're able to
support in terms of operations,
um
we did, uh, uh, uh, early last
year or early this year, we were
able to secure a 40 year
economic development lease with
the state land office, but part
of that included 2% of all of
our customer revenues now go to
the state land office, so that's
a little hit on our budget.
Um, one of the things I wanted
to highlight, which we've been
working on as part of the reason
I have art here, our CFO, if, if
we want to answer, if we have
any questions, is that anytime
we have revenue from a customer,
it takes about 18 months, up to
18 months to get recognized so
we can spend it. This puts us in
a very interesting position that
if I were to get a really,
really big customer, um,
immediately and that needed to
um uh front a lot of services or
construction so they could be on
site. I could then empty out my
budget, not have the ability to
support them, even though
we have a fund balance that we
could draw on, um, and, and, uh,
so we have two problems there.
One, the revenue from that
customer, even if they paid us,
I don't have immediate access to
and with a fund balance that we
are trying to preserve for those
sorts of things and for
emergencies, it can take a month
or two to get the money out of
the fund balance so this is not
like a normal business in the
sense that it we have this cash
flow issue for us, um, and that
has cropped up from time to
time, so, um, with the Virgin
Galactic uh re
du ction in rent, we have been
using our fund balance to, uh,
I, I should say in user fees, we
have been using our fund balance
to support operations until
they're back in operations.
We've been able to sustain that
because we had a large enough
fund balance, but we are
draining it down, and I could be
in a position where, um, either
I couldn't support emergency
repairs to the site. Again, we
have water and uh fire and
everything else we do, or I
couldn't support a new customer,
so I wanted you to be aware of
that. We, we do have, we are
non-reverting agency
so we have the ability to keep
the fund balance, but it's just
difficult to maneuver around
that and, and the delay in the
revenue recognition.
Um, last year we did ask for a
supplemental for FI-26. We
didn't get it, so again, we, we
worked on our fund balance, but
we're hoping, I think we're
going to apply for, uh, ask for
a, um, supplemental this year.
Um, so, uh, page 13 shows our
overall budget. You can see from
FI 24, it, it's forecasted to be
down, um, a little more than a
million dollars from um FI 24
but as Virgin Galactic starts
operating and resumes the user
fee payments which were're
working on with them. We should
see the budget go up in in FY
27.
um, kind of skipping ahead, uh,
I put in our org chart in case
you wanted to see it, but I am
asking for 5 new employees on
page 16 in the presentation, so
to me these are all vital uh
FTEs that we need, um, the STEM
workforce coordinator, I want to
hire a retired teacher or
certified teacher to work
directly with our customers on,
on workforce development and
directly with the public
schools. A deputy director is
just to handle the increased
workload in terms of organizing
and running the organization
Facilities technician where we
are increasing our facilities.
We're building two new
buildings, the, the total of
those two buildings is on the
order of $30 million and I don't
have a person to support those
buildings yet.
Um, one of the things we found
over the last few years is that
when a customer wants to build
something such as Virgin
Galactic or Sirius that is
building a launch complex in the
vertical launch area. We have to
spend a tremendous amount of
time helping them with the
project management. So, uh, this
is why the construction projects
leader I'm asking for is not
just for our construction
projects, but it's for the
customer um projects as well. We
need to guide them through the
process with the county and the
state.
um
so, uh, and then the contracts
manager, the last one is, uh,
with all these contracts we have
with customers and vendors, um,
we're wanting to have somebody
who can help monitor all the
contracts whether they're NDAs,
whether they're the uh
agreements that we make with the
state land office and the
customer, there's just every
time we, we increase, uh, the
number of customers on site, the
amount of paperwork, if you
will, increases significantly,
so.
um, I'm gonna know that, uh,
seabed talk about economic
impact, um, and on the business
development side, um, I, I won't
talk about those specifically
except I did say we had 30/30
contracts or or or 30 companies
we're working with, um, but just
to skip ahead a little bit, uh,
our biggest goal is to, we want
to see Virgin Galactic
successful. We've, we've saw
what could happen if they start
flying regularly, so that's our,
our number one goal. Um, we've
really increased our outreach
into the region
in terms of economic development
organizations and also tying
together El Paso to the
Spaceport Las Cruces and even El
Paso because what the spaceport
can do is tie everything
together, um, and it's not just
about one company at the
spaceport in this one remote
location. It's about building an
entire space economy.
so we're focused on that. Part
of that is I've been focusing on
orbital launch and what that
would mean for us at the state
as we move forward so.
I think that's all I have for
now and I'll, I'll hand it off
to Mike Moses, president of
Space Line.
or do you wanna do, uh
Madam Chair,
is that fine? OK, Chris, go
ahead
Thank you. So I'm Chris Eriksson
I'm a professor of economics at
NMSU, and I'm also the director
of the Center for Border
Economic Development and the
center seabed and uh Arrowhead
centered together have written
uh the economic impact study
that we're going to be
presenting the details of today.
Um, the Center for Border
Economic Development and the
Arrowhead Center at New Mexico
State University prepared this
analysis of the impact for 2019
to 2024. This is building on a
previous study that we did for
just, just the year 2022, but
now we're covering
a five-year span, giving you
more of a trend and, and uh, and
the idea of how the spa
spaceport has been growing.
um
the, uh, the, the methodology we
use, uh, we are uh using uh
established peer reviewed techno
techniques. They're well
established, used in similar
reports across the country.
We're not doing anything fancy.
We're just giving a straight up
economic impact analysis. We use
a well-known, uh, commercially
available, uh, uh, software
called, um, uh, implan, uh,
which is again a kind of
industry standard for these
kinds of reports.
s
Um, Arrowhead Center and the
Center for Bonock Development at
New Mexico State University
combined have 24 years of
experience in economic
development in our region, um,
and as part of the land grant
institution, both centers are
embedded in and uniquely placed
to do regional economic
development studies similar to
the one we're presenting today.
Uh, Arrowhead Center's track
record of providing eic
analysis, such as the impacts
they were doing today but also
economic based studies,
feasibility studies, cost
benefit analysis, and strategic
plans, um, among our, our
clients include the New Mexico
Economic Development Department
and we're currently working on
the San Teresa strategic Plan,
which has been which is uh
looking at uh the economy of the
border. We've also worked the
city of Anthony, the city of
Santa Fe, uh the County,
McKinley Coun
ty the Border Industrial
Association and, um, we've
worked at the state of Chihuahua
um
so these are indications of our
experience and we've done uh a
large number of these reports
and we've been working in the
region for quite a while, and
with that I'm gonna turn over
the the presentation to my
colleague, Doctor Kramer
Winningham, who present the
actual results of our economic
impact analysis.
Doctor Reid.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Kern
Winningham. I'm with Arrowhood
Center at New Mexico State
University. Um, I'll talk about
our approach to our economic
impact analysis and then the
results for what we found.
Um, with any economic impact
analysis, we're looking at the
impact on the local economy from
some new activity associated
with the new with the new
project, um, or something new
that's happening that's bringing
money into uh the community.
Uh the impacts for Spaceport
America were estimated for
Donana County, Sierra County,
and the rest of the state of New
Mexico. So the, the total
results are for the entire
state, as Doctor Erickson
mentioned, the implant is a
standard, uh, methodology, um,
just to follow along, I'm on
slide 6. moving to slide 7.
Um, as you interpret economic
impact studies, uh we usually
present our results in terms of
output, which you can think of
as revenue to businesses or
sales, value added production,
which would be the contribution
of GDP.
labor income, which is mostly
wages as well as job numbers and
uh tax revenues.
uh moving to the next slide.
impacts are also, uh, divided by
direct impacts, indirect
impacts, and induced impacts. So
the direct impacts are directly
from activity at
Spaceport America, um, the
indirect effects are from
purchases from local businesses,
um, and the, uh, induced effects
are from wages from employees in
the direct and indirect effects
spending in the local
communities so you capture all
three of those effects with our
analysis and so when you present
a total economic impacts, uh,
we're we're looking at those,
those combined effects there.
right to slide 9.
um, the impacts in our study are
based on the project activity
occurring in Donana County and
Sierra County.
Uh, we measured the spillover
effects to the rest of New
Mexico using MRIO.
um, slide 10, the, uh, the
primary sources of impact
for Spaceport America are the
tenant operations?
And so he adjusted this for
their uh real estate spending,
so we didn't double count with
the Spaceport America revenues,
but the bulk is the tenant
operation, so employment at
Spaceport and the, uh,
construction funded by tenants.
Uh, we also captured the impact
of the out of state visitor
spending.
and then Spaceport America's
revenues excluding funding from
state of New Mexico.
um, and so the rationale for
using these three impacts is
that all of these impacts are
bringing new dollars into New
Mexico.
um and so we're not double
counting stuff that would be
spent in New Mexico, uh, with
without the spaceport.
Our moon slide 11, these are uh
some of the inputs to our
calculations, um, the tenant
employment levels, you could see
there is some variation there
going from 2019 with 139 jobs
up to a high of 381 jobs in
2022.
and then in 2024, uh, 260, uh,
jobs at the spaceport.
Uh, slide 12 shows the tenant
construction. There's some
volatility in this, um.
uh.
you know, depending on how, uh,
the, the tenants are investing
in the location.
All right, next s I do, um,
slide 13.
Uh, we estimated, uh, our impact
for visitor spending based on
the uh New Mexico tourism
department economic impact
study.
which estimated visitor spending
at $328
uh per day, you know, accounting
for hotels and all the other
typical spending. Um, on slide
14, we can see the visitor days
by counties and um
basically this is a measure of
how many visitors from out of
state were brought to the
spaceport
um, either from, uh Spaceport
America or the tenants and then
um
the counties that we allocated
those to are based on the
counties they, they spent. So
in, um
2021, uh, 30 3500 visitor days
in Diana County and, uh, about
500 and uh Sierra County, uh,
going to 2024, 6100 visitor days
in Dana County and then 1500 in
in Sierra County.
Uh, the last slide is on slide
15. Um, these are the revenues
from Spaceport America as
detailed in their audit reports,
uh, mostly coming from rental
revenues then tours, some other
revenue, and then, uh, at least
interest revenues.
Uh, 16 shows the uh results.
from tenant employment
So the total impact from tenant
employment was 250 jobs in 2019.
and then in 2024 it was 698
jobs.
uh supported by
tenant Employment. Uh, the next
slide shows, um
uh, the impacts, um, the dotted
line on the bottom is labor
income, uh, the next one is
value added and and total
output.
So total output grew from 50
million in 2019 to 220 million
in 2024.
Uh, from tenant construction on
uh slide 9,
again, there's some volatility
in that, so you can see how
those jobs change.
um, the next slide 2019 shows uh
the economic impacts from, from
tenant construction
The, uh, job impacts from
visitor spending, um, in 2021,
uh, we didn't have data for
visitor spending before 2021,
went from 16 to 27 jobs in 2024.
And we can keep going to uh
slide 22 shows the job impact
from the Spaceport America
revenues, uh, going from 38 to
50 in 2024.
and then the economic impact on
23 goes from uh.
8 million to 14 million.
Slide 24 shows the job impact by
county and then the spill over
to the rest of New Mexico.
On slide 25, uh, the value added
by county. So this is the
contribution to GDP.
um, in 2019 was
um, 32 million
and then rising, uh, to over 100
million in, in 2024.
Um, I think from there we can go
to uh slide 27, uh, the total
tax revenue impact
grew from 7 million to 24
million, and we did adjust for
the um GRT exemptions.
uh for uh the tenants at
Spaceport.
right.
And then I think we can go to
slide 30 to show the total
impact. So this adds up the
tenant operations.
the, uh, visitor spending and
then the Sportsport America
revenues. So growing uh on an
output basis from 72 million to
240 million by 2024 on a
value-added basis going from 32
million to 111 million.
and uh slide 31 uh shows, shows
the uh job numbers as well
there.
Uh, so to conclude, um,
Spaceport America's economic
impact over the period 2019 to
2024. It's been positive for the
state. Jobs grew from 313 in
2024 on a direct basis, uh, up
from uh
342 in 2019.
Total jobs reach reached 790 in
2024 from 396 in 2019.
and uh I think you can see the,
the rest of them so, uh, wrap up
there and happy to answer any
questions.
Uh,
so thank you, uh, Madam
Chairwoman, uh, and the
committee for inviting me to
speak today. I am Mike Moses. I
am the president of Virgin
Galactic Space Line. I've been
with Virgin Galactic for over 14
years, uh, following my career
at NASA. I've been a New Mexico
resident for over 6 years, and I
represent a, uh, local New
Mexico workforce of just under
200 employees who live and work
here in New Mexico thanks to
Spaceport America.
So today I'm going to give a
very brief update on the
progress we're making, uh, as
Scott mentioned, following our
success over the last several
years, flying 10 spaceflights
from the state of New Mexico
with our first spaceship. We're
in the heart of producing our
new fleet of spaceships, which
we call the Delta class. These
ships were designed to improve
the economic model behind our
company. Uh, they will carry 50%
more people, 6 customers, and
back instead of 4, they can fly
at a higher cadence. Each ship
able to go up to 3 times per
week as opposed to the once a
month of our
priorship, and they're going to
be faster and more
cost-effective to build, which
allows us to field a fleet of
spaceships at the spaceport.
We're very deep into the
assembly and build phase of
those ships right now, uh, our
carbon fiber parts are being
manufactured by vendors at
Carbon Aerospace and Beltexron,
uh, at their facilities in Texas
and in Georgia. Those completed
parts then shipped to our
factory in Phoenix, where we're
completing them and assembling
them into complete spaceships
before they'll be flown here to
Spaceport America, uh, for
flight testing and commercial
service. So those parts have
been flowing in now. We've begun
assembly of the wing and the
fuselage are key systems like
landing gear, rocket
motors, and flight controls have
moved from the design table over
to Flight Ready hardware and are
ready for installation. If you
haven't had a chance to see it,
uh, and I'm not plugging myself,
but we put out a quarterly
YouTube series called Galactic
10 on social media that kind of
highlights every quarter, uh,
the accomplishments we made.
They somehow got me to do the
voiceover, so that's why I've
got to plug the, the video,
right? So, um, but let's talk
about schedule. So our timeline
remains on schedule. We are
aiming for private astronaut
flights from Spaceport America
in the fall of 2026.
one year from now. The action's
going to return to New Mexico
sooner than that though. The
ships are being assembled, as I
said, in Phoenix, and there'll
be ground tested there, but then
they ferry flight over here to
Spaceport America for flight
testing. That's going to start
next summer. So in the summer,
we'll start with glide flights
followed by space flights in the
fall of 2026, carrying
commercial research payloads and
then our private astronauts.
Uh, in preparation for that, our
first stage launch vehicle, our
carrierplane called Eve has
resumed flights just a few weeks
ago from Spaceport America to
prepare the pilots and the
ground crews for the operations.
We need to be ready early next
year.
We practice instrument
approaches down at the Las
Cruces airport. Uh, so you might
spy our, our ship in the skies
around southern New Mexico, uh,
Albuquerque's sunport is also a
divert field for us, so we'll be
flying up there a couple times
this, uh, this fall as well.
So to recap, those commercial
private astronaut flights are
projected to start in the fall
of 26, with an initial fleet of
2 Delta Glass spaceships. That
gives us a yearly flight cadence
of 125 flights a year, which
equates to 750 customers going
to space from New Mexico every
year. Two spaceships flying 2 to
3 times a week starting next
fall.
And then we're not going to stop
there. We plan to have 2 more
spaceships plus a second carrier
aircraft, joined the fleet, and
that'll grow our flight capacity
at Spaceport America to
approximately 250 flights per
year.
To support that growth, we're
going to build a new hangar, at
least one out at Spaceport
America to house these carrier
aircraft, and we're designing
those new, new aircraft right
now, followed by more spaceships
So with Spaceport America at the
center of our global operations,
New Mexico will lead the way for
a new era of commercial human
spaceflight, and the region will
welcome astronauts and their
families from around the world.
It's a very exciting time for us
at Galactic. A lot of activity
happening across the country.
Thanks for the time today to
give you an update. Appreciate
it.
OK, and with that last question,
then I, I want to remind
everybody that we have several
organizations that report to
this committee that Spaceport
America, the Border Authority,
which we hear from shortly and
then we have all the, and
there's so we have New Mexico
Finance Authority organizations
and then we have other
legisislatively mandated reports
like the one we're just hearing.
OK, um, Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, um,
and thank you for your
presentation, uh, from all of
you, um, so I chair this
committee every other year and I
have, uh, lots of different
questions at different times. So
I have, I think for almost all
of you, the first one is just on
the uh uh for Spaceport America
and you may have talked a little
bit about this, but I wanna
maybe a little more detail on
where, where are things with
your overall master plan so like
the master plan for the entire
maybe the next decade or
whatever and, and, and what's
the timing to deliver that to
these folks.
so that they can plan and make
some long range or longer range
decisions.
Madam Chairman,
excuse me, um, yes, the master
plan was delivered in May. It
was actually, um, and I can send
you a copy. There's two parts of
it. There's an executive
summary, um, and then there's,
uh, which is, uh, I forget how
many pages that is and then
there's a very long one. The way
the master plan came out with
our contractors. It's more of a
multiple choice and, and part of
that is because it's very hard
to predict what's gonna happen
in the space industry right now.
Um, 10 years
ago, nobody thought that SpaceX
was going to be able to land a
booster, the same booster and
reuse it 20 times in a row, for
example. So what the space, what
the master plan shows is how we
could do vertical launches for
the vertical launch area, um,
ways to expand in the horizontal
Ontario, including the rail spur
and some other interesting ideas
we hadn't fully thought of, so
I'm, I'm happy to send that to
you. Uh, we've incorporated
parts of that in our ICIP
planning, um, but there's more
to do to try and figure out what
that's gonna
what's what that's gonna look
like, for example, we were
looking at now at some
electromagnetic testing
facilities that could be at the
site and that was also included
in the master plan, but trying
to figure out how to fit all
that in, but I'm happy to send
that to you or talk to you about
it at any time. So thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Mr. McLaughlin. So,
um, I guess I'll just take the
same question to to Virgin. I
mean, do you feel like you have
the info that you need on the
master plan to make some of
these longer range decisions
that you need to make. I'm sure
you're trying to figure out also
what do we do at this point
since there's so much going on
around the country and the
world.
Yeah, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Vice Chair. Um, so the
master plan, I think, is a very
good strategic outline and it's
got references it, it, it
outlines a series of activities
that could come to spaceport and
activities that could be there.
Um, we have our own master plan
for what we want to do at
Spaceport America and, and those
inputs were given and considered
in the study. I think the piece
that's, uh, probably as a
commercial business needed next
is the layout of the economic
business plan that goes with
that strategic master plan. So
it's much more of a, here's
where things
could go and what businesses
could be there. What's the
business strategy to drive to
that plan coming true. I think
that's probably the next element
that, uh, that would be very
helpful not only for us but any
other, uh, tenant or the local
communities to know what kind of
future economic impact is coming
to the state and we're actually
gonna work, uh, I think directly
with CBed as well to try to take
that, that economic study and
forecast to the future to show
at least from Virgin Galactic's
input where we think that
future's going. So I think that
would be a great addition for
the master plan.
strategic roadmap, or give it a
business plan along with the,
uh, the strategic plan.
So, Madam Chair, then, is that
something that, that, uh,
Spaceport America can
can help put
together and organize ahead of
time so that these folks can
make some of these decisions.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, Senator,
yes, we're, we're working with
Virgin Galactic on that, uh, the
what, what the master plan for
us, you know, encompasses is, is
a lot of infrastructure being
site ready and, and where we can
put things, but the dependencies
that we can't control are which
companies are going to come,
right? And depending on which
companies come, uh, you know,
what revenue we get, what
economic impact, one of the
things I I didn't put in my, my
talk was uh in satisfying the
legislature in particular, are
we, are we looking at revenues?
Are we looking at jobs?
Are we looking at being a
catalyst for the, the region,
the, you know, so our success is
defined really by what you all
consider success, um, but when
we're focused on what kind of
tenants to bring to the
spaceport or or attempt to bring
to the spaceport. We're also,
we're, we're primarily focused
on looking at jobs so we could
focus purely on revenue, but,
uh, you know, there are
customers that might pay a
higher revenue but have lower
jobs. So, um, we're trying to
balance what is good for the
region in terms of catalyzing
the region with also the reve
nu es that come to the spaceport
and the impact from Virgin
Galactic, which in terms of
airspace usage and, and uh
runway usage is a very high
level. So we're having to look
for customers, for example, that
may not be using the runway as
much um as other customers would
so we're in talks with Virgin
Galactic about that and how to
expand their facilities, um,
but, um, we, we can't control
who comes to the spaceport.
That's the problem. We're doing
our best to bring people in, but
we can't absolutely determine it
Thank you, Madam Chair. And so,
um, great segue to my next
question, which is really along
the lines of so when, when, when
Walmart decided to go into the
South Valley, which is everyone
here who knows me, it's, it's
God's country, OK, so, um, so
you come into the South Valley
with your Walmart and, and
Walmart's, uh, you know, allows
McDonald's to go in as an
example. They're not gonna
allow, uh, you know, Bob's
sandwich shop to go in there
also, and they're not gonna
allow the whatever. Do you have
those kind of agreements with
these folks or how does that
work for Spaceport
America? I think I just heard
you say you can't control who
comes, but I mean for the larger
players I mean there's gotta be
some protections in place to
make sure that they can do what
they're best at.
Uh, Madam Chair and, uh, Senator
Patil, yes, in the original
agreement with Virgin Galactic,
they have a higher priority in
terms of using the airfield, um,
and that's because there are
business model depends on that,
but what we've seen with our
operations is they tend to be
morning flights. They may not
always be morning flights, um,
and then we have other
priorities we have to consider,
you know, for White Sands
missile range, for example, we
have to get permission to use
that airspace that we're under,
um, so that we deconflict as
much as we can. We work with
white sands, we
even work with the FAA, but
they're Virgin Galactic does
have a higher priority. Now
keeping in mind again, the usage
that they'll have at the at the
uh horizontal launch area.
Again, we're focused on
customers that will use other
parts of the spaceport um it
won't interfere with Virgin
Galactic's operations.
I appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. And then so for the
NMS, you folk, um, I think this
is the um
the um arrowhead study, um, if
you look at page 2 and you look
at direct jobs, um
then economic well I guess total
jobs and economic impact and
then total taxes if this table
were a graph, you'd see these
lines crossing a couple of
crossing each other a couple of
times. Why is that? Um, because
sometimes you have higher
revenues but lower direct jobs
and um
and then same thing on economic
output what what would make that
happen? I would think that the
jobs lines would go along with
the
the revenue or the uh economic
impact and the total taxes and
all that.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, um,
the reason for that is, um, we,
there's additional data, um, on
the wages that were paid uh by
some of the tenants that didn't
follow the jobs exactly.
and so then, um, in the years
that, um
they paid higher, higher wage
amounts than that that had a
spill over effect to the tax
levels.
And Madam Chair, then I, in the,
I'm a business owner myself.
I've got a pretty large
business. I buy a lot of
equipment all the time, a lot of
computers and all that, um, so
I'm assuming this could also be
equipment on taxes because some
years they're buying
big pieces of equipment I'm
assuming and they don't have to
buy that again the next year. Is
that why taxes are kind of doing
what they're doing on this.
uh, when the wages move up that,
that is, uh, proportionately
calculated to all the other
pieces, uh, based on the way the
model works.
So is this only labor or is this
also like the taxes they may pay
with regard to
uh capital investments and, and,
and, uh.
equipment and
um the taxes are on, on
everything, all, all the
activities, um, so they could be
construction, um, as well. The
labor is just labor income and
then um
the difference between, uh,
economic output and value added
would be the intermediate inputs
that are purchased from, from
other places.
And then, uh, Madam Chair, just
one more then on the other
document, uh, this one here.
um
what percent of the, um,
construction jobs do you believe
are going to local um, Sierra
County, Donana, uh, and New
Mexico uh vendors.
so we have a lot of really great
contractors here in New Mexico,
a lot of great in this very
community that we are right now.
I wanna make sure a lot of that
money is going to these folks as
well, so.
uh we, we, um, we assume that
all the, uh
But that could have gone to
firms that were in other places
than CR County.
so
maybe I can chime in with some
practical examples right we're
looking right now to build a new
hangar facility out at the
spaceport roughly on the order
of about $30 million footprint.
Uh, we're contracting with, uh,
local New Mexico-based
architects, engineering firms,
and sourcing all materials
probably have maybe less than 5%
coming from out of state, but
the majority of all that work
going right into the state of
New Mexico.
OK, Madam Chair, that's
exciting. That's very exciting
to hear and I don't, is this
gonna be an ongoing impact
economic impact study, or is
this the sort of one and done
until you're asked to do it
again. I think the anticipations
will be ongoing. Is that
correct? Yeah, Madam Chair, yes,
that we're gonna, um, maybe
we'll skip a year, um, just, uh,
but the idea is to create a
continuous record of the impact
of the spaceport. That's great,
Madam Chair, because those of us
that are big supporters of yours
in the legislature, you always
arm us with really good data.
so that makes it easier to tell
your story and to help the
funding that we at least that we
provide, um, and I don't know
how you're charged with or how
you're asked to put this
together, but I'd like to see
that as a graph or some data
points in here and what
percentage of these construction
jobs, the, the construction
itself supplies, etc. but also
employees are New Mexico-based
individuals and New Mexico-based
companies. I I'd really like to
see that.
So that's something you could
add to that
we can do.
Yeah, we, we can make that
adjustment. The, the model does
make an adjustment for
um, local businesses that are
present.
that that captures those the
ones that aren't are, are not
factored into them all.
Uh, just, uh, you know, they
operate independently from the
spaceport we fund, um, CBE to do
this, and they do this based on
surveys of the customer, so some
of their data is simply whatever
the customers report back to our
customers report back to them.
So, um, I think we can do more
detail, but they'll have to ask
more specific questions, which
in their surveys and some, by
the way, we, we, we think it's a
little bit underreported because
I think some of our customers
have not reported back
um, you know, like we, we, I
think some of the questions are
how many people did you have on
site this year, um, and they
don't always either get the data
or they underreport. So I think
this study underreports a little
bit, but because it's a survey,
you really don't know, but I
think the data that we have is
solid and I do think we can get
more detail when they resume the
next version.
Great. All right, thank you,
Madam Chair, and I appreciate
all the answers, gentlemen.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative Jones and
then Representative Terasas.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for your
presentation. Before I start
questions, I have questions for,
uh, Mr. McLaughlin and Mr.
Moses, but I just want to say
everybody help yourselves to all
that food and that back there,
there's water and juice over
here on the side in case you
didn't notice, so please eat up,
drink up, um, so yeah, thank you
for your presentation and um Mr.
McLaughlin, something you said
in, in the first part of your
presentation, really jumped out
at me because I think so often
we disadvantage ourselves by
the the legislative rules, you
know, the statutes that we have
and to to live by here in New
Mexico you said that um the
Texas legislature gave $200
million to Texas A&M University
to create space institute and
also created a new agency called
Texas Space Commission with an
original, uh, amount of 150
million to invest uh with less
restrictive rules than New
Mexico's anti-donation clause.
They've made many awards to
private companies, as well as
count
ies economic development
organizations and nonprofits.
so we are competing with other
states.
and I, I, I guess my question
for you would be, could you give
those of us who, who aren't in
the middle of, of your business,
maybe an example of how if we
changed our anti-donation clause
to be more similar to Texas, or
competitive. How might Spaceport
benefit from that? Can you give
a real life example for me,
please?
Yeah, Madam Chair and
Representative Jones, thank you
for the question. Um, I'll give
you a couple of real world
examples. So Midland uh has a
spaceport. It's actually the
Midland Airport and when I talk
about us being able to do risky
things, for example, though,
they're never going to do
anything in at a, at a
commercial airport that's risky.
They just can't, so they're
waiting probably at least 15
years for things that they could
do at an airport to go to space,
which is on the horizon but far,
far away, um, they applied to
the
Texas-based commission and were
awarded $5 million to build
their own vertical spaceport
which they are now working on
120 miles south, so that, that
fund, the way Texas Space
commission handles it is
basically you apply, it's a
grant. They're going to give
away all that money, that $150
million from a couple of years
ago they're giving away and then
they have 300 million more to
give away. Um, the surprising
thing to me when they started
giving it away was, um, you can
go on their website and you can
look at the process, but there's
a grant application and
I saw probably a dozen private
companies getting a million
dollars here, $2 million there,
um, and there are companies in
Houston and scattered around
Texas. Now I don't know, you
know, so there's a basically
incentives
and they're able to handle them
in a much more straightforward
way than New Mexico. I sat in in
a a meeting the other day with a
customer who is very interested
in in the incentives at New
Mexico handles, you know, the
JTEP and everything else. My
gosh, that's a confusing, uh,
way that we do incentives in the
state. Um, so if there's
something to work on, um, I
think it's important to work on
that and you have that example
from the Texas Space Commission
also Arizona reconstituted
there. Arizona Space Commission,
um, I have not seen that they
funded it the same
way Texas has, but Texas is very
aggressive. Now the border plex
did get um
I think $20 million from the
Texas Space commission. They're
working on an office space in
downtown El Paso that will have
a skiff, uh, which is the secure
compartmentalized, uh, uh,
meeting room basically. So that
will help the spaceport and help
Las Cruces and help the region
generally, but it's another
example that they were able to
get money quickly through this
program. So, and that's who
we're competing with. So that, I
think the anti-donation clause
and the way New Mexico handles
it though is a factor in, in our
ability
to incentivize companies to come
here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you so much. That's
we just have to be looking at
being more competitive in, in
many ways, but this is a very
good example. I appreciate that.
I have a, um, a question also
for, um Mr. Moses, um, last year
with my transportation
committee, I toured Spaceport
fascinating. It was just
amazing. And what Virgin
Galactic doing is doing um with
commercial flight was, was also
if I, if I wasn't
claustrophobic, I would be
looking into it. My my oldest
son would be just be thrilled if
he could afford to, uh, you
know, go up into space, um, so
what really concerns me about
uh, about what I saw and I want
you to maybe give me a picture
of how last year and this year
are different is that there were
already lots of people who had
applied or made reservations and
they'd also paid their fees,
which were not
inexpensive at all. And, and
that we still had these flights
that they were expecting way
out, you know, a couple of years
from now, um
are there, have there been more
customers, so to speak, and, and
how, give me a picture of how
that's looking because there,
there were hundreds of people
who had already made the
reservations.
Yeah, sure thing, um, and thanks
for coming out for the visit.
We're happy to host anybody
anytime on a tour of our
facility. Um, so we've had a
customer deposit base uh over
the last, well, for the last 14
years that I've worked here, uh,
on the order of what's grown up
to about 700 customers that have
had a backlog of deposits. Most
all of those are in the form of
deposits. They're not full
ticket prices. And the way the,
the mechanisms work, right, you
put a deposit down and then we
issue just like if you're buying
an airline ticket, conditions of
carriage, which is your actual
ticket, that doesn't get issued
until about 6 months before you
fly when you have to pay the
full amount and then that
deposit goes hard and, and, and
we move on from there. So of all
those people that are in the
waiting queue, they've certainly
fronted money. They've been very
supportive. They've been with us
forever. Uh, and we've laid out
the order in which they're going
to fly and they're super
enthusiastic. We were flying our
commercial flights Galactic
1234. We flew 6 flights in 6
months, right? It was an amazing
cadence never seen before in
commercial human spaceflight,
but that's one flight a month.
So 700 people
need many, many years to get to
space.
Two Delta spaceships, even if
they only fly twice a week,
we'll fly 700 people a year, so
that customer base will be flown
in one year. So while it's very
painful to have to explain to
everybody, you were ready to go
probably 3 or 4 years from now
and we're going to make you
pause. But now you'll get to go
even faster because we paused.
So it's just a conversation we
have to have with folks. Uh,
we're going to start reoing
ticket sales in quarter 1 of
next year because again, that
first order book that we've had
forever will be gone within a
year, and we need to fill
that book back up. We'd like to
keep 1 to 2 years of ticket
sales in a backlog to just show
the order book to the to the
marketplace uh that we have
demand for our tickets. Um,
we're seeing a lot of repeat
customers fly. The crew that
flew our very last flight, all 4
of them, have each signed up for
another ticket already, so all 4
are gonna go again. Um, so we
see a really great interest in,
in the, in the marketplace, uh,
but, but basically right now
we're very supply limited, so
that's why we had to, we had to
stand down and build new ships.
The, the ones we had
were fantastic, but they were
kind of prototype demonstrators
who just couldn't keep up at a
commercial flight rate. So it's
a hard conversation to have with
some of those existing
customers. I know them all well,
uh, but they're actually very
supportive of the fact that
they'll get to go so much sooner
now once that fleet hits the
market.
Thank you so much. That's great
to hear. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Teassas, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Very good questions, very good
presentation, good, uh,
questions from our, uh, fellow
legislators, um, couple things
that I saw is actually let let
me go back, Madam Chair, um.
do, do they go through the
chair, did they do it right? OK,
um
you have a, I was looking at
your capital outlay, uh,
improvement plan on page 9,
and it's a, it's a long list of,
of improvements. Um, how has
that been working in past years?
Are you getting? are you moving
steadily in capital improvements
through the state, uh, or have
you had some
slimmer years, um.
I'll let you answer that first
Yeah, Madam Chair and
Representative Taras, um, we
only got $4 million last year.
So we're not moving as fast as I
would like an ICIP, uh, I
understand that part of the
reason is because of the
backlog. Um, that's why I showed
where we are on, on the previous
sites. One of the things I asked
for a few years ago was a
full-time employee to slowly
work on capital improvements,
which, um, you, you guys gave us
and that has helped tremendously
in, and if, if I, you know, I
know that you have other
agencies who are backlogged on,
on their
capital improvements. I think
it's important not to use your
regular operations staff for
that sort of thing, doing
capital improvements is a
special skill to write to RFPs,
the statement works, and to get
the job done and uh by us having
that person and he has a
contractor who works with him.
We've moved much faster, um, and
so all those projects are in
play and again what's what we've
also found is we're having to
help manage basically our
customers' projects as well.
That's why I'm asking for yet
another person to help with
capital improvements, but
um, we did not get a lot of
support in the last couple of
years on ICIP. Some of these are
really important, um, the, the
$8 million for the runway is, is
just to keep the runway up. We
also want to pave the shoulders
with asphalt so we don't get
every time a plane takes off, we
don't get a lot of stuff
rotating back onto the runway
rocks and things that we have to
go clean, um
there's matter of fact things
like the GTS chillers, the
gateway to space chillers,
they're now 15 years old to cool
that giant building, um, we're
at the end of life for those,
so, um, I would appreciate
support for these. Um, I think
these are paying back, you know,
through the economic impact, um,
I, I would like you all to think
of these as as proper
investments, uh, to, to build
just like building a road or a
bridge, you got to build the
infrastructure to bring the
customers in, so, um, I would
appreciate support on those, so
thank you. Oh, go ahead.
Senator, uh, Madam Chair, um,
I'd like to add that, uh, this
last fiscal year we had 3 bonds
that matured. We used all of
them, all expended all the
funds. When we had a very small
balance of like 100,000 that we
did roll over, we reauthorized
it, but uh we've we're fully
expending all the monies that we
get compared to the res a lot of
uh there's a big backlog
of bonds that were, weren't used
at fiscal year end. A lot of
agencies were not using the
their monies and so they
probably might have lost those
monies, reverted.
uh, or it was reauthorized, but
our agency has been really
active
constructing projects and we
fully use all those funds and
we'd like to get more of them.
Thank you.
So, Madam Chair, I, I, you know,
I think what's important, uh,
gentlemen, is, is, and you've
heard from the legislature and
we, it's just a posture that
they're taking that there's a
lot of unexpended dollars. Now
that could mean, Madam Chair,
there's other factors in there,
uh, they budgeted for X number
of dollars and because of the uh
the um inflation rates uh of
cost of building or whatever
that have stifled that
expenditure and some things
can't be phased out. There's a
number of reasons that that
happens. It's not just, uh, that
people aren't expending the
money, but you know obviously uh
I think it's the stance that
they want to see that money
moving shovel ready as fast as
possible. So I'm glad to hear
that that's happening, but I
think it's also um good, Madam
Chair for us to recognize that
our neighbors here, um, this is
a probably a very, very
competitive uh industry and if
you don't have the tools, uh,
to,
to compete, it puts you at a
disadvantage and so my question
would be, Madam Chair, uh, sir,
what is your biggest obstacle
that you have when you say, I
don't know who's coming next,
what is keeping them from
coming.
Madam Chair and Representative
Trossa, a great question. I
think in the, the previous 3 to
4 years, the biggest obstacle
was the reputation that the
spaceport had and, and, and I
think most of that reputation
emanated from New Mexico itself
that we were somehow a failure,
that we were not a logical place
to construct a business. We've
been working very hard to turn
that around and um and we're,
and we're gaining acceptance. I
get invited on panels, often as
because we're considered a very
successful inland spaceport now,
um, and, and like I said in my
in my initial statement we we're
now talking to, to three of the
larger defense contractors. One
of them is thinking of having a
long-term presence at the
spaceport, so
I think the the biggest obstacle
was the commitment from New
Mexico itself, um, and I can see
how I don't really blame
anybody, you know, when, when
you look back at what happened
with Virgin Galactic and the
Spaceport and Governor
Richardson and, um, what you see
is, uh, is the unknown unknowns,
right, that it's going to take a
little bit longer to get a
vehicle ready to go to space to
get uh operations going to
understand how to operate a
space spaceport, but what was
sold 20 years ago was, hey, this
is all gonna happen like in 5 or
6 years.
But when you look at space and
when you look at building
vehicles that are human
qualified, nothing ever moves
fast. It's, it's just there's
risk involved and people don't
understand the technology until
they actually try. So I think
we've overcome that we're, we're
just, we're, we've moved past
the point, it's sort of like
when someone gets a brand new
iPhone or some sort of gadget,
you know, amongst all your
friends, they're only gonna be
one who buys the new phone,
right? They're everybody else is
kind of waiting to see and
what's happened is we've got
enough customers, we've been
putting out an annual report. We
send that out as often as we
can. When people see all the
different things happening at
the spaceport. They're, they're,
they, their risk is lowered. But
again, in a committee hearing
just a few weeks ago, someone
said we should sell the
spaceport. And when that gets
out, it just kills us. I mean,
I, I, the companies don't want
to make a 20 or 30-year
commitment if the State of New
Mexico is not behind it. And if
the state in Mexico is not
behind it, fine, we can just
amble along the way we are, but
I, I think this is a good
100-year project. I think it's a
proper when you look
at our natural endowments when
you look at the state of New
Mexico and what we can do that's
different and competitive. But
every other state, this is
definitely something we should
be focused on.
So Madam Chair, um, sir, I think
what, what.
I think what happens is you've
got a legislature that some
people are business savvy, some
people aren't. They read some
news, they get some constituent
complaints over the over the tax
burden that they have and so
forth and so they see it and,
and, and they want everything
just like their iPhone or
whatever their Internet they
want it to happen right now.
and this is a capital intensive
business.
very, very capital intensive and
so I mean for you know for
people that have done that
and you have to invest
big
upfront money to see a return if
we all think that, hey, you know
what, this needs to return
immediately. It doesn't work
that way on every business and
so I, I think that.
you know, the more that we have
communications with you guys,
uh, Madam Chair, and the more
you educate us in understanding
how this diff this this industry
is different than others. It's a
developing industry. It's a very
competitive industry and you
know there's obviously for me it
there's obviously money in it or
you wouldn't be seeing, uh,
Texas and other uh states
competing to have that revenue
come in, so there's
something there and so when we
stifle and when we don't give
you a few tools, which is, which
is the manpower that you need to
keep up now obviously that's a
check and balance, right? They
give you the, the, the, the, um,
uh,
the employees, the, the, the,
the personnel that you need to
complete and expand and keep up
with projects or whatever you're
asking for those things
obviously as long as they I
think the legislature sees that
it's moving and we understand
that the the process I think it
help us, it help everyone come
together and and support it but
you know it's one of those
things that is you, you, you
can't control 112 people that
all think the same either and so
you're gonna have those people
that are your fans and you're
gonna have a few that aren't,
you know.
and, and it may be a simple,
madam Chair is that they don't
understand.
but I, I mean just reading all
this, I mean I've been, I kind
of just kind of
bumble all over this stuff, but
I, I've been reading uh the
economic impact, but when you
see a company, I, I can
understand if a company is gonna
come in and invest
tens of millions of dollars to
just sit and just find tenancy
there, you know, to, to, to sign
a lease agreement.
They're gonna get set back if
they don't see the investment.
If they see the runway starting
to tatter and come apart, why
are you going to put a
multi-million dollar, I don't
know how much those planes cost.
I don't know, but who's gonna do
that
And so I think, I think man sure
what I'm trying to get at is we
either have to jump on board and
take care of business, um, and
then hold them accountable.
or we sit back and say we don't
wanna do this but we're giving a
I think it's we're already
pretty far far in it. I think
we're a little further knee deep
and I think we need to, we need
to take care of business and and
when, when I, so when I go and
look at a business or I wanna
buy a business or I do anything
like that.
I talked to the people on the
ground.
and, and I wanna hear from them
what is going on there, um,
nothing, no, no, no disrespect
but sometimes we get a different
story from executives, right?
and so it's, it's better for me
to kind of get a feeling of the
people and see how things are
moving. I happened to just by
chance.
run into one of your employees
and I just had a nice
conversation with him and I
heard good things and so that
gave me a lot of uh good, a good
feeling about what you guys are
doing. Other things real quick,
can you just quickly man I just
so I don't burn all the time.
How much it would you estimate
has been privately invested in
that in that in spaceport.
Private investments coming in
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think that's a really hard one
to answer, um, Virgin Galactic,
I can let, uh, Mr. Moses speak,
but I, I think I've heard
numbers on the order of a
billion dollars for their space
system. Um, I know Spin launch
spent something on the order of
40 million for their site. Uh,
Aerovironment spent over 8
million prismatic, which built a
facility, I think that was on
the order of a million um
I could kind of go on, you know,
um, but, you know, when we build
a facility like we're building
the hangar, we're gonna, we're
gonna, it's a revenue driver,
it's not just, uh, it's there to
attract people, but it's there
to then charge people to be
inside of that hangar. Uh, we're
also gonna do that with the
Stark building, which is the
building at the front, but a lot
of private investment, but we,
we have to be responsible for
keeping up the fire department,
you know, keeping up the
security in the roads and the
utilities. That's, that's the
where these expenses, the ICIP
money is going, but
um Mr. Moses, Mike, would you
like to answer?
Uh, yeah, sure. Um, I think, you
know, it's, it's hard to break
the numbers out, but uh in terms
of investment into the facility
itself, uh, while the state put
up the money to build the runway
and the hangar facility, the
gateway to space building. Uh,
we've been outfitting and
spending money in that building
to to outfit it, uh, and then if
you count all of our equipment
that we've brought in, uh, it's
in the last 5 years it's on the
order of $50 million that we've
spent in the space part
improving those, those buildings
and facilities as Scott hinted,
uh, you know,
while the, the original 200 $225
million investment in the
spaceport itself, Virgin
Galactic as a company has spent
more than a billion dollars
developing this system and
hardware to be ready to operate
out of Spaceport America. So a
significant capital investment.
This is not a, there's
significant barriers to entry
here, right? And so, Madam
Chair, for, for those of us that
are may may not understand
Virgin Galactic doesn't fly
anywhere, well, doesn't it's
based out of
uh Spaceport America our flight
operations headquarters are here
at Spaceport America, correct?
So you know, I just, Madam
Chair, I think what I'm trying
to do here is understand and
then get an understanding for
the whole uh uh our our fellow
legislators to understand that,
you know, yes, there's so much
direct investment, Madam Chair,
um, but then there's other uh
R&D that is put in there. You've
got all of your payroll and your
other uh investments that come
outside of that that you won't
see direct
ly in bricks and mortar, but
it's still money that's being
invested there. I saw that you
guys had a, you had a dip
because of, of, of the founder,
not just funding money and so
you guys pulled back and and uh
in stock, but then it started to
rebound a little bit and then I
saw that, um, uh, it seemed to
me that your, um
when I was looking at all those
numbers and stuff. It looked
like that was around the 22 at
the end of the last quarter of
22 when that announcement was
made. Is that right? OK, so,
Madam Chair, the reason I'm
saying that is that what caused
part of the dip because you had
to reassess your, since you're
changing your model and saying,
hey, we're going to build a
bigger, we're going to build
bigger planes, more planes,
we're gonna take a pause. We're
gonna have to let go some of the
people here till we get
redevelop this but then you're
gonna catch up. It sounds to me
like you're gonna catch up
in the next, uh, next year when
you get going, you'll pick up
the pace because you're able to
carry more people out to space.
Yes, Representative, that, that
is correct. So the, the, the,
the dip was if, uh, if you'll
allow me for a second, right, we
flew 7 flights to space, uh, in
about 8 months, and during that
time our company lost about 60%
of its market capital in the
stock market, right? So the
industry awarded our success
rate by cutting our money in
half, right? So back to at the
time, rapid growth was really
what the
market was looking for. But, but
now it's more sustainable
growth, right? And so, uh, so
that ship flying that infrequent
once a month was not a
sustainable path, right? I could
have made 30 of them and, and
flown once a day, but the
revenue would not be there,
right? So that's why we had to
choose to stand down a little
bit. Our model never intended to
stop flying, right? We wanted to
build new ships while flying,
but the market contractions just
forced us to take that little
bit of a dip. Um, at the end of
the day, obviously, you know,
uh, reducing workforce any
number of employees is hard
to do, but we will definitely
rebound way past that, uh,
within a year. And that was my
question, Madam Chair. It looks
like you'll probably be able to
get some of these people rehired
and, and then uh if you're
moving that fast, you get, you
might even need more people sort
of looked like to me most
certainly. I have 175 plus
employees right now. That
number's gonna grow. Uh, we've
paid out $145 million in wages
just in the last 5 years, that
number's going to continue to
grow. So just an employee
footprint, um, you know, I, I
very much appreciate all the
other business out of
Spaceport America, but, but I
send, you know, hundreds of
employees to that gate every
single day.
Well, well, madam I'm curious
because, uh, uh, Virgin Galactic
is the anchor for spaceport is
what I understand right there,
the anchors, so if we can make
them successful then uh other
people in my opinion will come
because they'll see that uh the
investment's been made properly.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Just to reminder to
the committee that we're behind,
which means we'll have a shorter
lunch or a working lunch, but
just heads up, uh, next, uh,
Senator Ramos and then
Representative Royal Caballero.
Madam Chair, and
great presentation. Uh, I really
do appreciate that being back on
on the Senate, uh, it's uh great
to catch up and uh
you know, diversification is
definitely the big strength that
we're looking for. Um, I totally
understand that. And what are we
doing to attract others? What,
what, what's
what are we telling people? What
are we doing just to try and
make it easier here or feasible
for people to come in and
a couple of questions within
this is what can we do through
your capital outlay projects or
what capital Ola project would
be your best
jab at trying to make things
more attractive.
on this list that you gave us
today.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Ramos, thank you for the
question. Uh, on the question of
what are we doing, um, creating
the annual report that we've,
we've created is, is it was a
two fur, it was one for the
public and, and legislators to
know we're doing, but we send
that out to all of our all of
our candidate companies, all of
our prospects, it helps them
understand what that all the
different things the spaceport
is capable of. Um, 18,000 acres
in the, in the desert in a
remote site under restricted
airspace, um, and then, and
then, um, the, the one of
the single biggest things that
helps get lock a customer and is
getting them out to the site.
They just have such a hard time
imagining what we're talking
about. I mean, literally, so
when we bring them out to the
site and they stand on the
runway and we go visit the
vertical launch area, um, you
know, where they might operate
and they see the wide open
space, the good weather, uh,
that changes the mindset. That
seems to be the single biggest
thing is bringing to New Mexico.
And then we also tie them in
where appropriate with the
universities, it could be UTEP,
it could be MSU, UNM
New Mexico Tech, um, you know,
you sell, you, you market
regionally and you sell locally,
right? And so we're, we really
sell hard on the region, the
fact that we got the DOE
laboratories in Albuquerque that
we have got Kirtland, we've got
Space, um
RCO and Albuquerque, but then
we've got the White Sands
missile range with radar and
telemetry. So we sell cell
cells, so, um, uh, we're doing
everything we can to bring other
people in and looking for other
opportunities in terms of the,
probably the biggest thing that
would help us bring customers in
one of the, one of the big
things on here was the sightide
water infrastructure. I think
that's 15 million. Um, that's a
big one. We don't have water
down at the vertical launch
area. Um, water is important for
any company electricity. We
finally got electricity down to
the vert
ical Ontario, but we want to
keep extending the utilities and
the roads. There's another one
on here I, I forget where it is,
but there's a road improvement,
um, to it's a dirt road all the
way down to the vertical launch
area, so you, you stay on paved
roads all the way to the
spaceport, but if you're a
vertical launch company and
you're bringing a rocket, the,
the, and the customer told us
this, the worst ride of the
whole trip from Texas was the
last 5 miles. Yeah, that's not a
good selling point, right? So,
um, roads, roads and water, we,
we just go back to getting site
ready.
Madam Chair, thank you. And, and
that, uh, I mean that definitely
sounds good. We, uh, I'm
definitely in support of, of you
all and I just want to
make sure we start seeing some
kind of uh
return on investment one of
these days, right? And I think
as a businessman, that's what
we're always after. Um, one
thing that I did see was your
stem and other outreach that,
that's pretty awesome. You're
getting a lot of schools
involved. I mean, but our
children are our future though
that's the biggest investment
that we can make and what kind
of a of a program do you have
that goes and visits the
elementaries and the high
schools, and I, I see a lot of
these schools, but I, I really
think we need to start within
our, I know you started within
your region, but within our
whole state and getting people
involved because like I said, I,
I think our children are future
investment and uh if they don't
hear about these type of
projects or hear about your
organization and get excited
about it, then, then a lot of
these people that are smart
enough to do a lot of this
stuff, uh, choose other pathways
and uh if they don't hear about
this pathway, they'll never
choose it.
Madam Chair and Senator, um, I'm
a, I'm a good example. I'm a
boomerang. I was born in New
Mexico, but I left for 26 years
and I, I actually moved back
partially because of the
spaceport at least to Las
Cruces. I, otherwise I might
have moved to Albuquerque, but
because the space boat was here,
I kind of took a chance that I
might wind up with the job
there. I didn't think I'd be in
charge, but, um, here I am. But
we, we, uh, in terms of the
getting other kids invested and
interested. We, we do, I think
every sixth grade class in um uh
in the area we
have a, a, a retired PhD who
visits and does science
experiments and tries to get
them interested. Um, the
building we're building up front
is gonna have a dedicated STEM
classroom and an outdoorsTEM
amphitheater that, that they can
operate on and we're looking
for, it's too early right now,
but we're looking for
partnerships with Virgin
Galactic and our other customers
to uh get kids excited. That was
one of the reasons for my
full-time equivalent request
was, was the STEM workforce uh
uh coordinator. I, I wanted to
get again a certified someone
who's taught in public schools
and knows how to develop
curriculum and age-appropriate
curriculum and work with science
teachers and others to get them
out the spaceport. So that
funding that would be great. Um
what another thing the
legislature could do is maybe
give some money to the schools
to be able to pay for the buses
to come to the site. We've,
we've got Gallup who came, they
managed to pay for it, Roswell,
but we talked to lots of school
districts and they say, well, do
you have any funding to help pay
for the school buses, and we
don'
t um, all the way up to the
Navajo Nation, so that would be
if there was some sort of grant
or something a science teacher
could go after to pay for, you
know, especially if you're
coming from the four corners,
you're, you need, you're gonna
need a two-night thing, right?
You're gonna need chaperones
probably in a hotel, but, but we
would help then arrange for a
really good experience at the
spaceport and we're we're going
to continue to do that.
Well, Madam Chair, and I, I
totally agree. I, I think that
uh we've already made the
investment. We've got to take
advantage of, of having the
investment within our state and
do everything we can to make you
all successful and uh keep
creating these jobs for our
future children and, and our
students that are in school now,
but, uh, great presentation. I
thank you so much for coming and
presenting in front of us today
and uh hopefully we can come up
with some kind of help for, for,
uh, you all's future. Thank you.
Representative Royval Caballero
and then Representative of Beta.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you very much for your,
uh, presentation. It seems like
I just heard this not too long
ago and um every time I hear it
over the years, not just
recently, I've seen significant
improvements, as you've heard me
say when I first came back to
New Mexico uh under the
Richardson administration as
commuting economic developer for
uh uh Cibola counties. I, um,
heard the naysayers. Oh, no, no,
no, no, no, no to rail runner,
no to Spaceport, no to Borplex
and
lo and behold
all of these three have proven
to be uh excellent investments,
um, for our state. So I just
wanted to begin by saying that,
that, that uh we had a
tremendous amount of pushback
back in the day. And I, and then
since I've been elected and
taken this position, um, I've
seen significant
um
impact that Spaceport is having,
and I thank you again for your
reports. This, this is what I've
been asking for for years, um,
the specifics so that we can
begin to dispel the negative um
ideas or the unknowns or use the
detail to further educate and
inform so that we can continue
to garner the support that we
need in the, for the spaceport.
So, um, in saying that
Madam Chair, our return on
investment I see very clearly in
your report of um the total
economic impact. Um, it says it
very clearly, the total amount
of revenues that are being
brought in, the jobs that impact
on the counties, um.
and it goes on and on and on. I
lost my page already. Um,
however, I just wanted to say
that is a return on investment.
Clearly, that's a return on
investment. Your figures show it
from 20 2019 to current and in I
anticipate that your projections
will continue to show that
progress forward. So I, I just
want us to say, uh, wanna
clarify that we're impacting our
counties, our taxes, our
and I, I wanna encourage you
again to not refer just to jobs
but careers because what we're
trying to do, Madam Chair, is
influence the
future, uh, space travel, and
the imagination of our youth
that want to pursue a science
and technology in the in this
field and so we wanna be able to
enhance their ability to do
that. And so that's an
investment. That's investing in
the future of our youth. So I
will have 11 question in
particular, um, that I didn't
see or hear in the last
presentation. Oh, I, I did see
page 31 is
the page I was referring to in
terms of total impact. That's
very significant growth. So I
just, I wanted to highlight that
page.
My question is, and I, and I
again, I didn't hear it before
and, and I came in late on this,
but I was listening, but I
didn't hear it. Um, what is the
percentage of revenue that you
all place or put up in order to
match um capital outlay projects
or any other type of development
projects, can you, do you have
some sort of a, um, a figure to
that percentage-wise?
Uh, Madam Chair and and
Representative, are you talking
about spaceports specifically
or?
Madam Chair,
Spaceport.
Uh, and you're talking about
capital improvements. Yes, yes
sir. So we, Madam Chair, we have
two sources of capital
improvement revenue. One is the
ICIP process through the
legislature, which um is vital
and and important, but and if
you look back at the original
philosophy of the spaceport
perhaps there was also the GRT
tax that was voted on by
Donianna County and Sierra
County, um, so the citizens of
those two counties voted to tax
themselves and um
so we have a tax district and,
and the way it is traditionally
worked out as far as I can tell,
and maybe this was the original
formula as the state paid for
about 2/3 of the spaceport and
the county, the citizens of
those two counties paid for
about 3.
Um, we had some trouble after
COVID and um getting money out
of the counties, we finally got
that fixed. It was kind of a
bureaucratic process, but and so
lately the, the bulk of the
money that we're using for ICIP,
new ICI or new capital
improvements is the counties
that won't expire until I think
2029 or 2030 will continue to be
able to use excess pledged
revenue, um, but, um,
but and that is a relatively we
can get to that money relatively
quick in terms of it building up
or letting it build up and then
we'll make a request to the tax
district to use that money,
whereas the ICIP money is more
like another 18 month process
with a lot of high risk, so, um,
in terms of matching customers,
we're, I, I don't know if we, I,
if I can say it that way. What
we're like we're building roads
around the top of the runway,
for example. We're building
roads and putting utilities
around the top of the
runway to open up the east side.
We have identified candidates
for some of that, but right now
we have no subleases signed. We
have no guarantee that they'll
come there, so it's again
getting back to just investing
where we think the growth will
be and making sure the site is
ready for those customers.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
will say that um in reference to
Virgin Galactica and all the
others that we
um are attract hope to attract
tenancy is key to um advancing
our space forward. I, I can't
say that enough. So we have to
have it
capital project uh ready in
order to be able to attract the
tenants, and then it just spins
off from there, attracting the
tenants means more careers means
more futures for our children
and so on and so on. So it,
it's, um, development in this
arena is anything this massive
takes
it, it's a continual process. In
fact, there's no beginning,
there's no middle, and there's
no end. It just begins and it
continues. There's no other way
I can say that. And so it's a
continual investment in a
continual return on investment,
and it's not a fast process.
It's a very slow process. So I
commend you for all the work in
advancing uh spaceport, uh, and
all of the other economies
around Spaceport, uh, for the
state of New Mexico. So thank
you very much.
Representative Obea, thank you,
Madam Chair. Good morning,
gentlemen. Thank you for being
here. Thank you for the
informative presentation.
I have about 5 questions. Uh,
they're different areas, so
please feel free to answer, uh,
whoever wants to answer. The
first one is you talked about
your water source and roads. Uh,
what type of water source do you
use?
currently? Thank you, Madam
Chair, and Representative Abeda.
We, we have wells that are in
the basin, so, um, some of those
wells are, are deep. They're,
you know, 200 ft or so, but I
think we have 5 or 6 wells. Um,
you know, we're not very water
intensive in terms of use of
that water and and it's, and,
and we have our own uh
wastewater system, so the water
is actually treated and returned
to the ground.
Thank you.
Uh, my next question is, uh, you
had talked about the flights.
Can you give me a range of what
that costs for a writer?
per ticket? Uh, oh, for Virgin
Galactic, yeah, our current, uh,
ticket prices are set at around
450,000 per ticket right now.
Um, uh
Right, I was hoping that one of
the schools in my district.
could drink it if, if with your
permission just to a quick talk,
right? Uh, the cost of entry was
high for us to get there, right?
And, and a single ship, two
ships, doesn't let prices come
down. A fleet of ships flying
every single day. It doesn't
cost me much in in
infrastructure to add a 2nd
ship, a 3rd ship, a 4th. And so
at that point, ticket prices can
drop and you get the economy
scale. Thank you so much. Uh, my
next question is, I, and I may
have missed it, but I looked
through here, uh, again. Do you
receive any federal funding or
federal grants?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
great question. No. Are you
eligible for them? We, they,
the,
this, this is part of the reason
I've been pushing for things
like orbital launch from the
spaceport because the nation
when I talk about how they're
launching every 3 to 4 days at
the Cape. They're, they're
looking for other places to
launch. Unfortunately, DOD is
considering overseas locations
instead of working to develop
technology that would allow us
to launch from an inland site.
So I have also been working with
our federal delegation to try
and
make DOD look inward, and we've
had some good conversations,
but, um, I would, I would have
to say that over the last
several years, not, and this is
not reflective of any
presidential administration, but
over the last several years, the
strategy for commercial
spaceports is a little bit
unknown by the federal
government. There's been a
strong focus by the Space Force
who runs the Vandenberg and Cape
Canaveral launches to improve
those sites infrastructure wise,
but they have not looked that
far into the future about, well,
what are we going to do when we
start seeing more regular
flights all around the country,
so there's a focus by myself
and, and, and again another
reason for a deputy director, I
have to go to Washington and
make that case, but um, no, we
haven't got any federal funding,
anything significant. Thank you
so much for that. My next
question is about uh what sets
us apart from Texas and I'm
referring back to Texas because
a lot of my colleagues here have
talked about how they had their
positioned a lot better. Um,
what sets us apart from them?
You talked about weather, but
maybe you could give me two more
things
that set us apart
Madam Chair, um, and
Representative, I think it's uh
part of its reputation, and I,
I'm, I'm, I've been a business
guy, um, I've had to pay taxes.
I've been a business owner, but
Texas has a reputation of, of
doing business quicker if
there's environmental work doing
it quicker if there's
bureaucratic work doing it
quicker. We just have kind of a
negative reputation. I think the
GRT is confusing to people, um,
and, uh, um, but you know, we're
a small state, so we, I can get
to my economic secretary
quickly. I can get to the
governor's office
if I can quickly, so we try and
make up for those perceptions by
trying to get folks involved
quickly in the process of
attracting customers, but, um,
I, I think that's a good
question for Secretary Black,
who I work closely with, of
course.
Thank you. My last question is,
um, if you would please leave
your business cards with me. I
serve a very large district that
has a combination of
bureau-funded schools, charter
schools, public schools, and,
uh, actually over 5 high schools
over 10 elementary and middle
schools, very large areas. So if
you're interested in
collaborating with tribal
schools, private schools, public
schools. I'd love to be a
resource to pass on your
information and make sure you're
at educational conferences that
are taking place in my district
and so you could have a
partnership and bring perhaps
some students down, even
teachers down. Thank you.
Thank you. And I have a few
final questions um
Executive Director McLaughlin,
on page 12, you talked about um
as customers use and pay for
services, but it can take 18
months for recognition of that
new revenue. How can we fix
that? Do you have any
suggestions?
Uh, Madam Chair,
the, the process is we, we
eventually get a check, but that
check has to be audited. It has
to go to the financial audit.
It's, it's real money. It's in
our account, but we're not
allowed to use it. I'll, I'll
let our Trujillo, our CFO, say a
few more words about that. Yes,
Madam Chair, what happens is at
the end of each fiscal year,
there's a has to be an audit
conducted before DFA can take
the ending bounce.
the ending balance that's in our
uh
um, it's, I guess to business
wise it's net operating income
or loss before DFA Department of
Finance Administration can take
that into or close it into our
fund balance. Fund balance isn't
on the balance sheet and then
this is income statement driven.
And so for them to take that in,
they need an audit done. We're
currently gonna start an audit
here in a couple of weeks, and
by the time they conclude by
November 1st, then that audit
goes to DFA. They do a review
and goes to the state auditor's
office as
well. By that time it'll
probably be like February or so.
By the time they conclude and
then once they conclude, they do
a massive close
All agencies, so if there's some
agencies that are dragging,
it'll postpone or delay that
closing. So what happens is once
they do this close and this
master system, accounting system
called SHARE.
Then they'll close it into fund
balance and then we'll have uh
the ability to use those ones,
so it takes, there's a big lag
time sometimes up to 18 months.
um, I mean, we charge revenues
currently and uses up our
expenses, but we can't use those
revenues until like
18 months later, just about.
so it's in the meantime, you
know, it, uh, depletes. We have
a very small budget 13.2
million.
and then to have these massive,
uh, expenses it really
uh wears away at our budget
And, and Madam Chair, if I can
add that is a couple of reasons
why I want to keep our fund
balance at about 10% of our
budget, so 10 to 15% because
we're able to get to the fund
balance quicker. So if we did
have a customer come in that
needed services that we have to
pay for we can at least get to
that, but currently our fund
balance is going down because
of, of where we are with Virgin
Galactic in their paw. So, uh
those two we, we found a way to
balance out this huge delay, but
now we're, we're worried about
our fund balance getting too low
and then we, we
literally could have a customer
come in that want request
services and we simply don't
have any money to do anything.
Thank you. And then, uh, two
more quick questions for Virgin
Electric, you were going to
build um
astronaut facilities. How's that
project going on?
Uh, yeah, Madam Chair, thanks.
Uh, so yeah, we are looking, as
we talk about increasing space
flights, right? That's more and
more people coming in, where are
they housed? Where are they
trained, um, and where would
friends and family who visit
come to stay. So an initial
model uh looked at building in
Sierra County, a training and
hosting facility there. Um, it
requires, uh, again, a fair bit
of capital outlay from our
company. So we've paused that
until we've built up our revenue
from flights, so it is still on
our horizon to talk about, uh,
how do we get this influx of
customers once
we start flying 200 or 300 times
a year, uh, we'd need to add
more facilities for things like
that.
Thank you. And then my last
question, um
Scott, what about a New Mexico
Space commission. Do we need
that?
Madam Chair, thank you for that
question. Um,
I think there's a couple of ways
to do that. We could, uh
multiple ways to do it. One is
to, is to get the EDD, um, maybe
be more focused on specific
specifically, um, one would be
to create an independent space
commission. Another would be to
give us NMSA more power to um
and budget to then start looking
out for the rest of the state in
terms of space. The, the benefit
of the last one is that's what
we do. We, we're space people,
so we know what we're, what,
what
we need to do. So, um, I've
thought a lot about how to
counter the Texas Space
commission because they are so
well focused, especially with
the amount of money they were
given, um, and they have a, if
you go to their website, you can
see they have an impressive
board of directors, um, that,
that, uh, helps decide on that
money. So I, I would definitely
like to find a way to counter
that, especially given, um, you
know, our revenues from oil and
where, where we might have the
ability to make some targeted
investments, but I know the TO
office um has
aerospace as one of their
sectors, and I don't want to,
um, imply that they're not
already starting to do that, but
uh I think focusing on space
again because of our natural
endowments, what we already have
in the state, what we're already
capable of, is, is a good
investment.
Thank you
And with that, thank you. Oh
yes, uh, Senator, I thank you,
Madam Chair, and I, I thought,
uh, the answer from um
from Virgin Galactic to
Representative Abate this's
question on the cost per I mean
that's, that is actually down
the amount that you gave us,
isn't it? I think when I first
met you.
I wanna say it was something
like 2 million or 5 million or
something.
that cost per ticket. Yeah,
initial cost for tickets back,
uh, well, when I joined the
company, we're on the order of
2000 to 250,000 per ticket. So
they've been going up. Um, just
for comparisons, not to throw
competition under the bus if you
want to go fly with Blue Origin,
those tickets are running about
$2 million each. So I want you
to shove them under the bus
actually, no, but, but Madam
Madam Chair, though, I thought
that the original estimate was
like in the 2 to 5 minutes and
you've actually brought this
down in the time that you've
worked on at Spaceport America
or or did I have that
number reversed? It's a little
reversed, yes, so it's, I think
probably what you remember is
conversations you and I've had
that uh when they first hired
me, we didn't know how much it
cost to fly, but we set a ticket
price anyway, so, uh, that was
my challenge to get the price
down. OK, wonderful. Thank you.
So the message is fly New Mexico
galactics. OK, thank all of you
for being here. Thank you for
what you're doing and go
Spaceport America.
Thank you.
With that, we'll go to our next
presentation
This is a report from the Border
Authority. Lunch is ready
and so feel free to get it any
time if we finish
uh
before 1:30 we'll actually have
a break
um, so think about that. So if
our representatives of Border
Authority can come up.
Thank you
questions
comments
OK.
You, you asked my question that,
you know, the 18 month
delay in revenue recognition. I
was like I want to ask that.
Yeah, yeah, no, you got
swelling.
OK.
And I see we have our executive
director Fiatro here. I see we
have our board chairman, uh,
Joseph de la Rosa here. I see we
have a board, is it are you
Shapero or Romero?
OK,
and we have Deputy Director
Laura Romero, and we have one of
our board members who will also
introduce herself as Christy,
right? But I don't
OK, uh, so without further ado,
you have a handout and
um our all of our K. Thank you.
Start when you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee
um, first I, I would like to, to
welcome you to, to Demming and
Luna County. I, a border, uh,
county uh of the New Mexico
border.
Uh, first I would like to start
to uh give you uh an executive
summary of the, of, of fiscal
year 25 was a turning point for
the New Mexico border Authority.
The Santa Teresa port of entry
grew from 28 billion in 2023 to
40 billion in 2024 in total
trade value. Um, we rebuild the
agency with the help of the
board and the staff.
added uh critical capacity,
reignited 5 lung stalled
infrastructure projects
completing one of them, uh,
another one of them is at 95%
and advanced to major studies,
one of them is a 95% uh for the
border border highway connector,
including a partnership with El
Paso Metropolitan Planning
Organization for the phase 2
study of the water hybrid
connector.
The efforts, uh, these efforts
has strengthened NMBA's roles as
the governor's advisor and the
state's lead entity for border
infrastructure and economic
development.
Fiscal year 26, now underway,
focuses on execution and
delivery.
uh, completed completing active
projects, expanding by national
and interstate partnerships and
refining internal systems to
meet the growing demands of the
region.
Fiscal year 27 will build on
this momentum or plan is
centering 4
pillars.
being infrastructure delivery
and innovation.
economic growth and investment
by national and interstate
relations.
organizational excellence.
and DNMBA is prepared to scale
its work.
delivering projects and
partnerships that drive economic
growth.
and and reinforce New Mexico's
position as a competitive border
state.
Also, I would like to mention
that uh our budget request for
fiscal year 27 will be a a flat
budget.
um, of, uh, $575,000 that that
covers 84% of our total budget.
We have an enterprise fund that
that will increase uh $27,000
from $81,000 to $1,009,000
all of these being done because
uh or revenue from fiscal year
24, that was $105,000 grew in
fiscal year 25 to $125,000.17
dollars increase for fiscal year
25 and the projected revenue for
fiscal year 26, it's $143,000 at
at 14% increase from fiscal year
25.
and uh a 31% increase from 2024.
Now, if you, if you want to go
to slide number 2.
There we have the
how the New Mexico border plex,
it's, it's growing. Like I
mentioned Santa Teresa grew, but
not only Santa Teresa, Colombo,
the port of Columbus also grew,
it grew 20 26% on total trade
value that's including exports
and exports uh coming from the
US and Mexico.
Um, this explosive growth growth
sets them apart and as the
fastest growing ports in, in,
uh, the United States.
Um,
currently these are numbers for
2024, but currently for for uh
the year 2025, as many of you
might know, cattle crossing has,
has stopped uh on the imports
from Mexico to the United
States, hurting specially
Columbus because it, it's the
main commodity that crosses
through the port of Columbus,
but Santa Teres is the number
one port of the whole United
States North and so on the north
and southern border. So
right now after
the last month, so in July.
we started seeing a decrease
already on the total trade value
in New Mexico, around 9%.
Uh, that, that represents about
2.5 to 3 billion on, on just on
the on the cattle industry with
numbers still to be defined.
But re
even though with that not having
any cattle crossing through all
ports of entry we still, um, are
up there competing with the
other port of ports of entry of
of the region, especially in the
in El Paso region. El Paso has 4
port of entries, including the
Santa Teresa one, as many of you
may know, ridge of the Americas
is expected to close to
commercial traffic that that
bridged uh holds 600 trucks, uh,
daily crossing
s northbound and in about 2000
trucks crossing southbound.
But we, we are at this we have
this opportunity in 2 years that
bridge will be closed and we
have to take advantage of that
of that situation even though
it's not gonna be great for the
region. Southern New Mexico and
especially Donana depend on what
happens with El Paso and Ciad
Juarez. We're, uh, by not truly
by national um community that,
that depends on, on, on global
trade, as you know, with all the
chiefs that are happening on on
global politics, North America
is the
biggest blo uh economic bloc in
the world, Mexico, United
States, and Canada. Now Mexico
is the biggest trading partner
with the United States so we
investing in the border.
in Columbus, in Luna County,
Ialo County, Donana County,
Santa Teresa, Salmon Park is
very important that and that's
something that we come here to
ask, um, without strategic
investment in New New Mexico is
losing opportunities to other
states who are, uh, aggressively
investing the Rio Grande Valley
in Texas has gotten 5
presidential permits in the last
in the last 5 years. And, and
we, we don't need to ask for
presidential permits. We have
the presidential permits, but
we are, we are at the, at a
point where we can invest in our
port of entries to to attract
more trade to port of entries
and then do uh have economic
development.
If you switch to slide number 3,
you will have some of the uh
infrastructure projects that we
had, uh, we have on, on, on
Santa Teresa and Donana County.
Um, one of them being the border
highway connector, and there's a
a QR code that you can uh scan
and see all, all the details for
the project. It's a very, very
good project that will serve.
for the traffic that we might
attract from a bridge of the
Americas to cross and then have
a a a fastest access to El Paso
so and this will bring
development to Santa Teresa, to
Sunland Park, uh, have more
access for emergency vehicles to
the industrial park in Santa
Teresa. It will shorten times
for people that are working on
the industrial parks about 20 to
30 minutes, uh, up to 40 minutes
on, on commercial trucks on, on
the traffic, so it's, it's a
great project, not just for for
southern New Mexico
and but also for, for the whole
state.
um, on number 4, slide number 4,
you have the map of that um
alignment for the border highway
connector.
And then on slide number 5,
we have the New Mexico Bor
Authority, uh, projects that are
in in in in progress.
um, I wanna thank specially uh
the New Mexico Economic
Development Department through
the appropriation of border
planning and infrastructure in
infrastructure projects
appropriation we were able to
secure extra funding of 7.7
million to to complete some of
the projects that we have in the
border, including the, the
facultative wastewater plant in
Columbus that we, we will do
the, we will have the ribbon
cutting tomorrow and, and many
of, of our other projects, um
the Santa Teresa, uh, elevated
water tank right now it's at 35%
construction.
The New Mexico Border Authority
POV parking lot, it's a 90%
construction. The New Mexico War
Authority commercial parking
lot, um, the construction is set
to start early fall.
Uh, border have a connector
faces A, B, and CR completed and
phase two final design is a 95%
design.
The border hybrid connector
phase 2 study, which we have a,
a partnership with El Paso MPO,
um, they already did task Carter
one and and did the kickoff of
the project.
Uh, the Santa Teresa port of
entry, modernization feasibility
study, GSA finalized study, um,
but we haven't seen the study.
They, they haven't released that
study to 21 yet, um, for
we also have the Columbus
Faculty wastewater plan that is
completed that we will be doing
the ribbon cutting tomorrow
with, with you.
Uh, the Columbus flood control
project. That project is
probably the biggest project
that we have. It was, um, faced
into three phases, phase one,
it's under construction and it's
at 30%, uh, phase 3, the Luna
County has selected the, the
contractor and construction is
set to start, uh, this fall.
and for phase two, the design is
complete, but we have a
shortfall of around 9 to 10
million that we have.
that project is in collaboration
with Luna County. We're just a
fiscal agent for for that and
we, we, we're always in constant
communication with where the
county manager here, Chris Bryce
and his team and all the
leadership.
uh, this, this is totaling 8
projects of more than 50 million
with, if you count the border
hybrid connector when once it
goes into construction, that
project will be, uh, anywhere
from
it's around 190 million, 190
million.
And all of these if you turn now
to page 6, it's um, you will see
what we're asking, we're asking
for from you to support the
multi-agency collaboration that
we have between DOTor Authority,
DFA, Economic Development
Department.
uh prioritize or capital outlay
and infrastructure funding for
for uh
uh border projects
support legislation and finan
financing tools that enable
large scale border investments.
and I think uh Representative
Jones mentioned it investing in
the borders is strategic
investments support statewide,
uh, statewide trade, tax revenue
and job creation, while
enhancing New Mexico's global
competitiveness.
On slide 7,
several national vision of San
Geronimo and what's happening
on, on the other side of of of
of the border.
Um,
as you were aware, uh, some of
you that are were present at the
at the transportation
infrastructure revenue
subcommittee.
we had some of our, our Mexican
stakeholders, uh, Arica Zepeda
from uh Ministry of Foreign
Relations attended, uh, and all
the municipality of Ciudad
Juarez, the leadership was
there. They presented the
project that they have on the
other side of the project of the
border and everything that is
happening on, on, on Ciudad
Juarez that borders with with
Santa Teresa, then, uh, later at
the Legislative Finance
Committee, we have the Putao
Feral Alejandro Perezuellar, who
chairs the the northern
Northern Affairs Committee at
the Mexican uh Camaraiputals
Um, we we, all of this is with
the binational vision that we
have for the state.
on, on, on slide number 8.
uh I continue with, with the,
the shared getaway for the
binational growth and how Santa
Teres and San Geronimo. It's a
strategic priority for for the
state for the state of Chihuahua
as well and the Mexican federal
government and how and how we
should invest on this region.
They, they, the president
Claudia Shambaum just recently
announced a economic development
poll on San Geronimo on the
other side of the of of the
border. It's
about uh roughly a little bit
more than 100 acres with fiscal
inceptions from the federal
government to to do investments
on, on, on, on San Geronimo,
which is on the other side of,
of, of Santa Teresa.
um
uh, you would like to, to
continue building the corridor
of Santa Teresa and San
Geronimo, but also the Columbus
Palomas, um, corridor that,
that, that brings a lot of uh
jobs to the to New Mexico. We
also haveilloy walls or smallest
port, uh, we recently had
communication with Chihuahua to
find out uh about the, the gap
that they have on on their
highway of about 1 mile
Um, we received the the
technical information. We sent
it to the Putao Ferra Alejandro
Perez Square because we spoke to
him. I, I, we believe that if we
can get that part of being more
uh traffic to our port of entry
and with this, I would like to
uh, see if the chair or, or
Director Harvey wants, wants to
say something.
but I'd like to just
one of our largest projects, and
you heard that mentioned. Oh,
I'm so sorry. Yes.
Excuse me, please
um, chair, if I may, uh, I'd
like to address the shortfall on
one of the huge projects of the
Border Authority is working on,
and that's the Berm project.
It's a major project because we
have approximately 1800 acres
immediately north of the border
and the development that's going
to be taking place and is taking
place in Columbus at this time.
It's critically important that
we have the full funding for
that.
because everything depends on
that, so all the money spent at
this point absolutely goes to
waste if we're not able to get
the remaining amount of money.
We are going to the Water Trust
board. We're going to make an
application for that. We're
hopeful of that, but it's very
important that you all realize
that that needs to be finished.
It is, we have all worked for
many years in Columbus and
various different ways, uh, to
bring the activity there GSA
spent
about what, $84 million on the
uh state of state of um
state of the art, uh, land port
of entry over on the Mexican
side. They've done a wonderful
job with what they've done there
and we're all set to have some
wonderful things happen. We've
also dedicated on our side or
got approval about $200,000 to
do a cross-border logistics
study that board, that study
helps us pinpoint on both sides
of the border, the
infrastructure as well as uh
opportunities that that we can
use to move things forward
so obviously agriculture is very
important one for us, but
there's also manufacturing
opportunities, reshoring
opportunities and things that
can make a significant
difference. The people in Luna
County need this opportunity,
and we need your continued
support to do the things that we
need to do. We believe we know
in our hearts that we can
contribute greatly to this
state so your help, uh, is very
much appreciated as well as your
ear. Thank you all.
My name is Christianne Harvey.
Thank you. Yes, I'm commissioner
also serve obviously on the
Border Authority. I've been
appointed for about 3 years by
the governor. Thank you.
Chairman, do you want to add
anything?
Madam Chair, uh, no, thank you.
I, I think we're ready to take
questions if there are questions
from the members. Thank you.
And uh at transportation I, I
brought pictures so you can see
what it looks like down south in
Columbus when there's flooding
and there's no berm and I will
tell you I have pictures of the
burn which I pictured as these
big things of like at the, uh,
isotopes isotypes field in
Albuquerque and it was quite
different, so I encourage
everybody to go tomorrow on the
tour, which will not be at 2:30,
it'll be at 12:30 and with that
we'll go to uh Representative
Jones and Representative
Tarasses, Representative Block,
and Senator Ramos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for being here.
Appreciate you so much and all
the work you've done, especially
for, um, this sperm project, and
I, I feel like, you know, we've
said this over and over. There's
been a huge support for getting
this done, and I want to make
sure that the other committee
members are aware of what you've
both just spoken about 3-phase
project. 1st 1st phase is in
progress right now. The third
phase is totally paid for,
design, everything ready to go.
that second phase needs 9 to $10
million and if we don't get that
we lose all the the work that's
been done in phase one will
deteriorate.
The phase 3 money will go away.
It's just critical and, and the
reason that's important that is
there's so many things happening
on the border, um, and so many
possibilities, but if we don't
have that burn project that
prevents the flooding that
inevitably happens every year.
uh, not for long, but it, it's,
it's such a problem in the whole
area. We can't move forward. We
can't move forward with the
industrial part. We can't fully
um
experience all the benefits of
having a beautiful port that the
federal government has invested
in commercial uh 24 hour port,
commercial port, um, so I just
wanted to emphasize that and I
also wanted to take a bigger
perspective. I'm trying to be
short, be brief, but, but it's
so important, um, we've made a
trip down into Mexico. I've been
in touch with state Chihuahuan
state representatives met with
them, um, and
several other people as
stakeholders down in Mexico, um
the, uh, the governor of
Chihuahua is on board with with
developing the ports with New
Mexico, not just, you know, not
just Columbus and and Elobus,
but of course all three of our
ports San a trace as well,
they're ready to do business.
They're ready to expand and, and
they're working on their own
infrastructure in Mexico to make
sure that they have a way to
transport. They've got roads,
they've got everything they need
and they will go to Texas and
Arizona if
we don't move. It's, it, it
can't be stated enough that in
New Mexico I feel like one of
the things we do most often is
we
is we just, yeah, we just kind
of stall like, well, I'm not
sure about that. Maybe we'll
just slow walk that. We heard
that with Spaceport as well. We
need to move forward. This is,
it's huge. It's huge, not just
for us here in this part of New
Mexico, but for the entire
state, the entire country that
we move forward in developing
our ports, so that's my spiel,
Madam Chair. Thank you. Thank
you all.
OK, Representative Charazos,
thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna show, uh, Representative
Jones how to keep it short. I'm
totally kidding. I never do
that. I'm just joking. We're
good friends, you know, she's
just fighting for her district
and fighting for uh
I for a district, uh,
Representative Jones has, uh,
it's very, very valid what she
said, just teasing her as my
friend.
first question, uh, Madam Chair,
Colonia's funding wouldn't it
help with some of that? Have you
guys applied for Colonias to try
to help, uh, bridge that gap in
funding or
or are you just doing the one
application to the Water Trust
board.
concern
very.
At this time, Representative
Frazos, we are just submitting
to uh the Water Trust board.
Um, and just, Madam Chair,
recommend, I'm sorry, if I may
add that that's not the only
place we're seeking funding. Um,
we also had a meeting with the
North American Development Bank.
So NAtbank, um, so it's not
colonia's funding, but that does
have um available funding, some
with zero match, um, they're
actually grants, um, for water
and wastewater particularly, but
also for uh flood control which
does qualify and so we are kind
of readying other paths forward
if we're ultimately not succe
successful with the Water Trust
board.
and we're also not in a position
in January where we, where we're
looking for a capital outlay for
the entire 9 to 1010 million.
But in the event there is a gap
between water truss board or the
NAB Bank funding, um, we would
be potentially seeking capital
outlay and, and Madam Chair,
just quick question, is there a
reason that you wouldn't go to
the Colonnas.
Madam Chair, I believe, you
know, the primary reason would
be not to compete against some
of our other partners who are
also seeking that funding, um,
so traditionally the border
authority does, doesn't even see
capital outlay that is not, um,
sought by a local uh partner in
in along the border. That's
fair. And Madam Chair, the last
question I have is this I'm
gonna call this epidemic with
the screwworm that's keeping
cattle from coming across about
1.
$3 billion industry
that's on pause, right? Um
when did they see that uh that
will resume and how will that
happen?
Madam Chair Representative Te
Razas.
it's, it's a complex
uh uh
situation this is depending on
the advancement of Sannaica, the
agency in charge of, of, of the
Mexican, um, welfare of animals,
um, they have to show
advancement and reduction of of
the screw worm and but up until
now there's no signs of that, it
has moved a little bit forward
on to the to the northern part
of the country
which if you look at the map,
southern Texas, it's very close
to that part, so Mexican,
especially Chihuahua and Sonora,
um, uh, cattle growers
are, they have uh
covered their states Chihuahua
and Sonora have really good
genetics and they take really
good care of their animals and
they have mentioned to see if if
we can do something as a state
for them, but at this point it's
at at the federal level, it will
have to be USDA and Sennaica
coming to an agreement, um, but
there's no signs. Every the we
were expecting the opening day,
Secretary Rawlings had announced
the opening back in June and
then they just
the day they opened the next day
they closed, so it's, it's, it's
a matter of how good Mexican uh
authorities solve their problem
in in Mexico. So Madam Chair,
what I'm understanding is the
USDA US government basically
federal government is holding
Mexico accountable to, um,
importing good, uh, uh, healthy
beef, uh, that won't infest our,
our industries. Is that, am I
understanding that right?
Madam Chair Representative
Terazas, yes, um, it has to do
with covering and protecting
the, the, the US US ranchers and
cattle growers, um
and there's a lot of
cooperation. The United States
is investing, uh, they, they
used to, well they used to have
a plant in Mexico and Panama.
Now they're putting in uh
they're putting him back to
work. I believe there was an
appropriation from uh the
delegation of, of, of some uh
representatives in Washington to
do uh a new uh lab in Edinburgh,
Texas. So there's a lot of
cooperation between Mexico and
the United States and in both
countries. USD
A currently has some staff in
Mexico doing field uh operations
regarding the screworm as well.
OK, that's all, ma'am. I just
wanted to see when that was
going to resume. It sounds like
it's still in delay. Thank you,
ma'am. Madam Chair, if I may,
Representative Tarasa's, um, I
think the last part of what
Gerardo uh just mentioned
there's going to be a $750
million investment in a facility
to breed a sterile screw worms
as part of the solution for
this. There was New Mexico was
not even part
of the conversation for that.
Uh, we have the largest cattle
crossing along the US-Mexico
border. The cattle industry is
important here, but because of
our lack of infrastructure and
our lack of
development along the border. We
weren't even, you know, kind of
in that conversation and so when
we're here talking about the
need to kind of build up
infrastructure and expand kind
of the border authority, right?
A $577,000 flat budget that
we're trying to to kind of
advance, you know, initiatives
on the border. This is a great
example of kind of how we're
missing opportunities, um, on a
regular basis, so I just wanted
to kind of mention that. Yeah,
Madam Chair, I think that
happens a lot in New Mexico.
Penny pinchers, doll
ar wasters. That's what I call
them, but thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Blanc.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Hopefully, I beat my colleague's
time. I know he's very lengthy,
but he was very quiet and, uh,
so I'm, I'm going to go pretty
long here, but Madam Chair,
first question, I know that
right outside of Santa Teresa,
there is a Foxconn facility, and
I know that they make, I think
it's Navidia chips. I don't know
what else they make, but I'm
wondering with certain kinds of
changes when it comes to
production. How much production
is going on at that facility and
then
how much is coming through the
sanitary support of entry or
even the Columbus port of entry.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, yes, Foxconn is on the
other side of the Santa Teresa
port of entry, um, they, they
did not make uh Media chips.
They build computers there,
especially Dell computers. Um
it is on when you look at the
total trade value, I don't have
the the the the presentation
with me, but I can make it
available. Um, when you look at
the commodities that crosses the
cross through uh Santa Teresa.
Most of the it's it's a, it's
the most uh valuable trade to
com commodity there for exports
is computer parts, chips, and
then for exports is uh built
computers and phones, uh,
roughly about 70 to 80%
depending on the month on, on
the of the total trade value
that that's what's gonna take
from from Foxconn's.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and so
have you had any conversations
with their plans, their future
plans for that facility? And is
it going to grow or are they
expecting a steady?
output of any kinds of
production, Madam Chair, I don't
know if anyone has the answer to
that.
So, so, Madam Chair, our
Representative Block, um, just
to go back and add a little bit,
so Navidia chips are being put
into GPUs in Juarez, um, not at
that particular Foxconn, uh,
locations. I just wanted to, to
make that clear.
Um, and then I'd also say, um,
Foxconn has actually expanded
recently, um, so they expanded
and have essentially um new
buildings that are available for
increased production, uh, but
those plans have been
essentially put on
old as a reevaluate the impacts
of the tariffs and um the
upcoming um
renegotiation of the USMCA, um,
agreement, and so, uh, you know,
they, they started down a road
and and expanded and then right
now uh the productionist study,
a study, as Gerardo mentioned, a
large part of the impact or the
numbers you see and the value is
because we are having, um,
servers for Meta and other
places crossing at Santa Teresa
that are made not by Foxconn,
by, by other companies and then
also again there's um Dell
computers um.
and tablets, etc. that are, are,
you know, steadily crossing at
Santa Teresa.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that answer. So,
and then going forward with
other kinds of things, uh.
I always see windmills, windmill
blades coming up the highway,
especially in 285, whenever I'm
I'm going to Santa Fe for a
session or whatever. I always
see these
giant
caravans. And so I'm wondering,
is that a steady flow of those
blades? Is that something that's
going to continue going? Is it
going past New Mexico to another
state because I know we have a
few projects in the state that
are building, so I'm just
wondering when it comes to that,
is that something we can see
continually in the future, or is
it more of a one-off thing for a
specific projects in the region.
Madam Chairman
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, yes, it's a steady flow
and not only they do cross their
their stage in Santa Teresa.
and they have a a a big jar with
a lot of inventory and then they
start chipping either north,
west, east.
um, it's worth mentioning what
uh
Chair de la Rosa was saying the
we're the only port of entry in
the region that can hold uh
uh oversized and overweight.
Uh, but even the, even the, the,
the upgrades that were made in
the in the in the US um port of
entry in Santa Teresa were made
by TPI, the, the owner of the of
of the of the wind blades they
did the investment there through
the through the donations
acceptance program with CBP to
to be able to accommodate the,
the wind blades so it's, it just
shows how or part
of entry, we like to call our
little port of entry that can
citing um Miram backup from
Techma who is one of the biggest
users of the port of entry.
Thank you.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, I, I
do need to disclose
Representative Block, um, that
the company TPI composites,
which is actually manufacturing
those, um, did file for Chapter
11 bankruptcy and is
restructuring. I, I, I just fact
checked, so I, I just wanted to,
to make sure that it was clear
that they are going through
restructuring, but there is
still a significant amount of
inventory. Again, part of that
has to do with um the impact of
tarists, quite frankly. So if
you just do a search on job loss
Maquila Industries, Ciudad
Juarez, um, you'll see that
there's been a significant, um,
kind of reduction there, um, you
know, I just know what I see in
the media, um, but I, but I can
say, um, you know, New Mexico is
fortunate though that in the
wind production, you know,
sphere.
Now we do have the GD GE uh
Vernova Arcosa winds, um, uh,
turbine operation that's in
Valencia County and is um up in
full swing and is moving uh
equipment out to Sunzia, and so
there is, um, I think some gonna
be some continued growth in that
area, but we are watching
closely to see what happens with
TPI in Juarez.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that. And I think
a lot of the tariffs I
I haven't seen
what the newest tariffs are, but
I do know that they're, they're
supposed to be strategic in the
way that we get reciprocal trade
with the United States, which,
which I hope, and I, I hate to
put, wanna put you guys out of
business, so to speak. But I
would love to see more American
jobs even in New Mexico building
such things as wind turbines and
putting together computers and
things. So I think that would be
a good thing to move forward to,
but I actually had a question
next about we talked a little
bit about the
the Bridge of the Americas, on
the El Paso area side. I know
that they're doing renovations,
I believe, is that I believe
that's the current status of
that entry point. So I'm
wondering
do we know what timeline we're
looking forward to on that
because I know it's temporary,
it's not like we're going to
close it permanently. What does
that look like timeline-wise?
When will they begin the project
and when do you expect it to
end, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, the timeline is set to
start on uh May 2027.
and then full closure on May 20
or full construction, sorry, on
May 2028.
um
it's an investment of about 800
million, so they will remodel
the whole port of entry. They're
not gonna do anything to the
bridge itself, but it's a port
of entry, but they, they are
gonna eliminate eliminate uh
commercial traffic, so they're
gonna take out all the trucks
from the uh bora northbound and
southbound.
permanent
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
then do we, what do we expect
percentage-wise, the flow of
traffic to be at Santa Teresa
after that closure of
commercial.
Do we expect it to grow like by
150%. I mean, what kind of
resources will we need at our
point of port of entry for Santa
Tedesa when that does happen. Do
we, do we have any kind of
figures or guesses on what that
will be like, Madam Chairman.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, um, there's not a a a
full study of what's gonna be
the impact currently the El Paso
Metropolitan Planning
Organization is, it's trying to
run models of what's gonna
happen. The the only thing that
we do now is 600 trucks to 700
trucks cross northbound.
every day and about 20 2000
trucks cross southbound every
day.
In my, my, just my personal
opinion, I think we can get
about 30% of the northbound
traffic.
the southbound traffic is a
little bit more complicated, uh,
but, uh
that's just my, my personal
opinion on what we expect. I
don't know if
I just add about
strategic study.
Yes, yes.
So, and also the, the, the El
Paso Metropolitan Planning
Organization is currently doing
an IBC which is International
Border Crossing, uh, strategic
Plan where um the state is
participated on, on, on that
it's, it's uh and it's
being done by all the
stakeholders of the Paso
Metropolitan Planning
Organization where Santa Teresa
and Sunland Park are part of the
El Paso Metropolitan area.
Uh, that will give us that just
just uh started about a month
ago. It's gonna take
up to one year or even 2 years
to have a 3 plan
to do the investments on the
port of entries that that we
need, uh, and by then we will
have the full uh analysis of, of
the impact that is gonna create
on on the rest of the portal of
entries.
Great, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you all for the
answers. And it's just really
interesting to me to see how the
different flows of traffic can
be redirected when something
happens or when they make a a
change like that. So hopefully
the state comes out on top when
it comes to that change, even
though it's not necessarily
meant to benefit us specifically
30% is significant. So I would
just love to see that study
whenever you have it. And thank
you all so much for being here
and, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
I think that's all I had.
Senator Ramos and then
Representative Kates, Madam
Chair, and uh
board, I, I really appreciate
y'all coming in, coming in here
in front of us today um
the Columbus port is in my
district, and I know I'm very
biased, but I truly feel that if
we have a strong port, we have a
strong Columbus, then we have a
strong Luna County which makes
our state a lot stronger and we
got to do everything we can to,
to do everything that's feasible
on our side to make things well.
Um, the BE project is, I think a
is huge for us and we've got to
do everything we can to make
that come true, but on the flip
side, how is the infrastructure
on the
Mexico side and what are they
doing to prepare for the America
sport to uh shutting down or not
letting these trucks through
their port. What are they doing
on their side? Are we looking at
a catastrophe on their side?
What, what are we doing or what
talks are you all having with
them for the preparation of the,
of the big trucks not being able
to come through the America
side.
Madam Chair, Senator Ramos, so
the Mexican federal government
right now through ANAM, which is
the equivalent of CBP. They have
a, a, a master plan for the
modernization of San Geronimo,
so the
the facility on the Mexican side
of Santa Tere of Santa Teresa,
they're looking to modernize
that port of entry
Also, uh, Ciudad Juarez is, is,
is, is looking and has uh plans
to invest on, on roadways to, to
facilitate the, the, the truck
traffic out of Ciudad Juarez out
to Santa Teresa or Tornillo,
which are the two other port of
entries that are on the outside
of the of the metropolitan area,
uh, and that's just the
investments that both, um, I
mean, Ciudad Juarez, the state
of Chihuahua, and the Mexican
federal government are looking
to do on uh on the on their side
regarding infrastructure.
Madam Chair and board, what,
what, what's being looked at on
the Columbus side then? I mean,
we're looking at Americas, we're
looking at Santa Teresa what are
we doing to attract more traffic
through the Columbus port of
entry.
Madam Chair, Senator Ramos, for,
for Columbus and this was a
request also from from the mayor
of Columbus, Mayor Skinner, to
include the, the, the IBC study
to include Columbus and uh
Palomas on that, uh, uh, IBC
strategic plan, which is
important due to the fact that
when uh the contingencies on the
El Paso del Norte region
happened with uh with Texas
doing
uh the extra inspections for
trucks, some of that traffic,
uh, got to Columbus. The
Columbus Port of entry, it's,
it's on an ecosystem of its own,
but when it really when it goes
really, really bad on the Paso
Norte region some traffic
explores the option of going
through Columbus and uh Palomas,
Puerto Palomas, um
we, we have to be prepared, yes,
we need to talk to ANA and CBP
to be able to accommodate the,
the, the commodities that
normally flow on this region
than on that region that don't
flow through this region because
that at the end of the day
becomes a a problem if they're,
if
they normally don't cross
computers through here that
becomes a problem but that's
something that we need to speak
with ANA and CBP to be for them
to be able to facilitate that
trade here, uh, the Columbus
port of entry is, is, is fairly
new. It was recently, uh,
modernized the Mexican side has
been doing improvements, um, but
on infrastructure, uh,
transportation, roadways,
they're lacking uh a little bit
of infrastructure, um, and
I think that's something that we
have to talk with them regarding
a border border master plan for
transportation.
Uh, Madam Chair and board, I,
uh,
I know the Bern project is super
important for us and once we
complete the BE project, then we
can create more infrastructure
on our side, and I believe
industrial coolers are mentioned
and I think that's just gonna be
a huge step for us in in the
Columbus area if we can do that.
So I, I just want you to keep
fighting for for the Columbus
Port of entry. I think that's
gonna be a great revenue stream
for the, for the area and for
the state and I, I think, uh,
we, we need to just come
together and, and, uh, and make
sure that we get this berm
completed.
Um, I, I think, uh, we gotta
make sure that we go and talk to
the finance committee and make
sure that they understand how
important it is for Southwest
New Mexico and the and and the
state of New Mexico, um, uh,
just by having that berm fixed
and, and creating the uh new
industry in, in that area and
and the new jobs and I think
it's just a, a, a good trickle
effect if we could get things
done, uh, once we get that perm
done. So thank you so much and I
appreciate your present
ation and I appreciate what you
do. I know it's not easy, um,
dealing with, with, uh, what you
all deal with on both sides and,
and they're trying to gather all
the information for us and uh so
I thank you all for what you do.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Kates and then
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you again for your
presentation. I know that we are
like a half hour behind, so of
course I'm gonna ask a lot of
questions, but I don't expect
you to answer them so
thoroughly. You can answer them
off Mark. So, um, I'm very much
in support of, of this project
and and Santa Teresa as well as
Columbus. I understand the
economic impact it would have,
but I need to answer uh
questions regarding on
how because I have not heard in
this presentation, how are you
managing your increased need for
water in the area. So with
these, with, with the berm, with
construction, you not only have
uh a great deal of construction
water that you're using. Are you
using reclaimed water, using
potable water, um, with the
construction, you're gonna end
up with more groundwater and
stormwater management that needs
to be recaptured. Are you
treating it?
Are you diverting it to a
reservoir or a river or
reinjecting it into the aquifer
and where are you getting your
new increase of water as you
build and expand the area. Thank
you.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Kates, um, so the
Columbus Bur project
specifically um started as a
complex drainage study uh back
about 20 years ago. Um, that
water, uh, that community is
built on a dry lake bed, so the
flooding is actually water that
wants to go to a lake in Mexico
on the other side of Palomas,
and so with the International uh
boundary and Water Commission,
IBWC, the Army Corps of
Engineers, you know, as a very
comp
lic ated process to even get
approvals for the berm because
we can't retain that water
actually in New Mexico and in
the US, um, even the retention
basins which need, I think, to
be rehabbed. Um, they're under a
designed in conjunction with
that new port of entry design,
so they're not functioning the
way they need to, but the short
answer is that water needs to go
to Mexico and this project uh
facilitates that regarding the
construction water, and I don't
know if Mr. Bryce is here, um,
because he's more involved in
the
uh, day to day, but I can say
that, um, you know, water is
readily available um in that
area. That's not to say that we
should, you know, I think just
be using groundwater
just because it is available,
uh, but water is, is available
in Columbus on the Santa Teresa
side, um, we're also, um, the
Arrowhead folks in Center for
Border Economic Development.
They were here earlier, have
done a comprehensive analysis of
the water needs and water
availability to support both
growth and um uh residential
development there, so both
industrial, commercial, and
residential, and, um, we're
putting together plans to make
sure that there is strategy
regarding land use and the
protection of those resources.
as we do pursue development.
Thank you so much. That was a
great answer. Can you go a
little what, since you said you
have sufficient amounts of water
for the given planned expansion
where is that water coming from?
Is it aquifer? Is it a well? Is
it a, a, a river
So Madam Chair, Representative
Kate so in particular in Santa
Teresa, um, right now it's, um,
groundwater, so a guy named
Charlie Crowder, uh, back in
1985, um, secured 110,000 acre
feet of water, um, for the Santa
Teresa area, which over the past
40 years, um, has been, um, you
know, somewhat reduced, uh, but
there still are available uh
water resources there, so that's
groundwater from uh the aquifer
in that area.
Um, most of the development of
Santa Teresa is far from the
river, so it's not on the river
and so it's up on a mesa and so
it's uh that uh regarding that,
and then we are partnered with
NMSU and looking at um
uh the potential for
desalination and and the use of
brackish water. There's an
immense, uh, brackish a uh
aquifer below the, in the deep
uh kind of surface, uh, below
the surface in this area, which
is estimated to have, I think,
9400 years
of water availability based on
what, what I saw recently, um,
and it's worth exploring because
El Paso, our neighbors in the
border plex uh currently have
the largest inland water desal
plant in the world, right? So
they have folks coming from
Dubai and all over the Middle
East to come and see how they're
doing. Do you sell responsibly
there because they also have a,
a, a method where they take the
minerals and the kind of
leftover stuff from the Dal and
are able to use that product,
um.
you know, for other uses. So
we're, we're coordinating all of
that, I think for the first time
and the border Authority with
the economic development
department has been at the lead
in hiring those experts to start
to develop that strategy in
conjunction with other things
like, um, you know, strategic
water supply in some of the
statewide initiatives. So I can
say for the first time I think,
uh, in my 20 years of working on
the border, um, we're trying to
be really smart and strategic
about how we use water and
establish the different um
resources and um secure and
sustain them.
Uh, uh, thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that, and it does
sound very much so that you are
understanding that there's a
vast enough amount of answers
that have to be always explored,
um, and, uh, and knowing that we
have that opportunity of the
largest desalinization plant you
so close to El Paso I'm, I'm
glad we're communicating with
them, thinking, uh, so, so it
sounds to me like we've
purchased water rights.
over since the 80s. Um, uh,
we're looking at desalinization.
Uh, we currently have enough
feet in the aquifer to address
those issues, and that's what
we're using currently also
during this construction period.
Is that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, that's mostly
correct, yes. I mean, there are
some other water that comes from
trucks, you know, it's trucked
in from different places and so
on, but that's not thank you
very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Representative Roy Buck Carvedo,
thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative Kates
for the line of questioning. I
was along that same
um, line of questioning.
However, in your answers, I just
wanted to make sure that I add
my concern that I've stated in
previous committee I can't
remember what committee but we
were at NMSU, um, we've been
traveling quite a bit, uh,
listening to, uh, our
constituentcies around the
state. So pardon me if I don't
remember which committee, but my
concern is with the use of
brackish water. We've still not,
the science is not completely
developed. So a cautionary note
there that as you explore um the
strate how strategically you're
going to use water and using
your words, um, how we're going
to use water that you also keep
in mind that for future
generations, we want to continue
to protect our, our future
generations, our children, and
so we need to ensure that
everything that we do explore,
that we do put into our
strategic plans, Madam Chair,
um,
keep that in mind. So the use of
BRCA brackish water still is,
um, a majority of it is still
unknown. The science is still
unknown. However, what we do
know to this point is that it's
not the best use. So I just
offer that. Another
precautionary note, Madam Chair,
is that I'm obviously from the
border and from Las Cruces, El
Paso area grow up. That's my
this is my homelands. Welcome to
my homelands, by the way, um, so
I
' m very familiar with how the
border has developed. I've been
part of the border legislator
group in the past, so we've had
exchanges, um, very good
exchanges with Mexico and the
border um states along with us
in the development of where you
are now. So I just wanted to, to
state that, but as we um
continuing to develop in this
um area of um federal unknowns
I would uh say another
precautionary note that if we're
going to continue to enhance our
border development, particularly
along the Columbus Palomas port
of entries, we need to also keep
in mind that we have to have a
plan in place to protect our
workforce against um uh targeted
raids that we've been
experiencing that
not only are affecting our, um,
undocumented, but more
importantly, affecting our
citizenry, uh, because they're
targeted based on color of skin,
so I just caution that um we
keep that in mind because in
addition to our, our enthusiasm
and as we want to accelerate our
border development, we need to
make sure that our workforce is
apprised of the rights, apprised
of the
uh of
the environment and the ambiente
for lack of a better word, and
how we're going to set up
guardrails to protect, uh, them,
should we, um, or should they
experience any type of um,
unintended consequences based on
our development projects. That's
all, Madam Chair. That's all I
wanted to say. Thank you.
Thank you.
I have a couple of questions um
on that 10 million burn
so have we talked to the
governor about her Capitol
outlay.
Madam Chair, yes
because I know, I mean, I were
I give money myself, but I have
sail del Nortina Trisco Vista,
which, you know, swallows up 2
million every year right there.
So, OK, she, well, we don't know
yet, but she's open.
Madam Chair, yes, so I think the
direction was for us to explore
all of the available avenues for
funding which we are doing, and
then we will see where that, um,
where we end up
like, OK, so let's do our
prayers
and
whatever it takes. OK, what
about the 45 million that was
federal money for the border
highway connector.
Uh, how's that going? I
understand.
we're at our breaking point.
Madam Chair, um, the deadline to
obligate that um funding is
right around the corner, so I
believe that's next, um, or
actually it's this week on
Friday. Um, what I can say is
that, um,
the governor's office, Secretary
Serna
and I believe even conversations
with um, you know, members of
the legislature on kind of
funding have been taking place
and correspondence, um, was is
either going to be submitted or
was submitted, um, outlining,
um, a plan to preserve that $45
million and meet the obligation
um deadline. Um, those
conversations are happening both
locally here in New Mexico, but
also I'm in Washington DC, um,
and from what I understand, the
last update I received, um, it
looks like we will
be able to keep the $45 million
contingent upon, um, you know, a
proposal to get the balance in
funding, which I think we
discussed in more detail with
Secretary Serna at uh Tears uh.
uh, you know, a little while ago
was that a month or 2 months.
It's like yesterday. Long two
months seems like yesterday, but
I know I've seen you like twice
in the last month, um, OK, my
third question, what was my
third question?
Um
on these commissions, the New
Mexico Chihuahua. I asked this
every time and it's Laura knows
and the New Mexico Sonora
commission. How are those
functioning? I mean, there's a
list of like 15 things they
should be talking about. Are
those commissioned discussions
happening?
Madam Chair, uh, the actual
commission as plenary for both,
uh, Chihuahua and Sonora,
haven't happened, as you know,
uh, last year where we had
elections in the United States
and the change of the
administration, but also the
Mexican federal government had
elections.
that uh for the Mexican federal
government. I know this is at
the state level, but um
with, with all that happening
elections, change of the
administrations, uh, specialist
their Chihuahua and Sonora. They
were um
experiencing a lot of changes
through their administrations
and their relationships with the
Mexican, uh, federal government.
um
we are working to, to bring them
back in place, uh, we might
start with doing the work tables
um.
this was it this year, uh, that
Secretary Rob Black and
Secretary Luss Fernandez met for
the first time, um, just a year
ago in October, uh, both
governors, Marigenia Campos and,
and Governor Michel Luhanriam,
uh, met in Mexico City during
the President Chambao's
inarration. So their
relationships starting to build
the momentum is starting to to
come into play. So we're working
to
start with the work tables and
then see if if we can make the,
the plenary sessions for the
commissions to happen.
I don't know if you want to add
something
Sure. Yes, madam Chair, I would,
I would just, um, you know, add
that in addition to just the
economic Development Secretary,
I know, um, the tourism
secretary, um, acting secretary
Adams has also had
uh conversations and discussions
with his counterpart, as has um
workforce Development Secretary
Nair. She's also, I think
recently had an announcement on
a workforce kind of proposal
that was joined um with her
counterparts in Mexico.
That's great news, and I just
want to say, especially for some
of our members who are sitting
over there eating or getting
food, um, Representative Blanc.
I had a discussion at the
Legislative Finance Committee
with its chief economist Susy
Romero and I asked him about the
impact of tariffs, and it's
important for us to realize that
it's not just about how the
tariffs affect manufacturing in
Mexico. It's directly affected
senator Teresa with people not
locating or not being able to
keep a commitment at this time
because of uncertainty and so I
think we all need to realize
that the uncertainty, I mean, I
checked my email, did the
tariffs changed in the last
hour, you know, a lot of stuff
did happen in the last hour, by
the way.
But, um, so that uncertainty is
really troubling and really
paralyzing and, and making it
difficult. So I think it's
important to understand. And the
other thing I think we need to
remember which some leaders
don't remember is
for hundreds of thousands of
years there's been no border.
and in our region of Mexico and
New Mexico, um, with families we
The board to come to school in
Columbus every day. They're
actually Americans living in,
uh, Palomas, and so here in our
state, I think the fact that we
can celebrate the relationship
it's really vital without
bigotry, without just we're one
family across the border and I
think you, all of you who see
that vision and are working to
implement policies, legislation,
and things that support
everybody beyond.
a border which, you know, birds
certainly.
don't honor. So thank you for
all you do.
Yes.
Anything else you wanna say?
So Madam Chair, I, I do, um, I'm
just going to mention this very
briefly, um, this evening at
Sunland Park down on the border,
there is a community meeting at
5:30. The Donana Community
College, um, Sunland Park
campus, uh, we're members of the
company's uh Borplex, digital
assets that I think you heard
from before at maybe Alicey or
at tears, um
regarding something called
Project Jupiter
which uh could be the largest
uh investment in the state of
New Mexico, um, they're
proposing $165 billion which is
a combination of data centers
and um some accompanying
infrastructure
Um, I just wanted to mention
that because you are on the
border, you may get questions
from folks in the community or
um from some of your colleagues
and, and other elected officials
and it would be odd if I didn't
mention that since it is
happening today and it's been
very much in the news. They've
been spending a lot of my time,
um, kind of working on that and
so I just wanted to kind of
mention uh that and if there are
any questions I can
take those or rants or offline
and make myself available so.
thank you.
Thank you. And with that, we
will actually have a break until
1:30. Uh, legislators, please
come back promptly at 1:30.
Thank you so much.
