OK, attention, we have 3 or 4
legislators that we just are
missing profoundly. I sell
mporopada em peza la tarde.
Our first action is to prove the
minutes, so we really need our
quorum at the table.
Yeah, first sort of business is
to prove the minutes from our
last meeting. Do I hear a
motion? So move, Madam Chair.
OK, we have a motion to move
them by Senator Patilla,
seconded by Representative Royal
Caballero. Is there anybody who
objects to approving the
minutes.
which you've had to read for a
week.
Hey, see no objection. The
minutes are approved.
OK, so our first, uh,
presentation now is a report
from the colonia Infrastructure
Board, which several people
mentioned in the last
presentation, and we have
Marquita Russell, our our CEO of
the New Mexico Finance Authority
and Priscilla Lucero, the
executive director of the
Southwest New Mexico Council of
Governments, also known as COG.
OK, and please begin.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
we'll be talking through just
some highlights on a
presentation that's been passed
out to you. And then I think,
you know, I'm really happy to be
sitting, uh, aside Priscilla
today. You have heard from the
colonius Infrastructure Board
since its inception in 2011. Uh,
this is the first time you've
heard from a non-voting member,
an advisory member of the
committee, um, who frankly
understands these colonias I
think far better than most board
members are able to given our
other jobs that we do. So I
think you're going to
learn a lot today from, uh, Ms.
Lucero, and I'm really pleased
to sit here with her, uh, just
to kind of pick up that last
thread or the thread from the
last presentation, um, the
border authority, I do not
believe is a qualified entity
under the colonius, which is one
of the reasons they would not
have gotten funding from that,
uh, from that board. Um, I know
that one time they did get
funding, but that was through a
shave off of the appropriation
to the colonia, so they sort of
went around the colonious board,
shaved off the money and got the
project
funded through that mechanism,
but they can't themselves apply
for funding. Um, and then just,
uh, as a total aside, Madam
Chair, the, um, uh, highway, the
border highway connector project
is something that the finance
authority is, uh, considering
right now. Tomorrow there's a
special meeting to consider an
interim solution to that
financing so they can keep that
federal grant in place. So by
the end of the week, the
Department of Transportation
should have that obligation
locked up, um,
if all goes as expected. So I
if all goes as expected. So
wanted to part those two
highlights from, uh, just that
last meeting.
I'll be speaking from, um, what
turns out to be an 11 page
presentation on 16 pages, so
there are 5 duplicates. I don't
know how that happened, but
Madam Chair, we have 5
duplicates, so I'll be skipping
the interim part of it. It's
just because they're simply
duplicated, um, but it gives you
a very broad overview of the
colonia's infrastructure Act and
the kinds of things that we can
fund from that and then we'll
turn it over, I think, to
questions and, um, and
observations from Priscilla if
we could. Um, so the colonia
Infrastruc
ture Act was created, was, was
established in 2010 and the
first funding cycle was in 2011.
It was really created in the
likeness of the Water Trust
Board. It's got a, a, a
dedicated percentage of the
severance tax bonds, similar to
the Water Trust Board and the
tribal Infrastructure Board. Um,
the purpose of the program is to
provide funding to those areas
that have historically lacked
critical infrastructure, um,
lack of potable water, lack of
adequate sewage systems, lack of
decent, safe, and sanitary
housing. These are communities
that have a population of 25,000
or less are located within 150
miles of the US-Mexico border
and have been in existence as a
colonia since November of 1990.
Now, I'll note that that doesn't
mean they had to be designated
prior to 1990, but they had to
have those conditions in place
prior to 1990.
Um, the Act allows for funding
to be used for water,
wastewater, solid waste, roads,
housing, and flood control.
Um
on page 3, the
I'll just give you some
high-level overview of the last
14 application cycles. Again, we
started our first application
cycle, uh, was opened in 11 and
funded in 12, uh, 2012. We have,
um, made
uh, well, I'll update this
number for you. We've made 399
awards, um, because we, we're,
well, we will have by next week,
make another 5, because we'll do
2 funding cycles this year. Um,
so, but the total amount of uh
awards that are expected to be
made after next week is $361
million. Um, and that's a
significant amount of money uh
for the community, uh, in the
southern part of the state.
Um, I will take you to page 4
just to go over who the water
who the colonies infrastructure
board is. It's comprised of 12
members, 7 of whom are voting,
and that includes Secretaries of
DFA and, uh, the Environment
Department. It includes, uh, me.
I currently serve as the
secretary, uh, of the, of the
colonius Infrastructure Board.
There are 4 members that are
appointed by legislative
leaders, um, the, the one, the
member
that was appointed by, uh, the
Senate pro tem was is Mary Kay
Pain. She currently serves as
the chair, um, when we meet next
week, she's, um, suggested that
she does no longer feels like
she wants to be the chair. So
there will be a new chair coming
next week. The minority leader
of the Senate has appointed
Janice Baca Argebrite. She's the
woman that you heard from last
year on this presentation.
Speaker of the House presented
uh Jose Luis Suguera Segura and
the minority leader of the house
at one time had appointed, um,
Rebecca Dow, who then after
becoming a member of, uh, the
House of Representatives is no
longer able to serve in that
capacity. So we still have a
vacancy in that area. There are
5 advisory non-voting members.
Um, they are the executive
directors of the Three cogs that
covered the colonius, uh,
counties. So Jahar Mijo from the
South Central Council of
Governments, uh, Ms. Lucero from
the Southwest New Mexico Council
of Governments and Dora Battista
from the southeast
er n New Mexico Economic
Development District, and then
we had the county's represented
as well as the uh mortgage
Finance Authority or Housing New
Mexico, however you'd like to
put that.
Page 5, again, we are, we, the
Finance Authority is staffed to
the Colonia's Infrastructure
Board and we had administer the
fund that was created under that
program. Uh, we have set up the
program again since it was
created in the likeness of the
Water Trust Board. We created
our processes and our systems in
the same manner as the Water
Trust Board. So the, uh, board
has a policy committee and a
project review committee, uh,
the policy committee looks at
the policies and the the cri
ter ia that we use to prioritize
projects, um, and the project
review committee vets all the
recommendations to the board,
but all the decisions are made
at the board level. The board
has to meet at least quarterly.
Typically we meet 6 times a
year. This year, I think we may
meet 7.
and I think that's really the
important part of that. Oh, and
that we have policies that
govern all of their activities
as well as um project management
team members from, uh, agencies
such as Department of
Transportation, the Environment
Department.
um
we have,
uh, page 6 again, just very
high-level because the the
pardon me, the colonies's
infrastructure Board is not,
doesn't actually govern the
fund, it just makes
recommendations to the board.
There are clear differences
between what the colonious
Infrastructure Board does and
the New Mexico Finance Authority
does, and it gets kind of blurry
since everything really comes
through the Finance Authority
staff, but the duties of the
board are to promulgate rules,
um, to accept and evaluate
applications
and to make recommendations to
the NMFA. So they set policy,
they prioritize projects, they
look at project reconsideration.
So if there's a project that
that has to get changed as a
result of either some
engineering issue or another
unanticipated issue, the
colonius Infrastructure Board
reviews that, um, and they also
see oversee a project management
team. Those are typically
members of, um, as I said
earlier, Environment department,
uh, Department of Transportation
are the two big ones
NMFA provides the staff support.
We administer the project fund.
We do all the reviews and eva
evaluations from a financial
perspective of the applications.
So the water the colonia port
I'm gonna be talking about Water
Trust board later, so I have it
very much present on my mind.
Um, so the colonius board will
prioritize projects that are
important to the community and
the finance authority that
structures and makes those
awards, um, and
ultimately
uh, most of us are occurring as
both a grant, uh, and a loan,
90% grant, 10% loan for all the
projects that appeared before
the colonius.
Um, an eligible project under
the, on page 7, is a capital
outlay project selected by the
board for financial assistance.
That's that grant loan. That's
primarily to develop colonious
infrastructure and may include
water, wastewater, solid waste,
flood drain, flood and drainage
control, roads and housing, but
does not include general
operations and maintenance. It
doesn't include housing
allowance payments or mortgage
subsidies, nor, uh, equipment. I
mentioned that because there's
uh when it comes to housing in
particular, we can only bring
really the, um, pipe
um the up to the generally
speaking, up to the uh property
line. There are some instances
in which the property, the pipe
can go further to the house. We
haven't really done that yet,
um, but that, that is a
possibility under the law.
And then lastly, as we mentioned
earlier, eligibility for
applicants includes uh county
municipality or a political
subdivision of the state.
With that, I will turn you to
pages go to the money pages, um
and I will actually turn you to
page 14.
Um
and that is just an overview of
the 2025 cycle. The colonia
Infrastructure Board this year
had $51.2 million to award.
That's from the severance tax,
um, uh, earmark.
At its May 15th meeting, they
made 32 awards totaling $51
million.
Um
yes, $51 million
for applicants had submitted a
total of 11 applications could
not be considered for awards
because they didn't meet
regulatory compliance. So you'll
note 4 applications, 11, 4
applicants for 11 applications.
So one of those had, I think, 7
applications all on their own.
Um, so the coloniusport extended
the deadline to August 8th for
those four applicants, um, and
eventually, one of the
applicants withdrew its
application, um, well,
they they withdrew 6 of their 8
applications and, uh, the next
week the board will consider the
additional 5 awards of
$3,550,000. So at the point at
which that's all done, we'll
have made 37 awards from $60
million.
Uh, we actually have, um
an additional $20 million that
will be made available after
those awards are completed. So I
apologize. It looks like there's
an error on the first page. The
actual amount of money that's
available is
$86 million for the fiscal year
25 cycle. So 51 is what we
awarded in May. I apologize for
that oversight. 86 million
approximately. So we will end up
with $20 million that is unused
and available for other uses in
the colonious Infrastructure
Board. That is the first time
that has ever happened, and I
think a couple of things that
happened. The amount of money
has been increasing at such a
pace, um, that, that colonial
communities have not been able
to really develop their projects
in time for those applications,
um, and the other is that the,
what's now law but had been the
executive order, um, is
something that the board takes
very seriously and if you are
not able to complete projects
timely if you can't, uh, meet
the executive order that doesn't
put you in a position for
additional funding. So one of
our largest applicants this year
pulled back because they had
other awards that they had not
yet fully utilized, so we didn't
see as many applications from
Donana County. We had a
couple, as I mentioned earlier,
11 applications, uh, from those
four applicants who couldn't
meet their executive order, but
there were others who never even
tried to apply because they knew
they wouldn't be in a position
to do that. So it's, it's not
that there isn't a need for the
funding, but this year was an
unusual scenario where we just
didn't have enough projects for
the high amount of money we
have. So that $20 million is
gonna be considered by the board
next week. The Finance Authority
staff is recommending that that
be put aside for emergency
projects
in colonia areas, um, that the
emergency project had to stem
from a certified or a disaster
declared by the governor in the
last 3 years. So, uh,
flood issues, uh, burn scars,
uh, you've seen them, you've all
seen these issues that makes
it's not as if the colonia
communities aren't having enough
difficulty and then you add all
the flooding and the fires, uh,
to that issue.
So, uh, we hope to make that, we
hope that the board approves the
staff's recommendation that
would allow for grants only. Um,
so we would not charge the loan
portion of that, and it would
just again be for colonias, uh,
that had been in it, that had
suffered in uh an emergency as a
result of a natural disaster
declared such by the governor
declared a disaster. Um, all
right, and then lastly, on page
5,
just to give you some sense of
what happens after we make an
award, we open the applications
in January. We make awards, uh,
in May, um, and then they have 4
months from the point at which
we have approved those awards
for them to provide all the
readiness to proceed to close.
Again, very similar to the Water
Trust Board process. Uh, once
they're able to close on their
rewards, they have, they're
given 2 years to draw down those
funds. We size our projects so
that they can actually complete
those within the 2 years for a
lot of
people, for a lot of projects
these days, that's a stretch
goal because they can't get, um,
the kinds of uh
they can't get the uh pipes or,
or construction crews to show up
and make it a two-year process.
So we've done a lot of
extensions, but generally the
goal here is to get these
projects drawn down in 2 years.
And then after they've completed
the project, loan repayments
begin. You can see on that
bottom, on the bottom of page
15, we have, uh, through this
day, this presentation, again
awarded those 32 projects of 51
million, um,
those haven't, we haven't
secured any of those awards
because they just got made, so
we're in the process of doing
all the readiness to proceed.
Um, but we have $300 million of
those 355 secured. So you can
see there's a significant amount
of funds that have been secured
and all of them are spending at
a fairly rapid pace. You, uh,
2021, we have only 2 open
awards, um, and they've, you
know, we have 1% of the total
funds unexpended. So you can see
that once we get
into construction, these
projects are ready to go because
they have been vetted. So it
takes a little bit of time to
get them to the point at which
they can start, but then they're
in a position to close pretty
quickly.
Um, and then lastly, we will
open this application cycle next
year for, uh, this does not
require legislative
authorization as the Water Trust
Board does. So we're able to
open the application much closer
to the, uh, time that we award
those funds. So we'll begin in
with training for the applicants
in January. Uh, we do not
anticipate a change at all to
our application system this year
in 2027, we'll have a change in
the application system, but for
those that are, uh, paying
attention, it's gonna be the
exact
same as we have in prior years,
um, and so with that, I would,
uh, open it up for Ms. Lucero to
make her comments about the
program.
So good afternoon and welcome to
Southwest New Mexico. I've had
the privilege of serving this
region. I just, uh, last week
started my 40th year with the
council of governments. I know I
don't look a day older 40,
right, Senator Padilla just
agree, yeah, just agree with me.
But can I say what a privilege
it's been for me. Um, I think
what I wanna share with you
today is that I'm one of the
original Colonias planners when
the state of New Mexico got
awarded funding and in 1983 to
have three colonial partners in
southern New Mexico and so
Colonia were actually designated
uh by counties in 1990 and so
they had to meet certain
criteria and they were all
adopted by resolution. So this
is how old
I am when I still have the
original uh resolutions because
I'm just one of those paper
people that I just know I'm
gonna need it in the future. I
still have those resolutions and
those designations back from
when I started just because a
lot of times those things back
then the technology wasn't there
and those things get lost, but I
can, I can also say I'm the only
individual pretty much in the
state and uh Department of
Finance and Administration
works with me because I'm the
only one who knows how to
designate a colonia. So, uh,
nobody else really knows how to
do that and so I'm very
fortunate that I can actually
assist communities when they say
no we can't oh yes we can. This
is how we do it. Can we meet
this criteria and if we can meet
the criteria that just opens up
opportunities um for other local
governments that probably didn't
even know that they were
eligible, so those are things
that I've been able to do so in
some years, for example, I
designated two more in Luna
County this year and so that's
helpful and I help people across
southern New Mexico to ensure
that we're doing everything
possible for them.
What can I say about our, our,
our state colonials program.
It is one of the best
implemented programs that I've
seen in my career. Well done,
well structured, great staff,
and I don't have a complaint at
all about this program. I gotta
tell you that it just runs so
smooth from my perspective, uh,
it's a little chaotic sometimes
when we're doing applications,
but I don't really see any
challenges at all from that
perspective. I think where we
see challenges is not
necessarily
with the Colonias program itself
where we see challenges is
within the local governments
themselves whether it's capacity
issues. I have capacity issues.
I'm down to just myself and two
other staff people so not only
do I do that, I'm actually doing
a lot of the leg work for the
communities to ensure that we're
making sure that everything is
consistent with funding
mechanisms. One of the
advantages I really want to
speak to for myself is I have a
top view
of all the state agencies and
how each funding mechanism works
in each one of the agencies and
I feel uh blessed that I can
really share that knowledge
because a lot of communities
don't have that, right? And even
the state agencies don't know
what other state agencies are
doing, but in my opinion, I feel
like I've worked hard to be that
resource so that it can be a
resource for my communities
because in my opinion it's, it's
all about the people, right? and
providing basic needs. So, in
early years
um, you know, there's, there was
so many definitions that was
part of my work early is trying
to define impediments within the
colonious areas and, and a lot
of those where you had different
criteria for different programs
again at that time, federal
dollars were being reverted back
because they couldn't meet the
criteria because nobody again it
was a capacity issue.
and I think what we're seeing
now is more of those capacity
issues within local governments
when you see staff turnover and
then the first thing that
happens is when they see a
funding mechanisms they they see
fear and they freeze and they
don't even want to try because
they're so afraid of doing
something wrong, but the
application piece is the easy
piece, right? The difficult
piece is the implementation. And
also what I see is a lot of just
challenges around how do you
develop a project? What is a
good project? How do we do that?
So when
I retire, I think that's what
I'm gonna do is just really be
there to be a mentor to people
to teach them about how these
programs can work. So I feel
very fortunate. I couldn't do
any of this work right if I
didn't have the support number
one of the local governments
allowing me to come in and work
with them, and that takes trust,
right? It takes trust to be able
to ensure that they feel
comfortable, uh, and what I'm
doing for them and really
allowing me to do the
applications for them. I run
myself a little ragged
sometimes trying to make sure
that I'm covering every local
government and I represent 4
counties, 9 municipalities. So
and Water Conservation
Districts. I cover school
districts. I also cover, um,
about 15, maybe 15 to 30 mutual
domestics on top of that a
psyche associations so I've kind
of done the gamut of things
across this region, but again it
allows me to do a better job for
the local governments and of
course I couldn't
do that without my local
legislators and all of you
because in my opinion and I kind
of mentioned this to the Madam
Chair, uh, in the last
legislative committee about how
I feel like I represent all of
you because we're all dealing
with the same issues around
having adequate infrastructure,
whatever that is, and without
basic infrastructure we can't
move to a level of service to be
able to create those
opportunities, especially in
economic development and
especially in housing and we're
seeing those challenges now so I
think um
this is a very innovative
program I wanna say thank at
that time Senator Howie Morales
and and Representative and
Senator Mary Kate Pippin because
they were the advocates in
creating this fund, and we
continue to see how well and how
implemented and you'll you'll
see in the data, right, how much
of the dollars have been
leveraged with other dollars and
so we continue to see those
those opportunities now we're
seeing opportunities to the
technical assistance program
through New Mexico Finance
Authority where we can get
engineering reports done or
design done and then go to the
colonial program or water trust
port for being able to secure
construction dollars and so um
I'm open to any questions that
you may have. I'm very
passionate because this is how I
got my start when all I really
thought it was gonna be was a
secretary, and here I am sitting
at the hit table with Marquita
and what an honor that is for
me. So what can I answer and how
can I help you in moving forward
with Collonas or
any other program
Thank you and and I asked
Priscilla to send the electronic
version of what councils of
government cogs do because many
of us don't know that they exist
until they become a fiscal
agent, so she's going to email
that and with that we'll go to
Cat uh Representative Kates,
then Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you both for this
presentation, um, Marquita, I
mean,
uh
Miss
I'm sorry
Yeah, I know.
uh, Miss Lucera has been
threatening retirement for too
long, and I want to make sure
that we are addressing that as
soon as possible. Uh, uh, it is
my understanding that this
program just like all your
programs, the funding is siloed
in the program.
um
how can we build a program
that provides the mentorship and
the succession planning that we
need in all the quadrants
throughout the state to
understand that there is
technical assistance at that
local level who understands the
multi-layered governmental
agency and funding plan, and is
that appropriate for us to
consider such funding and
oversight from NFA for it to be
housed there.
Um, Madam Chair, I, I am also
afraid every time she uses the
word retirement and, and
frankly, across the state, I
mean, the, the folks that are
doing the work at the councils
of government are really doing,
uh, the work of the people. That
is, they're on the ground, they
understand this projects don't
typically happen particularly in
certain communities without the
direct support of councils of
government. Um, the finance
authority really works beside
them. We
projects are referred to us from
councils of government or we can
come in and help a council of
government try to figure out the
best way to, to attack a
financing, uh, problem. I'm not
sure that we're the best place
to help with, with technical
assistance, uh, with councils of
govern and making sure that that
succession lays in place that
may be a Department of Finance
and administration, but I think
I'll, I'll defer to Priscilla on
that question.
Sure, um, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Kates, so one of
the challenges is exactly what
you're talking about is how do
we begin to train people how to
do this kind of work, right? So
just most recently we did
receive funds from the federal
government through COVID, which
was um dis distributed to the
executive side through the
economic development department
and so what we've done thus far
is that we've created a state
association of COBs, which is
called the New Mexico
Association of Regional
Councils. So what we're
currently doing, we just got
that established and what we're
currently doing is developing
training programs where each of
one of us may have a certain
expertise within the Cog region
in my case it might be capital
or it might be working with
mutual domestics and so we wanna
develop a training program
specifically to start training
those individuals and how we
build the capacity from the
ground up, right? Because what's
happening is, at least from my
view is that those individuals
that are being staffed in the
local
governments are not attending
the trainings, and sometimes
what happens, and I see this a
lot is sometimes even in some of
the Zoom trainings, they're not
paying attention about to what
some of the what some of the
things they need to be informed
about and then what happens is
then it just adds another layer
when they have to communicate
with somebody to be able to do
that specific process, so I
think we're all being bombarded
with additional
responsibilities. So one of the
things that I'm pi piloting
right now and I'm a pilot in my
region with this state
association is doing exactly
that is number 11 of the things
I see also is challenges within
the elected officials,
especially newly elected
officials, and I just feel like
I wanna train them from the
ground up as well.
because so that they can make
good sound decision, uh, so
decisions within our region. So
I'm gonna pilot that and then on
top of that, um, I really wanna
pilot how we're doing here and
specifically in the region and
how we do legislative forums so
that we can ensure whatever
comes to you from a capital
request that it's been vetted
properly everything from are
they complying with executive
order? Are they compliant with
budgets and quarterlies, are
they compliant with their, you
know,
all their audits and whatever
other compliance is it
consistent with their capital
improvement plan and I gotta
tell you, as I, as I mentioned
to Madam Chair last week I crack
a way up because sometimes I
tell my local governments, you
are not gonna give a legislator
more than 2 to 3 projects for
capital.
They don't have that kind of
money and think about what is
the one project that you need
that's gonna bring you the most
benefit to your community so we
can stay focused so I think
that's one of my goals and then
the other goal, um, that we're
targeting for 2026 as cog Regens
is number one to foster those
training opportunities under a
rural policy conference or a
rural conference so that we can
continue to get to those rural
areas who have the greatest need
because I always feel like
the rural areas are the ones
either don't have travel money,
mutual domestics don't have
boards and so we're continuing
to deal with those challenges
and I continue to look at ways
that I can bring the training to
them versus otherwise, but also
I think a big part of that is
handholding, so that they build
a comfort level because I was
one of those individuals at one
time didn't think I could do it
and I remember walking out of a
train and I came back and I told
my boss, I can't do this job.
And he says, oh yes, you can.
No, I don't. But anyway, here I
am all these years later because
somebody just believed in me and
that's why I'm here so I hope
that answers your question.
Representative case, so we're in
that in that process. I very
much appreciate it. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I'll have a
side question and when did you
take that boss's job and so, um,
but
I will, um, I, so this is very
exciting to know that the state
cogs, um, have taken on this. Is
this a rule change or or uh a
policy bill that would have to
make so, so the colonial one it
it
it covers many different
infrastructure, so I'm gonna
talk specifically about
infrastructure that is
considered public, a public
utility like water.
So
we don't currently have on the
books, whether it's through a
rule or a law that if you are at
a certain position with the
water authority, whether that's
a watershed uh safety
association, uh, whatever it is.
that you need to complete X
amount of credit hours of
training and then continuing
education training, um, I know
that then we might have to fund
it a little bit to get a travel
per diem in there if that
happens, um, but that's we talk
about professionalizing.
this infrastructure, the
management of this
infrastructure and I am talking
to community colleges about
of when they talk about trades
to put in water controller 12,
and 3, and you know, engineer
and things like that instead of
uh just the the uh traditional
trades.
but for this
having that oversight, you know,
you're like you were just
saying, the audits, all these
other things. I love the fact
that you are mentoring and
giving them belief in
themselves, but I want them to
have required amount of credit
training, and I think that you
have the knowledge to build that
curriculum, you need to let us
know as legislator, is this
something that you just go back
to your organization and get
rules prop uh propagandated or
do you come to the
legislature and ask for a law to
be changed to make this a
requirement.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative Cates, the first
thing I wanna tell you is that
there is a rule in state statute
that requires mutual domestics
to have 12 hours of um training
every year for board members,
and I can tell you from my
experience, I'm not seeing that
happen with board members as it
should, right?
The other thing that I see in
some of these others, and I
think that's where we see the
different levels of challenges
based whether you're a local
government or in your Mitchell
domestic or even in sechia
there's different levels of
where these entities are and on
the muteual domestic side, um,
we're having some additional
challenges with just finding
accounting firms to help them do
their accounting, so some of the
capacity dollars that you all
have allocated that are coming
specifically to the
cause have really helped me do
some of that so that they don't
get so far behind that there's
no way for them to catch up, so
I think that's uh that that's a
positive, right? The other thing
is I think there are probably
some other items that are on
statutes that require training
like the, the chief procurement
officer, every local government
or every political subdivision
of the state is required to have
a a certified procurement
officer, but I've got to tell
you most of, most of those
mutual domestics don't
have one, and most of the
Iseques don't have one either
and so now they're relying on
me. So now I have to have an
agreement.
with that mutual domestic so
that I can serve as their
procurement officer because they
have no idea how to do it,
right? And I think that's what
really worries me about at some
point when I do move on is that
who, who's gonna teach them all
those little pieces that have
taken me can't take me this long
to learn and so that's kind of
what I'm trying to foster the
state association and I, I
totally agree. I wanna be, when
I retire, I wanna be that
educator, you know I wanna be
that person to say this is how
you do it because I feel like
we're
we're missing something's
falling through the cracks still
and how we're educating our
local people and the other part
that I have piloted in my areas
when I have one week schools,
for example, I just did one,
probably last year on fiber
technicians and they only had 12
slots and that school was filled
up and all those fiber
technicians got hired on just
like that. So those are the
things that how can we cut the
curriculum down so that we
can get more certified water
operators, wastewater operators.
We don't have enough economic
developers. We don't have all of
these things that are such a
necessity in our communities,
especially in the rural and
frontier communities and the
challenge is that we're starting
to see more emergencies around
infrastructure
just because
they're not
operating and maintaining their
systems as they.
So thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. This just one last
follow-up question and so I, I
agree.
and I think what is missing is
the requirement.
right? You have the knowledge.
You must certainly have the
energy, except for that
threatening of of retirement. I
think you know you, you, you are
a wonderful resource for this,
and you believe in the mission.
I, I think we have the tools it
is structuring that curriculum
and then making some level level
1, level 2, level 3 of our own,
so that we can help
professionalize and oversee
these infrastructures. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Senator Padilla, thank you,
Madam Chair. I didn't want to
interrupt what was going on over
there all good, um, thank you,
uh, for the presentation. I
think Representative Kate's
actually got to most of what I
was gonna ask about, um, I, I
know that, um, well, the one
question on the colonia
infrastructure fund. I mean, is
it sized appropriately? Do, do
you find that it, it, it, it
meets these are very large
decisions that are made. I mean,
I know that when I first arrived
in the legislature, uh,
Representative Roel Caballero
and I came in, I think
the same day. I think we're
probably the longest ones here
right now, but um
it was 20 million at that point.
Where is it now? Is it, is it up
to 50 now or where, what's the
60, OK, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, it's 60 million this
year. Again, it's that, it's the
percentage of severance tax
bonds. So, you know, it's, it
won't be that high forever, um,
and I would say that one of the
things is and you'll see it with
the Water Trust board as well as
these pots have grown, we've
been able to handle bigger and
bigger kinds of projects. So
wastewater in particular, are
expensive projects to undertake.
You can't really phase
wastewater projects so they take
a lot of money, um, there are
important pieces of
infrastructure. We've seen our
ability to get more of those
kinds of projects done with the
higher dollar amount, um, but I
think the biggest problem is we
don't have a, a really good
understanding of what the needs
in the coloniass
are so I can't tell you what the
universe looks like and um and,
and that's part of our, our
problem and of course, you know,
fires and floods and things just
make it a little worse. Um
and it's not quite clear when
you stop being a colonia. So
those are the things that stop
me from being able to give you a
good answer, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I,
uh
Marquita, I appreciate that
because now there has been, you
know, again I'll refer back to
my colleague Representative
Rabel Caballero and I. We
represent an area that, you
know, for all intents and
purposes is a colonia.
if you look at it. I mean, you
know, the, the western part of
our districts, I don't want to
speak for you, but you know I, I
think you might agree um and we
need a lot of work out there.
so I, I guess what what I would
ask is do we need to go about
creating a whole other fund like
this, or do you think that we
would have any luck at tapping
into that somehow and I I know
that rules would have to change
and things would have to change.
I think it's about 50 miles from
the border or something is how
you begin to qualify.
Yeah, Madam Chair and Senator
Padillosa, 150 miles from the
border and then you must uh have
inadequate water, inadequate
sewer, inadequate housing, and
you must have had that prior to
November 1st of 1990. Yeah, so
we're just outside of that, as
you can imagine.
uh, but we really need some help
over there on the Pajarito Mesa
and um so I you know I'm I'm
gonna be looking into it again.
I did draft a bill a couple of
years ago, got run over, then
backed over, then run over again
to make sure they got it that
year and the, uh, people that
created the fund to begin with
were the ones that kind of
helped kill that thing, but I, I
think we need to do something
creative with it. um, how much
actually stays in the fund every
year or do we use every last
penny of it every year.
uh,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, we
use every, we award every penny.
We have been in the last couple
of years setting aside 5% or so
for cost overruns because we are
seeing, we saw that that was a,
an issue in the 2020 2021. Um,
as we close out the cycle and
their funds remain, and that is
to say, we never awarded them.
Um, then we are looking again to
moving all those dollars into
that emergency fund that we're,
that we're contemplating for
next year. If we close on an
award of a million dollars, they
draw
down the project to 700,000, um,
and they've completed it. Uh,
that 300,000 returns to the
State Board of Finance. So
that's how the law works. Once I
have an award for a project
unused funds go back to the
State Board of Finance. If we
never award it, we have the
flexibility if we tell the state
board of Finance that we're
going to be changing the use of
the severance tax bonds. We have
the, uh, flexibility to change
it from cost overruns to, um,
you know, an emergency, uh,
fund, for instance.
Well, so, Madam Chair, I guess
then maybe what we could
potentially talk about is if
there is anything remaining at
the end and then that becomes
available for something outside
of that appears like a colonia
or something like that that way
the original intent is not
messed around with and you can
help other areas with some of
these dollars. 5% on $60 million
that, that, that could get
something done, that could make
something, you know, from a
planning standpoint or a, or
even, you know, a small road
or whatever, you know, you don't
know, um, OK, well I appreciate
that thank you. I just wanted to
clarify that because, you know,
I know we need to do something
creative for other parts of the
state as well that find
themselves in the same
situations and then Madam Chair,
I'm just gonna be very brief on
this. I just want to also say to
Priscilla that she, you cannot
retire, you can never retire, so
I don't know why you're even
talking about that, um, because
I know you and I don't think
you're gonna retire even if you
do retire, so I know, I just
like to threaten.
Well, if I could parachute you
into every one of the cogs, I
think we would all be better for
it, um, so please put together a
plan because this area's been
served very well by you and your
team and you very much and we
wanna make sure that all that is
continuous and I'm really
excited to hear that you've put
some sort of an association
together, so maybe you can
continue supporting it that way
from a contracting standpoint or
something like that, um.
a little outside, Madam Chair,
with your permission, could I
skirt outside of this issue just
for a second while we have uh
Priscilla here so you know, a
couple of years ago we talked
about how the cogs would help to
implement the um
the grow monies or the like the
junior money that kind of stuff
in a real nutshell how's that
going?
In my opinion, I, I really it's
going very well. I think the
only challenge that I had seen
and might have been with the cog
region that got the highest
dollar amount of funds and
trying to get that rolled out,
but I can tell you currently in
my region, I'm probably at 60%
expended already. I've seen
probably by the end of this
month, I'll probably have 70%
expended. I gotta tell you it's
made such a difference in my
region because we're really
supporting those nonprofit
groups that really are providing
services in the rural areas and
what concerns me moving forward
as we deal with the federal cuts
that if we don't have those
nonprofit groups that are doing
those services in the most rural
frontier communities we're not
gonna have services at all. So
currently I have 37 agreements
and um I, I've had to do some
training, right, for the
nonprofits to follow
procurement, but I think it's
been pretty easy in my regard,
but
I was kind of doing this before
in a very small scale, but I
think it's, it's an amazing
opportunity for us. Well, thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Priscilla, for making that work
for your area. I was very
nervous about what to do with
the dollars, you know, senators
we had the, we all had the same,
you know, I mean this wasn't
directly like capital, so you
know representative Kresentative
Raval Caballero. I, I'm not sure
what they did or where they
allocated their dollars. I sent
mine to UNM for a program that I
do every summer. It's a really
great program. I was worried
that
RCOG is has so many things that
they're up to that this would
not get the attention that it
needed, so I chose to go another
route and it was an allowable
route, but, um, but thank you
for for for doing that. I wanted
to get your take on it anytime I
have an opportunity to speak to
somebody like you, I asked this
question because I'm hoping that
we start moving back in that
direction again where
legislators have the ability to
start things and get things
rolling and all that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
OK, Senator Ramos and then
Representative Royal Caballero
and then Representative Jones.
Madam Chair, committee, and uh
uh presenters appreciate what
you're doing for us, um, I
definitely do not want Priscilla
to retire. I've been very
fortunate for the past 27 years
that I've been elected to a
position.
Um, I've always had Priscilla
next to me, um, fighting for
dollars and for multiple
projects, and I appreciate
everything you do
And uh I always told people that
if anyone could figure out how
to get a project done, it's
Priscilla and that, so that
brings me to my next question
Um, New Mexico Tech
had been uh
designated as a colonia and NFA
said that they were not
eligible.
um
I need to ask, how can we change
that to make them alable, being
that they are, you know, right
on the border.
and to figure out how to help
them get some of their projects
done within their.
their vicinity
Some, so Madam Chair Senator
Ramos, I, I believe that the
workaround had been having that
the New Mexico Tech have a
relationship.
uh with Idago County and that
Idago County would be the lead
applicant because that's the
eligible entity that can apply
for those funds. What happens at
times is that the, the entity
itself in this case Hidalgo
County for example, then has to
incur the loan, right? And so
that's where the, the, the uh
agreement has to occur between
the county government and New
Mexico Tech because that's who
has to cover it and a lot of
times
you see a little bit of
resistance because the actual
commissioners may be concerned
about incurring additional debt,
even though it is an economic
driver within our community that
is a challenge and so one of the
things that we are seeing and
not just in particular in this
program and other programs where
we're, we're being asked all the
time whether higher education
institutions can actually apply
for these dollars, and I think
it's been a challenge and I
believe there's been some legal
review on that.
And so, I, I don't believe it
falls within the initial statute
of the colonists program, but it
doesn't mean that we can't look
for another way to do it in
partnership with others. And,
and that's great, so, and the
only reason I thought they would
qualify because they are a
governmental entity, so maybe we
can get together to see if we
can't change statute and figure
out how to get these people or
these type of uh governmental
entities uh.
to qualify for
for these funds because these
funds are very important and I
mean it saddens me to see that
there's $20 million left over
this year that could have gone
to an entity like New Mexico
Tech when they only need a
couple million dollars to take
care of a project, but uh, madam
chair, that's all I've got and
again, Priscilla, you're not
retiring at least within the
next 3 years. Well, I'm still in
office. Thank you.
He actually, he can replace you
can. I don't know what, I don't
know what your day job is, but,
you know, think about it, um,
next is, uh, Representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you both and um
I.
I feel like
we're aging together, Priscilla.
We've known each other, uh, for
well over or close to 25 years
or over 25 years, yes, so
Priscilla was one of the first
persons that I met um when I
moved back to New Mexico to take
over economic development and so
it's been quite a, a journey and
I've seen um how
I've worked, I've had to work
with several council of
governments.
The most outstanding and that
should be the model is this
um
council of governments. I
literally pulled my hair out
working with Northwest. I'm not
ashamed or embarrassed or
not calling them out, but it was
just very difficult to work with
several other, um, council of
governments, uh, I think what
happens unfortunately, Madam
Chair, is that in the smaller
communities, um, individuals
that have long time owned land
water rights, all kinds of other
individual things, sit on these
boards and act as if the public
money now is their money to, um,
allocate and work with, and they
don't know how to separate.
That's one of those training
technical assistance things that
we have to constantly be driving
to improve or remove from their
mindset so that they can begin
to think that
this is for the public good,
public good and welfare. So, um,
I just, I just wanted to say
that and also pre as Priscilla
knows and others have heard, I
did
most of my community organizing
and the 60s, 70s, 80s, and 90s.
I hate to say all those years
because as I said, we're aging
in the Sunland Park. Anthony
Canutillo Chaparral Dona Anna,
just to name a few of the
colonials and um we started the
promotora program.
and the promodora program
actually, um, Madam Chair was
set up
to provide um health screening.
and health delivery health care
delivery and healthcare
screening to these communities
because of the contaminated
water that was um very
predominant and causing many
diseases and causing newborns to
be born with multiple illnesses,
so I'm, I'm very familiar with
um
the colonials in general and why
we set up this particular fund
when it, when we did, but it
look at how many years it took.
uh, all the years that I was
organizing up to 2010.
to get us to pass this and
acknowledge that these
communities were critical
um, and
should not be treated as uh in
third world conditions right
here in our backyard, so I say
that um because it's just
critically important that we
understand the distinction
between the colonials
and then Senator, what we are
faced with in our urban
communities. Yes, we have the
same similar conditions
unfortunately as we travel the
state, we find it in uh Dena um
Pueblo rural communities, I mean
we still have rural communities
that are not even accessing
regular utilities and water, so
those conditions still are
running rampant, but we have
ways in which we address their
needs as well. And in our area,
an urban areas I think
what we need to do a better job
of, uh, Madam Chair, is holding
our city councils and local
governments, county counties
and, and cities accountable for
the, um, money that we give them
in order to provide capital
improvements and all the other
types of infrastructure needs as
well as other needs that that
our constituents are facing in
an urban setting. That's
probably the best way that we
can respond, not necessarily
change the infrastructure at
Colonia's Infrastructure
Act were amended because it
serves its purpose and it was
set up to do so particularly,
but we also have to work with
our
local representatives to be a
little bit more accountable
about how they're using the
funds. Finally, I did want to,
uh, two things, uh, more. One is
offer some information about
technical assistance and I keep
forgetting to bring this up to
Marquita in all our
presentations for technical
assistance is that the
University of New Mexico has a
wonderful mentoring institute
and they have um a mentoring
institute that has tons and tons
of resources available on
self-help on how to um assist
communities
and uh in a multiple, multiple
ways. They also have an annual,
um, what they call an annual
mentoring, uh, conference.
Yeah, that's what it's called.
It's held every year and this
year it's gonna be October 20th
through October 24th.
and
in at the uh conference they
offer, oh my gosh, a wide array
of topics that would be very
helpful for, say, your boards
for the councils
in knowing how best to develop.
um
and pattern an effective
mentoring program.
We're all, Madam Chair, facing,
um
I don't even know what to call
it anymore because I'm proud of,
I'm proud of how we're aging,
and proud of our contributions.
I'm proud of and honored of
being where I'm at and where
others are at, but we really do
need to ensure that we have, um
that we're building another
generation of of professionals.
That's really critically
important, especially for our
state.
Um, so I don't want to and I
also want to distinguish, Madam
Chair, we have to understand
that the people that sit on
these boards, especially the
colons, we're, we're addressing
colonials right now are your
true grassroots people.
people that work the trenches,
people that work door to door in
the communities, um, on a daily
basis, but, but they are the
hard working class of our
communities, so they do not come
professionalized or
professional. They don't come to
us that way, but we need them
because they're the decision
makers of their communities, but
we need to um give them the
resources and the technical, um,
assistance to be able to be
better decision makers, not
necessarily to change their,
their
their demeanor or in any way
affect that, but to be better
decision makers. So this is
where the mentoring institute,
Madam Chair, comes in because
they do have different ways to,
to help these, uh, communities.
They, they were known as, um,
you know, they're still known as
community-based decision makers.
They, in fact, we need more of
them. We need more of the people
that are uh recipients of our
services, recipients of our um
organizing recipients of all of
our, uh, programs and benefits.
They need to be part of every
board of everything that we do
in our state. So I just wanted
to put a plug for that, um, and
that that is a great resource
that we have the UNM Mentoring
Institute and then finally,
Madam Chair, the mentoring
Institute will also uh help
design a particular technical
assistance, um,
program that you might need
based on the demographics, the
population, um, all of the
details that you may want to
have something specifically
designed and it's free because
it's part of the training of the
institute students that are um
being trained in this arena. The
other, um, asset I would say is
that we have a statewide
planners group, both Native
American, uh, planners group,
and then just a generic planners
group and um they also give, um,
free
um advice and, and, um
provide resources because
they're tapped in other ways,
but on their spare time, so to
speak, um, they offer their
spare, uh, expertise at a local
level. So I, I offer that
because I, I really firmly
believe that we need to have
stronger mentoring across the
board in our state. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I didn't have any
particular question. I just
wanted to offer my, my knowledge
in this particular area and
Priscilla, thank you very, very
much for the
many, many years that, um, you
made my life, um.
worth it in terms of my
professional work as a community
organizer in these colonials and
other areas and then when I came
back to New Mexico, um, to work
as a community economic
developer, so I wanted to just
say thank you because we've been
great partners, uh,
throughout. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative Patisa Robert
Caballero. It's heartfelt. Thank
you.
Representative Jones
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you both so much, uh, for all
that you do. I really appreciate
it and not to be really, really
repetitive, but
I'll start out with, I, I love
the way you describe the need,
you know, after 40 years, you
should know, and we should be
listening to you about what we
need to make this process more
efficient, more beneficial to
our communities.
We have all this money out there
and like you said, targeting and
training legislators. We walk
into these positions, not even
knowing what a cog is. Never
heard of a cog. I didn't know
what that was. And yeah, so, you
know, we get zeroed in on what
we do. I'm a nurse. I talk
nursing and people just look at
me with glazed eyes, you know,
and, and I know, so we, we think
we know that people are
understanding but, but they
don't necessarily new
legislators don't,
um, you know, our, our county
governments don't necessarily,
um, so I think that's just so
valuable if we don't
tap into your knowledge and your
experience, we are losing out
big time. So, um, yeah, and I
love the way you say that you're
retiring and then you describe
your new job. You just wrote
your new job description about
educating all of us, so I
appreciate you so much, yeah,
thank you so much and thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. I have to say the
first time I heard the word uh
cog was in the words to
Woodstock.
Like a car wheel spinning, which
I won't sing for you, but let it
run through your head.
Um, just a couple of questions
for both of you.
The anti-donation clause comes
up over and over again and just
about every session there will
be or there has been a bill and
I think it passed. We had when
we did the broadband, uh,
legislation, um, we added
broadband and wastewater, I
believed to anti-donation
clause.
What do each of you think, and
this isn't like you're declaring
what we should do, but what are
your perspectives on that as two
people who work so much with
grants, uh, benefiting New
Mexicans
So,
Madam Chair,
um, I think I've served on some
of these committees when we've
talked about the anti-donation,
and I believe that it does need
reform, for sure. I think the
other thing I think about,
especially in times of of the
federal dollar and where that's
going, I think, as I mentioned
earlier, we need to be looking
at what mechanisms we can put in
place to be able to do some of
those services within our local
governments and so some of those
are everything you can see from
health care to education.
etc. etc. So I think we have to
figure out a way if we're gonna
do away with the anti-onation,
which I think is, is doable, but
I think there also has to be
kept in mind that we have to
look at how we also have that
training mechanism for those
nonprofits in every aspect of
trying to spend a state dollar,
right? Because typically what
I'm dealing right now with the
New Mexico Growth Funds is they
don't understand state
procurement. They don't
understand
the state dollar. They don't
understand the level of
accountability from that
perspective, and they are even
struggling sometimes to ensure
that they're meeting the state
requirements as a nonprofit
everything from the New Mexico
corals to a certificate of good
standing to mean in the 990
requirements and most people
think that it's super easy,
right, to become a nonprofit and
all these doors are gonna open
for them and they're gonna be
able to receive funds and it's
really
not that easy
you know, I'll just become a
nonprofit. I'll get all this
money and I think those are
challenges, those are
challenges, and I, I do believe
that we have to figure out a way
how we can invest in some of
those nonprofit groups to be
able to bring community wealth
and one of the things we are
doing in this specific region,
uh, in the Southwest as we
started a foundation. It is now
called the GILLA Community
Foundation. It covers the four
counties. We're trying to build
community we
al th so that we can continue to
give grant programs to needs
within our communities and that
is now moving in that direction.
I had no knowledge about
foundations at all and nonprofit
groups, and I continue to learn
because they're all partners and
if we're not all working
collaboratively and trying to
ensure what's the best for the
communities we all we all have a
role to play, and I think um
that's what I attribute a lot of
my success is how do I make
those partnerships work for the
betterment of the community.
Um, Madam Chair, I don't know
that the Finance Authority
itself has a position, but I
would say that, you know,
particularly as it relates to
things like capital outlay.
You're seeing capital OA try to
get to nonprofits to help, um,
provide those core services in a
community that, that a community
needs to, to thrive and survive.
Um, in those instances in which
the local governments are then
having to kind of contort
themselves in order to carry out
the wishes of the legislature.
That's a lot of work on staff,
and
you, they'll, that uses up
capacity that they would have to
oversee their water projects,
oversee their other capital
outlays. So it's a, if in fact,
the goal is to get money to
those service providers, the
anti-donation isn't stopping it.
It's just making it harder and
more expensive to do, and much
more costly for the local
governments themselves. So I
would just kind of note that as
a person, as a, as a staffer who
has to get money out. The, the
harder you make it, it doesn't
mean it won't happen. It just
means it's
costly, it's time-consuming, and
it's, it you free, you could
free up staff time to actually
oversee the use of those funds
if you weren't, uh, requiring
staff to do um all these extra
efforts to, to.
complete or fulfill the wishes
of the legislator that uh
provided those dollars. So I
would just note that, um,
otherwise the capital outlay,
the changes that have been made
in order to allow for
infrastructure and other
services to be provided. I think
have been really very helpful.
So I would
I don't think I have further
comment there
No, very helpful, thank you and
you know, we're constantly um
jobs that I didn't know existed
until
I was 40 years old
Uh, industrial design, you know,
who makes the dang bottle so you
can hold it and it doesn't slip.
I mean, how many of us here knew
that was actually a job that's
great for people who like
hands-on stuff and makes them
learn math.
um
developer
uh, economic developer, you
know, there's so many jobs that
people don't know exist unless
somebody in their family is it
or they run into it by accident.
So I, you know, when I took the
economic development course, I
think a lot of people here took
the course that uh
representative uh Lenztromoy
tells us about, I mean, you
realize there's all these jobs
that I didn't know, economists,
I, I joke about
it, but I'm, it's true, it's a
very sexy job, but who knew
until we were legislators, how
important and vital it was, so
thank you. I mean, I think a
took us to come to the
legislature to know some of the
kinds of jobs that both of you
are doing. So thank you for
doing them. So, Madam Chair, if
I may, I think that the one
thing I want to articulate to
you, thank you for acknowledging
that because I think you heard
me mention earlier in my
presentation. That's all I
wanted to be was a secretary
because that's all I knew.
I didn't know about any more
that I had any more potential
than anything else and that's
what you see when you come from
these colonious communities, the
most rural frontier communities.
They don't have exposure to
those different jobs, just like
they don't know they can be a
water operator and start with a
level one. They don't
understand. They just don't know
that those are opportunities and
so I strive for that now because
somebody believed in me and I
want to continue to believe in
others and give them those same
opportunities no matter what
because we can be anything we
wanna be, right?
So thank you
Thank you for sharing that. We
just met a water operator was it
in Mora?
Uh, the kids, you were up there
where, yeah, up in Las Vegas, a
young man making very good money
that just kind of bumped into
being a water operator.
So yeah, very true, and we need
them. Are there any more
questions before we move on?
OK, we will move on. Uh, our
next item is the one you've all
been waiting for. It's
consideration of the public
project evolving fun rules. They
were handed out at our last
meeting. They've been emailed to
you. uh, do you wanna say
something before we get
questions. Madam Chair, I would
just note a couple of things.
After the uh presentation and
conversation in Las Vegas, we
took back the feedback in
particular of this com uh
committee and did add back
elements of
Section 9 that we had initially
struck because we thought it was
redundant or obvious. Um, it's
clear that they, I think that
the, the point that was made
that even if it's obvious, it's
good to have in there and so we
added back major sections. So
Section 9, which begins on page
um,
it begins at the bottom of page
9 on the, on the rules. We added
that back in and then edited it.
So there's still some things
that are being taken out, um,
because they conflict or um we
thought that they were
unnecessary or unnecessarily
restrictive in the use of the
fund. So I just wanted to
highlight that one section for
you and then the other section I
would highlight for you, um, the
Finance Authority in its review
added a section that had not
been in the in the
presentation that we made to you
in July. That's on page 8 in
section B3.
and that is that um if we
receive, if we make a loan using
disadvantage funding and that
money is repaid, that those
dollars can stay as
disadvantaged funding. So
subsidy dollars identified in
one year as they get repaid can
be subsidy dollars in another
year and so we wanted to make
sure we captured that concept
and so that is on page 8 to
everything else, Madam Chair,
is, as we discussed, um, back in
July, and we haven't made any
changes other than those two,
and we're, and the finance A
ity Board adopted the, the set
that are in front of you at
their meeting, uh, two weeks
ago.
questions are
Representative Block
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Marquita. And I, I
just wanted to say thank you for
the consideration of those
concerns. I know I was the
annoying one when it comes to
the changes I usually am, which
drives people crazy, but it's
good to read the rules and see
what's happening. So I really
appreciate your, your adding
back to this, some of those
things which, you know,
you would think they're obvious,
but it's always good to just
make double sure and uh so I
just wanted to say that, thank
you, Madam Chair, thank you
Marquita, and, uh, yeah, and I
think the addition to
the page 8
is interesting. I just am trying
to follow up on that. So it
would just extend.
whatever the loan requirements
were for disadvantaged, or would
it
forgive in some way. That's my
one clarification. So, Madam
Chair, first, thank you for
reading the rules and having
comments and, you know, it's,
it's good to get a second
perspective. We, we tend to
think alike when we sit at the
table together. Um
so on page 8, that section, we,
you'll recall that we can use
portions of the governmental
gross receipts tax to make loans
at below market interest rates.
In this instance, 0 or 2%,
depending on the community's
median household income. Um, we
typically put that in the most
advantageous place possible,
usually in the later years of a
maturity, um, but when they
actually repay those loans, they
weren't those, those, uh,
proceeds weren't being relied
upon to make bond payments and
so we have
this sort of equity, um, and
what we want to say is if we
have those loans, they're
repaid. We want to use those
same dollars to make more 0%
loans, right? So that's, that's
really what that is, uh, what
had been, what it appeared was
in here before is once a subsidy
was repaid, it then went back
for market rate lending, and we
wanted to keep the subsidy
dollars available for subsidy
dollars. That just means later
on we'd use less GGRT for
subsidy.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. So
that would mean we're getting
less.
well, we're not getting interest
then.
on the new loans with that
interest from the previous
loans. Is that, that's correct.
So we, we make portions of loans
at 0 or 2% interest rate, and,
uh, what this does is allow us
to continue to make more of
those available.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for this and uh
that makes sense to me. And uh
now I can vote for these rules.
I was, I was like keeping myself
up at night. I was like, dang
it, I never want to say no to
Marquita, but now I can say yes.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
These were some less
controversial changes than in
the past.
Um, uh, Representative Terasas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I, uh
I missed that meeting because of
a funeral and so family funeral.
So thank you for bringing that
up. So
quick question, when you give
the 0% loans just to catch me
up, um, what percentage of the
entire
um, I guess loan request.
is that because you said it's a
portion. So is that just like
10% of the loan? Can you explain
that for me real quick?
Certainly, that's an excellent
question, Madam Chair.
Representative, so on an
infrastructure project, it can't
exceed more than 10% of the
loan.
Um, on a, um, equipment loan, it
can be 100%. So for instance, we
do a lot of fire trucks at 0%,
but on an infrastructure
project, we want to make sure,
you know, it doesn't exceed that
it's at least 10% of the loan.
Apologize. It doesn't exceed 10%
alone. So on an infrastructure
project, 10% on equipment
project, it could be 100%. Madam
Chair, 100% of what's, is there
a cap on that? Um, Madam Chair,
yes, there's a cap by entity per
year of 500,
00 $0
Thank you for pushing me up on
the on those rules. I was trying
to remember, OK, and then
this being the way I'm reading
it, then that means that those,
when those dollars get repaid,
you don't have to get new, new
money you can possibly,
possibly, I'm not going to say
it never. You can possibly,
Madam Chair, use these same
dollars and recycle them again
rather than getting new dollars
in and just keep that, uh, or,
you know, you can supplement it
probably with some new dollars,
but mostly use the old dollars.
Is that, is that correct? I'm
sure that's exactly the point.
Yes, I'd like
that. Thank you, Madam Chair
Any other questions or comments?
If not, we need a motion to
proveant Chair, I'd like to make
that motion.
I'll second it, Madam Chair
It was you heard I had my hand
up, but you heard her voice, so
she can, she made the most
Representative Kate seconded by
Representative Royal Caballero,
uh, is there anybody who objects
approving the rules. See no
objection. You have approved.
Excellent rules.
OK,
our next, uh, and final, uh,
multi-sectioned presentation is
the overview of NMFA's proposed
legislation for endorsement
project authorization updates
and reporting.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So you
have a presentation we tried to
combine it as much as possible
because they are very similar
topics and so I wanted to make
sure we kind of grouped those
topics together. Um, so I'll be
speaking from, uh, the bigger
presentation, um, I think all
the pages are supposed to be
there. I don't think there's any
extra. I've included at the
beginning, uh, just for those of
you that are newer to the
finance authority who our board
is, what our purpose is at the
very front end. I won't go
through that because I think
most of you have now heard that,
um, but for, for some
you are new to, uh, the Finance
Authority. Um, on page 3, we
have our statutory authority
just to remind you that we're a
broad-based financing agency.
Um, this gives you some sense of
how broad that those powers go,
um, adding right at the very
end, the 2025 local solar Access
Fund, which you'll hear about
tomorrow by Fernando. Um, that's
a grant program for local
governments that we operate with
ENED that came through in this
last year. And so that's now
been updated here as well. And
I'll, again, one more time, we
don't have money
for all of these programs. The
finance authority, though it's
got the name Finance, doesn't
operate with a lot of lending
capital outside of the public
project revolving fund. That's
the one program where we have a
lot of capital, uh, that we're
able to leverage for projects
across New Mexico for many of
our other projects, so we're
getting, we're relying on
whatever the earmarks are from,
uh, the, the severance tax bonds
and or the funds that are made
available at the federal level.
So the programs that are the
largest outside of the PPRF
are funded with regular earmarks
of either severance tax bonds or
federal dollars, and those are
our, our infrastructure projects
that you've heard about before.
Um, on page 4, there's, there
used to be 3 standard pieces of
authorization that we would ask
you to, to support. One of them
went away with Senate Bill 170
from last year. It went away for
a couple of years. It's just a
two-year, I think, um, uh, pause
on that legislation. So we won't
be asking you this year for
legislative authorization on our
public project revolving fund
loans, and last year that
started out as 100 projects,
ended up at the end of the
session with 200 projects. It
was a
standard piece of legislation.
We won't have to go through that
exercise this year because
Senate Bill 170 allows us to
make those loans, um, and we'll
just report back to you on those
loans that we've made. Um, but
one that is required is our
annual request to move money as
allowed under the PPRF Act, um,
to move money from the PPRF over
to identified funds in law and
uh so there are 7 that are
identified and we are making a
recommendation that those monies
go to 3 specific funds.
So just to bring you back, uh,
section 621 6.1, uh, allows that
35% of the governmental gross
receipts tax, um, when it's
after it's been used to uh
ensure that we didn't need it to
pay bondholders up to 35% can be
distributed to any one of those
now 77 funds. Um, last year,
governmental gross receipts Tax
just topped $40 million for the
first time, so 35% is roughly
40, 14 million, 150,
000 roughly. Um, we use those
primarily as state match funds
for the drinking water State
revolving Fund. The tricky part
every year is that we don't
actually know the amount of the
capitalization grants when we
ask you to award funding. Some
years it's greater than what we
expected in some years it's
less. We've generally been able
to utilize overages in some
years to make up for, uh,
deficiencies in others. If we
base our, our this year request,
uh, or this year funding, um,
if I base my 2026 legislative
authorization request for monies
from the PPRF based on this
year's funding. We will need
$7.2 million because we expect
to receive a total of $36
million from the Feds. So that's
our $11 million standard base
capitalization grant, as well as
the, uh, last, uh, tranche of
the $25 million from the IIJA,
and that's for supplemental
projects for those, those base
kinds of projects. So 36 million
dollars which require a 20%
match, that comes to 7.2
million. We're asking that we
just do right under that and
take 7.15% and appropriate it,
uh, to the, from the PPRF over
to the, um, drinking water state
revolving Fund. Um, the
Department of Cultural Affairs
as they made a a presentation to
you last year since 2019 have
been receiving $5 million a
year. We kept that intact as a
starting place. And then lastly,
the local government planning
fund, um, we're
requesting $2 million. We have
expanded that in the, in prior
years and we are starting to see
it more for things like
affordable housing Act plans,
more economic development plans,
more metropolitan district plans
and those things require more
money. Um, so we are asking to
keep that $2 million in place so
we can continue to fund those
critical projects. The 4 other
funds that are listed, um, here
are funds that, uh, would not be
receiving an, uh, an
appropriation. One of them, it's
pretty simple. The
Water wastewater grant fund
hasn't been operational in more
than 20 years, so there's no
need to fund that. The Clean
water, uh, sorry, the wastewater
facility construction loan,
which the Environment department
operates as clean water. That in
years past has received an
appropriation, it would not this
year. Rural infrastructure fund
and their solid waste grant, uh,
solid waste facility grant fund
would also not receive one.
So that's a standard piece that
we're gonna be asking, uh, for
next, um,
meeting in early November. We'll
ask for your support there. On
page 5,
you heard at the, the Las Vegas
meeting from, uh, Doctor, I
think Brown from Sunrise Clinics
about the importance of two
funds that helped him with
hisucamari clinic and with
their, uh their Las Vegas clinic
and that's the primary care
capital fund and the Behavioral
Health Capital Fund. We combined
funding packages because we ran
out of money, so we figured out
how much we could fund, um, from
each of
the projects to complete their
acquisition of the facility in
Tucumerry because it was a
leased facility and they wanted
to make sure they could keep
their costs down and stay in
that community and in Las Vegas
they were able not only to
acquire a new building, uh, that
that allowed for the expansion
of services. That happens
through these funds which no
longer have any money. So we
have, uh, just a couple of
loans, I think we have 3 loans
outstanding on, um, the primary
care capital fund. So we
initially
received $5 million. We've made
20 loans from that over time,
uh, totaling about $12.5
million. Again, 3 are still
remaining, uh, outstanding. We
are, but we're out of dollars.
we have been asking, I think
we've been talking about this.
You all have supported the
endorsement of additional funds
to that. We made inroads last
year with the childcare facility
revolving loan fund. We have yet
to make any inroads really with
new dollars into the primary
care capital fund, and that is,
it, it really does help, um,
these nonprofit or even um local
government based programs allows
them to acquire their facility
and, um, contain the costs on
their, on their operations.
That's typically what we see it
used for and then for some
expansion of services after
that. Um, so that's, I think all
I would note is that we're
asking again for you to support
a $25 million appropriation.
We're not going to try to get
one for the behavioral
healthcare, we think maybe 3 is
too much at one time, so we'll
be asking the, the program that
we have prioritized is the
primary care capital Fund
because we're seeing regular
requests for it and we have to
turn those down.
So, Madam Chair, we'll be asking
for that support as well.
And then lastly, um,
you'll also receive a, a request
for Water Trust board and we'll
put that at the end. Um, the
other thing that we will be
requesting from you, um, in
November. Is your support of a
bill to um extend uh well
actually to eliminate um the
requirement from the
statewide economic Development
Finance Act. It requires
currently that we receive
legislative authorization before
we can make a loan from our
basically our economic
development fund. So that is a
request that we have
outstanding. Um, I'll just, by
way of background,
um
in 2005, I'm on page seven. In
2005, we made an the legislature
made an amendment to the
statewide Economic Development
Finance Act, SWEDFA, that
requires projects, financed from
the economic development
revolving Fund to first receive
legislative authorization. So it
would put it on par with the,
with then the PPRF and the Water
Trust port. Those are the three
programs that require
legislative authorization.
Between 2006 and 2011, um, we
had 314 projects request
assistance, typically by the
bank.
Um, one of those bills which had
129 projects, did not get
through the legislature in 2007.
Um, and so only 185 were
authorized. We made 3 loans in
that time period. Um, it turns
out that projects receiving
projects that have to wait a
year to move forward are not
likely projects that, um, our
loans that we really want to do.
They're largely much outside our
risk template. So, um, it's
it, it was, it was really not a,
it was a hindrance to getting
good projects done. So 185
projects were authorized. We
funded 3 for a total of about
$4.7 million. Outside of
legislative authorization, we
have funded an additional 43
projects totaling about $18
million. So
you know, the authorized
projects represent 6% of the
projects we've done to date and
about 20% of the capital we've
used to date. So I just wanted
to give some perspective of how
we've basically been operating
this program since 2011 without
legislative authorization, and
that means that in those times
in which we have capital, we're
able to address those needs as
the businesses, um, uh, go to
their banks and require
assistance. So that is the
request before you is that we
will ask for uh
an extension of that in
November, uh, for that, and
that's again, it's been the
first extension went in in 2011
in anticipation of funding. It
was extended 3 times, um, since
that time period.
Um
so that is those I'll go through
a water trust board report, but
I don't know if you want to stop
and answer any, have me answer
any questions on that before I
go into the economic development
report itself. Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
and thank you, uh, Marquita for
all of that data. On page 5.
I think I got a little lost. I
want to make sure I understand
what what you're proposing here
or what you're wanting to do
here. So the fund previously was
5 million.
Was that for all three of those
funds? Just the primary, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chairman, $5 million
was the primary care capital
fund capitalization in 1995. The
um behavioral healthcare
received 2.5 million of bond
proceeds in 2004, 2005, around
that time period. Um, and then
the cap the childcare really
didn't receive money until last
year and this past year. So
then, Madam Chair, on, uh, this
is all of my questions are,
excuse me, related to the uh
primary care
capital fund, um
so then you, you're proposing we
increase that to 25 million.
as a one-time shot, not what
we'd have to come back every
year if you wanted to replenish.
Sherman, yes, it's a one-time
shot. Yeah, so then the last
bullet on the page, uh, well,
you have 4 bullets, then the the
3rd bullet on the last primary
bullet or whatever, uh, clinics
frequently use a one stop shop
model that provides dental and
behavioral health with primary
care. So could they feasibly use
some of if if if uh
XYZ clinic was, was, um
if an XYZ clinic was awarded
some of these dollars, they
could feasibly use them for the
behavioral health component and
the dental component because
they are a one stop.
Um,
Madam Chair, is there a one stop
Mr. Chairman, yes, so for
instance, the Sunrise clinic was
a combination of primary care
and behavioral healthcare, which
is why we use the two funds to
do that, um, and dentals already
considered primary care under
the Primary Care Capital Act, so
they already, we've already
funded dental care expansions
under the primary Care Act. We
just note that, um, these are
very broad
um,
multi-purpose facilities that we
ultimately are funding and to
the extent that we're able to
help keep the cost down for that
com that provider to stay in the
community. We think it's
important, but yes, if we expand
it, if they end up using that
facility later on for, uh,
primary care, behavioral
healthcare, um, you know, that,
that's not an issue. So let me
give you a little scenario then.
Excuse me.
So, Madam Chair, First Choice
Community Healthcare, which
resides in many of our central
New Mexico uh legislative
districts. I know that they want
to bring a pharmacy into their
operations. I don't know if
you're familiar with this or
not, um, and with, with these
dollars as capital be something
they could utilize because
pharmacy is a service that leads
to well well is is an offshoot
of my primary care.
Would they be able to, so, so
the primary one in the South
Valley Health Commons, uh, over
in uh Representative Rael
Caballero and I uh neighborhood
uh
we rebuilt that whole thing for
them. It took a long time to get
all that money together and and
it's, it's a beautiful place and
everything, but they, they don't
have a pharmacy there. They want
to have a pharmacy there, they
have space, but they need to do
some retrofitting and some
remodeling and all they do
dental there that's probably one
of the most more successful
things they do there, could they
feasibly apply to this fund to
gain capital dollars to
build up the pharmacy
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman,
yes.
And they're the only project in
Bernalio County that we've done
in this program, the one, the
one project in Berlingo County
was First Choice. OK, yeah, I
mean, it's 6 or 7 locations at
this point. I think they need to
probably consolidate some of it
in the East Mountains area. I,
I, you know, I don't know their
whole business model or
whatever, but, um, and so, but
when you say 175 clinic sites,
that's across New Mexico or
where's the um it's the 2nd of
the last bullet under the
request of 25.
for 25 mil. Um, yeah, Mr.
Chairman, yes, that is, sorry,
I've got myself. um
that's pro that's the uh that's
the number of clinics that the
primary care association, um,
represents. So their member
clinics are 175 clinic sites in
90 communities, and we use their
data for purposes of uh being
able to demonstrate need. We
have a long laundry list. We've
shown it to you a couple of
times. We haven't made a dent in
that laundry list of projects.
OK, so, so then, uh, I'll wrap
up now, Madam Chair, but so just
for my edification, there was 5
million there to begin with
Was it all used
Mister Chairman, Madam Chair,
yes, we made, we took that $5
million we leveraged it into,
um, about 12.5 million of loans.
OK.
with um the principle of
forgiveness in place, um, the
legislature made an additional
it, it was really about a, a
bounds pass the 9 million
additional 4 million went in,
but that very same year, 4
million came out. So, um
largely that happened and then
900,000 has been taken back for
solvency purposes. So a total of
$9 million has gone into the
fund and we have a net of
general fund appropriation of
900,000.
But you plan to get that back
Mr. Chairman, we'd love to be
able to help the communities,
the, the, so now fast forward
this gets approved, then
suddenly that fund is now $25
million for these 170, well,
these 175, but now some of these
like like uh Southwest Car and
Albuquerque, they're where they
have one in Albuquerque, 2 in
Santa Fe. They're opening
another one that's 4, so then
First Choice Community
Healthcare has like 6 or 7, do
you know how many they have?
7, they have 7, so those that
those 4 for Southwest Care
Center, 7 for First Choice,
they're in that 175 number.
I believe they are. I believe
they're part of the primary care
association FQHCs. Yes, you
don't have to be an FQHC in
order to, no, but most of them
are because they're primarily
operating in rural areas. So we
have of the 20 loans that we've
made to date, we've made 4 in
Grant County. Uh
3 in Riobiba County, 3 in Taos,
uh, 4 in Donana, uh, 2 in San
Miguel, one in Cue. I mean
they're primarily in these more
rural parts of the, uh, state.
We've only done 3 in urban
counties, one in Sandoval, one
in Santa Fe, and one in, uh,
Berlingo County.
So then those 175 are now
eligible to do propose submit
applications for any part of
that 25 million.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
that's correct. And, and the
reason that's important is it
takes a while for them to plan
their projects. Um, so what
we've been able to do is help
people, uh, really in a very
serendipitous way, which is we
find out we have money available
because some loan has been
prepaid and the client comes up
and we now have money to fund
that one client's needs. That
doesn't mean it's the most
important project. It means it's
the one that made itself
available when we had money. And
that's really, um, what we're
hoping to do or to find really
impactful projects, and that
means that the community
providers need an opportunity to
plan their requests to put
together proposals, and we have
not provided our communities
that opportunity since the late
90s. 0 wow, this is interesting.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
so as an example, one of those
first choice clinics has a
boiler system that was put in
when President Truman was
president and um needs to be
completely gutted out of there
and redone and the that is a
potential project they could
submit on for something for some
of these dollars, Mr. Chairman,
if it is a part of a part of a
facility that serves as a
primary care, then yes, we have
done roofs, parking lots, um,
HVAC systems. Again, these are
loans, and if they um enter into
a contract for service with NMFA
and the Department of Health.
They're able to repay a portion
of those services, that loan
with contract for Services. So
roughly uh under those programs,
it's 20% of their annual
principal and interest payments,
and the interest now is at 2%,
so these would be very
attractive loans for these
non-profit clinics, um, and if
they're able to provide those
free and reduced services for
indigent patients that would put
them in a position to get
grant-like terms for about 20%
of the loan. Outstanding. All
right, thank you very much,
Madam Chair. This is I can fully
support this. This is, this is a
good move, so thank you.
Representative Kates, thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and thank you
very much. I am so very excited.
that as a committee we feel
heard and that you're uh uh
proposing this funding for the
primary care.
giver. I mean, it is, it is
essential, especially when our
healthcare is under attack right
now, but, um,
those, uh
mid-range clinics, those
federally qualified.
um, clinics are essential.
That's where most of our
healthcare comes and, and, and,
and the tours I've taken, most
of them do have some sort of
pharmacies. They're limited
pharmacies. They may only have a
certain, they may not have like
controlled substances or they
may only have like the 10 most
prescribed drugs in them, but
they do have some kind of uh
uh pharmacy in there, but I
would like to ask a couple of
questions. One is I am a little
disappointed in this proposal
that it looks like there is no
funding for wastewater
treatment. Both, both, both
funds that address
um
wastewater treatment seemed to
be
and I know that when you fund
one thing, you may have to make
some tough choices, but is that
what I'm seeing is that there is
um
that we're not conti is it
because that we are also working
with funds that are being paid
back in the current. Why is
there no new funding for our
wastewater treatments.
So, Madam Chair, I think you're
referring to page 4 in our
request to transfer money from
the PPRF to those 7 identified
funds.
Is that the wastewater you're
talking about?
Yes, thank you. Um, it is, well,
for both of them, the NMFA Water
and wastewater Project grant and
the NMED wastewater Facilities
construction. So Madam Chair, we
are limited to the 14 to the 35%
of our governmental gross
receipts tax. So we have roughly
$14 million available for these
projects. Um, it is the only
source of funding that we have
those dollars are the only
source that we have to match the
federal drinking water money. So
in years passed, when our CAP
grant was $8 million
we were talking about a 20 $2.5
million dollar match. We're now
talking about $36 million so we
have 7, you know, $7 million
that we need from those funds.
So we take half of it
immediately just to match the
federal dollars for the drinking
water program. Um, the question
then remains, how do you use the
remaining 7 million. Our
recommendation is that 5 million
go to the Department of Cultural
Affairs. It is the only source,
as you heard last time, of
regular kind of maintenance
funding that they get is through
this facilities fund, and $2
million to the local government
planning fund. Again, that
doesn't have another source of
capital. Um, if you chose to do
one of these other wastewater
projects, something else has to
give. And so the question is, do
you take the money back from the
cultural affairs, um, we would
really strongly advocate that if
you don't fund the drinking
water, we're not going to get
those $36 million and we don't
have another place that we can
get those dollars. We're not
funded, you know, those kinds of
things aren't funded, uh, by the
legislature for us. So
that it's a tough question.
There's not enough money. The
first one though, I can't
answer, the water wastewater
project grant Fund hasn't been
operational in 20 years. So we
don't want that money because we
don't want to open up that
program again. Um, and unless
we're gonna have a regular, if,
if it's a regular program and
we're gonna get regular pots of
money, then we'd certainly
you know, be happy to talk about
it, but for the most part, those
projects now just go to the
Water Trust board, particularly
now that wastewater is
available.
Um, the NMED wastewater facility
Construction loan Fund, about
half the time since, uh, since
this law went into effect, I
think in
like 1995 or 1996, um
about half their money has come
from the PPRF and the other half
has come from the general fund
as part of their request. I
don't know how they're handling
it. Um, they seem to have been
able to get the state match
though, um, and the rip loan,
they got a state appropriation,
and I don't even know if they
still operate the solid waste
Facility Grant Fund. I don't
think they do. So two of those,
I believe, are, uh, old funds
and the legislature, they put
$20 million into the RIP program
recently.
thank you, Madam Chair, and I
understand that's why we're here
making those tough decisions,
but I just want to say out loud,
disappointing, but we're also
in attack to keep our uh medical
uh services accessible for New
Mexicans, and I applaud the
funding of the primary care, and
I will support that. I just want
to say that there's, there's
tough choices out there and one
is cultural affairs. It's
shocking to me that we only
provided 5 million to begin
with.
Um, it's shocking to me that
they're not asking for more. Um
uh, I, I understand that they're
getting funding from other
sources. This is not their only
funding, but as we increase our,
um, visibility to increase our
economic development through our
cultural a fair sites, um
making sure that we have
invested in our infrastructure,
especially when it comes to
water and sewage is essential in
being able to make that. And so
I applaud you for once again
doing the tough decisions, but I
do want to say out loud that
those, those are decisions and
they're they're they're, they're
difficult ones and, and I think
we should continue to talk about
um other sources of funding, um,
for these very important
projects. Thank you, Marquina.
OK, and Representative
Royal Cabeo
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um
Marquita for the presentation. I
have um is, is the University of
New Mexico, um, healthcare,
primary care, I mean, what do
they call them? Family care
system in a member of the
association. I was trying to
look it up right now and I
didn't move as fast as I could.
Madam Chair, I, I, I don't know
that answer, and again they
don't have to, they just have to
be licensed by the Department of
Health in order to, um, uh,
apply to that fund. So it's not
a requirement. We just note that
a large
number of, um, providers are in
rural areas and as you know,
those are the ones that are
probably having the most
difficult time, um, staying
alive.
Yes, and, and, um, that's why I
think it's important for us to
prioritize however way we can.
It's going to be based on um the
application process as I'm sure.
However, we do have very um
high poverty in pockets of our
urban areas that I know several
healthcare systems are trying to
address through their family
care, um, including UNMH and
it's one of those that have been
trying to address um
growth in these various
communities, so, uh, I was just
curious about that. And then,
um, I had, what was the other
question?
um
so in terms of the um
you haven't drawn up or, or are
there um
loan requirements and guidelines
already drawn up for this
particular fund.
Madam Chair, yes, the primary
care capital fund, we refreshed
the rules and policies last
year, um, following the 2023 law
change from Senate Bill 423.
Senator Rodriguez, sponsored a
bill that allows for working
capital to also be an eligible
use of the primary care capital
fund Behavioral Health Capital
Fund, and childcare Facility
Fund, um, and that's because,
you know, if you want to do
expansion, it's not enough to
just build the building. You
need the funding to hire the
individuals.
So that was added in 2023, and
we refreshed the rules and
policies following that.
Thank you, Marquita, and um
so I'm, I've been a really
strong proponent of primary care
because
it is the first stop
in determining um
critical illnesses
and um a holistic approach.
to the delivery of healthcare,
which our families need. I know
that for far too long, specialty
care has not been the way to go.
because our family care, family
practitioners are trained
holistically to address the
entire mind, body and soul if
should, should it be necessary,
um, and so that includes dental
care, vision care. They're able
to, um, determine the best care
models for each family. And if
it requires, Madam Chair,
referrals to specialty care,
then so be it. But we have found
throughout the years in
research that, uh, actually our
family care, primary care
providers are better at making
these determinations. So I'm um
research that, uh, actually our
family care, primary care
providers are better at making
these determinations. So I'm
really happy that we're
increasing or yeah, we're
basically increasing the fund
and there's so much more need,
so this is just the beginning as
I see it, and Madam Chair, as I
shared with Marquita, I'm happy
to sponsor this piece of
legislation. In fact,
volunteering to do so and um I
have been part of myself and
other legislators were part of
the enactment of the primary
care bill, um, when was it? I
can't remember when it was, um.
a few years, this particular
bill was created in 1995, was
passed, yes, and then we brought
up the um most recent bill. I
can't remember what it was. I
think it was 2 or 4 years ago,
which
um
I think it was 4 years ago. I'm
not sure
Um, but anyway, because of
of that, Madam Chair, I have
volunteered along with anybody
else who wants to join in
sponsoring this particular piece
of legislation. Thank you.
And as we hear, we're not gonna
like determine exactly till next
meeting, November 3rd, but if
there's things that just speak
to you have it in your mind to
share. I just have one question
and Marquita, that's these funds
that haven't functioned for 20
years
So where did you shut them out
and like in them, or do they
just stay there eternally.
Um, Madam Chair, we had, uh,
actually attacked that a couple
of different times, um, and it
just ended up being a lot of
work. It wasn't hurting anyone
to have it on the books. We'd
like to get it cleaned up. We
actually had identified the
childcare revolving loan fund
because we'd only made one loan
of $50,000. And in doing that,
people, uh took heed or took
notice of the fund, and now it's
funded with 11.75 million, um,
and the program has been
substantially uh rejuvenated as,
as a result of
our partnership with the ECECD.
So we, um, we tried, we tried to
get rid of 3 programs and, um,
one of them got rejuvenated and
the other one still sit there.
Uh, we could take that off. I
think it just depends on how
much
uh work we want to do through
the session. There's usually a
lot bigger fish to fry.
Thank you. And with that, please
continue.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I
wanted to just go through those
very big pieces, um, the
economic development we evolving
report, uh, the revolving fund
report is uh required under
statute. We're required to give
you two reports during the
interim, and that was put in
place largely due to um the
accommodation of not having
legislative authorization. So in
lieu of you authorizing these
large lists of potential
projects we now give you
in-depth reports on status of
the funds. Last month you
received the most in-d
ep th report. You got to see the
five portfolios that are
operated out of the economic
development revolving fund, the
number of loans we have
outstanding. This report, I just
wanted to share with you where
we're headed with the dollars
that we do have available in
that program. Um, so on page 8
of the largest source of dollars
that we have under the state,
the SWEPA programs is federal
dollars, about 97% of the
funding that we've received to
date are 98%, has been as a
result of federal funding. Um,
the state Small Business Credit
initiative is the largest source
of that capital, um, we got that
first in 2011 and it was
recently reauthorized by
Congress, um, and we are the
state is in a position to
receive up to $74 million in
federal funds to help the flow
of capital to small businesses
that truly is, how can we
support small businesses in
times of um uh
credit retraction. Um, so the
most recent version of SSBCI as
we call it, the 2.0 program
focuses on socially and
economically disadvantaged
individuals, which is both a, a
geographic, um, designation as
well as a demographic.
uh, designation and then very
small businesses which are
businesses that are defined with
fewer than 10 employees. Um, the
economic development department
gets these dollars and we are
working in partnership with them
on 4 different programs that
will ultimately trying to fund
with the federal dollars on, uh,
the next page, um, page, it
doesn't have page number. I
apologize, uh, titled NMFA
Business.
uh ecosystem, um, we had
commissioned a report a couple
of years ago. You got, uh, an
actual in-depth report on that
from the authors of the study,
but we wanted to understand how
to best use or best target the
venture capital dollars that you
made available under the New
Mexico venture capital program
you placed with us several years
back, as well as the, um, uh
anticipated SSBCI funding. SSBCI
allows you to use the dollars in
a variety of ways. You could do
venture capital, capital access,
direct lending, loan
participations, um, what they
call a credit enhancement
program, a variety of authorized
tools in the states have to
decide how to best utilize those
funds and meet the federal $10
of private capital for every
federal dollar, um, uh, formula.
So one of the things that came
out of that study was
just a snapshot of what New
Mexico businesses look like, uh,
you'll see there on the bottom
left-hand side, small
businesses. There's about 167
7000, small businesses
60, uh, 41 of them or 42,000 of
them, um, are employer-based
firms. The other 126,000 are
non-employer firms, so they
don't have employees of the
employers of the ones that do,
of the 40, roughly 42,000 that
do, you can see that the vast
majority have fewer than 10
employees, um, and then
ultimately, we determine that
small business, these small
employer firms provide over
300,000 jobs in New Mexico
and account for 47% of the
employment.
So
um, and I'll just turn to the
next page on page 10. Um, so
this is where we decided to
focus the money. We looked at
what banks are able to do
efficiently. We looked at where
we have, uh
um, CDFIs, folks like Dream
Spring West, uh, the loan fund
Nina, they're serving of a
number of these clients already
and we're, we're trying to
figure out is what we were
looking at was where do we best
target these dollars to help
those businesses that are not
already supported and so on page
11 you can see that we put, um,
funding with our partners at the
Economic Development department.
Um, we have about 22 million
ultimately anticipated to go to
vent ure capital. $27 million to
a loan participation program, $5
million to a capital access
program which helps um very
small businesses and the
economic development department
has $10 million allocated for
its collateral assistance
program. Um, and so you see
that's if we ultimately make
enough loans to get that $9
million kind of SETI bonus they
call it. Then that's how the $74
million will be distributed on
the bottom of page 11 there.
Um, and then lastly on page 12,
we'd note that if we're not able
to get that sunset, the only way
for New Mexico Finance Authority
to utilize those dollars is to
turn those dollars back to
venture capital.
So right now we've got them
targeted for loan
participations, and we work with
banks on that. Right now we are,
um, talking to about 15, uh,
to banks at about, for about 15
projects that are looking to
apply for those dollars. Um,
we're talking to four banks
currently or CDFIs to um operate
in that capital access program,
but if we're not able to
actually relieve ourselves of
that sunset date either by an
extension or elimination, then
the only opportunity we will
have for those dollars is to put
them back into vent
ure capital. So that's kind of
where we started with this
program and um we'd like to
continue to operate the loan
participation and capital
access but that that prior
legislative authorization
requirement is the difficulty
that we're facing in being able
to utilize the federal funds. So
that's really the, the purpose
behind our request ultimately to
extend those dollars or extend
that extend and or eliminate
that um legislative
authorization requirement.
OK, and Madam Chair, the last
one I wanted to do was to give
you an update on the Water Trust
board, um, seems like I'm going
to be giving you a report on the
Water Trust board every year,
but there's a reason. There's a
lot of money and a lot of good
things happening in the Water
Trust board. You heard a number
of those things in, in uh
July or June when we were in Las
Vegas, um, but since then we
actually have a couple of things
to report. So, um, our 2025,
let's see on page 14, uh, 1 of
the things that we have been
working with the Interstate
Stream Commission on is their
review, um, or
on applications for their New
Mexico unit fund several years
ago, uh, the Water Trust Board
was named as the entity to vet
the projects to be funded
ultimately by the Interstate
Stream Commission from the New
Mexico Unit Fund, um, and we
opened a pilot project in
February. Um, it ran for about 6
weeks, and that was for pla
planning and design projects. So
it was our first attempt at
working with the Interstate
Stream Commission. They set
policies on the kinds of
projects they wanted us to look
for.
Um, ultimately, we received 21
applications, uh, totaling about
$12.8 million. Um, one was
ineligible and one removed its,
um, application. So of the
remaining 19, uh, we ended up,
um
recommending 11 applications for
just under, um, for just over $4
million. And we did that based
on what, how the projects, uh,
were scored when we looked at
the evaluation criteria and I
have that there listed on 14.
It's contribution to
regionalization goals, its
contributions to system
resiliency, to water security,
to the economic health of the
local community, uh, the ability
to protect and enhance or
maintain cultural life ways or
resources, um, and level
of, uh, local community
engagement and participation as
well as urgency. So those were
the things that were outlined in
the Interstate Stream
Commission, um, goals for the,
for the program and so we
created criteria and evaluated
those applications thusly. The
application scores range from 51
to 67, uh, 60 points is
typically where we look to cut
those off. And so 11 projects
were ultimately recommended and
vetted. So that was the first
time in a couple of years. It's
been a multi-year effort to get
that going, and we were really
happy.
uh to have that done, the first
award done. So with that, I
think we'll open a construction,
um, application at the beginning
of the calendar year 2026, we'll
go through a review process and
the Interstate stream Commission
will revisit its policies to
make sure that it's hitting the
targets it hopes to hit.
Um, the other thing that you
heard, the beginnings of was an
update on our um technical
assistance program. Colonel
Quintana gave you a sense of,
uh, the RFP that went out, we
selected, uh, 9 technical
assistance providers. They are
engineers, community
facilitators, um, accountants,
financial advisors, attorneys,
um
those are the folks that we can
put out to the community to help
in one of two areas. One is
small system planning, and the
other is the facilitation of
regionalization. Um, so to date,
as of the end of August, we had
approved 9 applications for
small system planning, um, they
are projects in primarily in
pretty rural areas, McKinley
County, Rio Ripa, Eddie, uh,
Guadalupe and Taos, and then two
regionalization facilitations,
one in the Penasco area and one
up in the northwest, uh, part of
the state, Ingamerico. So we're
really happy that this effort
again took a while to get going,
um, but we're really pleased to
be able to provide that direct
technical assistance for two
areas that these small systems
really need.
Um, and that application opened
at the end of June, so you were
just hearing about the efforts
to start that process.
Um, at the end of August at that
meeting of the Water Trust Board
on page 16, we took care of the
second half of our awards, um,
these last several years, the
amount of money we've had
available, uh, has required that
we end up doing two award
cycles, one in May and then one
in, um, or this one was April
and August, the colonius is May
and September, um, and that's
largely because the several of
those large applications, if
they have any problems with
their audits, we can't make
those awards.
so we have been, um, extending
the compliance deadline for
several of those, um,
communities to finish their
audit requirement if they're a
little behind and still be able
to, uh, receive funds.
For 2025, the Water Trust Board
was dealing with the potential
for up to $357.8 million. That
comes from a high amount of
severance tax bond proceeds, the
net allocation is 154 roughly.
We got a water trust fund
distribution of $4 million and
then the in 2025, the
legislature you all set aside
$200 million for projects
authorized in the 2025 and 2026
sessions.
So that 200 million, if you add
that leaves a potential for $357
million of awards. Uh, we made
an initial 6060 awards totaling
just 146.6 million and in August
we went back, approved an
additional 4 applications, um
totaling 62, I'm sorry, 11
applications from 4 applicants
totaling $62 million. So our
total awards are 208.8 million
for, uh, the 2025 session. 74
awards were made, um, which is
the largest we've done to date.
Um,
and as always, about 3/4 of it
goes to water storage and
conveyance.
What you will see in November at
that meeting is our request for
legislative authorization for
Water Trussport projects. Uh,
the part of the application that
because it requires legislative
authorization. We start this in
July. We do training and we ask
for applicants to submit their
notice of intent to file an
application that gives us some
sense of what kind of um uh
volume we're gonna have uh for
projects and it also um allows
for them to get access to our
online application system. The,
we received 135 notices of
intent. It's the largest number
of notices we've received to
date. The notices of intent
total $685.5 million. Um, again,
most of them for water storage
and conveyance, but I'll pull
your attention to the
wastewater, the first year that
it's eligible here. Uh, we
received 40 notices of intent
for wastewater
projects for uh totaling 263.6
million. That doesn't mean
they're gonna submit
applications or that they'll
submit applications for those
full amounts, but it's an
indication of need, um, in these
areas. um
the application is actually due
on Thursday, so we'll find out
exactly how many ultimately
file. Um, I did a review on
Friday and a large number of
them were in process. Very few,
if any, were actually completed
and submitted. So there's a big
week for Water Trust board
applicants. The thing I've
noticed that there's a high
concentration of municipal
applicants of the 86 applicants,
um, so 135 projects were
submitted by 86 applicants, so
several
multi-applicant application
entities are being anticipated
here, but 38 of the applicants
are municipalities, and I think
the highest number we've seen to
date was 24. So we're getting
more and more, uh, requests from
municipalities, um.
and from municipalities we've
never seen before. So there are
brand new entities, um,
approaching the Water Trust
board this year.
Uh, they will be invited after
they complete their application
and submit it on October 2nd and
3rd, the Water Trust Board holds
in-person meetings so that the
applicants have the opportunity
to present their projects. The
applications are otherwise
reviewed by a technical team.
This gives the the communities,
um, the applicants, they can
tell their story, give a little
bit of a 3rd, 3 dimension, um,
aspect to it, which you really
can't pull out of a technical
application. Um, you can pull
out specs, but actually
understanding the urgency behind
it is important for these
communities, and then it gives
the opportunity for the Water
Trust Board to ask questions as
well, so that when they're
making those awards, they are
well informed of the projects
that they are recommending to
you all and ultimately when they
make the award at the end of the
year.
Um, so that's gonna happen on
October 2nd and 3rd, um, and
it'll happen at the finance
Authority's new offices in our
new boardroom, and we're excited
to have, um, to be home for that
one.
and then lastly, um, we hope to
see you there in November.
That's when we hope we can have
the oversight meeting in
November there, and you can see
firsthand the Finance Authority
operations and, um, and we can
we can be hosts for the first
time in our 30-something year,
uh, history. So those are, those
are, that's my, uh, water trusts
board update. You'll see more
when I know more, but just
wanted to give you a sense of
what kind of volume we were
seeing in the Water Trust board
activity.
I have one question. What, what
is a typical interstate stream
commission
I mean we've heard all these
water trust board. How did they
vary because I start seeing
streams and wondering what are
they?
So Madam Chair, we work with the
Interstate Stream Commission,
um, on their review of the uh
New Mexico unit Fund
applications. The otherwise
don't really act, they're not
really partners in the, um, in
the Water Trust board in the
sense they have applied from
time to time for endangered
Species Act, implementation
projects. I think they've
received, uh, 4 awards over the
last 25 years or so, a small
amount of money, um, but their
job is to, uh, they, they are in
a lot of uh
multi-state compacts dealing
with the streams that go through
those waters. That's their
primary purpose.
I see. So like the.
situations with Colorado or
Texas, that's what that is,
Madam Chavet's with the
Interstate stream Commission
does, yes.
I do not see any questions
and what I do see
is that
we're through for the day
which is incredible, um, which
means that you have free time.
A dinner's being provided at
5:30 at Maria's Italian kitchen?
Did you want to say something
about how to get there, um, yes,
thank you, Madam Chair. Marise
is down this, it's on this
street. I don't remember the
I don't remember the address
16011601. OK, you just head down
the street. It's going to be on
the left. When you drive in, it,
it's behind it is the Days Inn,
she said. Park on the other side
of the entrance there, and
there's a, there's a private
entrance. You don't have to go
through the restaurant and
there's a, there'll be a sign on
the door.
5:30. See you all there. So if
you're wandering around, we know
who said they're coming.
and we'll look for you
and then, um, Sabina has an
announcement.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee,
so
for files open to be endorsed.
I am requesting that those be
sent to me by September 26th
with like any additional
information, um, Marquita, I'm
not sure. I know for the water
russ board recommendations. I
don't know if that would affect
Madam Chair. The Water Trust
board won't make its
recommendations to the
legislature. They won't approve
that till October 29th, I think
is the day. So we'll have the
form of the appli the form of
the legislation to you and the
project list with all of its
scores as we typically do on
that November for that November
meeting, but we won't have a lot
of information prior to that.
And then I just want to note
that tomorrow's schedule,
uh
we will have box lunches to go
like at 11.
uh, the event is at Columbus.
It's 30
miles away, so you have to allow
time to get there
and there's been maps sent out
by Sabina to study. I think
it's, it's not that big of a
place really, but the maps will
be helpful and then the tour of
Columbus port of entry won't be
at 1:30. It'll be at 12:30 right
after the ceremony. So if you're
worried about time
uh, it'll be closer. And if you
were thinking, well, I signed up
for it, but I'm not gonna go. If
you've never been to Columbus,
and that part of the border, I
highly recommend it.
to see, uh, you can't really
imagine it even with pictures
until you go there.
So I highly recommend it
Madam Chair, I'm being harassed
by, uh, Representative Jones to
fill in the gap of time between
now and dinner that if anybody
wants to go
tour the mortuary.
Welcome to do that.
I will extended my invitation to
open the door if you want to do
that, but I doubt it. We're just
teasing. You're doing all right?
I have a few people,
but I.
You have any requests. Can I
take some people there?
No, I, you know, I enjoy Demi's
beautiful place, uh, and, and
thank you, Madam Chair. Got to
make everybody laugh once in a
while. She's been giggling,
poking at me.
Thanks
I think we're all going to leave
with these questions to ask him
at some point. OK, thank you
everybody for being here again,
dinner at 5:30. Tomorrow is at 9
