Tech area
I get the good morning, uh, Pat
Boone, Senator
from uh
District 27, Chavis Curry,
Debacca Lee, and Roosevelt.
Good morning, Stan Ros I'm the
executive director for the
Coalition of Educational Leaders
and the school superintendents
Association. Good to be here.
Hey, Ms. Montoya, good morning.
Cindy Montoya, New Mexico School
for the Arts, a charter school.
Julie Lucero retired educator
and current
HT program officer for Golden
Apple Foundation and.
Amanda Mcardti Public Education
Department.
um,
representing the Department of
Finance and Administration with
the State Board of Finance and
uh also on the post-school Caity
council.
Good morning, Rhiannon Chavez,
Public school superintendent out
of Cuba Independent School
District in Cuba, New Mexico.
I'm State Representative Andres
Romero. I represent House
District 10, it's far South
Valley, um, in Berna Leo County
and parts of southeast
Albuquerque.
All right, so, um, we'll hold
off any business till we get a
quorum. But we have our council
folks. So good morning, Mr. Yin.
Good morning, Mr. Thank you for
inviting us to be here with you
this morning.
Wanted to provide
a little bit of report on what
we've done since your last
meeting.
that our
two subcommittee chairs to be
with us. Joe, if you wouldn't
mind moving the microphone a
little bit closer. I know it's
acting up but
is that better? I think so,
yeah. Thank you. And we also
have our new interim director
with us today, Larry Tillotson.
Uh, I think you're, you're
familiar with Ashley Lee and
Charles Seli.
uh, who are the two subcommittee
chairs. So again, thank you uh
for the invitation.
Did have a presentation in front
of you today.
and you'll see the topics on the
first page that we're page 2
actually looking at covering uh
and briefing you on.
uh
sort of an overview of the
organization's uh status report
on our executive director
search, uh, current funding
programs, uh, active projects,
those that we awarded last uh
funding cycle.
And we're also in the middle of
a new funding cycle currently.
uh, so we'll let you know what
we've received to date. And, and
if I, if I mean, I'm sorry, is
just so members know, um, since
this is the same panel for both
agenda items for the update as
well as the updated PSCOC rules.
They're going to be combining
the presentation. That's
correct. Just so members know
that we'll be combining those
presentations. So when you have
questions, it'll be over both
items. Sorry about that, Joe.
Thank you. Thank you for that
clarification.
So we want to talk to you about
uh the autocycle projects. These
are projects that have been
previously funded, uh, for
planning and design, and now
they're up for construction and
those, uh, Mr. Sali will be
going over those. Uh, some of
the projects, of course, that
have been completed, that's a
very important part of the
process, completing projects and
closing them out.
And then uh finally we'll get a
a uh status report from the AMS
subcommittee chair, Miss Lee,
and uh then our executive
director will talk about
measurement and verification of
uh update in the program that we
run there, that will be
available, uh, for any questions
or any other topics that you may
want to discuss with us. So, um
we turn to uh
I'm having a hard time looking
at finding the numbers, but next
page is the sort of the
organization and how we're set
up. Of course, uh, the oversight
task force that you all sit on
are uh uh
provided an overview and and
policy direction and of course,
listen to us and others in terms
of any changes that you may
need, uh, to the, to the author,
authorizing legislation or
regulations.
then we have the public school
Capital Outlay Council,
nine-member committee that
really uh manages the allocation
of of of the funds and uh
develops policies to do that. I
mentioned that we have 2
subcommittees, the award
subcommittee in the
Administration Maintenance and
Standards Committee, the award
subcommittee gets into the
detail on individual projects
and uh uh gets into the weeds,
you can say about uh all
of the square footage, the costs
and so on.
Our administration and
maintenance subcommittee, uh,
takes care of our, a lot of our
uh policy issues, strategic
planning, uh, of course,
maintenance and um
provides a uh
sort of an outlook for us in
terms of where we, where we go.
And then, of course, the public
school facilities Authority is
the staff, and they actually
implement all of the pro
programs and projects that, that
you all have authorized.
Next page is a listing of all of
our uh PSCOC members.
Uh, you can see we have a good
uh uh it's actually a great team
that we work with, uh, from
various, uh, agencies. They
bring their expertise to the
council and to the decisions we
make and are, are very uh
we work very well together.
Um
you may have heard that, uh, in
early July.
we received a notice of the uh
that our director, Iris Romero
was leaving. She had been with
us almost 2 years, and uh it's a
couple of things have happened.
She became a grandma twice in in
uh 2 weeks, I think. So she's
taking some time there and uh I
decided to leave so we initiated
a executive director search.
We started, of course, by, uh, I
appointed a subcommittee, which
includes the two
subcommittee chairs and, uh, the
Secretary of Education, as well
as myself to, uh,
uh sit on a
preliminary search committee
where we're uh
we went ahead and authorized the
posting of the position.
and uh
we are in the process now of
um looking at applications. We
started uh and gave about a
three-week period for.
uh applications, uh,
unfortunately, the, the number
of applications that we received
was not that high of those that
that qualified and met the
requirements, so we extended it
another 3 weeks.
and uh the current uh deadline
um
uh the new deadline was, uh,
let's see, September
August 2 August 27th, uh,
actually 26th.
was the uh
ending of the, uh, the next
period, so we did get an
additional uh
number of applications. Uh,
we've reviewed those last week
and we're in the process of
scheduling interviews at this
time for next week.
We'll do a preliminary set of
interviews. We'll narrow down
the field, uh, and then the
final uh decision and interviews
will be made down the line in uh
October.
And we hope to have someone, uh,
by the end of October or uh
beginning of November. In the
meantime, uh, Larry Tillotson is
is serving as interim director.
He's got over 20 years'
experience in this field or tee
with the
uh uh
public school uh facilities
authority, and I, I believe many
of you know him and uh we're
very comfortable with that
position uh for the interim
period.
That's the uh
the overview of the executive
director search. We're hoping
again to, you know, this is a
very uh important position and
very a lot of
serious responsibilities uh in
terms of
tracking the funding that you
all provide with making sure the
projects move along and making
sure we're making the right
decisions in that process.
Uh, just, uh, another slide here
in terms of staffing.
uh with uh PSFA is currently
staffed to 50 of the 56 budgeted
positions.
Uh.
There are 6 vacancies, of
course, the executive director,
a staff attorney.
that were the uh
staff is interviewing for
uh programs, uh, manager.
field division, uh, folks.
and uh all of these positions
are posted on the PSFA website.
and externally
So
the next slide
is the um
programs that we're
administering you all may be
familiar with these are
standards-based capital outlay
programs. These are the large uh
replacement or new, new uh uh
school, uh, projects, systems,
projects which are replacing a
particular system in the school
district
uh the pre-K, uh, capital
outlay, uh, replacement and
addition of pre-K facilities, a
teacher housing pilot program
that we're that temporarily on
hold. We've been, I think, very
successful and uh uh we've
provided reports on that. And of
course, the lease assistance
programs, primarily for charter
schools in any district schools
that are leasing property from
others.
And then finally the facility's
master plan assistants where we
provide funding and assistance
to each district to make sure
they have a
current facilities master plan,
uh, in place.
So at this point, I'll turn it
over to Larry, uh, to go over
the uh active projects list.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
Again, my name's Larry
Tillerson. I'm the uh interim uh
executive director.
for the public school f
Facilities Authority, just want
to report something that I think
is very important with regards
to our primary operations is how
many projects is the PSFA
managing on a day to day, week
to week, month to month basis.
The amount of total active
projects equals 153, and those
can be broken down into our
primary standards-based
systems-based pre-K teacher
housing, facility master plans
and measurement verification
programs. We are currently
managing 66 standards-based
projects across the state of New
Mexico, with our current staff,
73 of those are systems-based
projects, 10 pre-K projects or
teacher housing projects.
and these particular teacher
housing ones are managed through
the standards-based program.
and then as a part of the pilot
program for the teacher housing.
We have 5 currently being
managed in, uh, as a part of our
project's internally. Our
facility master plans are also
managed, uh, considered a
project. They don't necessarily
come to light, but I think it's
important that we communicate
what our staff is assisting New
Mexico school districts with as
they progress with their
five-year facility master plans.
And then last but not least
we have a measurement and
verification, which I term
energy management on steroids,
if you will, real-time energy
management solutions for New
Mexico school districts. We are
currently piloting 5 districts
across the state of New Mexico
and progressing forward with
phase 2. The next slide in your
books this morning, page 9, just
an update to the FY 25
standards-based projects that
we're managing uh in at uh the
PSFA.
Last year we approved 4 New
Mexico school districts for
standards-based projects.
silver
with combined school
replacement, and they are all
ranked, uh, by the way,
accordingly to our criteria,
they're ranked number 11,
Bloomfield. They're doing a
consolidation replacement of 3
schools across the spectrum of
their footprint, and again they
are all ranked accordingly and
uh have the opportunity to come
for funding through the PSCOC
Rio Rancho, Lincoln Middle
School, ranked number 88.
They're in a planning study for
system upgrades and a partial
renovation, renov
ation excuse me
and then once again Rio Rancho
for Rio Rancho High School
ranked number 99. They're in a
planning study, and they plan to
do system upgrades, including a
special ed classroom edition.
Page 10 in your books is the
fiscal year 25 system-based
awards that we awarded uh in the
past year.
Those include 4 systems-based
programs, Alamogoda High School,
Clayton Junior high school.
Eunice High School
Grants High School, Hatch Valley
Middle School, Logan combined,
Riodoso High School.
Silver Consolidated School
District for Harrison H. Schmidt
and La Plata Middle School.
and then we have 5 demolition
awards to New Mexico school
districts, who include Cimarron,
Corona, Grants, Lovington, and
Toumari.
The next slide in your books is
the uh FY 25 prekindergarten
awards.
Rio Rancho, Shining Stars
Preschool. They are currently in
the planning study, uh, for an
addition
and then the FOI 25 teacher
housing pilot program, there
were 2 additional New Mexico
school districts that came
forward, uh, in FY 25 to include
Corona and hatch Valley School
Districts, or a total of 5 in
the current.
pilot program
Pardon me
The next slide in your books.
slide number 12 is the fiscal
year 26 capital outlay Awards
cycle, uh, through the
awards subcommittee and the
PSCOC, we've determined this
award cycle would open up July
1st, 2025. It's currently open
today. It, uh, includes, um,
applications for standards-based
systems-based, pre-kindergarten,
and pilot teacher housing
funding programs.
and I do take that back for a
moment. The pilot teacher
housing funding program is
currently on hold, and we're
doing a complete analysis to
basically determine the
viability of that program moving
forward.
The application cycle closes
September 30th of this year. Uh,
what is happening currently is
what happens every single year.
We expect, as the deadline
approaches, we're going to see
more and more New Mexico school
districts getting in at the end
of the finish line.
so we expect to see a lot more
in that list row, um, advantages
of this cycle, of course, we do
an anticipate year over year
that there may be a higher
volume of applications than in
previous years, so we have to be
prepared.
Um.
hence the opportunity for just
one cycle. There's always a
potential for a second round
cycle to open depending on how
many people do come apply. We
just want to make sure that we
have affecting staffing levels
to be able to manage that type
of workload.
Um
So again, those could be
challenges. Age 13 in your books
is just a preliminary list of
the pre-applications received
thus far.
Uh, that includes 4
standards-based applications for
Roswell High School, Roswell
Goddard High School
Mount Mountaineer Elementary
School and Truth or Consequences
Middle School, all ranked uh
appropriately, uh, meeting our
criteria. One systems-based
applications so far for Mercury
Charter School, and then he's a
demolition, one pre-kindergarten
application for reserve
and then last but not least, we
have a teacher housing pilot
application for Clayton
Municipal School District.
page 13 in your e-books. I will
hand this over to Mr. Charles
Sali for update.
Uh, Mr. Chair, there have been a
number of uh projects that have
some of which are uh date back
to 2021, kind of old. They're
coming back to the council
asking for uh updated award, uh,
language. As you recall the um
council approved a new square
footage calculator at the end of
last year, many of these
projects that were in the design
phase, um.
you know, felt that they wanted
to come back to, uh, fit
underneath that new, uh,
calculated gross square footage
and the council's approved that.
There are a number of older
projects that came back wanting
to do the same thing. Uh, one of
the common themes I've observed,
uh, with this is the calculator
really focused on instructional
space.
Um, but there's a great desire
out there amongst school
districts to increase gymnasium
space, which didn't change under
the the calculator, both for uh
just general size of the, of the
gym, but, but then also bleacher
space for basically community
events. So that's something that
the council has been grappling
with this fall and, and it
proved those projects uh under
the broadest uh level of
flexibility for uh school
districts. So you can see those
on uh slides 14 and 15
and and what we've got in in the
pipeline coming back.
The Mexico School for the Deaf
this is a replacement project of
a campus that they have in
Albuquerque for a preschool
students been determined that uh
the facility needs replacement
as opposed to an addition, uh,
there
struggling with figuring out how
to uh find a site for that uh
and working with Albuquerque
Public Schools, which owns the
property right next door. Uh, so
they're still working through
that and, and the design phase.
In terms of completed projects
on uh slide 16, you can see a
list of those, a handful of uh
demolition, uh, projects have
been completed and then some
older projects including Los
Luna Middle School and
uh Hobbs High School in Tier C
uh combo school. Uh, those
systems-based projects have been
completed as well.
That'll hand it back over to.
Larry or Joe or actually Ashley.
Thank you and good morning, Mr.
Chair, members, uh, happy to be
here today to provide a quick
update on some of the recent
initiatives of the
administration, maintenance and
uh standards Subcommittee
activity. Uh, I'm on page 18,
uh, for your following. Uh, I'm
gonna begin by talking very
briefly about the strategic
plan, so, um, uh, the council
guided staff to engage with a
third party consultant to
basically create a uh a new
strategic plan for PSFA
from the ground up. It was a
five-year, uh, or 5 year, 5
month, uh, collaborative
process. Uh, they engaged with
focus groups. They conducted
surveys, including those of the
council and districts to develop
that. Um, the council did
approve that plan this last
January, but uh a staff and
Larry, who I know is very
passionate about this project
and has been leading it, uh,
would say this is a living
document that they continue to
update and uh, you know, as they
get the
additional feedback from, from
districts as their initiatives
change and their focuses change.
Um, but it lays out sort of
organizational challenges, a new
mission statement and things
like that to help guide um PSFA
and the council for the next 5
years, I believe.
Moving to the next slide, this
would be slide 19. Uh, I'm going
to, uh, talk about one of the
larger initiatives, I think
that's going on the AMS uh is
trying to guide, which is the
adequacy planning guide update.
So there, there are really 3
kind of icy, I see it as three
key components, uh, for school
districts when being evaluated
and then when looking at um
renovation or replacement. And
that's the adequacy standards,
the adequacy planning guide in
the gross square footage
calculator. And
as uh I believe Larry mentioned
uh back in September of last
year, the adequacy standards
were updated and approved by the
council. They went into effect
this January.
And that really is um
essentially a document that's
utilized to evaluate existing
facilities and the adequacy of
the existing facilities, which
then leads to sort of the
conditions index and the
rankings. The adequacy planning
guide is really a key document
that's used by design
professionals, the districts and
contractors in making sure that
new facilities meet specific
standards and guidelines. Uh, so
again, it's part of um the
guidance and the process for the
development of new schools. Uh,
it
' s based on best practices,
both nationally and locally here
in New Mexico. And so this that
process is currently underway.
Um, the adequacy planning guide
has been, uh, initially updated.
So following the approval and
the enactment of the new
adequacy standards. The planning
guide was updated minimally to
incorporate new terminology and
other um factors that could be
updated from the standards. That
being said, the document has a
broader purpose than that and so
staff have been
uh, have initiated um
stakeholder meetings uh
throughout the state to get
feedback from districts,
construction companies, design
professionals to guide what
needs to go into that planning
guide.
Um, I believe they're meeting,
uh, I think it's 6 meetings,
Larry, but correct me if I'm
wrong, maybe 8 throughout the
state, they've had 2 so far
where they're engaging in the
local communities to get
feedback to help develop that
planning guide, and I believe we
anticipate that coming to the
council for review and approval
towards the end of, uh, I think
uh maybe spring of next year. I
think it was a one year process,
but Larry can correct me if I'm
wrong.
Um, so that's the, that update,
but it is a big initiative. Uh,
it's really a, a, a key focus
cause this is one of the key
documents utilized in the design
and development of new schools
around the state.
Larry, did you want me to want
to correct me on that timeline?
No,
Ashley, you're spot on. um, and
we are as Ashley mentioned.
currently in the throes of of
doing these meetings and getting
stakeholder input as to where
they would like to see
improvements to the adequacy
planning guide to better support
New Mexico school districts, and
I will say that also through the
PSFA this is the number one item
on our strategic plan to move
this forward in a very guided
approach. We have 12 months to
update this document, and then
thereafter routinely every 3 to
5 years through policy, we're
going to provide routine updates
instead
of here and there and as needed.
I think this is one of our
longest living performance
measures for the public school
capital outlay and how we
determine who gets the funding.
Top 100, top 300, so it's very
important that we are on task
with creating structure for this
particular document. Thank you.
Thank you, Larry
So moving on to slide 20 this
will, I'll be brief on this. Uh,
this is an annual effort, but I
just wanted to note that the new
rankings have been released by
PSFA and approved by PSCOC, um,
those go out, I believe, in July
of every year.
Um, and, uh, as well as the
weighted, uh, conditions index
and the facilities condition
index, the average for the
state, which you can see on this
slide. Um, I would note that the
uh FY 26 final ranking did
consider the revised adequacy
standards. So those rankings do
take into effect or take into
account the um standards that
went and affected uh at the
beginning of 2025. Uh, so this
has been published, uh, school
districts have an opportunity to
review and provide feedb
ack to the staff if they, um,
have any kind of uh questions
about their ranking or would
like to discuss or or um sort of
appeal that ranking. Uh, usually
we don't get a lot of feedback
from the districts, but that has
been finalized and approved by
the council. And with that, I
believe I will pass it back over
to uh uh Larry to discuss the
measurement and verification,
uh, project.
Thank you, Ashley
Mr. Chair, members, at the last
task force meeting, I provided a
very detailed overview of the
measurement verification pilot
program number 4, which is
managed currently by the
maintenance and operations Group
at the PSFA.
It was handed over from the
field group into our maintenance
division, because we had some
staff that were more keen with
energy management solutions and
drive it through a strategic
planning and and goal
methodologies. Just wanted to
provide you with an update.
That's too short slides, just an
overview of what I provided last
time. No doubt New Mexico spends
New Mexico public school
infrastructure spends about $95
million on util
ities and that was from 2024.
Since 2006, we've partnered with
five New Mexico, actually, I'm
sorry, since 2006, we've
partnered with all 91 New Mexico
school districts to include the
two constitutional schools at
this point.
and providing what's called
FIMS.
A portion of FIMs is dedicated
to a utility module that helps
New Mexico districts manage
their basic utilities through
billing statements in order to
build a better, more robust
energy management plan.
In 2014, through our field group
and some of our different
infrastructure that we've had at
PSFA. We launched a pilot one
initiative to improve energy,
water, and gas efficiency
through real-time energy
management solutions.
Here we are in 2024. We are now
in the 4th pilot. That pilot has
since been transferred to the
maintenance and operations group
through our strategic planning
efforts and goals. We have
partnered now with 5 New Mexico
school districts to implement
what we call pilot 4, with
Gallop, Farmington, Los Lunas,
Hobbs, and Berlio implementing a
real-time robust energy
management program.
I promised last time that I
would provide a
success story through the task
force, and I wanted to
respectfully provide this report
to the council first, because we
were already in the
process of, of talking about
this and trying to move it
forward and talking about the
success stories that we've seen
across the state of New Mexico
with this pilot phase phase 4
program.
We've now implemented this at
166 buildings, over 8, 8,468
square feet of property,
totaling 71 m and over 1500
utility accounts across these
five New Mexico school
districts.
The success story is hope that
everybody has a copy for your
review.
on page 23, just a really quick
update. We've
after a short year of just
managing this program through
these 5 New Mexico school
districts. We've seen a
reduction in water use by 5%.
New Mexico school districts
gained the opportunity to look
at real-time energy and interval
data, uh, saving up to $378,000
annually on water leaks, gas
leaks, peak demand reduction. It
gives them the ability to look
at data in real time to make
actionable decisions right away,
instead of waiting for the bill
cycle to be done, and after
this infrastructure really
provides opportunities for New
Mexico school districts to
integrate training into their
STEM programs. Again, more of
the CTE programs that students
can learn from and teachers can
teach too. It also creates a
great deal of public
transparency. Custom dashboards,
benchmarking across elementary
schools, middle schools, high
schools in the state of New
Mexico, and we can also
benchmark data across other
states, uh, the size
of ours across the United
States.
Moving forward, we've approved
through the PSCOC phase 2, which
will expand the number of
measurement and verification
programs to 20 New Mexico school
districts, really deepening that
education and integration
opportunity, allowing New Mexico
facility managers and energy
managers and managers to better
understand their footprint and
take care of our investments
moving forward.
I want to take a moment
to really think
the subcommittees, the PSCOC and
the task force for the impacts
that we've had over time.
I was just going through some of
our documentation from our last
annual report.
and it reflects a really, really
strong story in my opinion, and
that includes um many, many
successes.
up to $3.1 billion of state
investments in funding since the
inception of PSFA.
You know, that in itself is a
tremendous success story, and I
couldn't have done it. I know
I've been at the PiSFA since
20011 myself. I've been through
now 4 administrations, uh,
including Mr. Bob Garrell, Mr.
Chamblin,
Iris, Martika, and now we're
heading towards the 5th
I'm really excited to be moving
forward and continuing to be a
part of the PSFA as we progress
and, and continuing our success
with supporting our New Mexico
public school infrastructure.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair,
members, we will stand for any
questions you might have this
morning.
All right, thank you all so
much. So members, if you wish to
get on the list, let me know.
Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and let me
ask some questions on the
Teatridge housing. I know that
McKinley County we use quite a
bit of that. Why is that pilot
on hold?
I mean, we put them at Rama, we
put them at Crown Point to
hatch.
Part of it, Mr. Chairman, as we
are seeing the cost per unit
load.
and
you know, down at Zuni is an
example, Mascaro.
um, some of these were uh coming
in and they were being, uh,
built by their regular
construction contractors, as
opposed to homebuilder. In other
cases, we are seeing an
encouraging uh modular uh
purchases and even the modular
purchases were coming in
significantly high.
The other observation we had was
that
trying to solve a housing
shortage issue just through uh
the schools was maybe uh too
much of a stovepipe and, and we
ask.
the SFA staff to go back and
look at how communities could
engage for broader uh housing
projects that maybe the state
would participate in through
uh PSCOC or there could be other
avenues to, you know, to think
about, you know, medical housing
in Cuba as well as teacher
housing as well as, you know,
entrepreneurs or other uh
business folk trying to get a
better lay of the land, uh,
about what the state's role
would be.
those of you that don't know in
Zuni, they built 8 homes.
for 8 million, and so I, I told
them that was pretty much
fraudulent.
to my district, and so, but that
doesn't mean you suspend a
program.
I mean, then, then you just got
to come back and you gotta, you
gotta put controls in there and
say, OK, well, here's what we'll
pay for.
And that's what we've done is,
is basically paused it to say,
what's the lay of the land and
how can we, what's the best
alternative for moving forward
why, why pause it? Why, why
would you do that because
I mean, just look across the
board
and Senator Boone's district,
like, those are places that all
need housing and we, we're kind
of a teacher shortage, but why
would you pause the program, why
would you not just come back and
say, we're gonna put temporary
restrictions until we figure
this out.
because
while we're in
September now, so it's kind of
late, but those school districts
are planning for housing, I
mean,
and I'm not just trying it hard,
but I mean.
putting it on hold and pausing
it or capping it for reasons
would be more sense to me than
just completely pausing it.
because then they're not gonna
plan for it.
Let me, if I could, uh,
Senator, um
add that we know the demand is
there, the demand is.
sky high for these
Even Albuquerque, Santa Fe, but
as you know, the pilot program
has been limited to rural
communities.
uh, Native American communities,
and we feel that
um the impact and the cost, we
really need to, need to take a
look at that and see if we want
to keep those, those limited
applicants in there, uh, opening
it up um would really uh take a
huge chunk out of our, our
funding for schools.
And uh again, 1 or 2 units at
schools is not really taking
care of the.
of the problem. It is addressing
it for a few again. I think
we're, we're gonna look at it,
uh
and, uh, and try to come up with
a good solution to address all
these needs, including looking
at other funding to supplement
this funding, you know, with the
housing agencies that operate in
the state and seeing if we can
tie those in. There was also an
effort to provide tax credits
uh for,
uh, to address housing shortages
in some of these communities,
pursue the larger communities,
but again, we're taking a look
at it and we'll, we'll be back
with the, with the selection,
Mr. Chan again,
how much money do we have?
How much has set aside to say
the wrong kids, so.
Mr. Chair, members, I believe
the money that we allotted to
the pilot program was $10
million in the pilot program
phase.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members, uh, Mr.
Munoz, if I could as well, um,
through the PSFA, the teacher
pilot housing program, uh, at
the point that it was put on
hold, we immediately brought to
the table a review and analysis
of not only the pilot program,
but everything that we've done
from teacher housing from 2 2019
to current, uh, legislative
appropriations, and we've done a
nice white paper, which is
leading to uh some work groups
that we will be developing here
in the next 1 to 2 weeks to
discuss re-engaging this program
and the potential for moving it
forward again. So those are
forthcoming.
Thank you.
So, so the 10 million is that
annual or 10 million is the cap
for the total. Um, Mr. Chair,
members
Mr. Munoz, I don't have an
answer to that, but I will find
out for you, absolutely. And
then, then why did you approve
Zuni at $8 million if you knew
the program, it was gonna fail.
That's a question for the
council.
Miss, why did you approve them
and then say, OK, we'll give you
whatever you gave them.
Mr. Chair, Senator
the, the council is capped how
much uh the council will, will
pay for in that, and I think the
tab the the cap was 500,000 per
unit.
That is correct. 500,000 per
unit?
I think you guys need to, I, I
we're gonna have to look into
this, cause I mean, you guys
could just say, we're only gonna
give you 100,000, right?
But you gave them the max. Why
give them the max when you know
that?
that's highway robbery, a
criminal, I should say.
but I guess I won't, I won't
dwell on that, so we'll have to
look at that. And then, uh my
next question, Mr. Chairman.
You know that
and I did call Zuni, and I asked
him, uh, uh, you know, you're
gonna build 8 houses for $8
million. Does that not seem
absurd and does not, can you not
just redo that? And they told
me, oh, no, they don't want to
live in a different house like I
like to live in a million dollar
home for free.
or at $500,000 home for free in
government. I mean, if you give
give them the opportunity. When
you're doing the adequacy
planning guides, and so this
comes up a lot in my district.
Who's on that committee and
who's giving you the information
and cuz I hear it a lot, right?
You can go back to every school
district in grants, it was the
Bluewater village who wanted a
bigger building for the students
said that they didn't even have.
But then you go to certain
places Tohachi or Crown Point,
where they want bigger gyms
because
you know, res ball and
basketball will pack those gyms
tighter than a sardine can on
any given day.
and some of those are not in the
attic, they're, they're not in
the adequate standards because
they're asking for larger
gymnasiums.
That's maybe where they do more
stuff. Who's on that committee
and how are they looking at the
adequacy when it's determined
that there's a sporting event. I
mean, take La Cueva in football
or baseball or or are they
asking for above adequate
Mr. Chair, members, Senator
Munoz, the committee is a group
of people at the public school
facilities Authority to include
myself. I will say that many of
the PSFA staff are relatively
new.
Uh, in the last 6 to 8 months,
we've lost some critical staff
that had that institutional
knowledge moving forward.
And what that has done is it
forced me to really dive deep
into not only the history of the
adequacy standards, but the
criteria and how we've supported
it over time. Um, so internally,
those are the staff members to
include myself.
the new Deputy Director of
Capitol Operations, uh, are
planning and design group to
include Mr. John Valdez and
Andrew Martinez are FA manager,
and then we are also um
moving forward with
establishing a work group, if
you will, with our
administration maintenance and
standards Subcommittee, really,
again, dig down deep and and
determine the, the best way to
move this forward. Uh, again,
this is at the top of our list
for strategic planning for the
public school facilities
Authority, who really
do this study, garner input from
our stakeholders across the
state of New Mexico and get some
good feedback so we can update
these cri this criteria on a
routine basis instead of here
and there, so that's our goals
moving forward. I hope I
answered your question, Mr.
Munoz. Yeah, yeah, but Mr.
Chairman, it leads me to another
question. So if you don't have
the institutional knowledge.
and you have to recreate that.
How do they know what's adequate
in this school if they have it,
they don't have institutional
knowledge, I mean, institutional
knowledge for the legislature
trains the new people.
and, and so, but if you don't
have an institution, you can
pull the wool over anybody's
eyes at any point in time, just
saying, you know.
I use Groc 5 and this is what it
said it should be.
And what is actually adequate
versus.
I mean, that's some question you
make too much to me's time, but
that, that's something that
always uh we always hear they
give me the classroom size, but
they don't give me the football
field where I have the most kids
in athletics or, you know, the
gym is always maybe you can just
tell us how you're gonna plan on
doing that, maybe.
Maybe the legislature needs to
review that.
Let me, uh, had some comments uh
Senator, and that is that, you
know, with the new uh calculator
that we're using to determine
square footage and also uh
with uh the new standards.
um
we're allowing more flexibility,
uh working with each individual.
applicant to make sure that
we're not sacrificing any
academic.
uh space for, you know, Jimm
space or those kinds of things.
But we are, we do have the
guidelines that we use for the
size of the gyms.
and if they want bigger gyms,
then they have to pay for. So,
again, keep that in mind.
Yeah, but in the same hand, Mr.
Chairman, sometimes athletics
keeps kids tied to school,
right?
Maybe a tennis court, who knows,
right? But sometimes it ties
them to there in words done
before, but that, that's
something that is
you know, in Roy
or wherever, six-man teams is
what.
draws it or the local gym is the
local.
gathering place for all the kids
or
whatever, but I, I, it's been an
issue and it's always been an
issue, but I think it needs to
be looked at, so.
Thank you, Mrs
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First
of all, I want to thank each of
you for your dedication and hard
work.
For what you do, I don't think
that goes on said sometimes. I
know in the field there's a lot
of appreciation for the work you
do.
However, we got some questions
cause I kind of need to unpack
some things, some, uh, Sarah
Munoz went into and I'm just
gonna ask a couple of questions
to clarify. Uh, you had
the pilot
program
on uh teacher housing.
and I think I heard you say that
there was $10 million.
in the current year and the
currents last, the last cycle.
It was aimed at that
I'm interested because there was
an interruption now.
on where those interruptions
were, and my question is, are
there districts and if so, who
are they who had their pilot
request for teacher housing put
on hold.
Mr. Chair, members, Mr. Rounds,
excellent question. The, there
is one
current district that is applied
for the pilot teacher housing
program.
will give me just one moment.
Um, on page 13 in your
presentation this morning,
Clayton School District has
applied for the teacher pilot
program.
But my question, Mr. Chairman,
thank you for that, and I
understand that's
that's on hold now as you're
moving future cast.
I'm going backwards. I thought I
understood that there were 1 or
2 districts whose projects were
suspended or put on hold in
process. Am I wrong, Mr. Chair,
Members, uh, Mr. Rounds, no,
they're the 5 pilot uh
districts, uh, did receive their
funding and they're moving
forward. The only one on hold
currently would be the Clayton
District and any others that
come up to September 30th or an
application for that particular.
Thank you for that so program
follow on question of the $10
million.
was all of it subsumed in the
pilot to date.
Mr. Chair, members know the
analysis that PSFA did recently,
uh, the last PSCOC meeting
determined that about 5
about half of that was spent.
Mr. Chairman, I, I'm just gonna
go back to what Senator Munoz
talked about in dealing with the
field.
um, and the concerns they have
in Project syncopation, I'll
call it.
as, as we move through projects,
it's, it's a lot of stuff for
everybody to handle.
I would urge us to consider
once we do an appropriation like
the $10 million finding another
way to move as an example,
capping what.
lower probably than the half a
million dollars. $5 million for
a residences is a ridiculous
amount of money to spend and I
understand a lot of the
causation to that and that's a
whole other debate we could
have, but I would hope that he
should go back.
that there may be a way to move
forward to enable those kinds of
issues, um, I'm not gonna do a
sermonette on that, but I'll
tell you that in rural New
Mexico in our in our uh uh
nation there
in their isolation.
are well served by providing
housing for those employees.
And while I understand the
broader community context that
Mr. Sali raised.
and I, and I think I agree with
the concept, but I hate to.
stop
momentums as we try to go back
and re-study, I'd rather do it
as we're pacing through the
remaining money, and then size
the new dollars, the forward
cast dollars according to that,
to that process, and I, I'm just
weighing in as a member of this,
um, and I, and I appreciate that
and I think, you know, uh, uh,
in talking with the field, I
think those.
standards even for.
those housing projects are
something.
I agree with that cause the cost
overruns her a horrible, but the
importance of that.
in strategic planning on the
part of this research that Mr.
Rounds, let me just address, Mr.
Chairman, um,
the pause is a pause
and we'll be looking at
uh where we go from here, but we
will take your, your comments
into consideration, and that's
one of the reasons we wanted to
uh
to uh hear from you all today
and see where we go from there.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
uh, Mr. Gui, good to see you
this morning, by the way. Uh,
Mr. Chairman, I also have a
question about the APG.
and
I'm gonna move upstream just to
the broader perspective from a
field perspective.
especially in rural New Mexico,
but across school districts in
New Mexico. I think we're out of
balance.
in, in the question in the
policy question we have about
how we fund new schools, new
facilities.
Thank you for
easing, if you will, the
restrictive nature of the APGs,
so you have a broader context to
work with, that's been very
helpful, but my view in talking
with superintendents is that
it's still short.
And and here's the issue
uh gymnasiums and other
activity centers that serve
these small communities. They
are the community.
and and in our policy I would
hope we would consider that
kinds of issues, Senator Munoz
talked about.
how we keep kids in school.
and part of the activities we
involve them in, we're extending
education through all kinds.
and I think our policy is a
little short shrifted on
gymnasia, playing fields, fine
arts centers, things like that,
and I, I would urge us to, to go
back and really reconsider.
what our invested dollar looks
like of the return on that
investment.
I'm afraid for public education.
I'm afraid we're gonna lose our
constituency.
I'm afraid we're gonna lose our
students.
because of the things that
compete with the public schools,
and I think we need to be
thoughtful and mindful about how
we move that forward. I'm not
talking about a jailbreak we're
gonna fund everything either.
but, but there's gotta be a, a
recompilation, I think, and I
would urge this in your APG work
to
again direct our efforts at
trying to sift and sort that
out.
um
as a superintendent for 27
years, and I don't know how many
projects I did probably a dozen
or so in the districts I served.
we struggled in a lot of those
regards and we did, we were able
to pay for it in the districts I
was in. I was in Hobbs. We could
pay for it. I was in Las Cruces.
We could pay for it. There are a
lot of districts in New Mexico,
especially rurals, they cannot
pay for it.
They simply don't have the
property value. I mean, they
bond, they exhaust their bonded
indebtedness, and they pay just
a fractional cost to what it
costs nowadays.
I think that needs to be
recognized. I think it is to the
extent we've done, but I would
urge us to, to broaden that
quite a bit.
Um, and so
that's my message and my, my
request in that particular part.
um
and the broader community, the
broader community is is
important. The FEMs process,
thank you for doing that work.
Uh, that's another one that I
think we need to continue to
tweak. I was looking at interest
with your energy cost savings
work you're doing.
And I know Hobbs pretty well. In
fact, I was just down there uh
for some work I'm doing down
there with those districts.
Uh, I'm glad that they're
stepping up in that energy
corridor.
um
I would urge us to, to continue
to talk about how we can best
savings without deconstructing.
a lot of the process and that's
that balance again as we and
where we're trying to go and I'm
gonna urge us to be very
thoughtful about what we do
there. Now, let me move to
pre-K.
I think if I read this properly.
you have one pre-K project that
is public school oriented in the
in the future
I think I also see that the
pre-K projects.
that have been funded so far.
exclude public school districts.
Did I read?
Mr. Chair, members, it's my
understanding that our pre-K
program, a district has to have
a current pre-K program.
Mr. Chairman, I, I agree with
that, however, I think a
majority of your districts now
have a pre-K program in place.
and when I look at the numbers
of those.
it appears to me and and please
correct me where I'm wrong.
It appears to me that where our
efforts are right now.
are in the childcare side of the
world.
and not on the child education
side of the world.
In my business, in my position,
in the business I've been to
date for 52 years in New Mexico.
have been aimed at public
school, public school students.
and programs are there, and it
appears to me there's a huge
deficit.
in what the appropriation cycles
look like going to public
schools.
and I find that, and, and so in,
in, in this, in this it's a
balance act in this balancing
act, it appears to me that, that
I would think the public schools
would have at least equal
representation in funding that
occurs in our push to bring
pre-kindergarten programs to
full bore and full bearing
because that's a policy issue we
made at the state when we
brought ECECD in to play.
and we
funded that robust effort which
I support.
but on the, on the facility
side.
I'm a personal opinion that a
district and its local community
should not have to bear all of
that. There should be some equal
representation of that and, and
as I view the stats you're
giving me, thank you for that.
It appears to me that that's
rather void.
for public schools, how urged us
in our policy work to
contemplate.
how does that bear? What, what
does that look like? And that's
a whole other debate that we can
do offline, but
I would, I would urge us to do,
to go there cause I talked to
districts, I know there's a lot
of desire.
to to press that educational
quality, but there is a
competition
with
the historic or of education and
districts, the buildings you
built and things like that.
When I was a superintendent, I
built a number of Kinder and
pre-kinder programs into our
buildings.
OK? We had to do it all, all on
our own, but it was before ECECD
came into play.
Now that it's into play, I think
there needs to be some.
equilateral distribution if you
will, of, of some of that money.
So I quit preaching, but those
are the issues there last item,
but this is of great interest to
me. Sir, could I address your
last comment.
Thank you.
um
Chairman Romero and Stan.
uh, we do not fund other than
public schools for pre-K.
out of this, this program. There
may be other funds that are
available to the non
uh uh public school providers,
but, uh, so all of these funds
are set aside for them in the,
uh, it's just a matter of those
uh districts that want to apply
to prioritize that, and we know
it's, it's tough to expand your
programs these days, but uh it
is available and uh
only to them through this
program. And Joe, thank you for
correcting me that and so I'm
being a little more global
because I believe ECECD has
concerns in the policy world.
I'm sorry, to me it's the same
numbers. It's, it's the same
outcome and it's how do you
balance that? Does it mean that
we as an execution to your
point, do we need to see there's
more funding in PSFA PSCOC.
or the public school side of
this and if so, where does that
draw?
as far as the funding is it it,
it currently it's out of the,
out of what the normal GSFA pot
is.
as I understand it, and my
question really is, do we expand
into the rest of the pot.
or the aggregate amount of money
because that's the state policy
decision we made.
when we brought in ECCD and and
in collaborating that and in, in
aggregating that my
understanding, the philosophy
was that it would serve all
sides of early childhood, and it
appears to me that's not
happening.
in the capital outlay side of
it. So that's, that's part of
the discussion. Thank you for
correcting me though.
And finally, the staff, um
wow, OK, we're going through
quite a bit of, you're going
through quite a bit of
transition in the staffing. I
look forward to the executive
director's side of it. Um,
there's syncopation in the field
right now, as, as you're moving
through staffing who's doing
what or why and how.
And um I'm very interested in
probably offline to talk about
how we can see that everything
is full, fully supported.
I know your intentionality is
not having the interruptive, uh,
but there are some syncopations
that are beginning to happen. I
know you're aware of it, but I'm
painfully aware of it because I
talked to the superintendents
and the feet. We appreciate
anything you can do to
tamp that down and, you know,
change his heart. I've, I've
lived through a lot of changes
in my career as you're moving
through staffings and things
like that, so I'm not without
uh understanding of your
challenges, but I would tamp
down the
the upsets, the popcorn thing is
happening, Mr. Chairman, thank
you and thank you Stewart.
to continue on this, but these
teacher program teachers are
very important, but I just have
on page 8.
Uh, this is where you talk about
the active project. So you have
10 pre-kindergarten projects.
Can anybody tell us where those?
Mr. Chair, members, uh, Senator
Stewart, I do apologize. I did
not bring my data with me to
that that really articulates
where those programs would be,
but I would definitely be happy
to provide that to you.
OK, that would be great, um, uh,
because, you know, I certainly
uh uh was listening to uh Mr.
Rounds, but then I noticed that
you've got 10 pre-K projects
right now.
Are they in public schools?
Yes. OK. So, second question,
right under that, um, you talk
about the four teaching housing
projects that you've got the
pilot.
Can you tell us where those are.
Mr. Chair members, Senator
Stewart, again, I, I do
apologize and not bring my uh
project status report with me to
talk about those particular
areas, but I would definitely
entertain a telephone call uh
with you or your staff to um.
Uh, so I guess probably you
can't answer the last question
on this page, which is
you've got 5 that are the
housing projects through the
pilot. You talked about that
that earlier about using about
where are those pilot projects
and those pilot projects are
ones that haven't been paused,
is that correct? You've just
paused the breast of the money
moving forward because of the
extreme cost that you're seeing,
but where are the five pilots
right now.
Mr. Chair, members, I can answer
a portion of that. Currently, we
have 2 active projects moving
forward for the Corona School
District and the Hatch Valley
School District, as far as the
other three, again, I would have
to entertain a telephone call.
Those would be, I think there's
ongoing uh work still being done
in Mascaro.
Uh, there's been projects in
Cuba
Central, and Zoom to mind off
the top of my head.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, it, you
know, next time when you tell
those projects, please bring us
where they are, but we're all
interested in, so seems to me
that we are moving forward, you
kind of scared us in the
beginning, saying, oh, we're
gonna pause that, um, but
there's at least 4 standards
based and then 5 with your
pilot. So be good for us to
know.
where this is happening and and
what Stewart, absolutely. OK.
So I have one more question.
So, um
if I say, uh, this year, got
another project in your lap, and
that is $60 million for electric
buses for school districts, and
you all were the ones that
started it, you, I would like an
update, and I'm gonna ask for
this update every one of these
meetings, so just get ready, um,
it's not part of your
presentation, but I assuming
it's going well.
and people are applying and
you're giving out money. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair,
um.
Mr. Chair
members, Ms. Stewart.
we currently
want to ask Amanda if this is OK
if I present.
on what we have so far, OK, uh,
just want to be sure I'm not
overstepping boundaries.
from one agency, agency to
another. We currently have 4 New
Mexico school districts that
have applied for that funding
for a total of $6,301,000. That
includes the Albuquerque Public
School District.
Inteel Residential Campus in
Aztec. I believe that's a
charter school.
Las Cruces Public Schools has
advised interest and they've
applied in the Rio Rancho Public
School Districts has also
applied for some of the funding
available through this program.
OK, so, uh, Mr. Chairman, are
you gonna send a follow-up
letter. That's not very many,
and that's a lot of money and
districts are not used to this.
They're not used to us funding
things in this way. So I suggest
a follow-up letter. We don't
want that money just sitting
there, a follow-up letter, try
to get more people, uh.
So I'm just curious, you've got.
3 of our largest school
districts, our three largest
requesting 6 million does not
seem like enough to spread
around the three largest school
districts when you're sitting
shed some light on that why it's
so low.
Madam Chair
Mr. Chair.
Senator Stewart, members, um
we currently have a
collaboration that we're doing
with the cooperative Educational
Services. We do it every year.
Part of that program is asking
New Mexico's, advising New
Mexico school districts of this
community community benefit
fund.
We initially had, there's 10
currently going on now, and our
maintenance program is tackling
the details and providing the
presentation on behalf of PSFA.
One of the things that we're
asking these groups, which is
mainly members of um regions
across the state of New Mexico,
Superintendents, facility
managers, and business officials
is, are they aware of the fund?
Are they aware of this money
available to them, and if so,
why?
haven't they
gotten on board with applying
for funding.
I attended the first one in
Aztec, New Mexico a couple weeks
ago.
And I was really surprised at
what I heard.
I got 10 reasons why they don't
want to do it, and no reasons
why they should.
Um, I don't know if there's
opportunity, and I have not
created a summary yet of this.
I wrote it on the board and I
took a nice picture of it
But some of their concerns
included, we don't know so much
about electric buses yet. Are
they going to be good for rural
communities? Are they, how, how
far can they drive from one
charge to another. Um, some of
them also mentioned the fact
that they have to engage um
local law enforcement and
emergency responders because
they're electric now versus
diesel, and there's a whole
different function there.
And then the last piece was, as
you move from managing a
diesel-fueled bus.
to an electric bus, you have to
change the resources that you
have in staff.
They have to be certified to
maintain those buses moving
forward, there was just a litany
of things that they had, which
were, in my opinion, legitimate.
but also things that we could
come up with solutions for.
Absolutely.
So as the maintenance team
progresses throughout the state
of New Mexico at these 10
sessions we're garnering
additional information from
school districts, albeit it was
last minute.
but I think it's a story that
needs to be told once these
committee meetings are done.
and we'd be happy to surmise
that and provide it to the task
force.
Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Tillotson, thank you very much
for that. You know, the funding
is for infrastructure too. So a
lot of this is building the
charging stations, the
infrastructure, diesel, the
training, it's not just for
buses, it says it clearly, so
assure them that they can apply
for infrastructure charging
stations, maintenance training,
etc.
Uh, so it's not just here's bus,
good luck.
Uh, so, all right, well, thank
you, thank you so much for your
work on that. I'm gonna ask
about it every, every time, so
just get ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, thank you for the
work you do. I don't think it's
fair to um try to penalize the
community for what they don't
have, especially when you talk
about Zuni, um, going down into
the area, you have to haul
everything in to build, uh, it,
I mean, everything, um, and
there's no housing there for um
for the work
ers to stay, so they commute all
the way wherever they're from.
Um I think that's one of the
things going down there and uh
seeing the area and seeing where
they have to um literally build
is you'll you'll take things in
consider it. And when they were
talking about gyms, it's not
just about the gym itself, and I
think that's one of the things
we build gyms to really, um, for
basketball and volleyball, but
in those areas and in our
communities more than that
happens in the gyms when we
need indoor space that is big
enough.
Um
just uh last week we with LESC,
we were over at central office
in um Gallup in the Gal McKinley
County School District, and when
you talk about safety for our
students.
that building, um,
I don't know why we didn't have
that kind of investment or that
kind of strategic planning when
we are talking about building
stuff, um, for the safety of our
students about the masses, but
yet, those in administration
actually have the best security
versus what we have in our
public schools out in the area,
and in lieu of that too, uh,
with all this investment with
infrastructure is some of those
communities do not have the fire
suppression, fire
departments within a close
vicinity. So I think we should,
wow, I mean, we've talked about
energy and wasting money, but
when we talk about Medel, what
are those insurance premiums
that we're playing to make sure
that we're um
securing it, especially when we
talk about these healthy food
programs that we're trying to
put into our schools, um, with
the gas lines, uh, water, um.
it, it's, it's, uh, a lot of
things tailed in that, and I
think the reason too for not
really kind of pushing back on
Zoomy leaves because a lot of
the projects had a shortfall due
to inflation, so we didn't want
to cap it that much, um, I
completely understood that.
but in some instances too, uh,
there was fraud in, in some of
these areas and those that were
involved just turned a blind eye
and let it continue and let
these let money walk out the
door to some certain people in
um.
some of these higher
administration.
areas
So I hope we don't uh
kind of push back too much on
our rural schools, especially
when we talk about trying to cap
it.
um.
and over time, some of those
costs do add up to quite a
significant amount for our
schools, but um
I don't know if the um.
in my area, uh one of my
elementary schools, you know,
kids have to bring the, I was
not sure if that was because the
water was not safe.
or, um, you know, we have these
special water fountains here in
our capital, um.
to battle against COVID, um.
but I don't know if the school,
I did, I've walked through and I
have not seen that at our
schools. I don't know um if that
was available there for our
students, um, but thank you for
the work you do and uh I hope
those
like, I'm not a contractor, I'm
not, I don't do all of that.
Thank you.
resumed Luhan
Thank you, sir. Just really
quickly, in regards to the the
teachers and the housing, um.
in those areas where you have
the, the capacity or the
projects to moving forward, I
believe there's 5 now and are
they working with the the
housing authorities.
um, either the regional housing
Authority or the local housing
authority in
and really just planning, um,
Mr. Chair.
Oh
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Lujan, I think that uh
uh in as we approve these
projects, we do ask them to look
at uh partnerships with their
local and regional housing
authorities. I'm not certain
that the, we've had to follow up
on that, but again, uh there are
other resources there that we
encourage that they approach.
uh so that they can expand those
programs if necessary.
Mr. Chair, members,
Representative Lujan, uh, if I
could just provide some
clarification. I did reach out
to as a part of my study, um,
the New Mexico, the housing
Authority, if you will, um, had
great conversation with, with
that group. It's my
understanding that thus far, the
only one that currently provides
funding for teacher housing
formally through a pilot program
or through a standards-based
program at the PSFA is us.
Uh, they do have funding
available in their
infrastructure. However, none is
dedicated to specifically
teacher hum. Through my
conversation with them, there is
opportunity for collaboration
moving forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that answer. I, I
feel like there are a lot of
different moving pieces and and
and trying to figure out our how
our housing issues, especially
for our workforce housing. So I
would just encourage that you,
you look at those lo, our local
governments or our local
authorities and just really kind
of dive into um what they're
doing, how they're planning, and
even down to their zoning and
and the issues that we have
around housing and why we're in
in lack thereof. I know a lot of
it, you know, very rural areas
like we,
we're discussing today, there
those are
I think exceptions, but if we're
going to put those dollars to
the best use. Um, we really need
to bring in, um
all forces if you will. I know
here in Santa Fe, um, my local
district is looking at a a geo
bond, but they don't go through
um the state process, so they're
looking for that type of funding
and that so therefore, there are
there are there are other
buckets, if you will, and really
putting those together,
especially in our rural
communities, and um it's going
to be really essential in
getting and getting these
projects.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members.
Uh, first of all, I want to
thank the team before us for all
the work you do to support
schools. Um, I do wanna
reiterate the importance of
teacher housing, especially in
rural districts, um, as a
superintendent in Cuba, New
Mexico. We currently have 2
teacher housing units, um, one
duplex was funded in 2021
$500,000 and the duplex itself
costed $1.2 million to build,
um, and I understand Senator
Munoz's concerns, my school
board had the same concerns. I
had the same concerns, but at
the same time, like Senator
Pinto mentioned, um, the cost of
building Cuba has tripled since
COVID. Um, you know, the other,
we built some teacher housing
units in 2018 for about half the
price. So we, we saw things
double and triple.
um, but I do wanna reiterate the
importance of those teacher
houses for our staff, um, like I
said, we have 20 in addition to
that, we have the Rio Metro bus
through Sandoval County, that
buses in 17.
other staff members, and these
are mostly our teaching staff.
Um, so that just gives you an an
idea of how important housing is
for these rural districts. Uh,
we're lucky to be an hour, an
hour and a half away from
Bernalli, and we can bus in 17
of our staff members, um, but
thank you for, uh, considering,
continuing with this project. I,
I realized that it may be on
hold, um, but it was very
critical to our, uh, our
district.
um
one other thing I wanted to um
kind of ask. I'm not sure how
the adequacy standards were
communicated to districts, um,
as a local school district, the
superintendent, um, who has done
several projects through PSFA,
um, in addition to the teacher
housing, we are one of the
districts that I didn't see, um,
but I think Senator Stewart was
asking, who are these districts
that are kind of in progress,
um, with the pre-K. We've been,
uh, we were awarded a pre-K
design, uh,
funding in 2023, and we're still
in design here, and I don't
expect it we'll move into
construction until 2026. Um, but
things like this, I'm just
wondering where I we're very
involved. I'm very involved as a
school district superintendent,
and I was not aware of the
adequacy standards until I
attended my first meeting, which
was last month. Um, so then I
reached out to my architect, um,
to see if this, these adequacy
standards, do they apply to
pre-K
Are they just for community
facilities and gyms? How do we
make this request to uh for
somebody that's in the middle of
design, how do you make this
request to increase your
adequacy, um, and how it, how
can we improve on getting this
word out to other
superintendents and other um
stakeholders that may work with
PSME.
Chair, members, Ms. Chavez, uh,
absolutely, we will reach out to
you with the updated
announcement for the adequacy
standards. Um, I have no excuse
except that I've been in my
position for a week. Uh, I think
it's definitely an opportunity
for us to resend this out to New
Mexico school district, so
you're aware of the meetings and
their locations, and you can
provide input. And we could also
provide some guidance, more
guidance as to what the adequacy
standards are the adequacy
planning guide and the gross
square foot calculator and how
it works to build new schools,
absolutely.
Thank you. I appreciate that. I
had one other um
item I wanted to just touch base
on was the Electric school bus
initiative through PSFA, um, as
a rural district, we have many
of the same concerns that you
talked about, um, we have kids
that jump on the bus at 5:30 in
the morning.
to get to school at 8
Um, so an electric school bus
for us is very scary. Um, they
might work for in town routes.
Um, and so that is not a fund
that we applied for as a rural
school district. Um, also many
of our
uh routes are on unmaintained
roads, dirt roads, um, and we're
talking of hours of travel on an
unmaintained dirt road.
Um, so an electric school bus,
I'm not sure how well that would
stand up, but I do want to talk
about um something just food for
thought to put in your ear. Um,
Cuba is participating in an
initiative through the Economic
Development Department, um,
where you basically try out a
school bus, and they help you
with the infrastructure for one
bus. Um, and so we are
participating in that to see if,
if that's something that we
could possibly move towards. We
may not be able to move the
entire fleet, but if we can
move, you know,
start slowly as technology
improves, that's something that
uh is very helpful for a rural
rural school district like Cuba
and like others, um, in the
state and so just food for
thought, that may be a way to uh
roll out some of the the
funding.
Thank you.
Senator, please
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, just one quick
question I wanted to ask, uh,
with the housing project being
put on hold and be easy to
answer. Is that money safe?
or is it in danger if it's not
spending on time, is it
late?
just
in response, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, yes, the, uh,
the money is there.
It will not be lost
Your shortsan for a 2nd time.
This chairman,
I thank you,
Mr. Chairman, uh, members.
I've got one other question and
I, I think it's for education
for us on the panel, cause I'm
not sure those of us sitting
here know, and I don't. I just
talk to my superintendent in
Silver City.
and they, they are combining
sites and they're eliminating
buildings.
And his question was disposition
of those buildings and the steps
he needs to go through, and I
don't know if anybody on the
panel would be willing to step
up on that just to talk about it
because what you have was a
public procurement issue.
You have a property worth issue.
and things like that that have
to be contemplated, says he
disposes of facilities.
as you're moving into the new
buildings that PSFA are helping
build.
and consolidating his operation,
that's something that I think
for superintendents and others
might be a good redo, if you
will, as far as in from air.
here today
Mr. Chairman, there are, uh,
Chairman Mr. Stan, uh.
there are requirements for
disposition of property and
buildings, uh, that are valued
at a certain level that must go
to the state board of Finance
for approval prior to
disposition. Uh, we also have
some demolition money available
as well.
uh, if that's, if that's uh
needed in those cases
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman very quickly
representative. Well, just to
follow up on, uh, Mr. Chair on
Stan's question. So,
in order for the, the school
district to get this fundings
through the finance uh for
demolition and and.
they, do they already have to
like be going through the
process for the new build
through the the state or do they
just to clarify.
Representative Lujan members, I
don't have an exact answer for
you currently. Uh, we do have a
program that districts can apply
for for demolition of old
antiquated buildings that uh fit
the criteria that need to be
removed, absolutely, but I'll
get an answer to your specific
question at a later date. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you. Um, so if we
could get that information sent
to Simon so he could distribute
it to him.
teacher facilities, pre-K
facilities, and then we
appreciate it, just so that we
have an update on it.
But thank you for
I appreciate you
right
Um
so if we could have
Mark Map
representing team move up. In
the meantime, members, while you
are in the room, we need to
approve, um, our agenda, which
we're.
partly through, right? So we
oh.
uh yeah, we'll do separate
motions. It gets long as to um
to the minutes for January or
June 9th. 0, for, so this is for
the agenda. I'm sorry, the
agenda, so to move approval of
the agenda. Thank you. Seed by
Senator Stewart, is there any
objection?
All right. And then to approve
the minutes except with one
change, so we have um member
Montoya as absent, however, she
was here, so that would be
reflected in the chain. So the
minutes from, ah, from June we
have June.
Yup.
So motion to approve the minutes
for June 9th with the amended.
absentee names and the change.
Thank you, Stuart, any
objection?
Right? And then we have July
14th, motion to approve the
minutes for July 14, 2025 for
the PSO. All right, thank you,
Senator Pinto. Thank you,
Senator Stewart, any objection?
Right, we're all caught up. All
right, gentlemen, good morning,
please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the task force. My name is
Mark Montoya, and I serve as a
senior policy analyst for the
Legislative Education Study
Committee.
Mr. Chair, members of the task
force, my name is Matt Paul with
Public Charter Schools of New
Mexico.
Thank you. So today we're going
to be starting with this
PowerPoint. It's going to be a
brief overview of the structure
and financial picture for
charter schools in New Mexico.
Let's first start with the
authorizing structure.
very briefly, just to give us
some context of what we're
talking about here.
So during the 2024-925 school
year, there were 99 charter
schools in New Mexico.
They served 30,000 students, or
approximately 10% of the 300,000
students that are currently in
the public school system.
Of these 99 charter schools, 60
were state chartered.
and 39 were locally charted.
The 60 charter schools that are
state chartered, those are
overseen by the Public Education
Committee.
with help from the public
education department under an
MOU.
and the locally chartered
charter schools are overseen by
local school districts and their
uh corresponding school boards.
Moving on to slide 3. Let's talk
a little bit about the
operational funding for charter
schools.
Similar to traditional public
schools, charter schools receive
their operational funds through
the state equalization state
equalization guarantee that word
always gets me.
Particles may also be eligible
for federal funds, uh, for
example, we have Title I funds
and the other ones that are on
page 3. How do these funds flow?
Page 4, we'll talk about how
state charter schools receive
their SEG and federal funds
directly.
In contrast, locally charter
schools
both the SEG and federal funds
and any other allocations to
receive flow through their
respective school districts.
Now this is one major point that
differs charter schools from
traditional public schools. And
that is the 2% administrative
withholding. We'll start talking
about that on page 5.
As opposed to traditional public
schools, charter schools do not
receive the full funding from
their SUG.
They receive a portion of that,
approximately 98%.
Per state statute, the local
authorizers are are allowed to
withhold up to 98% of those
funds. And in reality or in
practice, it is a standard 2%
that is being withheld.
That 2% is for the purpose of
authorizer to support and
provide the administrative
functions related to overseeing
the related charter schools.
Continuing with that 2%
The public education, or PED
retains the 2% on behalf of the
PEC for all state charter
schools.
Again, the 2% for locally
charter schools are already held
by the local school district or
the school board. But let me put
that into context for you at 2%
actually looks like. During the
2024, 25 school year, $8.9
million was withheld from
charter schools. That's 5.9
million for state charter
schools and 2.9 million for
locally charter schools.
Appendix A will provide a
detailed uh breakdown of each
charter schools withholding for
that year.
Now let's move on to expenses on
page 7.
State charter schools cover all
operational costs independently,
included, including by unlimited
to transportation costs.
staffing, special education,
mental health resources and
items like reporting and data
systems. State charter charter
schools are considered alley-ya
and operate like small school
districts.
Locally, locally charter
schools, on the other hand, do
have access to services and
resources from their respective
school district. These schools
typically pay for these items
such as pay for items such as
transportation costs and food
services, and they usually have
some type of an arrangement with
their corresponding school
district to provide those
services.
Local school districts, however,
receive varying levels of
support, depending on the
authorizer's capacity and their
relationship with that school
district.
Now transitioned to Cara Alley.
Page 8
charter schools in Mexico can
access CapaA funds through
multiple state and local
revenues. Eligibility may depend
on whether they are state or
locally authorized.
State funding sources such as
direct legislative
appropriations, public school
capitality council programs or
the Mexico Finance Authority or
some of the state programs that
are available. Locally funding
sources include geoons, Public
school capital improvements Act
or SP 9.
the Public School Buildings Act,
or HB 33, and Education
Technology notes.
Access to certain funds and
moving onto slide 9. Access to
certain funds does differ, as I
said, from state versus locally
charter schools. Charter schools
do not have the ability to
impose local taxes and are
unable to issue geo bonds or
education technology notes the
way school districts do.
8 charter schools may be
considered by school districts
when geo bonds are issued, but
it is not guaranteed. Locally
chartered charter schools are
included in the respective
school districts, 5-year
facility master plan.
but similar to the operational
support they receive, the level
of capital Alley support from
school district depends on the
relationship and the capacity of
the district which within they
fall.
We'll not talk about the public
public school capital, Haley
Council.
Um, I won't dive too deep into
this. We did hear a report from
the staff on the programs that
you deliver, um, but we will
dive into lease's assistance
awards, particularly, um, that's
a topic that, um
my colleague here, um, Mr. Paul
will dive into a little bit
deeper.
And Lisa assistance awards.
how the purpose of supporting
charter schools by perverting,
by providing grants that cover
either part or full amount of
leased payments for classroom
facilities with the goal of
ensuring equitable access to
adequate buildings across the
state.
Key points of this program, they
enable lease to own arrangements
and are not considered long-term
debt. Charter schools may, uh,
will be required to be renewed
at least once during their,
their lifespan. And they have to
be approved by PED and PSFA.
and must meet adequacy
standards.
The lease assisted program
covers only base rent, does not
include utilities, insurance,
taxes, or repairs.
These agreements for lease
assistance can last up to 30
years. They can include
principal and interest payments
and allow for prepayments of any
loans.
Carter boards must also comply
with the Open Meetings Act and
formally approve funding
sources.
Now the basic calculation on
page 12 for lease assistants is
pretty simple.
You have the per student rate
which is currently $815.60 times
enrollment, or the actual lease
cost, whatever is less. Now,
there are is further information
on PSFA's website. It talks
about some of the other
considerations that need to be
taken into account when applying
for lea assistance, uh.
program
uh NMSA Temeso Finance Authority
does also offer some programs
that are accessible to charter
schools. We have the charter
school revolving Loan Fund. We
have the Public Project
revolving Fund, and the new
Markets Tax Credit program.
However
all these programs being in
place, there are still
challenges for charter schools
in accessing these funds.
Page 14, we'll talk about some
of those challenges.
Well, charter schools can access
those funds, including the ones
I just mentioned for PSCOC and
MFAer certain inherent
characteristics of charter
schools limit them from totally
taking advantage of these
opportunities.
First
the inability to impose local
taxes
severely impacts the ability of
charter schools to apply for
loan repayments or loan
programs.
Lease arrangements also present
a challenge as some of these
leases may be um short term or
maybe terminated on short-term
notice.
Charter renewal terms, every 5
years, provides a certain level
of uncertainty for long-term
borrowers.
and the lack of real property to
serve as collateral also
prohibits or
uh prevents them from fully
taking advantage of any loan
programs.
Now, I'll stop there. Um, this
section is, uh, a small excerpt
from a larger report that I did,
uh, present in July to the
Legislative Education Study
Committee, dive into some of
these items a little bit more in
depth with uh greater detail.
But I'll stop there and hand it
over to Mr. Paul to talk about
some of these programs a little
more in depth.
Thanks, Mark, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the task force, um,
what we'll be walking through
this, uh, slide deck here with
the logo charter schools of New
Mexico. I did neglect to put
slide numbers on here, so I'll
just be naming the bolded titles
of the slide to help you, uh,
uh, uh, keep, keep on pace with
me. Um, so we'll go over some
charter school basics. Uh,
there's a lot of familiar faces
here, and I think Mark hit most
of those, um, but they're here
for your, your, um, uh, your,
your review,
um should you want to. The thing
that I'll just note is that
charter schools in New Mexico
are different from charter
schools in most other states. We
establish a new governmental
entity, and so all of the
oversight that um applies to a
school district, applies to a
charter school, in addition to
the oversight that must be um
conducted by their authorizer.
So, in other states, it's a
nonprofit and looks a little
more like a childcare center
might, where they get
governmental funds to conduct
governmental activities, but
they, they get it more on kind
of like a grant basis that may
be per student. Um, so it's just
a, a note about our charter
environment, charter schools in
New Mexico, it says charter
school basics, a poll of 500 New
Mexicans, um, uh, conducted by
research and polling last fall
found that there's an
overwhelming support for charter
schools in New Mexico. And I
think it's because of the way we
do it. Um, we have a nice
structure here. Our, our charter
schools are homegrown, um, and
they serve kids from that
community, from educators in
that community.
Um, so 82% of New Mexicans
believe we need more free public
school choices in our
communities. I note, we ask that
question and not just about
charter schools because we
recognize also that magnet
schools and other um options
that are provided by districts
are very desirable by families.
Um, Mandela High School here in
Santa Fe, Coronado and
Albuquerque. These are good
options and we are, we, we like
those as well in the charter
movement, um, to provide more,
uh, programming that fit
s students' needs, and then over
73% of uh of respondents believe
that we should develop more
public charter schools,
including those in their own
community.
Um, in the next two pages,
you'll see charter school
performance, um, on our
standardized testing for
reading, math and science, um,
we, this is, this is new for us
in the last 5 years, um, that,
that we're showing performance
that we think is is showing
what's possible for students in
the state. And the second slide,
you'll see not as large of gaps.
This is a, this chart is for
low-income students. And so
you're seeing that um charter
schools performance with
low-income students is
outstripping that of tradition
al district schools
Inadequacy standards.
Um
charter schools are exempt from
adequacy standards that aren't
directly related to the health
and safety of their students. So
this includes specific
transportation, parking, or
square footage requirements, um,
specialty classrooms, gyms,
things of that nature, um, the
PSCOC does not, uh, uh, require
that of our schools. Um, there
are some advantages to this. Um,
oh.
um, a common, uh, theme from the
um PSCOC and this task force has
been the costs of construction.
Um, you're clearly building less
when you don't have these
adequacy standards in play and
so charter schools can fund
facilities at a fraction of the
cost, um, of those who are, uh,
adhering to full adequacy
standards. So it's a significant
cost savings and we'll go into a
couple of examples in the
following slides. Um,
and there are very few available
facilities for charter schools
to move in that would meet
adequacy standards. So we're
glad that they don't all apply
to us. I don't think our schools
would be able to find
facilities, um, so we wouldn't
be able to find them, we
wouldn't be able to afford them,
um, and then lastly on the
advantages, um
the the the the current funding
level just wouldn't really allow
us to to do what we need to do
to afford an uh uh facility that
meets adequacy. However, the,
the disadvantage is that charter
schools are pretty bare bones
affairs, um, and, uh, there,
there aren't a lot of bells and
whistles that they, they cannot
be afforded. Um, they also
aren't required. Um, this isn't
impacting charter enrollment
families still choose schools
that are um that are not quite
uh on par
with some new construction with
the school districts, but it,
but it's a real give or take
here. We'd, we're not held to
the standards. We have
facilities that are commensurate
with that. Um, and if you go to
the next slide, um, I just
walked through two examples, and
you'll hear from another one,
Cottonwood Classical, as well,
which I have a picture of next,
but um we have some
cost-effective facilities.
Albuquerque Collegiate is
building a campus via their
lease purchase financing for 642
students
Um, that total cost is $27
million.
East Mountain High School, this
is an expansion, $19 million for
a campus expansion that adds 350
new students. Um
these are low numbers for
construction right now, but as
you'll see, they're missing some
elements and, and the, the space
just isn't, uh, isn't maybe what
we'd hoped for. Um, so are these
same projects they're unaffo
they're unable to uh provide for
gyms, sports fields, um, some
technology and landscaping is
being sacrificed as well. Um,
and if you look at the new, the,
the next page here, there's a
picture. This is from Cottonwood
Classical, and this is uh Mr.
Bennard's school.
He'll be able to speak to you
next, but this is one of their
new build classrooms. There's 28
or 30 students in this room. You
can see how tight the desks are
and all of those desks are about
3 or 4 ft away from the wall.
Um, not a lot of room there, but
this is what they could afford.
On the last slide that is
entitled These Assistant, um,
that, um, the lease assistants
totaled $22.7 million last year.
Um, and that, that those dollars
support over 30,000 students in
New Mexico who attend a public
charter school. Um, in each, in
2022, HB 43, which was sponsored
by Representative Garrett,
Representative Dixon, um,
representatives Brown,
Hernandez, and Senator Hemphill.
Um, we made some
changes to Lise assistance. So
at that time, lease assistance
was done by square footage. Um,
we had PSFA staff who was
looking at how much square
footage there was, and they'd
reimburse based on reimbursable
square footage. We worked uh
with those legislators on this
bill to simplify the program to
just make it on the per mem, um,
calculation that Mark showed you
in his slides. Right now, that
dollar amount is at 815 and some
change, um, multiplied times the
number of students that you
have, uh, in the building. So it
ended that reimbursement, um,
uh, by square footage. It also
made this program a mandated
program for PSCOC. There was no,
uh, taking the threats to take
away the program in full, um,
but the language did exist to
make this an optional program,
and with charter schools
establishing themselves, uh, the
way they have in their
communities, it made sense to
mandate the program, so it, so
it happened every year.
Um
lease assistance covers about
59% of toll square of the total
costs for leases. Um, so that
other 41% must be covered by
charter schools' operational
funds, and we'll talk a little
bit more about that, uh, in a
moment. And the, and the last
point on lease assistance is
that we're receiving irregular
CPI changes, um, for that
funding. Um, and that, that's
something we believe needs to be
fixed in statute. Um, we, we
made public comment at the last
PSCOC meeting.
formally requesting a CPI
increase to the to the um uh
lease assistance program. Um,
this really just has to do with
the inflated construction costs
that you're seeing now. These
aren't all for construction. It
doesn't mean every school would
get an increase in dollars if
they're in a lease that works
for them and their lease
assistance covers it, they would
not receive more funding.
However, if they're not covered
by lease assistance, they would
get a little more to cover it
via the program, and they would
have they would use less of
their
operational dollars, um, to pay
for their facility.
Um, the next slide is entitled
uh Funding and in parentheses
SEG funding inequity for charter
schools, um, lease assistance is
just one funding gap that
charter schools must use their
operational to pay for.
the charter sector needs to
cover 41% of their lease costs
with their operational dollars.
That's a substantial amount of
money coming out of dollars that
are meant for students and
instruction. Um, the SCG is
generated by student factors,
size factors, and staffing
factors, and it doesn't consider
facility factors. So it's an
undue burden on their
operational dollars to pay for
facilities.
The there are a few other
factors that are specific to
charter schools, um, that, that
put extra burden on their SEG.
As Mark mentioned, the 2%
authorizer withholding is
something that we just get kind
of skimmed off the top. Um, so
we start the day with 98% of the
funding, um, the facilities that
I've articulated here, first
year transportation is something
that charter schools must save
for with their cash, pay for the
first year, and then it's
covered with state funds. Um,
and then lastly
um, saving for facility down
payments. Those also come out of
operational dollars. So this um
the foundations of how we fund
our schools, which are quite
good and are emulated by other
states in the country. There are
some disadvantages for, from the
charter school perspective of
what we need to spend our money
on that traditional district
schools, the systems designed
for it not to. They may still be
doing it, but they, it's not
designed as such.
And lastly, I'll, I'll make a
note on capital awards, um, uh,
School of Dreams Academy has,
uh, an example of how they're
working, uh, through this
process right now that, that
they'll be on your next agenda
item, but very few charters of
it have attained capital awards
independent of working with
their school district. For those
awards. Um, and this is for a
few reasons. One is that our
initial leases have to meet at
least the 50th percentile
conditions index. Um, so we
start with the facility
that should be in pretty good
shape. Um, and, and that, that's
a policy that just puts us in a
position where they're in good
shape and we're not entering
into leases with facilities that
are, are uh in disrepair. Um,
charter schools, we, we don't
have a good understanding of the
process. So it's something that
our organization is working on
to just help guide folks through
the process and learn from PSFA,
um, because it happens so
infrequently that schools try to
go through the process. So
there's a missing link on our
end as well. Um
and then lastly, and I think
Mark's presentation alluded to
this is that the local match is
based off of a local tax base
that charters don't have access
to. So if if our local match is
anywhere beyond 15 to 20%. It,
it's pretty inaccessible for a
charter school to be saving up
that amount of dollars to be
able to qualify for a capital
award from PSCOC.
So I, I wanted to end with just
some questions for thoughts, um,
because we're exploring what,
what solutions might be, um, to
our facility scenario. We're
thankful for the lease
assistance program. It's served
charter schools well, um, and we
do have facilities that were
allowed to serve kids in the way
that we are, which we're having
great impact in. Um, but how do
we make that program have the
adequate coverage that's
reliable enough to rely on for
long-range planning. And that's
where we get into asking
for CPI increases and knowing
that we'll get them every year.
If a charter school is going to
build a new facility, they
should know that that leas
assistance generally will go up
a little bit each year. CPI can
go down, um, and, and we would
say that, uh, that we should be
connected with that as well. Um,
secondly, how does charter
schools successfully and
independently apply for PSCOC
Capital Awards. Um,
hearing a little bit about
what's going on at PSCOC and
Capital Awards. It's a
complicated process, and I think
it's gotten more complicated
over the last 5 years with
costs. But we want to commit to
learning how to navigate it,
cause I think um I think our
charter schools are generally
less prepared than some of our
school district partners because
it's a common thing within
traditional district schools.
And then lastly
you know, the Zuni lawsuit
serves as a considerable
foundation for the work of PSCOC
and PSFA, um, and there are many
parallels with charter schools
in the Zuni School District.
Zuni, uh, did not have any
taxable land. Um, charter
schools don't have any taxable
land. Um, though we are getting
SB 9 and HB 33 from our
district. So we, it's another
way in which we don't quite fit
into the system.
but having to meet that local
match as high as some of our
local districts are. I think
it's a real challenge. And so
the question at the end here is,
does this demand a different uh
bar or mechanism for capital
awards, just an open question,
something we're investigating.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate your time.
Mr.
Sherman, thank you. Uh, so I
wanna ask both of you this
question.
Why not the same adequacy
standards.
for
charters as for public schools.
Um, Mr. Chair and Mr. Rens,
charter schools are public
schools, so the, so the two, the
two are in the same, same bit
here, but I think the reality of
not being able to find
facilities of adequacy and the
costs that would be associated
with it. I wasn't there at the
time this decision, like the
waiver was made, but I believe
those were the foundations of
that decision.
And I was there, Mr. Chairman,
who, and that is part of the
discussion. I've always
wondered.
because I'm gonna flip the, I'm
gonna flip the paradigm a little
bit, we talked about very
restrictive, very specific
standards on public schools that
are driving costs.
up significantly
So we're taking PSFA dollars.
through the public school Cat
Lake Council, and we're applying
different
differential treatment between
decisions and uh the, the awards
that are happening.
and that's always intriguing me
as to why we're doing that.
And why don't we have the same
standard? It's still public
school kids. Thank you, Matt,
for correcting me. I guess I
should have said
charters and non-charter public
schools, but the issue is
there's not parity.
But here's the question, why
can't we take the parody of
public schools and give the same
flexibility as we are charter
schools.
The 2% drawdown is because
charter schools
are able to make a profit in
running their business.
In public schools aren't.
and part of it is we regulate
the dog out of out of out of the
non-charter public schools.
Excuse me, thank you, Matt, for
smiling at me, um.
and I've, I've always wondered
why we're
willing to invest the state
dollar using different
paradigms. Now hear this, I did
a lot of work as superintendent
in Las Cruces Public schools in
particular, I built charter
centers and all kinds of stuff,
but I don't want to be told,
well, you're not a charter
supporter. That's not the fact.
The fact is, it's a policy
question about what do we do for
our students that are moving
through our public education
system.
And so I'm just interested in,
in your thoughtfulness, Mister
Guehan stepped back in and, and
I'm, I'm gonna, I'm gonna ask
that as, as you do the policy
work on FMP on Adiwe standards
and all of that that this be an
item of discussion that we have.
because I think that that
deserves attention.
and and it were there by
happenstance, perhaps as we
rolled out charter schools, a
number of years ago.
much earlier in my career when I
had hair and it was dark.
and I had a V body, not an A
frame like I have now and all of
that, but uh I, I just wonder
about, about that.
uh, also there's a distinction
between state chartered charter
schools and locally chartered
charter schools.
Now if you're a locally
chartered charter school,
correct me if I'm wrong, that,
uh.
you get a percentage
based on your enrollment over
the enrollment of the district.
of uh of Senate Bill 9 of House
Bill 33, and you have to have
the opportunity to be considered
in any bond issues that come
forward on that kind of a
matrix, although that's a little
harder to define right now. Am I
correct?
Mister Chair and Mr. Rounds uh
on the HB 33 and SB 9, you're
correct, there is an opportunity
to be on the bonds, but it, it
rarely happens. I do want to
address two things that you
noted. Um, one is that there's
no profit motive here. The PD
has the same access to the books
of our schools that they would
any traditional district
schools, then it would be found
pretty quickly. Um, the lease
assistance covers
40 59%.
How are you going to make money
when you only cover 59% of your
costs. Um, it just, the math
doesn't work out. It's a, it's a
misconception and misinformation
about charter schools, that
there's any profit motive,
particularly here in New Mexico,
where for-profit charter schools
are barred by law.
Thank you for correcting me on
that. You and I are gonna
disagree with the, with the 2%
question because I believe
charter schools are still use
the term viable under the 2%
drawout as they're not because
we have a proliferation of them
occurring in a request to do
more and so I would suggest it
has better
generosity in it than public
schools have because of how we
manage them, but we can talk
offline about that.
um
Mr. Chairman, I, I guess final
point.
it really is the policy
question. I'd love to have
discussed. I think, I think
Mattis, what you're really
driving at on how do we have
parity?
between all the parts of public
education.
and and then the real question
is what does that parity?
look like
Mister Chair
Um, I got a nod from Mr. Rounds
if I, if I can respond to that.
OK, thanks. Um, the I am asking
that. There's a gap there and I
wanna, I wanted to note one
thing and then, you know, submit
that same question back because
I think it's an important 11 is
for capital awards, though we
haven't had my understanding
that is, is that if a charter
school was to receive a capital
award from PSCOC, they would be
held to adequacy standards.
What we're, but on lease
assistants, no. And so when I
when I take that snapshot of
that classroom.
and you see the dollar amounts
that charter schools are
spending.
OK, is that, is that the right
size approach is adequacy
standard full adequacy standards
are those overbuilt. I don't
know, but I think that is a
relevant policy questions,
especially as you all grapple
with high construction costs.
It's like, what are we saying
needs to be in all of these
buildings? And what does that do
to the price tag? Because what
we're seeing is that
and I would argue that these are
underbuilt, um, uh, but I don't
know where the there's a gap
between those two, and maybe
they would answer is somewhere
in between those, but I did note
what I did about enrollment
because
for parents and students.
they're not looking at these
facilities and saying, oh, we
can't go there.
And so that should tell that's a
signal to us in the system
around facilities.
Mr. Chairman, final, final point
on that one, so.
if we were to look at parity in
a different view.
Uh, I think that drives the
issue, but when you're a state
the, the real policy question is
what is the state
required to do
because the majority now have
switched to state, state.
approved charters
And so what it does in the local
community, it puts a risk the
question of your, of your
Centinel 9 of your House Bill
33, and of your bonds.
And I'm of the view, Mr.
Chairman, that, that we really
need to resolve that policy
issue. I seem to think that if a
state approves it, the state is
the one that is responsible for
the parody question for funding
that, uh, and, and probably
through PSFA or something like
that, but I think there needs to
be work done on that question,
and I've lived that in the field
in both Hobbs and in Las Cruces
pretty deeply in Las Cruces, and
that was a an issue we never
have cleared the, the deck on,
if you will, and so like I
think might be worthy where
effort. Thank you.
Representative Luhan
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, and
thank you, Stan. I think you,
you really hit a lot of the
things that I've been talking
about, and many of us have been
talking about for many years
now, is where is that parody?
And to answer for me to answer
the question you asked, how do
you get to where you want to get
to, and you spent, I don't know,
countless hours here with us
trying to figure things out on
your side, the mechanism.
And I'd say, you know, to, to,
you know.
you've learned a lot. We've all
learned a lot, but I'd say you,
we need to find a better
solution. Um, last month at
NMFA, uh, oversight committee.
Uh, we had a presentation and,
and with the $10 million that
you received for the
for the capital, uh,
it was too high of a risk,
right? That was the assessment
from uh
NMFA
So you're coming back to the
board and what your solution was
was to ask us for more money.
And then now we're going through
this committee and this process
and then this information and I
cannot, I, I've stressed really
what um Stan has mentioned, Mr.
Chair, that we need to find a
different and a better process
to find that parody. Mr. Chair,
I'm going through this process
right here in my own district
and trying to figure out how my
school district.
holds true to their promise of
building a new school.
while they have consolidated two
schools in the, you know, in the
interim and trying to figure
this out while we're, we have
uh.
an application for a new charter
school.
Well, our
there's a decline in our
population and our birth rate.
We're trying to put this all
together. It's just there's,
there's this, this is, this is
not working. This is not it, you
know, if this was if we're
looking at this from a business
model and economic development.
This isn't, this isn't working
So I'd say we need to maybe have
some kind of task force or do
some some some sort of solution
because.
um, I come across as not being
pro charter or anything. I
understand you have a space and
a place, and there are many
charter schools that are doing,
um, exemplary uh work, and I
commend them.
But what what is happening at
the expense of other others
other kids, other students in
the neighborhoods, and those
that are less fortunate or more
vulnerable in population and
they're we're losing out. My
school district is making are
making decisions based on all
this information and and the
building, um, that they, they
would like to build that we
would like to see, but based on
all these stresses, Mr. Chair,
we have to make some really er,
you know, some some decisions.
and it's unfortunate, so I
believe it's because.
you do have a business model. It
is set up for a for-profit in
some ways, in some sense, and
you are tasked with getting as
many students into your schools
and
getting the reward and then not
having and having these
exemptions through state law,
right? You have a lot of
exemptions, as we discussed
financially and, and, and
operationally.
and you're coming back to us
year after year asking us for
more, for more, for more.
Well, it's not, it's not a
balanced approach, it's not the
way that we should be doing
things, Mister Chair,
especially.
uh, you know, when we are, we're
in a place where we're gonna be
looking at potential budget
cuts, perhaps I'm not sure, but.
depending on what the federal
government gets, and also, Mr.
Chair, you all get some pretty
good federal dollars.
as well. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Lujan, we get federal dollars
that are commensurate with any
other traditional district
school. They'll say are per
pupil is on the lower end of any
public school student, um, which
is my, my point in, in this
presentation. So, you know, if
we're talking about the
differences in funding. I think
that'll be an interesting
conversation on where we land
where we land on that. We have
institutions and we have adults
that are making decisions that
are tough ones. Um, our world
has changed quite
a bit. Student world has changed
quite a bit, but if we look at
what's happening on the ground
level for the student experience
of that isn't doesn't look equal
either. Um, and so we need to
start looking at what that, how
we balance that playing field.
Thank you, Mr. I appreciate that
comment and I agree with it, and
I think that.
we're talking about public
dollars and how we're spending
those those public dollars and
we've created this exemption
process for some and not all. I
think we've, you know, it would
it'd be
beneficial to our public that we
do the work and create some kind
of.
um, task force to really look at
this and how we do become and
create an equalization that
creates parody
and I keep, I'm gonna keep on,
on, on this, you know, I am, but
it's, this is just another place
where in my own district, my
schools are are finding
themselves in a disadvantage,
and there's just
just much to what stand. I think
you've covered most of
everything very eloquently, so
thank you. I can't say much
more, but I agree with him. I
think that it's time for us to
come to the table and and
reevaluate and restructure
because this is not working,
having two separate um ways of
doing things for public
education, or 3 if you add, you
know, the local charter schools,
I mean, they're still part of
the public, they're still part
of the education process, and we
have private uh.
private schools. I think all
these things.
come, have come to a head, and
we really need to come back to
the table and reevaluate what's
going on, especially with our
state, uh, budget and how we're
spending these public dollars,
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, I did have a question. So,
Mark, I was rereading.
um, and
I guess I'm on page 4.
charts showing the um
population, the number of
locally chartered schools and
state chartered schools, um, and
there's been
pretty noticeable dip in from.
FY 22 to FY 25 and locally
chartered charter school, and
they rise
in a state charter charter
school that they're, oh, what
was it 3 more expected to open
the school year. So about 63,
and I was wondering about um
why
why the dip in uh low pretty.
substantial increase
We should chair members of the
task force, um, so if you don't
mind, I would actually answer
that anecdotally from the
feedback that I've had from
local charter schools that are
considering that move, and a
couple of the new charter
schools.
What I was told, um, and I won't
reveal any names, but they felt
that in moving to a charter or
state chartered authorizing
structure would allow them more
access to their funds.
Um, I'm not sure if you
remember, Mr. Chair, I'm sure
you do. But part of the point I
was making in my report was the
2% is is there. Um, I think the
point I was trying to make is if
the 2%'s gonna be retained, that
it needs to be supported by a
level of support to commiserate
them giving up percentage of
their SEG and budget. Um, I
think what those schools felt
was they're not receiving
equitable representation for
that 2%. Some of those schools
are feeling that they had not
received any authorization site
visits, anything corresponding
to oversight during the lifespan
of their charter school uh
tenure. Um, I think what I was
told, again, that was one of the
main drivers, um, but I'm sure
Mr. Paul
could add more to that. Yeah,
just reaching back earlier than
2022, uh, the opposite was
happening. We were having a
number of state charter charter
schools moved to locally
authorized, um, and that was
because of some of the uh I
guess I'd call them antagonistic
postures of the public education
commission at that time. And so
looking back like 10 years, I
think we're just kind of seeing
seeing that balance go back some
of those schools who went local
are, are considering going back
and, and then some others for
reasons that are outside of
that. But that's another factor
at play.
Thank you. Thank you.
All right, so we'll bring our
panel up.
All right. Welcome folks. I
don't know who we.
you all decided might be
opening.
but if not, I'm happy to cold
call folks.
Mister Chairman, uh, my name is
Mike Ogas. I'm the
superintendent of School of
Dreams Academy, local state
authorized charter school in Los
Sumis, New Mexico. I have with
me today Miguellogas, who is uh
working on our staff and it's
helping with our, our capital
projects as well as Rick
Martinez.
back here
uh, in case, you know, we can
provi provide any feedback, um
right.
Mr. Chair, members of the task
force, my name is John Bennet.
I'm from rural Torrance County,
and in my 7th year as executive
director at Cottonwood Classical
Preparatory School, 920 students
in the Albuquerque metro area.
And before I pass it over, uh,
we are one of those charters to
the chair's question, who
switched from being locally
authorized by the district to
being a state authorized school
at the end of FY 23, so I could
speak to that as well as lease
assistants and quite a lot of
the, the bond issues that that
are entailed in doing the the
facility work.
Mr. Chair, if I could, I, I
first of all, School of Dreams
Academy really appreciates the
opportunity to be able to share
our story with you, uh, we've
been a state-authorized charter
school since 2008, when we were
founded, uh, my wife and I
founded the, the charter based
on a dream that my father-in-law
had, so we are definitely a mom
and pop locally chartered
charter school, and we're very
proud of it. We think we're
doing a good job in Musunas, and
we're gonna continue doing that,
uh, that said, we are moving
into our 17th year of existence,
and we've grown from a
storefront property in uh on
Main Street to 20 acre site that
the village has helped us get on
to right next to the rail
runner. Uh, we're very excited
to be there. We are in a
position and very desperately
want to be able to build a
facility that's commensurate
with our programs and, uh, and
that our uh families and
children deserve. Right now we
have about 460 students pre-K
through 12th grade.
and uh we have some very
exemplary programs, uh, that I
would just like, I've provided
you two handouts, one that talks
about our school and our
programs and shows you some
pictures of our school site, uh,
just to give you an idea, we
have, we're, you know, we're
very well, um, engulfed and or
ingrained in our community. We
have tremendous partners, you
know, from, from Meta to uh
thispanal chamber of Lindsey
County and, and very, very, uh,
that are very involved with us
in different aspects of our
schooling.
Uh, again, pre-K through 12th
grade.
uh where we've been accredited
since 2012 through Cognia, which
used to be advanced aid, which
used to be Northwest, North
Central, I believe. So we wanted
to be accredited to make our to
legitimacy and show that we're a
school that, that um works off
of a continuous improvement
model.
We have uh
very, very good programs of
excellent teachers and staff at
all levels are FFA program is,
uh, been an award-winning
program for several years. We're
the only FFA program in the
country that's run out of a
double white portable and uh our
FFA teacher is a national
ambassador for FFA. Uh, she's
very well respected.
We're building out a CTE program
with many pathways. Uh, we have
partnerships, uh, through our
early college high school, we're
the only early college high
school in Valencia County. We
have pathways, uh
for, for work-related kinds of
things as well as degree-related
kinds of things, since 2015, we
have graduated 30, I believe, 30
students with their associate's
degrees and many, many more,
almost hundreds more, that have
more than uh you leave school
with 50, 40, 50 credit hours
under their belt if that's the,
you know, the, the, the, I mean
is they wanna take uh our pre-K
program has received an exemplar
rating from the early childhood
education, child division, um
for the last several years, it's
a growing program which we serve
both the New Mexico pre-K model
as well as the 3Y 4Y
developmentally delayed program.
We serve right now about 85
students in that program. Uh,
there's no cap on it, and it
was, there was no cap on that
program. Our cap is 625 students
K through.
K through 12, um.
and then on the second page of
that we've done a number of
things to try to get ourselves
and position ourselves to
become, to be able to have a
school, uh, starting from, you
know, uh.
realizing that our initial NMCI
ranking was probably in the
600s, uh, and during the pan, we
when we moved from our, our, our
riverfront property facility
over to the 20 acres by the rail
runner, we moved into 34
portable buildings, um, that we
renovated, uh, with a loan uh
that we took out through our
foundation.
Um.
around during the pandemic, we
asked the PSFA to come back out
and re-evaluate our school, uh
setting, and the result of that
basically for the last going on
2 years now, we rank number 1 on
the WNMCI rankings, and we have
about an 80, almost an 86% FCI
ranking, uh, and so we're, we're
positioned to be able to speak
in front of the PSCOC. There are
some things in rule and in
statute that have uh prohibited
that, uh, we, we follow, we're,
we're trying very hard to follow
the adequacy standards and, and
the things that, you know, uh,
Mr. Rounds
spoke to in terms of, of being
able to, to provide adequate
facilities for the types of
programs that we have and for
the numbers of students that we
have. So we're working very hard
to do that, um.
we are in a lease-purchase
agreement with the village for
the land, so eventually the, the
land will be owned by the
school, uh, we just recently the
PSCOC just recently uh awarded
the rest of the, I think it was
12 or 13 portables, two sodas,
so that we now own all 34
portables, which gives us a
little bit more capacity when
we're trying to, to go for for
money to be basically meet the
match of the um.
of the capital outlay award. We
have applied last year and we're
not able to get on the PSCOC
agenda for a couple of reasons
that I'm happy to talk about.
Just basically little bumps in
the road that, that's both
statute and rule
didn't allow at that time, um,
so we've applied again, uh,
being the number one ranked
school in the state, uh.
kind of hard to say that, but
our facility does, we need a new
facility and we've been working
very hard to, to work with the
state to try to comply with the
adequacy standards the way they
are. We've realized that there
are some changes that need to be
made, and we've, I've even, uh,
wrote those.
in the
the legislative asks on the
bottom of the page that there
needs to be something to be
done, and you've heard it before
with the local match, uh, with
respect to state charter
schools, we're happy to pay our
share. If we need to, we'll go
out and we'll borrow money to do
it so that we can make it happen
and uh there's a, I just
recently learned this last go
around that there's problems
with the lease purchase
agreement and uh some
interpretations of that is that
the Capitol Outlay Committee
cannot award uh anything
exceeding your current lease
purchase agreement.
Now,
there's lots of inconsistencies
over the last 17 years that I've
learned that we've tried to
comply with throughout the
years, right? First of all, it
was, you need to be in a state
building, and the only way to do
that is either to rent from a
state entity.
or create a foundation and then
get into a lease-purchase
agreement. So we created a
foundation and got into a lease
purchase agreement, did that,
and, and basically
thought we were OK. Um, knowing
that we wanted to build, and we
were trying to position
ourselves to build a good
facility for our kids and then
it turns out that these purchase
agreement turned out to be a
bump in the road, uh, because at
least purchase agreement right
now is for $8 million because
that's basically what it took to
get us from the riverfront
property and the land to get on
the land and the portables and
all the infrastructure that was
involved with that.
So, so that's where we are, you
know, we, we, we respectfully
request to be heard again by the
PSCOC to try to get an award,
uh, and, and to work through
that process with the PSFA. Uh,
I look forward to doing that,
uh, knowing that, you know,
there may need to be some some
legislative changes or
considerations. I don't know the
entirety of of what needs to
happen. I know that our, our, we
have 460 kids. We've, we hover
around 500 depending on the
enrollment.
Our facility is hard to live
with. Uh, we have, you know,
roofs that leak that were
constantly fixing. We have air
conditioners in the summer that
go out. We spend a lot of money
replacing, you know, uh, swamp
coolers with, with dual unit
kinds of things and we shouldn't
have to, but we have to because
I don't want the kids to be in
hot buildings and neither do
their parents, right? So we're,
we work through that, we're
doing the best we can with the
resources we have, um
we're not in it to make money,
you know, we're just trying to
use the the resources that we
have to to get what we need to
do for the kids in our school.
We're at about 460 kids right
now and um I'm not gonna read
both handouts to you, but at the
same time, we are very well uh
involved and engulfed in this
process trying to get a facility
for our, for our kids and for
our community.
I've been very optimistic over
the years. I have promised a new
facility since 2009 to our
community and uh they're
beginning to wonder if I'm
uh not crazy because it's not
happened yet, so I'll, I'll
yield to Mr. Brennick.
All right, I don't have a
handout for you, but I've got
some numbers. So we have about
10 acres in the Journal Center
neighborhood of Albuquerque. We
have 74,000 GSF.
for 920 students.
And it took a Wisconsin Public
Bond Authority, a broker in
Chicago, and a bank in Denver
that believed in us to be able
to make that happen because
there didn't seem to be a
mechanism in New Mexico to make
it happen. Uh, we are one of the
schools that was awarded by NMFA
for that charter school
revolving loan fund, and I can
explain why that didn't work
out. Uh, a lot of it has to do
with being first edition on the
debts, which no existing
bondholder is going to agree to.
Um, we have a annual debt
service payment of $1,551,401
and our lease assistance is
648,402, at least for FY 24 FO
25, I'm hoping for um CPI
increases that are corrective
for the prior year or two as
well because we need as much as
we can get, um, especially with
some of the changes to SEG
calculation and how the whole
harmless did not pan out. So,
um,
those are just some basic
numbers. We still have almost
400 students on our waitlist,
and no, no classroom space to to
even consider adding them at
this time. I would just add that
we, we went through the process
3 times of the similar funding,
uh, that my colleague here has
done and we turned them down
because it, it didn't make sense
to us, uh, when we looked at the
finances and how they they
worked out in terms of what was
taken off the top before we
actually got to the point of
building a school and getting,
getting
realizes, I don't know, I mean,
I think every, every deal is
different, but, uh, the three
that we encountered, we turned
out, uh, because we felt we
there had to be a better use of
public funds out there
somewhere, and so we're still
working through it.
I guess we can stand for
questions or do you have
anything to say?
So the, the only other thing I'd
say we provided a few pictures
and not to, to do any kind of
shock value or anything, but
they're real pictures. We have
kids that eat outside under a
tent that, you know, when the
wind blows, we have to get it
replaced, uh, and then the dust
blows, we try to bring him
inside. Uh, we really don't have
a big room to meet in, we have
no big cafeteria room to,
they're all just double wide
portables or single portables.
Uh, it's a, it's a
it's not the best learning
conditions, but we still have
460 families, parents' families
that believe in us enough to
bring their kids to school and,
and you know, we believe that
our, our programs are working
good for their kids and uh
and hope one day that we can get
a facility.
All right, Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and I, and I hear
you. I've been having some
conversations, Mr. Sherwood.
uh, my neighborhood school and
and our parents and our students
and the dedication we have.
and it's hard, and it's hard on
our school boards, and it's hard
on our.
our charter school board, um.
to make some of these decisions,
but really, I mean.
it's just really getting to me
because I mean.
when you decided to go into uh
starting a brand new school.
And you understood our state
laws, and, you know, the
exemptions that you would have
as a first locally, are you
still locally chartered? Excuse
me, Mr. Chair,
or not? Where your chartered
school, great.
And then understanding those,
you know, those exemptions and
all the things that you have to
work with to to formulate and
create your school.
and part of those are, you know,
the square footage and all the
um, you obviously are.
it looks from these photos that
you've given us in dire straits
and, um, quite honestly, Mr.
Cha, I have a problem with
having my child attend your
school.
Um, yeah, but you're having
these incredible outcomes. So
how do we balance that, right?
This is the, this is, this is an
interesting problem to have is
what I'm I'm saying here. But I
would say this, um, and I guess
I would, I, I just remiss if I
didn't ask, would, would, um, if
you, if these students are going
to your local.
public school, would they still
be getting the same education,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
I do not believe they would be,
well, I think that there's two
parts to that question,
actually. So, uh, the first is
that we do make sure that every
single one of our students
adheres to all the state
standards. So from uh
kindergarten all the way through
high school, uh, all the
curriculum that we use is, uh,
the state approved curriculum,
the state recommended
curriculum. So we use SaviS for
uh K through 12th grade. Um, we
also have though, I think
the ability to move a little
faster with some of our programs
such as like.
FFACTE.
um early college high school,
uh, in particular, uh, which I
run, um, we're able to
tailor kids education in order
to get those associate's
degrees. And, uh, so I do
believe that on the one hand,
yes, it's the same education, at
least adhering to the state
standards. Um, every single
thing that I try to do at the
school is I try to make sure
that we are following the rules.
Uh, but on top of that, though,
I do believe that we have unique
programs that are unique to
Valencia County.
Um, that a lot of our families
really care about.
Thank you Mr. Chair. And again,
I'm going to go back to my
argument. The school that I'm
fighting for is a regular public
school, and they're telling us
we're not gonna have it rebuilt.
We're gonna have to make some
serious changes and decisions,
and I'm just letting, you know,
I'm using this as a an analogy.
Um, you're having a charter
school and you're, you know,
you're having all these needs
and everything, and we have a
declining population. We have
all these other factors that we
have to consider here as as
state legislators, when we're
looking at our budget and being
fiscally responsible, and
when I'm, you know, I'm looking
at this too, and when I'm going
to my other locally public
schools in my district here in
Santa Fe, there are signs out
there for recruitment for
charter schools or
state charter schools or however
they're they define them. I find
that a bit appalling, Mister
Chair, because our public's
regular public schools aren't
allowed to be doing those sorts
of things, and you operate on a
continuous enrollment model, I
would assume that's the
recruitment model. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Luhan, uh, we
we have the, the standard
enrollment process at all
charter schools are are uh
supposed to have by law we have
an enrollment process in the
lottery, and then based on that,
our children are enrolled if
they, you know, meet, they just
come in. They we, we do not pick
and choose any child. In fact,
we have um
we have had as highs of 40% um
uh
of our student body with IEPs.
And you know, another
several close to 100 of our kids
qualify as ELL. So we, we, we
make, we make sure and my
expertise is in special
education and and I ran special
programs and in my other life,
so we understand that our needs
of our community are tremendous.
Our kids come because they want
their families to believe that
we can help them. Some kids come
to us that have been in trouble
in other schools, you know, and,
and we, we do our best to try to
help them through that. We're
not 100% successful, but we give
it a
try and we have helped some kids
get across the line in our
graduation.
So, um
I understand what you're saying.
Uh, I, I think it would be
really nice. We'd love to have
you come visit our school just
to get a feel for it. We're,
we're, we welcome all of you to
come, uh, I just wanted to say
that we, we definitely
work with all kids, you know,
whoever comes in, uh, and, and
that's, that's what we're known
for, I think. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, I believe that that's
true too. I believe that your
heart is in this and that you're
doing this for the right
reasons. I don't question that.
I think that.
in the education process, we
have to, you know, we, we
understand that, and you know
what, what I'm saying is the way
that we're making our decisions,
and the exceptions that you've
been granted and coming into
this from this model, you
understood what.
basically what you're getting
into, and we, again, I'm gonna
come back to, we need to
reevaluate. We need to look at
what, what is going on,
especially when you're having
these outcomes, and I want to
commend you again for these
outcomes, I think that.
we do, we did make these
exemptions and these exceptions.
for certain reasons, I don't
believe that I also believe that
there are many applications
going forward with for pub for
publicly chartered schools and
state chartered schools that
aren't necessary.
And I think we need to really do
a better evaluation of what is
going on and what is working and
what is not, and bring us all
back to the same table because
when we are spending money and
funding for.
all these separate types of
buckets. It's, it's not.
it's not judicious, it's not,
it's not fiscally responsible.
So I think there's a better way
of doing this. I appreciate your
presentation today and bring and
coming forward with us and
showing us this, but I, I, we
can see the dire need that you
have. But I just think that, you
know, through the legislation
and where we are right now and
I'm want to be very honest with
you. Um, I will, I will continue
to prioritize our regular public
schools, especially through the
the PSFA um a process, and I
know that we need to help you
guys out
too, and you have other means
and other ways of doing this
through a foundation.
through fundraising, through all
these other things that you have
at at the table for you all and
I just wish you all the best and
I'm sorry that you have, you're
in this circumstance because I
truly believe you're doing the
right thing, but this is where
we are making these types of
decisions, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, may I respond just.
Yes, so and I, I appreciate
Representative the, your, you
know, your position on that. I
can tell you that uh
we try real hard to follow the
processes that were in place for
all, all the public schools, you
know, going through the NMCI
ranking process and that kind of
stuff, you know, uh.
that is definitely not an
exemption, um, because all
charter schools are having an
MCI rank. We got one when I, I
didn't even know what it was
when I first saw it. It was like
985, you know, when we first
started and, and I wasn't sure
what that meant. So many of the
exemptions, I, I know that
they're there. I, I know what,
what, um.
what the possibilities can be,
however, this is the route that
we feel, uh, needs to be taken
with our school, you know, uh,
we didn't ask to be ranked
number one on the NMCI rankings.
It happened. We're there, you
know, uh, so we think we at
least deserve the, the option
to, to go through the process
and see what happens. You know,
I, I, I honestly believe that.
Otherwise, don't rank charter
schools under the NMCI model.
do something different. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and to my point,
when we have too many
applications and too, too many
schools coming online, and we
don't have the population to
support them, then, then there
is an inadequacy for uh for
others and and not for, you
know, for some and not others,
there's not a balance, is what
I'm saying.
So that is that that is, that's
where I'm at. And I think that
we need to have a better way of
doing this and who and the
authority of saying, well, who's
going to make that decision?
Well, I believe that, you know,
we're at the table here to to
look at better policy and you
reevaluate.
But we cannot continue to grow
schools and grow schools, and we
have a declining. It's not fair.
It's not physically responsible,
and we're, you know, these are
tough choices that our school
boards, and you're not part of
our school board system, but
these are our, our local school
boards that are having to make
these decisions for my public
schools in my district right
now.
And I'm letting you know you act
independently as your own board.
and you have to come into this
understanding where you're, you
what you are, what is available
to you and what is, you know,
what is not. And I just think
that we need to be a bit more
judicious about this. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair,
may briefly. We have other
people asking questions. OK, uh,
Representative Lujan, uh, I
would just like to say that um
our school has a really amazing
relationship with the districts
around us as well.
So, uh, there's consistent
meetings that uh my dad Michael
Gus has, uh, with the
superintendents of Osluna Public
Schools, Bolen Public schools,
uh, and UNMBC, um, so I just
wanna add that as well. Thank
you.
calling.
Chair.
Um, I just had a convince and
all that, but, um, there was
something that you had said, and
I always wondered when I served
on rearrange the school board, I
could never figure this out
because it really didn't look
specifically at charters, but
why is it so much and you had
mentioned it here, that it's
easier for you guys to be able
to build the CTE.
and an early college, then your
traditional. And why is that? Is
there a difference in
regulations or rules or and how
is it that you're able to get
that much more money. Our CTUU
programs are extremely
expensive.
and the early college was really
hard to do as well when we were
trying to implement that and
expand on that. Mr. Chair,
Representative Cullen, we
applied uh through the early
college the college career
readiness Bureau, or I think it
was about 2012 to become an
early college high school.
That's how we became an early
college high school, we were
awarded an initial award to get
that going, uh, with you and in
Valencia, and then a few years
later, we went through another
renewal process on that, and we,
we, we were successful and then
just this past year, we went to
a 3rd renewal process, uh, to be
an early
college high school, all those
processes were from the the pet,
uh, and, and so we followed
those guidelines. Um, it was, it
was
it was hard, but it was
something that we had, uh, you
know, uh
decided to do and to continue
with respect to CTE, the, the
nice thing about having a
charter school is we can make
decisions a little bit more
readily, uh, and, and allocate
resources. We began prior to the
innovation zone money even
becoming a reality, we had
already started looking at CTV
things, we had a relationship
with CNM already we had a
relationship with uh Una
Valencia, we were offering
welding classes and then our
relationship with TLC plum
b ing classes and that kind of
stuff. We just kind of built it
out little by little, and we're
still continuing to build that
out, you know, with the
resources that we have, we have
not received any, aside from the
innovation zone grant that we
received a couple of for two
years, we, uh.
we did not, have not received
anything major, substantial or
special to build out our CT
program to accept the
willingness to do it. That,
that's pretty much how we've
done it.
and Perkins, I believe, yeah,
we, we do get some Perkins
money, um
yeah, we do a little bit of
Perkins. And with regards to
early college high school, uh,
we've had a really good
relationship with different
universities. So we have 4
different MOUs in place, uh,
with UNMBC, uh, CNM. Actually,
we just started our first
classes with New Mexico State
and New Mexico Tech uh this fall
as well, it's it's been going
well.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Culler, the only thing I wanted
to add on the CTE programs is a
number of the CTE programs
established by charter schools
were just aligned with their
mission to begin with. We have,
um, schools that focus in
construction and trades, um, uh,
aviation, things like that where
it's a natural fit. Um, some of
our charter schools, many other
charter schools, I think Mike's
program is unique at SOA, um, in
the, in the sense that I think
you'll find most of our charter
schools
aren't investing in the capital
intensive CTE programs that need
arc welders and things of that
that nature cause they don't
have the space and and that, but
they do engage in career
technical education activities
that are maybe more uh based in
like administrative kind of
clerical, like going to college
type things.
And the other question was, I
think you had said that you're
um, you have 40%, that's on the
IEP. How much of that is a gift?
I think we have about 22 kids
that are identified K through 12
as gifted, uh, as opposed to
about another.
100 in
40 students that have I, I'm
just doing it off the top of my
head, but
the, it's, you know, we just
started identifying students as
gifted maybe.
2 years ago, we knew, we knew
the program existed, uh, we had,
we were doing it individually,
but we, we hired a teacher who
start working that program now.
I believe Representative Cole
that uh most of those kids with
IEPs are transferred over from
other schools. Did they come to
us with IEPs. We're not
identifying them. Most of them
on our own. You identified on
your own or they were the
majority of them come to us with
IEPs from other districts, and a
lot of those are outdated. So
the other, the Mr. Chair, the
other question that I just had
in reference to the I it's been
around a while, so this is
one of my things, and it's hard
to always to address because
it's been rumored or seen or I
mean in in not you guys,
particularly, but within the
charter realm.
uh within students with high
special needs in that A, you
can't take care of very high
special needs on certain levels
because they require nurses and
EA's and all that. So you're not
able to take all students then
is, would that be correct?
that's incorrect, ma'am, uh, Mr.
Chair, Representative Cullen, we
do take kids that have high
special needs. We have uh nur a
nurse and a nurse aide on staff.
We if students need
instructional assistance, we
provide those, uh, we, we're,
my, my forte, my background was
special education. I was a
special ed director for many
years, oversaw programs at the
Assistant Superintendent level.
So I'm very much aware of how to
comply with an IEP, and we have
never, we've never turned a
child away. We have children on
feeding tubes, um, then you,
yes, we do, behavioral,
and I'm not specifically you get
you but as charters and you
might be able to answer that
because
um, my understanding it's not
all of charter, so I'm glad to
hear that you are certainly, but
my understanding is that.
there's limitations on some
charter schools. Would that be
correct? it could be. I, I'm not
available to answer that. So,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Cole, I'll speak on behalf of a
very high performing charter
school, where you have 5%
students with disabilities and
in the most recent publicly
available performance data 2024,
our students with disabilities
were above 50% proficient in
both math and English, and we've
pretty recently had a student
graduate who was still having
toileting support.
Oh yes, we accept and support
all students that come through
our doors.
Mr. Chair Representative Cole,
these experiences are are what's
standard in charter schools
today. Um, they're, there may
have been something back when
that was a problem. We have
focused on it as a community
about how we address those
needs, um, and it was only 3 or
4 years ago where the fund, and
I'm gonna forget the name of it,
but there's a fund to help
compensate districts that don't
have the financial capacity to,
to take on students like that in
their, in their budgets
I just, I cannot remember the
name, but only 5 years ago,
maybe it was 4, did we gain
access to those funds, so it's
uh, it's for students with
exceptional needs and just
helping a school district or a
charter school now, um, be able
to
purchase the supports that are
outlined in the IEP.
and so I, I appreciate that
because um
and this is where I think it's
important to track these
numbers. Um, so what there were
certain schools, let me just say
that was rumored for years that
after the headcount,
it would um say we couldn't.
um, we couldn't provide the
needs for these, the help for
these certain students, so they
put them back into the
traditional.
um public school after and
usually was after the count. And
so, um.
and that's where my concern is,
is, you know, our certain
charters driving them out and
I'll be tracking that so that we
can understand the data of which
schools might be doing that and
who has a pattern of that.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Cullen, I'm not aware of any
tracking on that. What I, uh, I
will say.
something that does happen when
a student with special needs and
an IEP does apply to a charter
school is when they get
enrolled, they'll have a meeting
with the with the special ed
director or the or the executive
director of the school, and
they'll say, here are your IP
needs, and here's how we meet
those at our school. Um, and
they are meeting the needs of
the IEP but it may look
different. They may be have more
of an inclination towards
inclusion or not. Um, so what
the family's used to, and
sometimes that can be
a confusing message, um, for,
um, for families to hear. And so
that's sometimes where that
rumor comes from is they feel
like, well, this doesn't look
the same while the outline of
the IEP are met, and that's just
based on the mission of the
school. So I'm, I'm not aware of
any tracking because you did ask
that question. Um, and I'm not
sure how we would do that. We
can't do that. We don't get that
data, but, but maybe there's a
partnership with PED that we can
look into it, um, but did want
to note that, that, that
sometimes that idea of like, oh,
it might look different on this
campus gets interpreted in a in
a different way though, meet
fulfilling the um identified
needs of the IEPs is standard
and what our schools are doing.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Cullen, I, I'm not aware of any,
I don't know of any school that
does that. There may be, I know
that we do not.
I can guarantee we do not
and uh we, we work with children
when they come through our
doors, and we do the best that
we can.
and uh I just wanted to say
that. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the presentation,
very helpful.
Um
wanting you to, if you may, uh,
elaborate a little bit on the
need for a full waiver, um, and
sort of not being able to
provide a kind of any level of
match, not even just the, the
41% or whatever it was that I
saw, and you kind of address
that a little bit like what,
what have you looked into to
identify any funding, even, you
know, loans, anything like that,
whether it's inimFfe or outside
of NMFA to kind of be able to
bring a little bit of something
to the table and it
I don't want to sound overly
critical, but you know,
districts and I understand it
does seem kind of odd to me
that, you know, local district
or districts may can elect to
not include you in their bonds,
although I think you guys may
have been included in a bond
historically, I could be wrong
on that, so please correct me if
I am, but I guess the question
is, you know, those districts
are having to put in some
funding, and so it is a little
bit hard, I think, for PSDOC to
kind of consider full 100%
funding for charter schools,
you, while you might be very in
need of
it and it may be appropriate
here, you know, that opens the
door for all charters to kind of
maybe come in and say, hey, we
don't have a match, so the state
needs to fund fully, so I kind
of just want to understand that
a little better. I, I'm not that
familiar with this issue, but
kind of wanting to understand
what you guys have looked at as
far as your own financing so
that you can bring a little.
Leach, I'll, I'll respond first
and then let Mr. Ogus elaborate
for his context. So being in the
Albuquerque school district,
even though we draw students
from 5 or 6 different counties.
We would be required to be on a
bond
issue for APS and the match is
94%, that would be required,
which without a tax base and
going by wage rates is sort of a
silly amount of money in my
opinion. And we found that when
we were not able to get anywhere
with the district on getting on
a bond measure, uh, that we had
to seek other avenues through
our foundation, um, and other
states, as I mentioned earlier,
so it required bond issuance
from Wisconsin.
uh a bank in Denver willing to
purchase the bonds and really
kind of bizarre when we're
talking about efficiency, um, to
do it that way. Um, and so 94%
match though when our lease
assistance doesn't even cover
half of our current debt
service, just it's really
impossible.
Um, and raising those funds
through grants is also nearly
impossible because very few
grants can be used for hard
construction costs, and they
often are capped at a certain
amount per additional student
that you would add.
rather than acknowledging the
students you currently have. So
that's been our context and
setting, and I would say it's
essentially impossible. Uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, Miss Lee, uh,
we
we have um
started with the 100% waiver
request as a starting point, uh,
having been to a few PSCOC
meetings, there have been
schools, to my knowledge, with a
similar enrollment as ours that
have received significant
waivers, so I'm not in, in, I
can't name any of them at this
point, but I do know, so we
started there knowing that we
probably would need to negotiate
or match in order to try to do
that, we have been seeking
funding, you know, to try to
come up with anywhere between 7
and 10% of what the ask is. It's
hard to get
funding for the match if you
don't know what your award is.
I know one school where they got
the award and then they went out
and got a match. So, I mean, and
then they negotiated it there,
so it's, it's interesting to see
how it happens. We know that
there's going to be some sort of
match, you know, but we didn't,
we weren't in a position to say,
well, we'll, we can come up with
a 7% match without knowing what
the overall award is going to
be. We're, we're, we know that
there's going to be negotiation,
um
but we started there
Can you speak a little bit also
about we have sought a private
funding, um.
to the point where we're talking
about the first position on a
lien and all that kind of stuff
hit us too, and that's why we
turned it down. But we have
sought private funding. We've
also sought funding through the
NMFA, uh, and, and there was a
little bit of bump in the road
there. We're gonna go back to
them and see what what might be
able to be done, knowing that we
do need to, I believe it's
prudent for us to come up with
something at the table.
you know, but to start with 100%
waiver, knowing that that
probably was going to happen,
uh, it's where we, we began, and
that's how we choose to do it,
but we know that there's gonna
have to be some sort of match
that we have to come up with.
and we're willing to do it, but
we have to stay within our debt
service as well. And, and for us
the the the least reimbursement
um
we have to come up with about
$350,000 on top of what the
lease reimbursement just to, to
meet our debt service right now.
out of operations. Well, and I'm
sorry, we're also included,
we're also included on the HB 33
and the SB 9 questions for the
local district, uh, a little bit
of a hiccup last year. They had
had some changes in their
administration, and they left us
off the question, which uh we
then had to come back and they,
they corrected it in December
through a resolution that they
did with their board. So we are
receiving those funds and we're,
we're fine now for the next.
6 years and we've also requested
that they include us on their
next building bond, knowing that
that's probably not going to
happen because they have their
own needs. They're, they're
trying to build two elementary
schools through the PSFA, and I,
we understand that, but we are
just to be able to.
to try to touch all of our bases
to say we we're trying to to get
this, uh, is what we've done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah, I, I
think that's heartening to hear
because I think, um, I think
everyone can appreciate a good,
like a very good faith effort,
and yes, you come up empty and
you're kind of like we've
exhausted all options, I think,
I think the key just speaking
from a PSOC member, and I don't
speak for the whole council on
this, but I would just say, you
know, you want to see that good
faith effort there have, I think
it was the Sign Language Academy
that was able to secure private
financing may be may be a good
resource, cause I'm sure that
they've run into similar issues.
I know they have different
funding challenges
but those are things that I
think we would want to as a
council see, you know, because
again, a 100 like there are
schools, as you mentioned, that
have received waivers, but I
think as the presentation shows
like it's sort of a different
playing field for them, you
know, and maybe shouldn't be,
but you know, you guys already
having the challenge of having
to, you know, be included in a,
a district geo bond, but they
may not include you. That's,
that's already a larger hurdle
for you than the district, so
there are different challenges,
but I think, um, you know,
there's gotta be also maybe
some brainstorming, and it
sounds like you've done that and
solutions to kind of think about
how you could come up with, um,
you know, at least a portion of
the match, so it's not a full
waiver, but at least, you know,
charter school is, is able to be
resourceful in that.
Mr. Cha, I could respond
quickly, um, Ms. Lee, uh, I'm
very familiar with what uh the
Sign Language Academy went
through. I was, I was part of
those discussions actually, and
we've modeled everything that
we've done similar it's almost
an identical type of thing. The
only difference is we own the
land, we will own the Scar
school will own the land when
it's all said and done, so it'll
be, you know, and
frankly, I think we were in a
better position to be able to,
to get some funding and, and I
applaud them for getting what
they got because they certainly
deserve it, it's a very good
school, uh, but the, the
similarities in terms of our
structure and our ask were close
to identical, uh, because we all
kind of worked on it together
even if it was from the back,
you know, the background and
knowing and discussions that
we've had.
I just want to let you know that
that it's very similar. There
are.
Thank you. Good afternoon,
gentlemen.
Um, I just have a couple of
really simple questions. So, for
both of you, what, what is your
reading proficiency. Let's do
reading, math and science.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier, a
commonclassical in the spring of
2024, which is the most recently
available data. We're 75%
proficient and advances in
English, and 53% in math. And as
I mentioned earlier, our
students with disabilities were
above 50% in both categories. In
science, our 11th graders were
about 80% proficient and
advanced. I don't recall 8th
grade, as I sit here.
And again, we have about 920
students.
And that's Mr. Chair, that,
that's
K through 12, 66 to 12, so that
would be coming from grades 678,
and the 11th grade. Mr. Chair,
Senator Lanier, our proficiency
rates rank around 37% in reading
and probably close to 20% in
math.
and but they are increasing. We,
that's why we went to a
standards based curriculum and
uh.
different options within our
school that include um.
um.
periodic check, periodic two
week checks on our grading
system and that kind of stuff
that Miguel put in place so.
Yeah, um
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, uh,
yeah, we are very focused on
improving our academic
performance at School of Dreams
and a couple of things that we
installed and put in place
starting last year is, um, we're
following a multi-tiered system
of supports, so, uh, what we do
is we have a consistent grades
that teachers turn grades in
every 2nd and 4th Friday of the
month. Um, we use that data to
do interventions for students,
um, who are struggling
academically, so, uh, for
instance,
in the high school, um, any
student that has a D+ is put
into a tier 2 intervention, and
what that looks like is all of
our advisors, they reach out to
the teacher to see what work
they need to make up. They reach
out directly to the parent and
to the student. They log
everything within our SIS to
make sure that we know that
these interventions are taking
place. Um, we have data, I don't
have in front of me, but we have
a lot of kids that move out of
intervention and improve
academically. I can tell you
that although our numbers are
not exactly impressive right
now.
Um, they did go up from the
previous year, pretty much all
around from elementary through
to the high school level. Uh,
our SAT scores in English went
up, um, I believe it was about
14 points in our SAT scores in
math went up as well. So
although it is uh it is where it
is, we're doing our best to go
in the right direction. And, uh,
this whole entire year, I also
run our dash team, um, we are
focused primarily on academic
rigor and making sure that we
improve in that.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair, I,
did you, did you say the
science, I think I missed
science. I, I didn't, Mr. Chair,
uh, Senator Luneiro, I don't
have the number for the science,
but I think it's around.
38% rough. Yes, sir. No, I
appreciate it. Thank you guys.
And then my, my only other
question would be
for again, for both of you
do you, so you're interventions
is that in school or is that
after school, um.
you know, do you pull kids out
of classes or do you have them
before school, after school?
What's the most effective way
that you have an intervention.
So what's really great about our
school is every single one of
our middle school through high
school students have the
opportunity to be in either a
homeroom or an advisory. So most
of our social emotional learning
and also, um, a lot of our
academic checkups happen within
those advisory periods. Um, some
of the things like reaching out
to parents and stuff would
happen, uh, either after school
that the teachers would reach
out or during the time that they
have, um, they, every single
teacher has a free period. What
do we call it, every single,
yeah, every single teacher has a
prep period so they can reach
out to the parents, uh, during
that time as well. But to answer
your question, Senator, we're
not pooling students out of
their academic learning time in
order to do these interventions.
Uh, every single one of our
students does have advisory time
and homeroom time.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Linnier,
for Cottonwood, I'll start with
after school. We have a banner
near peer program where our
juniors and seniors are paid to
tutor younger students, and we
have a late bus that comes every
single day, 5 days a week.
That's a very effective program
run by teachers. In addition,
during the day, something we did
with at-risk funding over the
last 5 or 6 years when we had it
and we're working to see if we
can maintain it is that uh we
have students in their grade
level classes, and in addition,
we work with the family to
choose an elective period where
they are also pulled out to do
ELA or math coaching or
intervention. So they're getting
just in time supports while
being at the grade level, um,
and it works incredibly
effectively.
OK, thank you. And last
question, I promise, Mr. Chair.
So when you
do you track your parent
participation, so both of you
were talking about reaching out
to parents is are you tracking,
um, you know, how much
involvement are the parents? Are
you getting more than a regular
public school? Are you, um, kind
of along with the same average
or do you even know for sure.
Uh, thank you, Senator. We do
track and we do, uh, right, so
every time they do reach out to
a parent that is logged, and
what the parents responded is,
is logged as well. Um, I will
take a moment to say also that
we are a community school, um,
so we're in our implementation
year right now, and, uh, we have
many community partners and
parents that are partnered with
us, um, on a consistent basis.
So, uh, but as far as tracking
goes, we
do log every conversation.
OK, thank you
Mr. Chair, Senator De Linier, we
track attendances at every event
that we have for parents. We
have monthly parent education
nights, and we have an
intervention tracking sheet
where teachers and advisors log
communication home.
Uh, we also have 2 twice a year
student-led conferences where we
track how many parents
participate with us.
And do you have a percent of
involvement? I mean, I know, I
know that's kind of putting you
on the spot. It varies based on
the event. So I can tell you for
our back to school night, we had
a little over 300 families out
of the, yeah, it's 920 students,
but probably 550 families. So a
little more than 50% of our
families participated in that
event.
Mister Chair,
Senator Linnier, I, I, we, we
have very good parent
involvement. We, we have events
and there's.
hundreds of people to come, you
know, they, they enjoy coming to
the school, they enjoy talking
about their kids, they enjoy
talking to us, and we're very
open in terms of uh meeting with
parents whenever, whenever they
want to, so, um, I think we have
a good relationship with, you
know, most all of our parents.
All right, thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Munoz
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'll,
I'll, I'll try to be brief. Uh,
Benjamin, right? from?
um
John Binner. Let me ask you, how
many 6 between 6th grade and 9th
grade are dropping out of your
charter school.
So Mr. Chair, Senator Munoz,
between 6th and 8th grade, it is
1 or 2 students a year out of
about 155 per grade level. And
in the most recent year, we had
above 92% re-enrollment in every
single grade, including 8 to 9.
And, and how are you keeping
them in there? I mean, what,
what I mean, cuz I'm asking this
question because the 6th through
the 9th grade is where so if we
can change that, right?
then that changes our, our
graduation rates in, and you
lose one or two students, you
know, you never know what one or
two is, but that is, that's, I
don't know how you target them
to keep them other than being in
a charter school. Mr. Chair,
Senator Munoz, it's a
comprehensive, but it involves
things like the interventions
that I was speaking about
earlier for students that
struggle. Every student is seen
by multiple adults and known.
Our students ranked us in the
top 1% 2 years in a row for
safety in the country. That
includes physical and emotional
safety. So it, it
it matters that you know their
name
and it matters that you know
something about how they learn,
and that you engage with their
parents, uh, on top of that,
although it was extremely
difficult and I had to go
through all those hoops I
mentioned earlier to to add
facilities. We have a gym, it's
a no nonsense, no frills gym,
but having a gym and having a
place to gather and also host
some sporting events, makes a
big difference for culture. So
students feel like it isn't just
about learning, but they can
have a holistic school
experience. I would say that
also matters.
And, and maybe the other people,
I mean, what's your if you have
it, I don't know, I'm sorry, it
was not being here, but the 6th
through 9th
So, um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Munoz, we have, uh, over the
last two years for sure had to
higher graduation rate in our
valley for between the three
school districts that are there.
We, we work, we don't have quite
the numbers per grade level. We
have around 40 to 55 students
per grade level. So if you lose
one or two, it makes a big
difference on that percentage.
So we try very hard, uh, not to
keep them and if some transfer
for reasons maybe by sports or
something, we want to
make sure that we kind of keep
in touch with them a little bit
to make sure that they do get
across the line, um.
you know, it, it, it's sort of
fluctuates, I'll be honest with
you, uh, given the years, but
we, with the interventions that
we have and the conversations
and the
the, the community environment
that we try to provide for
families, I think that we're
making a difference in that
area.
And Senator, I don't know, um,
I don't know exactly the reason.
There's probably multiple
factors for this, uh, but we did
implement that, the tiered
system of interventions last
school year, and uh with the,
the whole focus was on making
sure to have a good graduation
rate and making sure our kids
don't drop out of school. And um
after the first 10-day count,
there, there was, unfortunately,
before the 1st 10 day count,
there was one senior last year
who did end up dropping out, but
after that, every single one of
our seniors did stay, did
maintain, and did graduate.
And uh so that could be unique
to the year, but, um, we're
continuing implementing those
tiered systems of supports and
hopefully uh hopefully more kids
don't fall through the cracks.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Then Matthew Paul, can I ask you
one question because you're head
of the charters, right?
Association.
Could you get me all the
administrative costs and and
what it varies between charters,
you know, you may have a
superintendent. I'll use alal
McKinnon County has 380,000. And
then you have a middle college,
high school.
in Gallup, and they have 200
students in his pays $180,000.
And, and I want to see what the
administrative costs are on some
charter schools to to see how
they compared to per capita per
student.
that they're getting in there
and then.
you know, the other thing is,
charter schools, my kids went to
the other one academy and
they're dual credit schools they
they work, right? When they're
ran right, when they're not ran
right, they don't work. Some of
the proficiency numbers are
pretty. You can ask us for a
lot, but if you, if the
performance is not there, I
don't think how we hunting el
that's been in trouble and
what's going to happen with
that, but it started, but if the
proficiency is there and they're
not educating the students
there, then some of these are
gonna go away and then what
happens, uh, you know.
there's a charter school that
moved to, to different building
and vacated the other buildings
and what happens to those when
they cause they're state
property because the state buys
them and funds what happens to
that property?
uh, when it's, they bannered and
and they abandoned it, and then
they try to come back to it. I
mean, who has
Mr. Chair and Senator Munoz, um,
just a couple things. One, just
on the performance side of
things, charter schools do
close, um, because of
performance issues, it's, it's a
feature, not a bug of the
movement. Um, and so that's on
the table for schools that that
chronically struggle and then
make that comment just to the
system, not of the particular
school in Gallup. Um, we have
yet to have a charter facility
that was vacated by a school
that left that wasn't just
filled by another school. Um,
when, when the investment is
made to make it a real education
facility. It kind of becomes a
prize, uh, excuse me, um, uh,
uh, uh, prize like, oh, well,
I'll move into that building if
that school is actually going
away because they're they're
quite hard to find, um, on the
administrative and I, I, I heard
two things, administrative costs
and, um, administrator, uh,
salaries for like directors, um,
the administrative cost is going
to vary widely.
and that really depends on the
model of the school, um, and how
they choose to work, um, uh, how
they choose to do their work. I
think there's a lot of models in
the charter space where some of
our um administrative expenses
are actually providing
real good coaching or, you know,
it's at it's administrative, but
it's showing to have an impact
in the classroom. Um, and so,
yes, more administrative costs,
but I think like, if the results
are there, I'm not sure why we
care, um, but then secondly on
the salaries, um, we don't have
a standard salary schedule, so
they vary greatly as well. I do
not have that information, um,
but I can work with the
legislative staff to try and
find it.
Yeah, it's just interesting me
per capita per student, right,
how you, you have 200 students
or you have 100 students in the
charter. What's the overhead
cost?
If you don't have a set scale
and you can come in and say, oh,
I'm gonna pay myself as the
$1000 when you have 100 students
and you have other
superintendents and.
gentleman in the middle, not
Benjamin.
Uh, she told me you Colin
and, and she has, I think you
said 600 students, right?
And so what's the cost? What's
the true cost and it's not, and
is there an issue when you pay
on the higher end with a low
amount of student population
compared and so where is the
money really going and, and is
it really getting into the
classroom to to this. I, I don't
know if you were here before,
when I said I mean some of those
gyms and um basketball courts,
keep kids in school or care if
they played dodgeball in them or
whatever, right?
Some of the ties to to getting
them into how we're funding
those if they really are worth
having it. And Mr. Chair and
Senator, just 11 additional
comment on how compensation is
viewed in our world, the the
charter school leader, if you're
expecting the same compensation
as a principal at that level.
It's, it's apples to oranges.
They're essentially playing a
hybrid role of a superintendent
and a, um, and a principle. So I
only say that not
to negate what you're saying on
the scale issue and performance,
uh, that is worth looking into,
but the, but the baseline, it,
it should be higher than, than a
traditional, uh, district
principal.
Well, we'll find out when you
give us the numbers. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I think I'll aim
this one to you Matt, to start
with since I think you'll be the
historian with me. What was the
original purpose for charters?
Mr. Chair, and, uh, Mr. Rounds,
uh, there have been many, uh,
public promises made regarding
the charter school movement. But
if you look back at our statue,
it's about uh innovation, it's
about choice within that space,
and it's about having
complimentary um practices or
providing a complimentary role
in in the state for their
education system. And I say
those three things because that
last one is, is more inherent in
the way we wrote it compared to
other states. In other states,
they are, they are authorized
and set up to almost be
computing school districts, and
we don't have that environment
here, and I think that was
purposeful from the outset.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think
part of, I didn't hear you
mention was that it was an
opportunity to try new
innovation and then replicate
that in the rest of the public
school system, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Browns, yes.
So let me ask you a question.
Didn't you just say that you
don't have any standing salary
schedule requirement Mr.
Chair and uh I want to call you
senator.
You stand.
Uh, Mr. Rus, the, the same
minimum supply, um, for, for
teachers and for administrators,
but much like superintendents
where there is no um set salary
schedule, that's the same for
the, the, uh, leader at the at
the school, but generally
speaking, if you just look at
the
revenue from SCG and the
requirements, our schools can't
stray very far away from what is
mandated and what districts do.
Mr. Chairman, the real variance
is that.
you have exceedingly
high level of
design
that can be done by the charter
school.
that is in charter schools, so
this is interesting, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Rounds, the largely the
exemptions that I know
representative Luhan has
mentioned it a few times.
There's, there's two big buckets
of exemptions. One, it
essentially has to do with the
student experience. It's around
curriculum. It's around, I would
say probably the biggest one is
on, um, teacher evaluation, so
we can align our evaluation with
the mission of the school, but I
would say curriculum
actually, any public school can
do. Um, that, that it's a, a lot
of the um freedoms come from the
fact that we get to make uh
decisions at the school level,
and we have this mission that
serves as the North Star for how
we make those decisions. That's
where you get the real
difference there. But as far as
legal restrictions from, say, we
have two Montessori schools, for
example, Montessori is not new.
I don't know how old it is, but
it's, it's not new. That's a
possi, a real possibility for a
school
district to implement on their
own. Now, what they have to
consider is that we're going to
have one school that looks a
little different than the rest
of our, our schools, and many
school districts do that, but
that's a new cascade of uh of
choices and policies that they
have to figure out to just kind
of enact and enable a school
like that to occur.
Mr. Chairman, I'm just another
layer down, cause I'm looking
for the difference, why
cottonwood?
has the performance it has
Why, why the work you're doing
in Valencia County is doing what
it is, right?
And, and I've always been
intrigued about what's bringing
us to the table. Am I correct
that the boards of tend to have
longer longevity. Mister Chair
and Mr. Rounds, I, I believe
they would have longer
longevity, yeah, tremors you'll
begin to unpack.
public policy. That's a question
I would ask why, why are you
able to achieve?
Now the take that we talk about
in the Super Tennis Association
on the coalition of Educational
Leaders is longevity. Longevity
of leadership, longevity of
policy.
and things like that and, and I
wonder out loud if you'd like to
share anything about that, I
wonder if Cottonwood as an
example, how long is that?
board of directors been in place
for Cottonwood, Mr. Chairman.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Mr. Rounds,
our, our bylaws, first of all,
uh,
the board members are not
elected. They are appointed, um,
and the bylaws restrict them to
a total of 4 years of service in
2-year terms, but they recruit
replacements. It's part of their
role before they depart. We also
do not allow parents,
grandparents, um, or relatives,
so that it maintains a focus on
the mission, um, and we do from
a longevity standpoint, it will
say our faculty retention rate
is excellent, and if you hire
good teachers, support them and
keep them. That helps a
tremendous amount with imple
ment ation of your program
And final question Mr. Chairman
Matt.
are any of the charter schools
Mr. Chair and Mr. Rounds, yes,
um, 5 charter schools are
unionized, um, yep, and I, I, if
I could just add one more thing,
I do think there is an element
of the focus of the schools and
just being able to go in that
direction.
A comprehensive high school has
to be a lot of things to a lot
of people, um, when you're a
charter school or any other
school of choice, you're telling
those who are coming to that
school, you're telling staff,
the governing council, it's not
a confinement necessarily, but
it's a direction. And so when
everybody understands we're here
for an international
baccalaureate education, and
that's what our decisions will
be. I do think there's a, there,
there's some, uh some benefit to
the the explicit
purpose versus some of the
challenges of, of there's a lot
of families that come with
different objectives in any
school. Um, my kids are entering
school age and the things I want
from elementary school are a
little different from my
neighbors. Um, it doesn't mean
we can't both get those things,
but it, it does present a
different, um, uh, trade-off
there when making decisions and
making those decisions at the
school site versus decisions for
multiple campuses, which is just
challenging. I turn final
insights. So,
in my longevity as a
superintendent, about 27 years
in that. We did some
programmatic things like early
college high school, and then
you know.
in in Las Cruces
purposed
defined, delivered 99%
graduation rate.
65% of the graduates were first
time half of them were
first-time high school graduates
ever in the family.
The issue that
was the line of demarcation
between that and the rest of the
district.
was that it was very focused,
very purposed, and bought into
and ran its own scenarios, so I
would submit that that may be
one of the reasons.
why charters tend to move ahead
and give our uh other publishing
fos.
OK, so, um
I yeah, I just want to provide
one other thing since we're
talking about, you know, how
we're going to judge schools and
base schools. It seems like we
have um two different charter
schools, you know, with, with
different missions.
right? And one of the things I
think we need to take into
consideration as well, is
student population deficiency.
Um, right, because as I'm
looking through the LESC um
annual report, um, School of
Dreams Academy in all different
categories, and his students,
ELL students, um,
and students with disabilities
pretty closely tracked. Los
Lunas, so you all are talking
about making gains year by year
in your proficiency rates, and
then Cottonwood Classical is
economically disadvantaged
students, 7 students with
disabilities, 5%. So it's
population that's pretty
different and radically
different than Albuquerque's
schools within the district. Um,
so the evaluating schools and
and charter schools, I think is
matter, a matter of their
student
population as well, because, um,
in some cases, some schools are
serving, um, a different and in
some cases radically different
student population than than our
local public schools. Um,
are as well, Matt.
Just one other example that I do
want to bring back to the to the
group here because it gets
brought up a fair amount are we
have schools that on traditional
metrics look particularly bad.
Um, and those schools are
targeted towards dropouts and
re-engaging them, getting them
across the finish line, and so
it's another um demographic that
it it it's, it's pretty well
suited for the charter school
movement, um, when, when a
student drops out of their high
school, it doesn't feel like a
welcoming place all the time and
having a separate school that
that is run by different folks
that have policies that are
aimed towards re-engagement and
accelerated learning makes
sense. Their proficiency rates
are quite
low, and they're included in our
numbers, but it's a, it's
another demographic that did
want to hit on because just last
year we graduated 1000 students
from those 12 high schools. Um,
those are potentially 1000 that
wouldn't have graduated. That's
a real thing, but if you look at
those numbers, it's not telling
that story necessarily. In, in,
and I appreciate that. I mean,
and I think that speaks to some
of the frustration amongst
members in
services cause when we're
talking about declining
enrollment and various schools
competing over students like us
at me and my school, we take.
the students that we
And we provide all of those
services we need teachers that
are um um bilingual certified.
We need to certified. We need
all those sort of different
services, um, because we take
who comes in behind, um, partly
behind the idea in changing the
state equalization guarantee is
to get an accurate picture of
what's servicing at-risk
students in particular, and then
providing the money for them
because in some cases, some of
those school districts, some
of those charter schools were
getting shortchanged in their
at-risk funding, um, others were
getting an inflated amount based
on the population that they were
getting. And I think that if
those examples of those schools
that were getting that added
money, um, their proficiency
rates are great and should serve
an example as um to the question
of are we funding schools
adequately enough if they're
getting an added amount, um, um,
what are they doing right with
the funding that do?
Um, but without any other sort
of questions. Uh, quickly,
Representative Lu Hong Cougar at
time. Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
just appreciate that. I just
would just like to remind us,
like, you know, and I think it
was, it was mentioned a little
bit of like why we moved to
have.
the charter, you know, state
charter charter schools in place
was to see what those models
were and what was working best
so that then we could replicate
that into the regular
population, but what I'm hearing
is quite the opposite. It's just
that it's, it's growing and
growing into a place where it's
really hindering and hurting our
other um other populations and
other schools. So I think we
need to really evaluate that
balance and look at, you know,
from my recollection, it's been
the community schools that have
the best model, and I'm gonna
uh, you know, I admire that,
that's why I commend you so
much, because it takes a lot to
have that in place, but I just
want to remind you all that that
was this was the experiment, if
you will.
and we should have landed at
what those best models are, and
we should be moving towards
those models within our, our
curriculum within our school
programs and.
throughout Mr. Chair, so I'd
just like to remind us that and
if we continue to grow the the
different charters and more
application, it's going to just
hurt other schools and it's
hurting my district. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, may I just
respond quickly to that. So, uh,
to Mr. Round's statement on why
charter schools are even here,
uh, we got into it because we
wanted to be bastions of, of
learning, you know, uh, kinds of
experimentation or trying to
find new things.
What happened and it's just a
reality. I'm not complaining.
We, we, we created a school with
lots of great ideas. We went
with those ideas and then we
found out we had to comply with
everything the public education
department wanted all the
different divisions, all the
different things started, you
know, with all these reports and
all this and that, and we, we,
we do it with very minimal
staff, but it's just a reality
that, that takes not only time
but a lot of effort and, and,
and things that throughout the
years we've gotten
very good at it, but that was
one thing we've talked about
this for a number of years, you
know, creating something great
and then having to comply with
rules are rules, you got to
comply with the, the ed
department that's why they're
there, but it's just kind of
like a dichotomy that that
exists in the charter world
because you don't have an entire
central office to do all these
things in different departments.
You do it with 3 or 4 people.
and Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Luhan, I just
want to add to that, um, first
off, we're really grateful to be
able to speak in front of all of
you today and uh with regards to
best practices, anything, any
input that we could have in the
future, we would love to be in
that conversation too.
All right. Well, thank you all.
All right, folks, thank you. We
don't have public anybody signed
up. That's it. We'll see you all
for the special session.
Oh,
is there? Yeah,
yeah, yeah.
Like I had, I had public
comment, Mister Chairman.
about the special session.
You're still on
