Very much
Thank you. I'm glad we were able
to help
Anyone else?
Uh, if not, uh
let's go ahead and move on to
the award cycle, item number 5.
Uh.
report on the pre-applic
applications received to date.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Members, I want to start off by
um reminding the council of what
we brought to you the last
meeting, so this is gonna be the
pre-ops you see before July 16th
and um that was for Mountainair,
Mountainair Elementary School,
as well as treat the
consequences middle school.
These both are requesting
standards-based projects.
um for our pre-K facility
reserve uh has requested, uh,
funding for a pre-K facility.
The current applications that
we've received, uh, since then,
we have two standards-based
project for Roswell. Roswell
High School, as well as Roswell
Goddard High School.
Her systems-based projects, Mr.
Chair, we have McCurdy Charter
School who is um award
And as we do know as well as the
district that the teacher
housing pilot is currently on
hold. They blattened Schools has
submitted a request for funding
for teacher housing.
Um, still, who we've have heard
from is uh Las Cruces, as I
indicated the last meeting, um,
Mora, in fact just submitted as
of yesterday. So we've also
heard that uh Santa Rosa,
Albuquerque, Taos, Clovis, and
Questa are still some space
projects, Roy, Albuquerque as
well as Roy and Soorro for
teacher standpoint of question.
Thank you
Question Mr. Chair, um, Iris,
I'm curious, given, uh, both,
you know, the number of old
projects we've seen coming back
to request adjustments to the
award.
that still haven't completed or
maybe made much progress on
design, as well as um the very
helpful reporting you guys are
providing now in the project
status report that has also
identified a number of projects
that have made no progress.
When we are making new awards.
How are we evaluating district
readiness to actually move on
those projects.
Kelly, um, we're definitely
taking a look at what they what
do those timelines look like.
Um, and then as far as whether
or not they have a qualified
district representative, uh, in
order to assist in these
projects because that's what
we're noticing quite a bit more
on the district level. Um, so
we're having those
Um, thank you for that. I think,
you know, when these projects
actually come forward to the
council for award, if you guys
could provide a little bit of
information on um the results of
that analysis.
Thank you. Yeah, just to, we're
gonna see some project, one of
the concerns, and I would just
recommend
to to whatever level, I mean,
every, every project is is gonna
have its own characteristics and
every district has its own stuff
happening, I guess. But to
whatever to whatever.
extent we can standardize some
of that process, whether through
some sort of, I don't want to
call it a checklist that's too
perfunctory, but some sort of
rubric or waiting on how we
consider uh district readiness,
I think is really important.
one, because we want to make
sure that they can actually get
the projects done and 2 so that
we can potentially think about
how we use that.
that same level of um
evaluation.
to judge
mass projects that have already
been awarded and in our nation,
but just as, as we get closer
and closer to
funding big projects and people
coming back to us for a word
language changes that are going
to cost more money.
how we consider where we spend
that money is going to be really
important if it's sitting
somewhere.
not moving
and where projects because of
it. So whatever way we can make
that consistent, I think would
be really helpful.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, quick
question, you mentioned that um
Las Cruces is potentially coming
forward. Do you know if they are
considering bringing forward a
request for Whitesands. K
through 8.
Mr. Chair, Miss Lee, it looks
like it's an elementary sounds
something that they are
considering to bring forward.
OK, thank you. Thank you. Along
the lines of the uh
movement on existing projects. I
think we really need to take a
uh.
standard uh
um.
percentage
that would be applied to all
districts equally serve again as
an incentive to move those fle
projects that just need closing
down these projects, a threshold
requirement could be the.
certain year additional funds,
so I
think we really need to look at
that kind of.
Mr. Chair, members, excellent
comments, one of the tools that
we have.
in our toolkit to adjust
district readiness is the
memorandum of understanding,
which we are currently updating
through our strategic planning
efforts.
It really outlines a lot of the
starting point details for
districts and whether or not
they're ready financially,
operationally, to move forward
with these projects, and we have
some ideas to partner with
school districts to move that
along so that we don't get these
delays moving forward.
Any other questions
No, thank you for the report and
let's move on then to Autocycle
Awards.
and uh we award subcommittee
where you want to start with
these uh short summary or we'll
go with the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm happy
to do whatever you'd like. Uh,
the 1st 3 that we're going to go
through are all um in Gallup,
they have their own
characteristics. And so I think
I'll just say a couple of things
real fast and then maybe if
staff could go through each of
the projects very briefly, uh,
um, I asked that we put these on
uh to pull these out of consent,
to make sure that I just wanted
the council to be aware that the
1st 3 projects were all affected
by the policy that we set at our
special meeting a few weeks ago.
And so as we were discussing
them in, in awards, obviously we
have questions and all that
stuff, go through some of the
details, but more than anything,
just wanted to say that these
were uh approved by sub
com m it te e or recommended for
approval by subcommittee.
based on that policy that they
did meet the requirements of
they came back for additional
square footage.
and they used that additional
square footage, um, with some
flexibility, but as long as they
did not go below minimums for
academic spaces, and they did
not exceed their allowable
maximum allowable square footage
that we uh recommended Mr.
Chair, maybe the staff could go
through.
morning chair and members.
Uh, the first item on the, on
the agenda.
for uh cycle 24006, Gray.
District request was to increase
the current design capacity from
116 students would result in a
net increase of gross square
footage of 4360.
uh
The district is
They met all of the criteria,
special meeting.
uh lined up with, with what we
have 3 we have 3 exhibits
available for your review.
The PSFA recommendations letter
and the programming of spaces
that we.
our recommendation is to include
the increase in the current
design capacity and to amend the
current standards-based award.
to include that increase.
in students as well as the. Do
you want to move on to the next
one? Specific question on this
project, um, what prompted the
request for an adjustment based
on 6 students, like, is there
anything substantive that
happened or changed with the
enrollment, um, or the
district's expectations or
uh was this just an opportunity
to increase the square footage.
This is called Caswell, I
believe that is correct, is that
it was just they were allowed a
little bit more square footage
to use in some of their uh
academic spaces, gym spaces, CT
spaces, um, I think that's what
prompted it. It wasn't so much
that they were the increase in
enrollment was doing that, but
it was just
they were allowed to, you go to
the calculator value.
OK, and what do we require of
districts to come back to
increase their enrollment
capacity. I mean, I, I do
realize for this project that
they are under slightly under
your projections for potential
enrollment.
um, but do we require them to
provide any evidence that
there's a need to reconsider the
award, uh, Mr. Chairman Caswell,
what we, the first thing we do
when we look at the enrollment
projections, and we start with
the FMP.
And if the MMP is, is, is
slightly outdated, or we're
seeing that actually enrollment
trends.
um are not following the
projection, then we will go back
and sometimes ask districts to
see if they could revise that.
um enrollment projection or else
we will take a look at it as
well. And in this situation, the
district included a letter that
said that they just wanted 122
at this location. Um, so the
projection was about 1:30, uh.
I would believe that, um, what
we do support the 122 based on
the district request.
OK. Um
you know, I realized there's a
number of things going on here,
but it, it does seem like if
districts are going to keep
coming back, asking to change
old awards that we should have
some
uh, justification for doing
that.
Um, so just we'll leave this one
there.
Thank you for those comments and
I do think that as a council, we
established some deadlines for,
I think those are uh in place
for.
Go ahead with the motion,
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, I would move that the
council, um
approved this request for the
word language change for the
increase in the design capacity
from 116 to 122 and for the
increase.
second
this committee motion. So all
those in favor of uh.
approving the award subcommittee
recommendation, please indicate
by saying I.
Alright.
All those opposed
Uh, next is the uh
John point
High School
project
Chair members, uh, Project P
21005 Crown Point High School,
also Gallop McKinley County's
potential motion is to amend the
2021, 2020 toward language to
Gallop McKinley County School to
include an increase in the
maximum allowable gross square
footage.
from 52,055 gross square feet to
60 square feet.
resulting in a net increase of
12,0007U gross square feet.
Points are
again, the use of the new
calculator.
Um, all of the data that were
approval.
Um, we have again 3 exhibits
that support the request and the
recommendation made by staff.
uh move forward
and the official staff
recommendation.
is to make the award language
change to increase the awarded
maximum allowable score 5 square
feet to 64,792 square feet.
uh, the estimated fiscal impact
is.
we have the cost shown, so.
um
change their
uh directives
um
