I work looks like we're ready to
go thank you for being so
patient good morning everyone we
are here for their science
technology to tell
communications committee and
first I want to think that our
host on the school for the blind
and visually impaired for
hosting us today i'm a great
room great area lot of traffic I
never do you guys have so much
traffic with so we'll go ahead
and get start well actually will
do a quick introduction just
really fast introduction of the
of the committee nor it so
representatives could all you
want to start
good morning you need a good
rollout representative eighty
hours you take the I for the
other with the course basically
that's yeah i'm very excited to
be here thank you
thanks madame chair joy garrett
if you see the volcanoes on the
west side that's my.
Good morning everyone had the
berg mins from senate district
fifteen which is in midtown
albuquerque.
There are people
thank you madam chair senator
herald of junior district twenty
three northwest alba kirky and
you can see where the volcanoes
are at we over I over it up a
lot with representative happy
beer
good morning madam chairman by
share thank you very much for
having us here at this beautiful
location and thank you for
hosting us here my second or
third time i've been at the
school and it's just a beautiful
thing I my senator michael pity
service the senate majority went
my district is the southern
portion of burning leo county
from the base of the east
mountains to the west side of
albuquerque at the end of the
city proper thank you.
Good morning on those souls I
think I get the award for
traveling the further so far
everybody else is more local and
from last cruises district
thirty seven uh the east may so
where the beautiful organ
mountains are the defined the
city of los cruises thank you
and I have mark introduce.
Thank you madame chair my name
is mark edward some of the
legislative council service I to
my right in the back is joan
montaque who is her legislative
council librarian and incredibly
efficient committee staffer and
to my left is will you mason
also with the legislative
council service he keeps all
over a normally he keeps all of
the documents that come out of
uh the legislature incorrect
form he is a proof of for us
thank you.
And and back in the corner and
i've forgot about him cause
he a lio gonzalez is our
webcaster and so you will be on
steep wide webcasting actually I
think you get picked up an
alaska anywhere else in the
world if you turn in to
legislature
alright and thank you am debby
saranian I represent how sister
twenty one which is just north
of here montana high school area
of albuquerque so let's go ahead
and get started right our first
our first presenters they're
gonna welcome us here or doctor
hither miller their
superintendent just in berks
facilities and capital project
coordinator and kitty australian
innovation and development
research coordinator often in
mexico school the blind visually
impaired whenever you already.
She.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members thank you for
the opportunity to speak to dave
about and it ms ba doctor
edstrand was not able to join us
so it'll just be just in tonight
this morning i'm heather miller
i'm the superintendent
i'm just a little bit of
background about msbi we have
been serving kidos here since
nineteen oh three in the state
of new mexico we have multiple
statewide departments are birth
to three department works with
any kiddles who have a diagnosed
visual impermanent or who are
identified is at risk at both to
each three we evaluate around
nine hundred kidos a year
through that department and have
a rotating case sort of about
three hundred kilos in the state
that we serve this campuses are
early childhood program it
serves pre k in kindergarten
students.
We also have or campus in
almogoro it serves kiddles from
pre create up to each twenty two
in the age out we have a regular
programming up there as well as
our post secondary program which
focuses on life skills and job
skills for our kiddles our
outrage program serves districts
around the entire state we
provide support with
evaluations.
And with mentoring teachers they
also help facilitate our animals
you program that we have we pay
for the tuition of educators in
the state who want to become
certified as teachers of
students with fishing parents or
original mobility specialists
and the outage department serves
as our mentors for that program
we also house the instruction a
resource center which supplies
specialized learning materials
around the state to any students
or districts who require it as
well as we do all of the brail
transcribing for students around
the state textbooks school
materials anything like that.
Our instruction on our campuses
specifically we have a
combination of tieing in the
common course standards with our
common curriculums which we
align with the ones that are
suggested by the public
education department.
As well as the expanded core
curriculum the expenditure core
curriculum is a set of nine
areas that focuses on skills
that folks with vision loss do
not have the opportunity to
learn incidentally through their
vision since we know about
eighty percent of our learning
happens through our vision we
have to compensate for that so
that's things even as simple as
wiping a table someone was site
can look at a table so the spot
that dirty and white bit someone
who has vision loss needs to
learn a methodical way to wait
from corner to corner to make
sure that they don't miss the
spot that they can't see.
We host a variety of extra
curricular events are brill
challenges state white we invite
kids from around the state to
come stand our campus for a
weekend and it's a competition
on their brill learning skills
we host summer camps make forty
eight is a competition and
national competition we
participate in which i'll talk a
little bit more about and we
have specialized athletics
including goba.
Are students learn nemeth brill
code which is a separate code
from our youi be code and it's
specific to math and science
it's a very complicated code to
learn there's very few people
actually then on our country who
have certifications to turn
transcribed nemeth but it's the
only way to access specialized
annotations and math and science
for our kiddles
make forty eight is a
competition we participated at
the kentucky school for the
blind kansas school for the
blind two years ago it's a
competition that exists within
three days the kiddles are given
just a a general topic and they
have to design build markets and
promote whatever they've.
Come up with their they have a
little bit of support from
people like contractors to help
build it in things but otherwise
i've to do everything else
budgeting and creating
everything else we sent three
kidos to that they so showed
such a profound success with
that that we implemented our own
version of that so we have what
we call make or mondays then
we've done this for the last two
years now and this is where we
we group our kids into we switch
it up depending on the project
but we group our kids across the
campus and they work together
they receive it a general topic
and they work together as a
group with very minimal adult
support to design create builds
and market something that ties
to the topic they've been given
this year we added a new letter
of new letter a new layer
and mr burks is serving as our
banker and so and then they also
have to figure out how to get
the money for their project and
then they go shopping and they
do all the pieces so it combines
a whole bunch of life and career
skills with that science and
math and technology learning so
it's been a really successful
program or kiddoes have really
really enjoyed it.
I'm here on this campus mr
killman our principle is going
to talk to you a little bit more
specifically about the science
cricklin curriculum they use
here but even here at our pre k
level we build in those core
curriculums to make sure that
those kidders are getting that
inconjunction with their brail
and their sister technology
learning that we do specialize
in their own m.
Um technology why is something
that's been a really big thing
for us this year is the monarch
that was released by the
american printing house for the
blind it is one of the most
significant developments and
technology for folks with vision
loss in a long long time one of
the challenges that happens for
our folks with vision loss is
that brail materials especially
when you enter adulthood are
very hard to access so we use
what we call refresh refreshable
bray oh my goodness refreshable
brill displays which essentially
are like a small computer and
you can connect text to them and
then it shows it is brill on
their little screen the issue
with those as those only produce
two to three lines of brill at a
time so there's not really ever
an opportunity for fluency and
reading the monarch has fifteen
lines and so for the first time
folks who use brill can actually
read a text the same way as
cited person would read a page
of text it also can connect to
computers or to sell phones and
you can draw something on your
phone and it produces it as a
tactile image on that device so
it's a really significant access
tool for our folks with vision
loss now.
We have partnered with the
american printing house of the
blind to purchase some of those
and get them out into our state
we were we have two of around
the thousand that went out in
the country to start with.
We because they are about
seventeen thousand dollars so
they are a little bit expensive
but we wanted to get some out so
we house one with our lending
library which is another branch
of our technology services we
have staff in our outreach
department who focused
specifically on assisted
technology like the monarch and
they go out around the state to
school districts when requested
and provide devices to test out
to introduce the kidos they do
evaluations for districts to
help districts identify what is
the technology would be the most
proficient first student and we
also lend out devices for
districts to use which we've we
lent out around sixty five last
school you're around the state.
Our low vision clinics are so
play a big piece in that we know
in new mexico and particular
special in our rural areas it's
difficult for some of our
kiddles to get to the doctor
services that they need so we
provide free clinics with an
optimologist and they're able to
come to those clinics receive a
free examination and report on
their child's vision and within
that process we also identify
assistant technology that would
be appropriate for them to use
in our classroom so they can
take those back to their school
districts and use them to help
those teachers have more success
with the kiddles.
We also have with on our
campuses as direct assisted
technology program we have staff
specifically.
Assigned to help support the
students in their classrooms
here on campus and when they go
to inclusion settings and we
also have separate course work
that we build into our classes
that we offer that focus
specifically on technology
because it's such a big part of
our kiddles being successful.
And I will let mister books talk
better capital outlet
thank you manager and committee
i'd like to express our
appreciation of the new mexico
legislature for this support
that we have received as one of
the
three constitutionally created
special schools in the state
long with the school for the
death and mexico military
institute were in the unique
position to to be able to access
capital funds to the new mexico
higher education department as
well as a play for funding for
facility needs to the new mexico
public school capital outlet
council so
we are moving forward with we
we've managed to accomplish
quite a bit over the past decade
or so in terms of a lot of our
buildings were really aging and
facilities were getting only
been
managed to accomplish quite a
bit in terms of replacing and
referred machine
some of our existing facilities
at this campus in particular
we've found that
our bar population and and needs
have continued to grow and as
talent continues to grow in
traffic continues to increase we
see that there's a need to
revise a specially are our
traffic blower are a bus drop
off situation and parent drop
off situation this dism working
well in terms of its congestion
and this campus was not
constructed with a dedicated
capteria or multiple purpose
building uhm so we're fortunate
to have
been awarded funding
through the new mexico hire it
and and the capitalist council
to begin a project to correct
those efficiencies here on this
campus to make this
work better for our staff and
students so those
construction documents are
nearly a hundred percent
complete way we we continue to
to wrestle some with some of the
bureaucracy involved in getting
the project move.
Forward
we
now need to complete a traffic
studies to make sure that those
with the sitting and
and get a final plans and
documents approved through the
the ps so that everybody's on
board so we can release the
repeat
to get pricing on the project
and and receive final
construction dollars to move the
project forward so we're still
hopeful that those are all this
is going to come together here
in the coming weeks and we're
still
waiting on some approvals from
these agencies to to be able to
move forward.
On and on main campus and really
throughout we've just completed
a fairly comprehensive
facility master plan
and as I mentioned we we while
we have accomplished quite a bit
they're still there still some
work to be done with existing
facilities particularly in the
area of
of safety and security on main
campus
they're now mcordo uh
historically our main campus has
been
really a bright spot in the time
at the the town of almost auto
and in terms of because we have
our own
access to water wells and it
said a really nice green space
and
some of the challenges we've had
with that is with with having
public accession there mainly
now we we we recognize we've had
some incidents that there is a
need to
really provide some security for
our students to separate our
educational activities from
public spaces and public access
to the campus so so as part of
our our master plan we did in a
fight that need and we're going
to be working with new mexico at
in the legislature to
fund some additional fencing and
some of the other
things that we need to modernize
in terms of access control to
buildings and cameras systems
and and these kinds of things
that take some funding to get
everything more needs to be so.
We we appreciate
as as you'll see these
initiatives so we present you
considering this some other
items on her facility matched
plan in include other upgrades
to present we see the the the
school for the blind continuing
to have a focus on the outreach
services and
we're we're struggling for space
for some of the those services
to take place and so it may be
necessary to add some facilities
host some little personal that
we need to provide some of these
outreach services so we will be
looking at over the next five
years to to look at funding to
expand those services that
but we have accomplished a lot
and we appreciate your support
and we'd be happy to answer any
questions that you might have.
Madam chair and can you member
so I have a couple more things I
apologize I am speaking of what
mister berks mentioned I did
want to speak to that just a
some of our additional services
as well so for a student to come
to one of our campuses it is an
individuals individualized
education plan committee
decision they do have to have a
level of need that warrants that
intensive service that we offer
once they come to us we of
course work to get them the
skills that they need identify
the technology that they need
and then they go back to their
home district circle is not ever
to keep kiddles for the duration
of their education we also offer
short term stays for kiddles so
those are ones that maybe the
discharge has identified they
could just use two weeks have
just really really solid
orientation ability services
they can come to our campus and
we focus just on that for that
time line so we do offer a
variety of services to the
kido's dependent on what they
need from us to make sure that
we can reach anybody any kiddle
that we need to.
Um and are a little shortfall
box just to put in a little
blurred for that you know our
funding is is unique and it can
be difficult we have ten to have
a pretty set number and our
funding so as we do look at
doing things like growing or
outreach department we don't
necessarily put in for more fts
and get more money funding for
that so we have to figure out
how to move money around to fund
his week role staff to serve
more kidos it also of course is
a challenge as prices go up for
things.
Our technology we provide
because where the main provider
of technology and brail
materials and specialized
learning materials around the
state we're always having to
count for making sure we can
supply those things with the way
that our budget is set and so.
Now answering questions those
are my last things.
Sorry
first question comes from
senator souls thank you madame
jon I appreciate what you do
every day for kids in in new
mexico we've heard recently the
new mexico trust lands even
generating lots more money I
know you're one of the specified
designs have you seen increases
with those large increases or as
your budget still pretty well
said it's just getting the
additional statements are just
being supplanted by the
additional money being raised by
the trust lands a manager madam
chairman senator we did see an
increase this year because of
that it was I do not want to
miss speak to but we received
about five hundred thousand
dollars more so it wasn't a
significant increase but when
that amount fluctuates we do get
a little bit more but if it
decreases then we also lose
budget which is a little bit of
a challenge force but yes as it
has grown we have seen some
benefit from that
thank you do you know how much
of your budget is directly trust
lands and how much is additional
but in by the general fund you
know what those percentage or
numbers so about ninety percent
of our funding comes from the
trust lames we receive about ten
percent of it through the higher
education instruction general
fund.
Thank you and because my concern
is so often.
Yeah when there's additional
money from the trust lands it's
often like good we take that
same amount out of the general
operational funds how much of
the money did you get from the
trust lands is that only for
capital are you able to use that
for operational as well
are trustline funds are for all
of our operational costs as
well.
Okay thank you that those were
the questions when some
clarification I because often
times with schools capital can
only be used for capital and
operational essentially only for
operational and just went to
know what that split or
breakdown was that so capital
getting many from the
new mexico public school finance
authority people is that correct
the capital outlay council.
Thank you thank you that manager
thank you center next is
represented
thanks for insured things for
this and I have two questions
it's like the american with
disabilities act been fit at all
of its baby carriages down non
curbs in this innovations and
accessible sites has that been
used by anybody to reach
students have have the been
increased about that because as
you know working with just
special instudents and regular
and students some of these
things are would be crucial have
you gotten any increase about
that.
Representative guarantee manager
i'm not sure you understand the
question about these things
specifically or just in general
in these kind of bit of
innovations that are designed
for visually impaired people.
But would transfer it to anybody
trying to understand complex
things visually and hands on
just curious about that.
Representative and manager we
have we have not received many
inquiries about that I think
that
they're there is a very strong
vision community every year we
have you know a big annual
meeting of all the state white
schools for the blind and the
american printing house for the
blind host a large meeting and
there's a lot of really cool
things that happen at there but
that has not transferred out yet
they're still a pretty
significant separation it feels
like in the schools of where
vision lost lays and comparison
to other special education
things and so there are a lot of
things that could overlap and we
have not gotten.
Two figuring all of that yet
thank you.
The.
Any more questions.
I just have a quick question on
your money on the monitor
technology is that something you
look like does it look like
something you'd want to invest
in or something we could get
caps likely to or
tell me about the monic
madame chair yes absolutely it
is.
It is a device that just when
they first released it and they
were really testing it with
folks with blindness it has it
has caused here's it is
something that has been long
overdue for the world of folks
who use brill it's just opens up
accessibility in a way that
nothing else ever has and so yes
absolutely the more of those we
can get in our little hands and
get out to kiddles and to folks
with blindness it's it's going
to be really profound for them
career wise to be able to go to
college far more successfully
than they do now
even simple things like going to
a restaurant and getting a menu
it's a hugely significant thing
to be able to just put it into a
device and be able to read it
umbrella versus have someone
read it to you it creates such a
level of independence that has
an existed so far so.
Well thank you for your
presentation thank you for being
patient at waiting for and if
you so you can get capped out
wait for most right correct is
that something you do or does it
strictly the funding the from
the promotion.
So the manager we we we make our
applications to higher education
that ultimately is a brick by
much like okay great well better
stuff thank you thank you so
much thank you so much.
Alright my next presentation is
securing artificial intelligence
to strengthen cyber security.
So
yes are enough.
Um
wallet doctor mcmi for ceo
whenever you're ready thank you.
The.
I guess it's
some madam chair
quite sure
members.
It's an honor to be here so
quick and deductions from
aspiral come up i'm uh the c
off.
And new mexico based cyber
security company had caught it
here.
And i'm also on the board of
regents of new mexico tech
product
I got my doctorate and mission
learning for cyprus security.
Uh through a federally funded
grand way back in two thousand
so was fortunate enough to have
john luila says my doctorate
adviser he was a founder of ibm
watson.
And
happened to the time I p m
made new mexico's home but
wanted to give back to the
society by picking a few phase
like me and I had a rate
opportunity to study under him
and is also the beneficiary of
uh great leaders from new
mexico.
The initial grant was provided
by could you so bad lucky what
i'll send it to fidel and center
dollar to but I know so the
supported are initiatives by
federal match in two thousand
one creating what's called like
costs that today.
And the congresswoman had the
wilson.
Actually give another grant that
supported.
Then he should at what's called
competitional analysis of cyper
terrorism against the united
states so it would a first
program and donate it states
that help their men and women.
Fight cypic terrorism using
mission on this as two thousand
two but nobody could spell cyber
or even spell michigan learning
so I mean again it really helps
to have regionally leaders.
And that paved a path for a new
mexico to build offensive
capabilities not only from a
cyber security ten point but
also use mission learning to
solve a very complex problem so
that's a journey and that
allowed us to produce some of
the best cyber security experts
in this country and are several
offers today hold very
procedures.
Portions in the dark world and
the white world several offers
became entrepreneurs be created
companies we run some amazing
companies in the world from
matter to microsoft.
You name it we have new mexico
tax slash new mexico presents
amen it's a very under statement
if we don't say we have the
pineers in cyber as a state so
we don't talk about it a lot but
today we actually everywhere
so I built a company here that
focused on risk based on ability
management the focus was to
prioritize risk like a bad guy
would do be created that with
the first in the space in the
world to do a defined the space.
Sold the business
to be one t for flager
subsecurity company ryan at and
I chose to come back and started
at the cyprus security company
got a new mexico so the company
was already founded here I just
took over as the sea of that
company where about seventy full
time employees here in new
mexico all high paying jobs and
the focus now is using a eye for
cyprus security and also
security i.
And we testify to the us
congress in december.
Educating the members on half we
should be working with the
chassisa to help.
The industry state and local and
the school districts as well at
scale
by taking the principles of
secure by design and built and
security not only for
traditional computer but extend
that to a work loads.
And when the federal.
A big beautiful bill dropped in
on a I the ten year moratorium
and we were the team that
actually testified again at
stanford to the congress and
also again back in the congress
saying that why that's not a
good idea.
A very really need to make sure
we have some guard rails for a
eye and not create a civil
undressed between the habs and
the habnots yes i'm a
technologies unfortunate to be
in the habs but at the same time
aa sort about accessibility and
if the accessibility is tonight
and if safety and security are
not considered.
Are we gonna create chaos and we
go to create massive craters in
a technology that's built to and
power the users that's going to
impede the people that don't
have access to it it's like no
child left behind there's a
reason for that and I should be
the primary facer of no child
should be left behind with our
day because they are is going to
be a political so they would
like it or not yeah I hear this
to stay and we need to make sure
it's affordable it's accessible
to every single kid early on.
It's not a high school thing
it's not a college thing it is
not an upskilling thing it is
actually should start as always
as we start teaching them how to
speak and it's very important if
you're not doing it south
couriers doing it china is doing
it india has a global a high
initiative that the prime
minister mortar is talking about
educating every citizen with the
eye from farmers to emergency
workers to children I mean we're
talking phone is being educated
on eye and that's becoming an
indicator of pot off how they
live how their work so coming to
security.
There are a thousand pieces of
legislation passed last year a
thousand pieces.
Every state has multiple pieces
of leislation new mexico had our
own share house bill sixty had
an opportunity to meet better
than it a chandler this morning
on you know what's really going
on in how to be.
Take a business friendly balance
at protect our citizens what
from a privacy data security and
accessibility so the beauty is
we actually built a framework
called navigate.
What it does says it takes
transparency breaking the whole
black box nature of what a I is
looking at what is in that
system is it secure is it safe.
Does it prevent.
The misuse of the data you're
contributing to what's a I do
you really know what's happening
with your data do you have the
ability to unlearn do you
happily they believe to forget
so that a lot of integracies
that going into building yeah I
systems and one of the primary
challenges is a lot of bills are
not comprehensive enough to
address the basic rights when it
comes to data data privacy and
data security so the visited on
multiple top x and one of the
things we're going to do on
september eleventh
for the members to actually meet
a few silicon valley leaders who
have been building I systems and
would actually security I
systems globally so they'll get
to.
Visit with them and learn how
the building security so the
world's like meadows the open
eyes the anthropox but the bill
systems our cypriot security
systems really doing at so when
it comes to the kind of research
we are doing here.
While navigate framework helps
compare different bills
on a quantifiable manner we can
look at state bite bills and
look at it as new mexico stack
crime can be represented to the
congress new mexico ranked about
six to three points on a hundred
mark.
I get that not bad right so
we're not the forty ninth the
saver sixty third i'm just
getting no it it's a very well
drafted bill there's no doubt
about it it's all new and.
The business community fell.
The bell is to restrictive.
And well when you frustrated
thing you want to protect the
consumer does nothing wrong with
that if you look at eu
you takes a citizen first
approach the protect the
consumer while a loving
innovation it's a balance and
that's one thing we're more than
happy to compare different
pieces of leislation and see
where the address that we need
to adapt.
So that we have fair governments
at the same time you're not
letting this companies build
whatever divish developed so
that's aspect on that so coming
to the cyber security office I
mean i'll start.
With this approach to day we
have what we called air blane
spots everywhere.
You walk into estate agency that
using our so new mexico
department of information
technology provided any I
guidance for the state agencies
have they can use ai in the day
to deliver you go to schools
they use a I today I mean kids
are using chat gpt they using
gemina you going to universities
every profit so building his on
or her aa rapper or any model
you walk into private industry
it's an ai for used approach the
utility I sit on out by select
trick we have a a first
initiative for safety predicting
in a hazards helping consumers
managed load so the lot of
things that are advancing.
However.
We don't have a very clear
guidance and what you can and
cannot do with the eye.
I mean you have a fragmented
approach of we need to governy
if you need to use a I for
safety but did we really
obscure.
And there are set of folks that
are absolutely scared of a I
that ais here to come take every
chart.
So does users.
Will not adopt it some
unlearning and read learning is
going to be a challenge so what
that means is if you don't learn
a I the data is clear in the
last twelve months.
You're getting laid off.
Does not doubt about it it
started in the silicon valley
right you can see microsoft you
can see matter you can see
google you can see a debate you
name the household company.
Extremely high paying jobs are
being ladgo because if you're
not an eye
that's going to trickle down to
every industry.
Legal is getting destructed
healthcare is getting disrupted
utilities are adopting it I mean
if you're fifty people in a call
center I don't need fifty
anymore I just need to.
Right I mean that technologies
rapidly walleting debit.
So but it's also helping you be
ten experiment.
I use their at least thirty
forty times a day what is to
take me an hour to ride a more
writer in three minutes i'm not
exaggerating and it.
Because I know what I want.
Then eyes your best friend if
you don't know what you don't
want that's when you get into a
house in nation I mean i'm
jumping all over the place here
but the key really here as from
at least later perspective.
Is riskilling up skilling yeah I
first in every walk off life is
very important which means we
need to support we need to
enable we need to encourage our
schools are current to have safe
and secure a I training it is
super important and especially
when you have things like jatie
through workforce development
and through economic development
we should incentivise businesses
here to really train their
employees on a because we have
to be an eye for a society given
how small we are as a state how
economically backward we are and
how we want to compete with the
rest of the world we want
incentivise are employees to be
trained in and and the I blind
spots which the topic i'm
talking about today when you
walk into a stad and see.
They're using a and if you're
inhipitant from using a eye.
They're not going to be
successful because they're under
tremendous pressure to fill in
the jobs in tack at the same
time they have to work with what
they have.
As a state we need to have a
very simple mechanism to
discover the use of a i.
Basics write it can not afford
to have blank spots like cyber
we had so many plans parts
that's where you have seen.
So many incidents we spend
millions of dollars I mean
representatives or nana you have
been a very big supporter of
cyber center to party I mean
just pretty much a post batter
for cyber secure right both of
you
right I mean that's what we need
for cyber
so because without the support
from what a few right every
piece of legislation you bought
sponsored at or the years trying
to have cyber is an important
thing.
Yeah I it's actually even more
important because it changes
that economic
impact or for we are so coming
back to the discovery we need to
really have a mechanism to
discover the use of a
and how would we do what it's a
very infancy that a lot of
emerging tools to help you
discover it you can use existing
text tax to come back and take a
look at it is yeah I being used
so a means a lot of things a lot
of people that are foundational
models that are custom models
that are wrappers their
applications you're nato
applications alcohol with today
you're not even ever add that it
is the actually is there using
your data that you're probably
are not even aware that using it
to make money you're not ever
off that so that a lot of things
that are going on once you have
a method in a mechanism to
discover a at least you're
informed very eyes being used
then comes the detection peace.
The.
You start looking for a
vanabilities and weaknesses
created by air.
Right while there are a lot of
good advantages ya needs to be
used and where it needs to be
used we also want to know what
witnesses and wonderful this is
creating is it opening up for
more risks what are those so
that's what the detect be
scammed so.
Dent that third piece is the
validation piece do I have the
defenses to protect against the
I threats if a eyes won a ball
how long had defending is a
proactive difference to date I
systems are centrally managed by
this behaviours you cannot even
do france let's see instant
response if something happens on
your network I can send in a
troop and I can look at what
happened.
With a you don't control it
don't want to let you touch.
The systems because it's just
not your data it's everybody's
data and direct sovereign it
comes into play.
Ragi doesn't have control on
california cg because that's
where the physical data centres
and how do I go to front six how
do I actually go in the rastic
so we haven't even taught
through and I odd on an eye
system very few office can even
speak to machine learning based
instant responses but if
something goes strong in an ai
system do we logged the behavior
can we explain the distincts
that are being made can be
explained and attribute who
trained this system what were
they thinking are the train
professionals in what did it so
all these are unanswered
questions so the validate piece
is so important you discover.
You detect and your validate in
a how bad it is how good it is
what is that I need to do.
That comes the other mediation
you keep hearing god right I can
prevent you from doing this
second provider from doing that
but do you know all the task is
so this is the framework we
should pretty much adopt
discover detect validate
remediate and it's a life cycle
in cyber we were used to doing
annual art that's corporate your
debt stubby is saying cyber has
to be done continuous but they
you can do frequency based you
have to do continuous every
single time you change your
model every single time you
change of rate every single time
you'd retrain it you have to
look for the central cycle which
means it's a continuous security
posture on how you look at a
systems what from a safety and a
security standpoint so that is
on how do I secure a guy not if
you take a step back i'll be
even I write it that's a
question we should ask for
ourselves a lot of the times
when we went through the
strategian the first question we
asked okay what all the
documents we need to or see
ardon makes them their machine
being able to format.
You all know this I mean whether
it's share whether it's ongoing
these are the systems whether
it's.
Helping human services has
decent systems I sd too all
these systems took years to
digitize.
And we still spending millions
of dollars trying to get this
systems to be modern so when it
comes to yeah you're number one
challenge.
Is.
Do you know what data do we
have.
Master data management when you
could take take a step back and
take a look at k twelve high
education and as recent as the
health care analytics dashboard
representative madrid want it
thirty year we don't have a
dashboard we spent three million
dollars plus every single time
you go ask you and m you go ask
new mexico tack you ask you ask
why we don't have the data or
yet we've been appropriating rps
peace.
Every single year with the hope
that you're going to see a
dashboard.
As a statewide on what's
happening from healthcare spend
perspective right and then if
that works then we want to do a
criminal justice that we want to
do acts on awkward first I mean
we want to do all recover so the
point i'm making heroes for a I
to be successful what is it
consumed data it's garbage and
garbage out if you don't have
the right data you're a I is
going to be absolutely in a
factor and it's going to
actually make it worse it's
going to give you wrong ditches.
That's the worst you don't want
that great first we need to
cathlog.
Pretty much work backwards not
forward what use cases do we
want to solve it there we not
today we have an efficiency
since they'd gone with you know
we have an efficiency simply to
twelve you know we have been
efficiency in health care we
know we have an efficiency side
education we can start small.
The models are going to be
adopted and I will be adopted
but as a state white any shadows
we should pick five six really
use cases and said these are the
five use cases we believe
that'll give us any economic.
Strategic advantage to the state
identify the use case then start
working backwards and seeing do
we have expertise within that
domain because they doesn't
eight hundred people yeah I just
need five people or experts
that's a beauty of a I do we
have those experts then come
even for the laugh to see do we
have the data.
That we've been collecting then
we start talking about i've been
labeling it are realitating it
how will be protecting then you
come back into overlay okay this
is the model i'm going to use or
i'm going to custom build a
model train the model apply for
my use case any trade of
I think that's a way to do it as
a state we should i'm back on an
air journey.
There's absolutely no doubt
about it let's identify a couple
of your cases work backwards to
make sure we have the right
experts a comedy of experts so
we don't have biases because if
you look at the big challenges
human bass i'll get the mcbs
database the bias is real one
thing you'll be fighting with is
the buyers and these are unknown
biases and this lot of word
that's being done by research
institutes across the country on
understanding by its
explainability of a great you
wanted to be transparent anyone
understand how the rates work
you want to understand who the
human behind it what data is
behind it what all good them
said they're using it so there's
a lot to be understood in the
centary consistent while
security is important there's a
fundamental things we need to
answer as a state we should
really create an economic hub
like we have quantity and mse is
designated and a I central
excellence they're doing some
good work you tap is doing some
amazing work and new mexico tech
does some decent work you and
i'm does good work sandios doing
good work loss all of us is
doing work we already have any
**** of as a state and also send
a hydrick is the other of the
united states a I bell so
there's a lot happening in a I
but we need to join forces to
really see how do we bring state
along I don't think.
Their solving for a local
problem while we have this
global initiatives as new
mexicans we should also take a
look at what can we do for state
of new mexico what are the store
three problems that are didn't
send them department of
transportation public safety it
is a big problem now and we have
education where we want to
improve and help we'll be spent
lotter for money we can pick
four or five departments and
take a look at what the things
we want to solve so there's a
real opportunity to do it from a
cyber security perspective I
guess I said.
Of your proud to be one of
those.
Ten to any companies in the
world that are leading this
front are be creating our own
data security model for
and the good example of that is
when you're out you ask.
I did a strike on your ran we
wanted to know every single
thing what iranians would do
from an offensive capability a
report would take typically ten
fifteen days to look at the
tactics what an adversary would
do.
Because of model to be built
here we were able to do that
report in under seven hours we
not only shated with the state
the state actually shated with
fifty one other states our
report was actually much better
than what he has shared and this
was clearly said by the industry
by the state season is half
again new mexico lead the
forefront of sharing knowledge
again that's three I on the
reverse of the I we actually
presented how to look for a I
weaknesses and yeah one
abilities have you been leading
that rebuilt a rate teaming
capabilities to test air models
and we're going on launching
that product on october first
it'll be here commercially
available product to test a for
safety and security it's coming
out really nice and we can also
look at weaknesses created by I
systems that's coming out really
well as well again a lot of good
work and we're going to form a
little consortium here but then
I miss your new mexico tech you
and them on how do we create a
capitality here today we have
about seventy fts working in the
state eleven off them are a
focused and not goal is to take
it to about twenty five folks
were true a I researchers from a
cyber security standpoint so
these are some of any **** as we
are doing again we're fortunate
to be here with proud to be
representing new mexico across
the group and we are one of the
video few that got invited by
the congress to actually educate
them on this data the members
were microsoft open a I are
institute and little thinking
company from new mexico second
plot to be a new mexican and
proud to do what we do here
again i'm happy to answer any
questions for the company
members thank you thank you for
your presentation I listen to
that there I listen to you on
the panel in the one thing that
struck me is somebody said thank
you for all the data and I
thought where did they get all
the data from was it does giving
down it that's just struck me
but it was it was fascinating
so.
We're gonna start off questions
i'm with senator pity.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you so much for your
presentation and all the work
that you've been doing to help
secure the information privacy
in our assets and all of the
things that you do to help me
mexico here
I see our cyprus security
overload there in the back and
just give me the night if you
think this is going well I guess
I saw the not okay that's good
it's it's it's something we
can't necessarily point to we
can't go see in touch and feel
so I think that's what makes the
so difficult in a lot of ways
I am concerned though that you
know one of the goals that we
had for this particular office
was that there be a minimum set
of standards that are put
together how familiar are you
with the state standards that
that mister sombondo has been
putting together for us because
you know it it doesn't really
matter if we have ninety nine
point nine ninety nine percent
of the state secure that one
little tany bathroom window
somebody comes in and there just
reconhabical over the place can
you give us a bit of an
assessment on where you think we
are from that standpoint
absolutely matter chair senator
pretty new mex guys come long
ways I mean I can absolutely
but conference we work with
multiple states we work with
your time we work with illinois
we work with state of washington
we work with that is on our.
The.
We're probably one of the very
few states that actually has a
state right.
I mean we always are joke right
but we're not the last actually
we were actually in some cases
we lead set an aspects in this
country so to answer question do
we have the right policies
procedures and governance in
place we have come long with the
answer is yes today we have the
right framework.
Today proactively we take a look
at all state agencies from a
diagnostics prioritisation and
valid dating do we have the
right defences every single
state agency because of the
lease later funding and the
governor's support would be able
to do that what used to be
fragmented that's allowing them
to comply with the federal
regulation that's allowing them
to be proactive about securing
the citizens data and also
responding if there is an
instant much faster.
That's already happening the
extended program to all the
cater twelve hundred school
districts are part of the
program the forty top school
districts go through what we
consider at three sixty what is
an attack of know about you from
an outside inside out what do we
know about your internal it's
not an eminent model right hard
out squishy and sight but we're
looking at what's really insight
and how scrutiny then we take a
look at how can we really
validate your controls and what
the bad things happening so
think about this as a human
anatomy extra you find something
bad from an outside you do your
cd scan if that's not enough
then you do your america.
If you find more you do your
biopsy
if things get worse it's a
popular instant response the
same analogy applies so that
three sixties exactly that
outside in set out do a
penetration testing value that
so we're doing old school
districts we're doing all kid at
twelfth and we'd just expanded
that to cities and counties and
water infrastructure we had the
only state actually that does
all and where the state ceasaw
has full visibility and a
collective collaboration so it's
working well now the kid is how
do you take what we learn or the
years and apply to a I is what
we need to adapt to.
Tweak what we already have in
place get the confidence with a
collective v new mexicans and
see what we can do.
Thank you a chair and I
appreciate that description so I
guess my my.
You know over over arching
question is are we secure I are
we secure at this time III feel
like every little while we still
have vulnerability and we find
that some agency has
done whatever do you find that
our standards at the state level
are being adhered to by
essentially every political
subdivision I don't want to use
the term it is below the state
government here has to have some
sort of a transaction of some
kind whether it be a document
funding
certifications or as an example.
Do you find that we've set up
the standards to let them in or
not let them in into the state
government apparatus some out of
chair center to pretty if I said
that's what is yes.
The cat is sure a hundred
percent security.
And resilience is what we should
strike for.
So there are three aspects going
on are you better.
Then read restarted with
conference I can tell you
because we quantify what we're
looking at from a cyber risk
perspective and you clearly said
it all it takes is one
misconfiguration one on pat
system one lost credential and
that's why you're seeing
incidents happen whether it's
western new mexico whether it
was auto rather it's p r c you
have seen sudden incidents what
used to be a multiple instant
it's down to single digits we
have gone long ways that's
question number one question
number two the political
subdivisions we still have a
little bit of a disconnect.
Why should I be a part of it i'm
in independent
cyber doesn't have independence
and attack or doesn't care
whether your judiciary or
whether kid are twelve for a
school board or whether you are
estate agency you ought to
connected network and we should
look at it from a connected
issue we still have gaps in
certain political subdivisions
opting in opting up and that is
something we have to suddenly
solve the independence but the
same time keep the macro
security
as a forefront that we're trying
to solve rather than the part of
the subject we should we have
gaps there and then coming back
to do we have the right
framework we have the right
frameworks adoptability is the
key and that's what we should be
striving towards and we're
getting there okay so chair and
I I know there's by others and
i'm sure i'm just you know this
is so when I created that office
of cyber security.
The number one goal was.
Minimum set of standards and
then we'll get the heck out of
the way and let everybody else
do whatever it isn't they're
going to do we had as mister
sombone and will tell you we had
just a horrible time with regard
to how is the judiciary going to
work in this in this scenario.
Because they're operating the
way that they are is that
creating baller ability because
we did let them out.
What we were doing in the
legislation.
Is that causing us grief
so madam madam chair senator
pretty a any connected network.
If you're not a dirty to the
same standards you create a
wonderful it does that there's
no doubt about that however many
chair if there's this minimum
set of standards even if they
are operating the way that
they're operating over there and
they want to have a transaction
which they have to with the
state government.
The minimum set of standards of
the state has set are those
being it here to for the
judiciary to come in and out of
the state government from a
transactional standpoint see I
mean it took me a while to get
that one I didn't
absolutely write I mean I
wouldn't mind sweats on this
madame chair and senator party
everybody has to add it to the
standards the minimum standard
set by the state are actually
very reasonable when you
compared with the federal
standards because when you look
at c j staff to dead to adults I
have healthcare did it have to
do hip they take credit cards p
c I don't stand it's a much more
stringent so again it's
education right now you don't
want it to be a political thing
right now that's where the
perception is and educating the
members what on the house
judiciary and also working with
chief justice from the supreme
court and giving them the reason
why this is important to be a
part of the state network and
not be let out I think we have
some education to be done glass
session was a little bit you
know confrontational we need
independence we don't want to
stay doing it to look at what
we're doing but stay do it
doesn't have to look at what is
destroying but as long as you
certify you meeting the
standards will get us one step
in that I direction and I I
think we have some work to do on
educating them and taking them
along with the I again you can't
leave judiciary out and i'm very
clear did a security can live at
it but yeah you cannot because
if they're going to regulate and
they're going to give
it a judgment on the use of data
there have to be a part of the
game and that's where we need to
educate them and make sure we
take them along if not we got a
create big craters
thank you madame chair and this
we might last more of a of a
statement so I just hear and now
madam chair I think you know the
statement needs to absolutely
be.
Then really matter if you're in
or out of the state law you
can't do a transaction with
state government unless you meet
this minimum set of standards
period.
And so I guess madam channel i'd
like to ask the the city to come
on up to the debt table if you'd
be willing.
If you'd be willing to come
under just for a second.
We love roger if we just think
you chair and think you member
so they could be thinking
senator to do do we have a
minimum state of standards for
anybody performing new
transaction with state
government are they documented
and are they communicated and
have you seen elvis and how's he
doing.
Thank you terrain then you
members of the committee I don't
know I haven't seen it with a
but anyway we do have a minimum
set of standards which is
the state and the dash fifty
three moderate to
doctor she was this point uhm he
brought up criminal justice
information system and the
security surrounding that
uhm i'm happy to report by
taking the leave the valuable to
work with the federal line force
mental couple of other like
minded individuals like me.
Help navigate and bring some
cohesion in there so then this
date under that fifty three
moderate standards is what now
serious following so we are
getting there
but to address your point about.
About fragmentation as if the
leads to
other political subdivision I
think that's what the pain
pointers which are as doctor
schuna was indicated there is a
lot of work that needs to be
done to bring them into the
fault
then when then let's say it's a
local government change the time
been a local government needs to
submit there budget information
through our share system of
record which is our state system
or record.
And if they information they are
uploading from their own local
restrictional system into our
system.
And if it's not validated as a
doctor she was pointed out
you're putting your crown jobs
at that significant risk
thank you so madam chair I know
it's going to be my last comment
the question but so one more
time is there a document it set
of minimum standards and they've
been communicated to everybody
that does business yesterday
yeah that has been communicated
in the last two years by the
states labor security strategic
plan that has been cascaded to
all parties that's available
publicly as well and that has
been provided to
the legislative branch and the
executive branch and the
judicial madam chair how often
do those standards get to revise
and update our view be reviewed
them every year and it is due to
the legislature october thirty
first
thank you chair
you senator next is senator
berkin
thank you madame chair I don't
think anybody's abuse
thank you so much for that great
ai or review especially just
from your brain
just to keep my equivalent
million questions but just to
keep them short end to focus on
some specific things and since
you're here if you had to do you
think that there will be a huge
disruption work force because of
aa in the next three to five
years and if yes which sectors
you think are the biggest have
the business biggest disruption
so madam chair senator bring
dancers yes it's already
happening so I don't think a two
to five years in thirty five
years the lot of things settled
radically change the first adian
that's getting distracted is
software development actually
bit because the rate should look
at that says there are seven
jobs say I will not get into
manufacturing with holidays
safety really this health care
bureau days so it does spaces
are going to be getting there.
But tack is actually becoming
texts worse enemy
and the the areas that'll get
disrupted will be silicon
valley.
New york austin walder bust
does have a million to million
dollar software development jobs
I just going
computer signed students are
finding it extremely hard to
find a job so the number one
impact will be software
development then a call center
called centers are getting
disrupted quite a bit across the
nation anything that needs
ripitidity tasks are getting
disrupted
then you'll start foreign into
automated the colombia factories
so you're deciding to see that
we have seen that in automobiles
we have seen that in other
technologies so the other radio
see is gig workers
you'll see the zipline companies
come in but drawn technologies
controlled by for shipments and
all that stuff so you're gonna
start seeing that sector
actually get to structure quite
a bit the sectors that created
mass employment like what i'm in
overdrivers right I mean we're
not far right we are already
saying robbers so you'll start
with software you'll get into
repeater tasks like call centers
then you will get into anything
that's human intense repair of
like manufacturing like delivery
you'll start seeing that then
we'll start seeing worklazation
of video I apply in stuff having
ten experts I only need to
experts so the next frontier is
going to be a very real I use a
I read i'm a comfortable and
before we figure this out
quantum is going to come right
at us right and none of us know
how corner is gonna change but
for now I think that's where we
are
and one area there'll be a
perceived like a ice creating
lot of jobs actually it's not is
different centers every state is
so excited to get that next big
company to come take up your
power your water your precious
land.
And or create ten jobs
it's not going to create
thousands of jobs it'll create
maybe hundred jobs for a ten
billion dollars investment so
that's something we have to
watch up do you really want this
big boxes staking up a precious
communities I don't know and
they create a ten billion
dollars you to make hundred
billion dollars and you get back
with a little one of that so
those are some of the things you
would really want to look at
what you want from any eye in
your society in your economy in
your state
thank you very much for that
that was the answer those with
answers I was expecting
when you were talking about
having a state level eighty ai
system and potentially having
state departments build their
own models that is something
open to hear about a lot lately
because I feel like it would
help our state agencies a light
but i'm curious if you had a
recommendation which suffered
you think of state agency in new
mexico should use to build their
onyo model on
such a great question
madame chairman and uh senator
bring
foundation models I made when
you look at it you pretty much
take to three at three aspects
there's a foundation model there
is a small language model and
their custom models which can be
a hydrate of these.
The game is going to be great
the ten players on a
foundational site
again you all know the names
open
I
clared
right amazon microsoft so the
number of foundation models is
going to shrink I mean channel
have their scoring I will have
this no ais considered a
national treasure for the first
time we are labeling yeah as
dual use technology which means
every country wants to protect
the rai chips which we are doing
we want to protect our air
models because we have seen what
china debt and we're gonna stick
to the foundational models so
when you look at the state
pretty much becomes your cloud
provider so today we have oracle
in the state everywhere we have
a short microsoft everywhere we
have gcp in multiple places we
also have a ws will end up
picking a combination of one or
two big players based on where a
computer today is where a cloud
computers and from there they
all have a fundry model you can
choose and pack which model you
want to build on and that's how
you believe wrappers so that's
one way to look at it if we are
building something
most likely what states will do
is they will work with their
native applications slash
software as a service window
where they will actually build
the aa model and you'll consume
it and that's why the super
important for us to understand
what the use case so this is
what palentier has done very
well they create it and then mel
work force charging
billions of dollars not millions
and open a eye for the first
time said I will give a I for
free however you need a
subscribe to my service and my
minimum charge is ten million so
I will have my engineer
understand your ditched if from
your work force then we will
take over.
Your work loss so more a I
companies are moving towards
what's considered as a service
lead model delight and open a I
and on step parknership
palentier and delight and on
step partnership so what that
really means is this is where
the destruction of work what's
happens so states will look at
rappers where they will build
something on and known for
national model or they'll have
the vendors who already sold
applications built native ai
kepabilities and then you'll
actually see a variety of things
where states will foreign to let
me go actually start like
coverage
will start out on a application
to solve a video unique need I
wouldn't recommend that because
that'll be super expensive we're
gonna go on that path hundred
million dollars for system will
not be enough
great because we have spend that
kind of money when we build this
new system so we just have to
see what works the best for us
and what you scarce we are
solving it's a long winded
answer yet no that was exactly
what I was expecting
thank you for that the
given what I know about the
state agencies use of software
vendors that gives me some
concern
I mean I have so many questions
that I feel like would be better
on a one and one conversations
because they're gonna get really
technical so I would have to do
it at that for now but thank
you.
Make senator next is
representative
thank you thank you
and thank you for your
presentation weigh breast of and
just touch a little bit on
these any selling without moving
away from this I agree
technology's part of basically
in sight now I I feel that way
but I also heard that I would be
in reading about how the energy
that yeah I uses is way higher
may respondentially higher than
system similar to this is there
something
it's correct is that some added
chair representative girl I mean
I happened to serve on what the
logistically dishear and the
demand puff power is
and
the southern new mexico pass a
region is the one of the most
sort of regions by this
companies
and
that
that's the happening place and I
don't think we have enough
to generate power right and
but again our goal is to support
economic development and that's
what what states won't so today
we need thirty five times more
power than what we're producing
today to meet the demands of a
we not even talking air factory
seat we haven't even talking
about autonomous ai we haven't
even talked about in space does
not all the areas that are still
i'm emerging this is what we
know to to this demand needs
thirty five bucks are you a
simple example when you do
google search for your name
let's see it consumes a single
water energy when you do and
friends for the same thing it
consumes ten times more energy
simple search to their people
stop using searching they just
go you there every single time
you do that.
It consumed sometimes more out
to you than another handed out
will you ever take a search on
it
I never did
today you thank you I was
chatted gives you a good result
who said thank you
that actually consumes energy
and tockets every single time we
do it it costs the company a
couple of dollars just for it to
respond to your thank you and
that's where we're going yeah
it's the best therapist we have
which means it's your best
friend in your consuming energy
left right
thank you that's what I was
that's when I heard and I was
reading about so my concern is
to take sustainability that you
all raise say that we are
probably not prepared enough but
also energy efficient
environmental impact on this I
love a I to ideal said I mean
like you say i'm in english my
second language used to take me
ours to read email now what I
want any help me but i'm also
concerned I was sustainability
and and they packed on the
environment with her with this
so how can we make it if energy
efficient I don't have any
suggestions things that you have
so
a chairman end up said
interesting thing sustainability
I ordered the opposite faults
yeah in its continuous energy
twenty four seven
your renewal balls need storage
to support that you're starting
off on a wrong hypothesis right
while the old say we will be
green data centers we're going
to focus on green but I need
twenty four seven power help and
renewable to help me on twenty
four seven yes they can if I
have storage which means again
it's not a great for the
environment either so you're
going to start seeing some very
interesting conflicting views
and how do we generate energy
how do we store energy what
types of energy I be generating
yeah will need water there's a
lot of research being done to
limit.
The use of clean water like you
can use brackets you can use
treated water so there's a lot
of work that's happening on how
do you limit the use of precious
resources like water the other
idiot that's been looked at is
energy efficiency the chips are
a lot better today if you go
back to years to nov power
consumed by the chips is much
lesser and with the constant
work that's been work going on
on the energy consumption by the
chips and again the hopeless
quantum if quantum comps again
there might be some great
opportunities but from an energy
and efficiency perspective so
there's a lot of work being done
but the key is was still in set
and fancy and sustainability
will be a challenge efficiency
is still a challenge and we need
to continue to work with the
demand is
unbilaterally exponential and
the billions of dollars being
port into a eye and it's a mad
rush it's your dot com to point
up
but will sustain I think
mansion
to thank you for much eighteen
this is is good to be aware of
it at a list thank you
thank you representative next
represent gearing
thanks for madam chair thank you
so much i'm glad to hear you're
working with representative
change in depths on this you
know
it talked about the challenges
we're still struggling with the
challenges of what data we want
to manage how we enter data
and so I just want to thank you
for pointing out that basic
issue because it's the interest
show
madame chair president of the
right hundred percent
with a you need to have three
fundamental thanks you need to
know your data
you need to know what answers
you want from a I as only as
good as what you.
It to do great if not it's going
to give you all kinds of garbage
and you're going to believe in
it and you can afford that the
thirteen the most important is
and I cannot be a black box
it'll be biased it's all about
the companies that are billing
it to prove the economic power
and the super powers in the
world and you have seen that
with so convalid billioners I
mean I spent my time that as
well and the human site is going
to get in the best way to impact
the world is through the to
their machines and they will do
it and already doing it so small
communities small states like us
we have to be mineful we cannot
in in his bed that we cannot
prevent it we have to go with it
but you want control what this
big gase of billing but you do
control what data you want to
feed and you do control what
answers you want from your are
and what efficiencies these two
you can control the three value
polls and as long as we put
enough guard rails and to make
sure this is business friendly
and make an impact for the
society I think we all want to
up to the races
thank you and then their state
you don't have to go into their
sausaled data sharing.
The data sharing agreements is
another part in the million
other questions out just came
back from senators and and
doniona county due to a company
there is a proposal for billions
of dollars for data center
however those data centers with
the emergence of cuanom could be
who don't need as much of the
resource I mean that could
change all these data centers
that people are building all
over the place so that's an
issue so thanks for pointing
that out
so madam chair representative
that's a real unknown
today's needs for energy
and the capital investments that
going to building this part
plans to cater will the demand
be there for the next ten years
each poplar is a forty year
shelf life we can even predict a
ten year demand for this because
the industry is changing so fast
and so radically however the tea
says
will continue to use more
applications for a and the
demand will catch up to it no
matter how much innovation
happens again it's a theater to
call modeling that every utility
is going through
because no air company is
willing to take the rest of this
billions of dollars in
investment they might take a
little bit of a rest not all the
rest so this is where the
capital intense projects have to
be really thoughtful before we
just throw money and figure out
it's going to be a sustainable
or the next four decades of five
tickets it's a very interesting
catch twenty two we are going to
write now
thank you.
Anyone else
alright I just so as you
recently
um you said we need to train on
eight but what does that mean is
it trained in the area focused
in or what does treanany I mean.
So
madame chairman
it's the basics when we go back
when we start it no child left
behind one of president bush's
initiative as we're going to
give them a laptop
what does it mean we want kids
to be online we want to provide
access to a kid sitting on a
rant somewhere he can't travel
right that was the basic tea
says off no chair left behind
and giving them a distributories
with a eye.
It's the same thing educating
them what a means educating them
what are safety means educating
them what a I can do and cannot
do at the same time helping them
focus on basic learning and not
have a I replace that
it's going back stood problem
solving
critical thinking first
principles the problem with air
is if you don't pay attention
and educate the kids they will
forget critical thinking they
will forget problem solving they
will forget for us principles
you can't afford that so that's
why it's important for us to
educate them what a I can't
cannot how you can leverage and
cannot live regi so that basic
foundational education very
early on will really help get
prepared for tomorrow
queeted to a calculator week we
we can give it as a calculator
but when they hit a wrong number
if they don't have an idea with
the answer is they don't know
that it's wrong so
and when I do search it
sometimes
I get I know it's a wrong answer
so how do we be so much on
either we don't know if it's
really true
madam chair fortunately
unfortunately that's a ninety
percent of the problem today
people believe in our
unbelievable era I mean today
they just take it on face value
the real challenge what we will
see is additional sites so today
when you look at safety when you
look at battlefield that using
eye systems to make real time
distance and all it takes is to
alter the coordinates by a
million meter or a millisecond
that a human can't even detect I
believe that's where different
service I come send a plan we
should look at what are the bad
distincts made by a I and comes
back to the explainability of
the eye.
I will be changing the
coordinates what did I be using
who is the one that straining so
the transparency explainable fee
I will become a very important
aspect
so do you have a book we can
read
yes to understand that actually
that spay beat hoffman it's an
amazing book that's what I gave
it to all my board members set
out by select and i'll actually
get to a copy manager thank you
thank you absolutely how do that
I find it yes next time I come
back i'll actually get a copy
that a either so much and there
is just so much going on this
book is great I mean that
there's a lot going on and i'm
happy to send you a ten reading
materials as well i'll work on
that and then i'll get you this
book this book is an amazing
book I think you all will enjoy
I think you are amazing asset
also to their state thank you
for all you do and can come back
any time anytime you point
something interesting we need to
hear come back right thank you
thank you that thank you sure so
thank you members thanks a lot
that's an honor.
That was a great discussion you
guys thank you next is sending a
national advertories status
update
director mcgill thanks for being
here.
Whenever you're ready.
The.
They're okay thank you madame
here thank you.
Very good thank you
ma'am cheers thank you i'd like
to give you just a little bit of
background so i'm the
seventeenth laboratories
director sandia national labs
i've just been in this role for
four months i've been I grew up
in seattle space engineer mostly
as a systems engineer working in
defense world but my whole
career right worked national
security earl space and defense
type of work I actually was a I
was a student in turn out white
sins missile range when I was in
college so I think I was always
destined to come back to the
desert I love it here and
actually enjoy being here and
especially having come most
recently from arizona that
altitude is really great
yeah ok so let me go ahead and
get into this um I want to give
you a little bit background on
slight two weeks india has by
far are critical mouse here in
albuquerque of a some seventeen
thousand plus employees mostly
here in albacoki are because we
are part of the original
manhattan project we were
divisions and that became
incorporated to sandy and
national labs in nineteen forty
nine so we just celebrate our
seventy fifth anniversary but we
have a long long been involved
as the non nuclear components
for the uh nuclear weapons
programs but we also serve as
the lead systems integrator so
in addition to building ninety
designing ninety seven percent
of the parts that go into the
nuclear weapons we also do all
the integration with the the the
military mostly the air force
and navy but also with the prime
contractors the north of
criminal slocking martins and
regular to are the delivery
platforms for our systems so
because of that we were we
worked very closely with lice
alamos some similarly we have
another site adjacent to large
liver more national lab in the
bay area because they do some of
the nuclear explosive packages
we work closely with them and
then we also have a fairly good
size group of people at penn
text in amarillo which is where
the new.
Clear weapons get assembled
before they get delivered to the
military services and then we
also exercise these weapons the
air drop weapons have been a ton
of pot test site which is for
that cruise missiles or the air
of airdropped weapons then we
have some other facilities at
quite test facility we actually
lied some are hypersonics and
sounding rockets personal
systems and up and alaska on the
north slope along the bearing
see we have the atmospheric
radiation monitoring center up
there and then we have a few
other smaller facilities the one
up in minneapolis is because of
our expertise in cyber security
it's a initially a kapability
that we develop to protect our
own networks and keep them safe
because of our expertise we now
extend that protection to all of
the nuclear security enterprise
that's all done by india and
continue to work a advancements
in cyber security and it turns
out that minneapolis is a hot
bed for safer security
professional so we went up there
and established an office so we
have a continging out there.
Okay moving on to slide three
so send you by far our primary
mission is with the nuclear
weapons program nuclear
deterrents I will I will talk
about that a little bit but just
going going around real quickly
we also have a mission in global
security which is areas where we
work to do non proliferation of
special nuclear materials we
have teams that respond to any
kind of a radiological or
nuclear type of accident or
incident
including things like the
fukishima
nuclear facility that was
this damage by the tsunami in
japan we we pay attention things
like this apparently nuclear
power plant in ukraine and we
also do the physical design the
physical protection systems for
areas that handle any kind of
radiological or nuclear
materials in since we support
that work all around the globe
we actually have people deployed
at any time who are in foreign
countries to work with over a
hundred cup countries to help
them with any kind of reality
sampling how to handle those
materials whether it's from
medical purposes or other
purposes we just train all kinds
of countries to be able to
handle those materials.
National security programs is
where we do are hypersonics the
conventional prompt strike came
in and out of that portfolio our
cyprus security resides there
and some of our hardware
development micro electronics we
have the only trusted strategy
grad hardened fabrication for
microelectronics in the country
which is important for a nuclear
deterrence portfolio but also
for other purposes and we also
do in that area design all the
advance rate are systems as well
and proliferation assessments to
keep track of what our
adversaries are up to so we can
be prepared to counter them in
energy and homeland security we
do work largely with department
of online security there are can
bio radiation in nuclear
responses and also work to
understand that resilient
systems we do things to keep
track of the electrical grids
actually you're going to hear
some more about how we're able
to monitor and use a eye on our
grids to help protect them and
design them better and also if
they do get taken down how would
you start them back up again and
we also do a lot of sensor
systems that came out of our
global security programs to to
do things like a understand
what's in all those cargo
containers coming into the port
of california port of los
angeles we do a lot of the
sensor technologies there and I
extra say that all this work is
based on the foundations of our
advance science and technology
the nation has invested
significantly in our national
laboratory and we've we
developed all that technology
for the nuclear determines
program it continues to be our
primary mission and we don't let
anything interfere with that but
a lot of the technologies we've
developed it turns out were
applicable to other adjacent
missions and to the point that
it doesn't interfere with our
primary mission we continue to
use it for that purpose
and I guess i'll just add that a
sandia is the premier national
laboratory for engineering my
background is aerospace
engineering.
Systems engineering I spent most
of my career as a either a
systems engineer a chief
engineer for major weapons
programs or as an engineering
executive for a defense
contractor and then just back to
new cleared it turns as I said
we do all the design of all the
non nuclear components where the
lead systems integrator and we
also have some limited
production those micro
electronics that I talked about
those are part of our nuclear
deterrence program some advanced
radars refusing and firing are
parted what we produce and then
also actually we don't produce
those are we design those and
then some of the boundaries that
are used the power sources that
we need for our systems we also
do some production along with
new trying generators which is
we're the only ones who produce
new try generators there the
world smallest linear
accelerators.
Great moving on to slight four
so lot of our key capabilities
are very touched on some like
microelectronics are rule as the
systems integrator because of
the nature of our continuing to
be ready to respond to the
adversaries we've invested
significantly in quantum
computing artificial
intelligence did digital
engineering and that's really
involves a lot of lot of
disciplines for example material
sciences high energy density
physics um
any kind of
physics chemistry
type of fields pretty much every
flavor of engineering science
and technology is involved in
our systems and so we continue
to develop and create
advancements there because it is
very much the future of what we
have to be able to build in our
systems going forward.
Going to slayed five
talk a little bit about our
budgets so for twenty four five
point one billion dollars
revenue that we brought in about
sixty three to sixty four
percent of that is associated
with the nuclear deterrents
program our primary mission that
can be either primarily funded
by internet say but also because
we're the lead systems
contractors sometimes we do get
some that funding direct from
the military dod
typically army or i'm sorry a
navy or air force to support
those programs and then other
department defense programs
support things like the
hypersonics the conventional
proper strike is a need and army
program and other work that we
do for the do around that
atmospheric radiation modeling
that we have been up and alaska
or other types of deal we work
that we do for the electrical
power grids and things and then
the last part is that seven
percent that's that non
proliferation mission that we
serve which is also funded by
the way by the national nuclear
security administration.
Okay moving on to how we support
the local economy here on page
six so obviously we purchase a
light have some statistics for
you on the next page we were
a closer with small businesses
not just because of the
procurements that we place with
them the contracts for for
materials and goods and services
but also we work directly with
them on some technology transfer
one of the things about the
national labs is that we are a
federally funded research and
development center which means
we do not compete with industry
we only take on work that is
unique to our capabilities and
that other companies or
commercial organizations are not
able to do or prepared do or
want to do in some cases so if
there's a technology that we
develop that is not for the
purpose of any of our missions
and it's not classified we will
work to transfer that to other
commercial concerns
obviously we have a AP roll and
pension distributions i'll give
them figures here in just a
minute and we were very much in
the local community and actually
across the state to help her
invest in stem and courage our
students in the local area to
want to pursue careers in
science technology engineering
in mathematics
keep moving on to slate seven
so there is the almost five
point two billion dollars and
expenditures for fy twenty four
or labor it's about three
hundred and i'm sorry three
billion three point three
billion the subcontracts one
point seven one seven billion of
which eighty three percent of
that actually goes to to new
mexico businesses six hundred
and seven million goes to new
mexico businesses and i'm sorry
that's that's thirty five
percent
our gross tax receipts are
hundred and thirty three million
and then through just small um
less less I guess
contracted we have procurement
cards we just go out and get
materials.
An amount to seventy three
million dollars.
Ok moving on test late eight so
overall our total small business
impact is a little over one
billion dollars of that five
hundred and five million of that
goes to new mexico small
businesses and as we're trying
to increase the diversity of
that supply base from the the
local state we have added three
hundred and eighty one suppliers
added to our industrial base
over the last year since FY
twenty four.
And um
yeah and eighty three percent of
that six hundred and seven
million of our total procurement
contracted dollars eighty three
percent that does go to new
mexico businesses.
Okay moving on to slate known
so in addition to that this is
actually new first rate now we
have a very old facility is a
mention you we we like this lot
of the facilities were built up
starting in in nineteen forty
nine in increase during the big
build up at the fifties and
sixties and seventies we have
very aging facilities that uh
the nasa is now investing to
recapitalize along with rest of
the nuclear security enterprise
so we have some of those big
line item projects are going
forward right now that the power
sources capability was just
recently approved to go to the
next phase we are actually if
you can mind site you'll see
we're actually moving dirt
around and will actually have it
a full construction site by the
end of september
the next one to be constructed
will be our combined radiation
environments for survivability
testing we know it is crest that
is recapitalizing facility our
annual or core research reactor
that we have today that is
important to every single one of
our nuclear deterrent systems
how do have the components
tested it get exposed to the uh
the post reactor radiation that
we get out of the c r that is up
very old facility it'll be
replaced with crest and allow us
to continue to insure that our
systems are robust against all
the environments that they have
to survive
ray beyond that is a I mentioned
a visa which is our our
microsystems engineering science
and applications that is the
microelectronics fab that is our
next line item coming up it's
not as far along as the other
two but that is another facility
that will be recapped in
especially to reestablish our
photo photography keepability
for me so which is the oldest
production line in that facility
okay going on to slate ten
so
we do a lot in the local
community that trigger
initiative which is actually a
credit to the work of the state
along with the new mexico small
business assistance program.
We give you a lot of credit for
your work which is allowed us to
do a lot of work to help
thirty one companies that we've
assisted this is companies that
are funded through bench venture
capital or grants and loans
that receive these fundings and
we work with them to help one
shape their businesses and ways
they'll be helpful for them.
Are in the new mexico small
business assistance program
we've assisted two hundred and
forty one small businesses in
twenty one countries
just in the last year much more
over the course of that program
but it also allows us to set our
experts along with los alamos
experts up to help support the
creation and retain mentioned
jobs in new mexico
and that look just in this area
right here at the site san diego
science and tech park there's
forty four companies and
organizations here pulling over
two thousand people and with
with that they have every salary
of ninety four thousand dollars
so these are good paying jobs
that help the local community
and actually then put more more
capital back into the area
moving on dislike eleven
so our labor I is over one point
eight billion dollars we pay out
in labor costs just a new mexico
and there are resalary for our
employees is a hundred and forty
five thousand dollars for our
regular employees and we also
because we have
about four thousand four more
employees who were in our
pension fund they also have
about two hundred and sixty
million in payments that go into
the local area for those
pensioners
okay now i'm to slide
twelve
so this is a a chart that shows
are employee count that we've
had tracking it going back
several years so there were if
you go back to twenty eleven
that's when
the the country started
reinvesting in our in our
nuclear stockpile so we've had a
continuous increase of our
employees to support that
primary mission that we have
grown to us over sixteen
thousand employees back in
twenty four and actually kind of
heading into that to twenty
three we made a conscious
decision to not grow and
constrained to make sure that as
we were people were coming more
and more to us for send you to
take on work we focused on work
that was unique to our expertise
and capabilities.
And would keep us with in the
infrastructure that we had
available to us we were starting
after you kind of coming up
coming out at the seam so we've
intentionally constricted our
work force and we invested our
work for sweet work closely with
nsa to increase our salaries to
get him up to market and as a
result of that artrition has is
drop significantly we have very
low attrition right now and were
you able to maintain work force
that we can continue to invest
in for the future
and as you see most that
critical mouse is in san diego
i'm sorry in albuquerque here at
fourteen
I live there for twenty years
ok so moving on to this light
thirteen um so we also really do
a lot of work to encourage
students in the local area
here's a couple of example
examples tissue mercado she is
went to originally send one
community college we weren't
closely with the community
colleges also to help their
students recognize what their
career pass could be she's now
got a master's degree in
mechanical engineering from UNM
she is one of our superfuse test
engineers so she works on this
very large test equipment that
we have it's got it twenty nine
foot radius and it allows us to
accelerate our systems to
represent reentry type of
accelerations as a dirt you know
something in space and coming
back in very important key
capability unique to send the
because we can also well it's
been around we can also by by
exposed the systems to vibration
in shark it's a incredible
capability she's when our lead
test engineers there for patrick
your hoya he has a a batteries
in computer science from n m s
you he
has also published in the new
mexico journal of science and he
was originally one of our stem
core interns
so you know we we like to see
these students you know even
from what we.
First get to meet them sometimes
in middle score even sometimes
elementary school and help them
develop their careers and maybe
some time be employees for us or
loss almost were fine if they go
there as well we want to help
the state continued developed
this talent.
And did you see seventy seven
percent of our staff to hold
about trust degree or higher
which is why we have those
higher salaries
okay inslight fourteen so
this is something else just say
that encouraging students to
enter dem careers is something
that are work force is very much
personally engaged in we donate
to a lot of things uh sandy it
does but it's really the the
volunteer time of our workers
who really enjoy these
engagements work with a four
hundred teachers we touch over
ten thousand students and
engaged a engaged by like five
hundred of our employees or more
in some years these are of just
a list of allowed the programs
we have these math and family
nights that we have mouth and
science nights we go to a local
school and we help them with
their math and their science
projects it's a bilingual
program so we're able to
the real value this program is
that these students get to see
people from the local area who
often look like them and who
they could maybe see as is
created that they would want to
expire to some day and so you
they get to see people who enjoy
their work are successful in you
know like mouth and science and
it's the intent is for it to be
inspiring to the students in an
often is
see that the thunderbird hax is
a hacker find that we do for
high school students there's
just lots of events that we do
the new mexico masa northwest
region is math engineering in
science achievements where we
have dream catchers that are
working in farming turned
grounds in gallop
the hm text somewhere workshops
I was just actually at that the
end of july we did a workshop at
delorte high school where it's
just students of actually mostly
junior high and high school but
there were some elementary
school kids there came I think
with their brothers and sisters
but their parents were there
teachers were there and we
brought all kinds of science
experiments.
In activities for the students
to do.
And then we have a lot of summer
camps to help develop
both interest in some skills in
things like quantum are quantum
computing camp that we have
every year you see a little bit
of the robotics they're on the
side so the students get a
chance to actually program it
operated in program it a little
bit we have cyber security basic
school skills and cyber security
and just lots of opportunities
for students to engage in in
numerous ways
and a going on to the next chart
of fifteen
we are you're continuing it
we're continuing to inspire the
next generation of students
couple of examples here on the
left so robin jacobs gedroom he
is one of our mesa electronics
device engineered that's him on
the left he's mentoring a
student jake up martinez mires
and enemies you student who is
actually studying neural morphic
systems which is a very leading
edge take technology that said
yeah has recently developed
we've been working on it for
years but it's a way it's a
technology in which the computer
processor is mimic the way that
brain passes neurons through
synapses and things so it works
a lot like the brain does which
which means that it's a
give a lot of cognitive cape
buildings but very low power
which is in advantage for our
systems why were so interested
in your more perfect processing.
And then on the right we have q
camp where make an ivory who
you'll meet later she's a leader
in our quantity work force
development she supports this q
camp which is a collaboration
with c n m n sandia and our
first cohort of students will be
starting in in the far.
Okay slide sixteen
so as I said as I said our
employee work forces prior most
powerful community outreached
that we have very generous with
their time in their treasure to
help the local community as you
can see four point four million
dollars don't need it to united
way of north central new mexico
which allows the a lot of
flexibility for that program to
invest in the most urgent
community needs and especially
in areas that we are most
interested in which is family
stability and education but also
community leadership and then
and test the organization that
operates sandy national labs has
also done need one point six
million dollars
we do a lot of things with the
book drives and big brothers and
big sisters lots of engagements
blood drives donate shoes
at beaning the school year help
with the operation back pack to
get back packs of loaded with
school supplies we have a lot of
volunteers at the road runner
food bank and syranum where we
help get apartments ready for
people as part of our our family
stability program and we just
have regular service activities
that we are goal is to make it
easy for our employees who want
to volunteer we help do the
arrangements so it makes it easy
for them and that's actually
something that they value I
would say that's actually a
retention thing for us because
if the organization helps them
to make those connections and
makes it easy for them to
volunteer it's a this is a kind
of organization they want to
work for so we keep those
employees.
And then I seventeen
contained to work in the local
community what are the issues
that does or some of the issues
that do concern sandia are the
the local crime access to public
health and education so we work
are our employees also like to
support these programs as does
the the the labs working with
the city of albuquerque in the
albuquerque police department
using I dated driven approaches
to help address crime in the
local area
we are looking at establishing a
foundation that would give some
flexibility for us to focus on
the programs that are of a most
interest to our employees into
our organization and then
continuing to develop damn
education right now specifically
in some underserved areas like
cohedy and central dimingo
published where we are actively
working to extend the stem
exposure
and then really the last slide
i'm going to cover is that we
just continue to provide
exceptional service in the
national interest that is a line
from a letter that was written
by present truman to establish
send you a labs it was sent to
the chairman of a tnt at the
time who's going to be the first
first organization trends and
the elabs so he said that they
had it and used a exceptional
opportunity to render
exceptional service in the
national interest and that's a
letter that all see indians are
familiar with and as well as
that freeze and we want to
continue to be an important
contributor to the state and the
local community working in all
the areas where we can to
continue to build they're going
to be here long term we have
been here for seventy five years
and we're going to be here for
at least another seventy five
III would be willing to bet and
we are I want to be a member of
that community in contributing
and with that matter chairman
i'll take some questions
thank you direct me
thank you for your presentation
I questions if any questions
senator source thank you
everybody sees in the news
regular cuts from dose the
federal government research
being cut.
In in inch and s f grants what
is the future look like it the
federal from the federal side
how is that impacting sandy as
far as personnel future missions
and things of that sort of
positive big enabled will just
get keep toast along and things
are saying so I will see if
anything were up beat about our
feature center thank you for
that question so you know we
don't have our budgets yet for
it for the next year but we are
anticipating at the end of the c
budget which is you heard a
sixty three percent of our work
and to speed that there will be
either even or possibly up a
little bit although we do some
department of energy works on
those budgets are down but it's
a small percentage of our
population and in fact we're
able
because the skills are very
fungible we are able to for
example people who have been
doing work on their the
radiation cycle nuclear power
cycle have expertise and
radiation now that we're
building this new radiation
facility we move some people
over there because the the
funding that they had has gone
away but it's such small numbers
were pretty much able to move so
as far as the federal budget got
where it were in pretty good
sheep what we did recognize is
because of our increase in
because we've increased our
salaries we had the i've set
some of those costs that and the
indirect costs you know
everything is going up from
software licenses to you know
you name it everything's going
up.
So we have meter intentional a
decision to limit our indirect
spend and with that we did do a
we wanted to reduce our
population by 1-3 percent we end
up around two percent but so far
that is a voluntary separation
program and I think we'll be
able to stay with that we just
kind of going through that right
now but what we offered was a
separate package we had enough
employees to take that to get us
to the two percent level so it's
just been voluntary to keep
those in direct costs in line
thank you in in manager and and
I should made some of my
ignorance is it standing or
curtain that has the reactor
that provides the medical
license each day for radiation
around the the state I don't
think we're doing that that's
must be not reacting it's a
current side I know yeah there's
lots interactions between the
two but thank you we have a
pulse reactor to expose our
systems to radiation
environments thank you
think you send it an extra
representative
here
thanks furniture thank you so
much director it's great to have
you
I hope the federal government
doesn't get involved they don't
seem to like women at the heads
of federal related things
help going off of what center is
so said a lot of the research
grants involve higher education
working with the lab have those
grants been affected do you know
the higher education grants so I
I couldn't commit what grandson
going going to those
institutions I don't have
visibility to that so yeah I
don't think I can come in on
that thank you
how about have you gotten any
directives from the federal
government about diversity
equity and inclusion because
sandy has been a huge huge
advocate for our state yet
representative geared that I
appreciate that question so
we've had some direction to to
to talk about how are our
outward facing.
Websites but it hasn't really
affected anything that we're
doing internally are we
are continued to support all our
employees we just believe in
belonging so it doesn't really
have to get attached to those
kinds of terms because all of
our employees are welcome and we
support all employees in their
career progression so I I guess
i'd say it it didn't really
affect us because it doesn't
really change the way we treat
our employees
thank you and then just thank
you for all the work as the
elementary school instruction of
good does send years science
nights have been terrific glad
to hear that thank you
anyone else center video
thank you chair and thank you
director for your presentation
and I just want to give kudos to
the person sitting almost
directly behind you
does a phenomenal job of keeping
us very well informed on what's
going on with your mission in
which all the working on we were
very much pristive of allery's
work she's just a super new
mexican and she's a constituent
to everybody that's not the
reason i'm saying this but
seriously she doesn't phenomenal
job that way so thank you
valerie but on it on a another
note you know this comes every
time i'm in front of you or are
you the person in your role I do
ask this I see five hundred and
five million dollars and new
mexico small business
interaction
how do small businesses get into
sending it but but it's the
better than maybe two or three
key ways to do that
so what we do we do let out
contracts for so so anybody can
submit a proposal any
organization can center and
we do lost also some time you
have to supply your conferences
which allows any organization
commercial energy to see what
kind of works india does and and
explore it there's opportunities
to earn contracts beyond that I
couldn't comment on what our
procurement group does but along
those lines thank you and again
madame chair ballery does a
great job of I just ask it every
time i'm in front of the
director because it's important
for us to hear it all the time
how do we.
How do we get involved that way
and will some of business owner
here new mexico myself and habit
but you do such a wonderful job
that way so please keep new
mexico small business top of
mind when their opportunities
for folks to to work with your
organization center party I
really appreciate that I will
say that I am coming from
defense industry I am in r of
the percentage that we have your
on the order of like sixty three
percent of our contracts go to
small businesses that is at
least double what i'm used to
seeing independence industry so
I actually think sandy does an
outstanding job of that
wonderful thing teacher
thank you senator I think I have
last just a couple questions I
am slight nine you're building
bricking ground for power source
capabilities and a combined
radiation environment first five
built in testing what it what
are those can you can you say
yes i'm madam chair so power
sources capability as I
mentioned one of the
components that we actually
produced in addition to
designing for the nuclear
deterrent is the battery sources
so these are the batteries and
and there's all kinds of
different types of batteries and
and that we have invested in and
again this is just a very aging
facility that needs to be
updated we also as as part of
these facilities expose our
batteries also to very harsh
environments we have a a battery
abuse lab bat lab so abuse lab
for for batteries that we expose
him to very harsh conditions so
it's it's it's not just that
production that is a big part of
it but what's unique about
sending in these kinds of
production facilities also for
mesa or micro electronics it's
the it's having both the expert
and the researchers on site with
these types of production
keep abilities that really does
make it world your world class
type of keep buildings because
we're not just building we are
actually continued to invent an
innovate on these really
advanced technologies
oh sure.
Uh so so chressed is a little
bit different that's the commit
radiation environment for for
survivability testing so in this
case we have will we call today
the annual record research
reactor which is at a
keepability that is absolutely
required because we have to
certify our systems to be able
to expose to all kinds of you
know x rays and gamers new trunk
raise and so we have that
facility today but it is very
aging it was built I think in
the fifties but it was it's in a
building that was never
it would not be correct code
today and so we have to we have
to
have that reactor in a facility
that is meeting all the
conditions it needs to today
there's note there's no risk of
any issue with that building but
we are at risk that we would
have to bring it down if it was
if the building that it is
that's around it were damaged in
some way
and my last question so so the
previous presented talked about
we were talking about energy use
for aa quantum is it a big
energy use
quite no quite him is not a
energy consumer like artificial
intelligences especially if you
think about kind of neural more
fictite processes which are
quite corner but they're they're
very much related adjacent
fields with quantum it's more
the exquizate mechanisms like
the eye on traps that we decide
because you that we design you
have to be able to capture ions
and keep a maintain in a state
so this isn't a big energy
consumer but it is a very
exquisite precise capability
that we are building here and
advancing the technology to be
able to employ corner and we are
doing some design on corner
sensors also
when an and the lfc
we did the tour and and I just
remember there said to see we
don't we're not in that quantum
side of using big energy so I
thought maybe there was a big
energy side because yeah you
were doing small that's all
right any more questions.
Thank you for your presentation
and thank you for everything you
do and sandy thank you very much
again she is pretty amazing
thank you
two introductions senator
okay
thank you madame chair i'm
senator in a call to buyers
saying I represent the northeast
part of albuquerque which is
then it district twenty one
thank you for offer bingo for
the first part anyway i'm lunch
is outside so we'll have about
