It started everyone
are next presentation is
modeling electric great
resistance to wildfire and so um
brain peer
whenever you're right
that on
hope well thank you for have me
managed here representative
centers thank you
honor to be here a little bit of
my background
i've been doing electric power
systems pretty much my whole
life first conference I attended
for power systems that were
seven years old so
it's been a while
and then I grew up
with a boises state for
undergrad and idaho down to
arizona state for my masters and
phd focused on power systems and
then looked at the national labs
and decided that's india was the
best fit for me and and i've
been here for almost eleven
years now
I have a wife until the kids
just started preschool and first
grade their great
and with that i'll dive into the
talk today so I manage our power
systems research department it's
in our electric grid security
program that includes five
departments lead by charles
hanley
and others a lot of topic areas
and electric security program
all about securing the electric
of the structure for
north america the US from the
balk system all the way down to
distribution and microgrades at
the community level
today i'll focus on wildfire
lecture good security this
program space on just like two
I also have the slides up here
because there were a couple
slides that have videos and
things like that that at some
point or point two appear as
well as this space primarily has
two goals so the first is
mitigating electric grade
ignited wildfires.
And if any time I talk with
utilities or coops this is one
of their top priorities is
trying to make sure that the
electric infrastructure does not
start wildfires so they're doing
a lot of work in that space
almost every utility we talk to
is very focused in this and the
second goal is to mitigate the
consequence of these large skill
wildfires to critical
infrastructure and the electric
print.
On the slide three
these wildfire impacts are or
drastic so here's kind of an
interest lied to some of the
largest scale wild fires in the
western us over the last decade
it includes a couple of these
large skill wildfires in new
mexico recently including hermes
peak fire back in twenty twenty
two
there's also wildfires of course
now everywhere that are
significant not just in the
western US
as things change in and wild
fires seem to become more
prevalent especially these large
scale events
the impact of these wildfires
the loss of life impects the
society loss of property and the
damage to critical
infrastructures significant and
business impacts as well
specifically in the context of
this talk the business impacts
to utilities and coops can be
significant
then they're supply change
impacts as well so for the
electric infrastructure there
are some components that are
very hard to get especially
large scale transformers that if
they are knocked out of service
or damaged it can take years to
find replacements and there's
not many spares just sitting
around
and then there's two pieces here
on insurance and lawsuits this
is not a topic area for
scientists that's india but we
know that it's a huge peace of
the wildfire space right
on in the next slide
or wildfire electric good
security program we primarily
break it up into four different
areas so the first is pre
wildfire this is early warning
and real time the monetary of
wildfire risk the next piece is
during the wildfire from the
ignition of that itself so
trying to mitigate those
ignitions and mitigate the
consequence of those while fired
by modeling the wildfire spread
for example
and then next is post wildfire
so this is after the wildfire
has as occurred
you have crues stationed outside
the wildfire primary area and
once you're given the green
light.
That it's safe to go in how to
optimize
the recovery process to restore
service to critical loads and
customers indeed and then the
last area which also circles
back to the front in a full
circle is planning for future
wildfires so this is where you
can go plate the system you
don't have infinite resources
you're going to have to optimize
what investments you make to
mitigate wildfire additions and
then get the consequence of
these large scale wildfires
so the first top of garage i'm
gonna get into is focused around
the the planning and monitoring
for these wildfires and before
you can even really get into
planning the monitoring you need
to look at his store history for
passwildfires to help in for
decisions for future wildfires
and so a lot of this is focused
on what conditions and drivers
lead to these large scale
wildfires and the wildfires that
cause the most consequence so
I point to primarily two
rows on this table one is the
high winds and drive or grasses
or drive education and almost
every single one of these large
scale wildfires that cause major
consequence those two things are
are very prevalent
for firefighters high winds is
it is awful because it causes
it's it to be extremely hard to
contain these wildfires when you
have high winds there just
throwing imbers everywhere so
those are two of the the most
credible and drivers leaving to
these large scale wildfires and
then you throw in drought high
heat
other fuels and other drive
vegetation low humidity and then
you have these perfect
conditions for for large scale
wildfires.
On the next one a little bit
more about wildfire risk in new
mexico specifically so the lines
on these maps for new mexico are
transmission lines throughout
mexico and then
on the right is heat now showing
historical fires and of course
in new mexico so this gives you
an idea of where fires are most
prevalent in new mexico
specifically you can see down
the hot spot down in the heat
the national forest that has
been quite of an area of
emphasis for this program space
in partnership with p and m
our local utility of course
working with them down in the
hulinational forest to mitigate
wildfire risk in in that area a
lot of our demonstrations are
also in that area
on the next slide we're focused
on a wind again so understanding
the wind in your area
significantly can change the
risk of wildfire in in an area
so on the screen here there's a
it's a gift actually of
wind speeds sustained or gusts
of different miles per hour
versus the static image on on
the slide deck that you see
and so this again helps us point
out specific areas that are of
the most interest and highest
consequence for large scale
wildfires.
So one of the first pieces
whenever we talk about wildfire
modeling
in the wildfire space is better
understanding the vegetation
characteristics in a certain
region so for example for
utilities and coops and one of
the main things to look at is
the vegetation in their rights
of way and around their rights
of way for their distribution
lines and transmission lines
so having these up to date
vegetation models and fuel
models I is the primary input
that if you have very accurate
vegetation data then you can
have accurate wildfire spread
models so one way we do this is
out you satellite imagery data
that you've trained on ground
truth data
for our machine learning already
and so we for example went down
to the health national forest
with some of our texts and
scientists that's indian
partnership with p and m we took
grounds with measurements under
their transmission and
distribution lines so that we
could have something to train
our data sets from satellite
image so that we could better
understand the vegetation under
it around those transmission
distribution assets so now you
can take satellite image and use
it on other parts of new mexico
for example or other regions
that have similar vegetation
characteristics as from our
ground truth data set
and so this let's use you
satellite image data to get
better understanding of the
vegetation around certain
regions of mexico
we use that in a lot of our
wildfire modeling work one of
the specific things with the
utilities and cops that were
partnered again with piano is
for dynamic wildfire risk maps
so instead of a static map that
just says this is a highway via
risk area it is instead updating
the more of a real time sense
based on that satellite energy
data has up to date as you can
get it
that allows us these dynamic
accurate machine learning drive.
Vegetation characteristics for
around their assets and then you
combine that with real time
weather data and you can get a
better idea of more of your real
time wildfire risk
which can be of a great use for
planning and monitoring an early
response
for utilities and others
the next piece is where we
combine wildfire modeling with
great modeling and so this is
where we're trying to find
vulnerabilities of the grid to
wild fires
so if a wildfire has started and
you model the spread of that
wildfire of the next hour's days
um
and you can identify okay the
next two to four hours this
transmission line might be
impacted by this wildfire well
hopefully that information
allows the utility to help
redispatch sources and be able
to mitigate the consequence to
the the customers if you have
that information ahead of time
and so this work is also looking
at cascading outages so these
are the largest scale outages in
the history there are some of
the worst consequences for the
US when you have huge cascading
outages that affect an entire
region of the country the
nineteen ninety six black out in
the west coast the two thousand
three black out in the northeast
US
those are very rare events but
if they do happen their
extremely consequential so what
we're trying to look at is if a
wildfire spreading and it takes
out one line and then there's
another wildfire somewhere else
you need even in another state
that takes out a different line
a generator goes down because of
maintenance for another reason
you have all these we call and
minus one minus one type of
events and be in the number of
components you have one line
goes down another line goes down
later and so forth finally we're
worried that there's the straw
that breaks the campus back and
you have this cascading outage
that occurs and takes out entire
region of the country so those
are the events that are almost
never happened but we're trying
to make sure that they never ha.
And then the last item on here
is optimising those investment
decisions to mitigate wildfires
so this is where you have you
have different options
and so you have to decide what's
right for your part of the
country and your region because
or your utility because there's
no one size for its all solution
I was at a while for our
conference recently and one very
large utility that has a lot of
wild fire risk got up and they
mentioned that a huge part of
their program is to underground
lines underground distribution
lines that are in high wildfire
risk areas
and so the cost to underground a
distribution line is somewhere
from two million to six million
dollars per mile so very
expensive it is a great solution
to mitigate wildfires and it
made sense for this large
utility to do this in certain
regions after they got up and
mentioned that strategy for
their program space a small co
op in forced it region stood up
and mentioned there's no way we
can underground all of our
distribution through the forest
because the cost is just far too
much so the number of customers
they serve per mile it's very
low and that means that the cost
of underground for millions
millions of dollars would pass
on to very few customers and
that's not not feasible so there
focused with vegetation
management so they were all
about using new technologies
making sure that there's no
vegetation that's close to any
of their lines and distribution
lines that can come in contact
with those lines cousin are
impossibly not a fire and so
that's that's one of the mingles
and so i'll go on to the next
next slide here so I mentioned
more of a real time monitoring
of wildfire risk this work is
primarily focused on forecasting
wildfire risk in months in
advance this says the next fire
season but really the fire
season seems to be all almost
all you're round at this point
um.
So in this case what we're doing
again using satellite imagery
and machine learning on that
image tell predict vegetation
growth in a certain area for up
to six months ahead we combine
that was seasonal forecasts and
long term weather forecast and
with that information get a
better idea of the vegetation
and moisture levels in that
vegetation
in different regions about
country or state or region
and with that information that
can help with planning for these
large skill wildfires
and so if you have that
information of this part is
looking in the next six months
to be
a possible hot spot for a
wildfire that could be good
information I have with planning
for
the next slide is focused on
power of public safety power
shutoffs so public safety power
shut off is win the utility
decides to pre emptively turn
off power to customers
because it's been determined
that it is in their best
interest to turn off the power
because
how high of a wildfire risk it
is at that moment in time so
this is when the winds are just
turkey level winds you have
extremely dot drive vegetation
there hasn't been rain in in
weeks and it's all these perfect
conditions for these very
drastic wildfires so pm for
example did their first public
safety power shut off back in
april and
utilities in california have
done these quite frequently as
well and so there's this balance
in act of optimizing the
minimizing the impact of
customers and low sharing
why you're also trying to
not compromise wildfire risk so
there's this trade off here that
is is quite difficult.
All right next is a tool that is
under developments india we just
demoted to p n m last week
actually
and it is focused
it's called pirated in its
focused on
we've mainly
our focused on small utilities
and cops we've realized is when
we talk with large utilities
they have entire teens of people
that are dedicated to a wildfire
risk mitigation
it's more the the rural
locations and co ops and smaller
utilities that don't have the
resources to do an entire while
for mitigation plan
or least as in depth as when you
have a team of fifty people
doing it
and so hopefully we plan to
partner with a pin and with this
along with others in the future
where we can provide a this tool
to help them with dynamic
wildfire risk maps
understanding future burn
probabilities customising public
safety power shut off
calculations which takes a lot
of input from that uh utility
and then contingency analysis
this is where we combine the
grip modeling with the wildfire
modeling and then also some
scenario analysis for mitigation
solutions so seeing trade offs
between different solutions
I briefly mention there's a lot
of wildfire tools out there that
each have their own specific
need in the wildfire community
of course the US forest service
does a lot of this calfire has
done a lot of this for decades
and basilifier lab
many of them have have tools
that do certain things for a
while by sped modeling
another aspects
so now i'm gonna get into the
ignition peace so this is where
we're looking at trying to mit a
gape while fire conditions first
step is lightning um
so lighting modeling at san dier
we have a a light in strike.
Lamp where we can hit different
objects with lightning strikes
of different energy and current
and we want to see how those
objects react to being hit by
lighting in our case what we're
using it for is hitting
different vegetation with
different waster levels with a
lightning strike and seen if it
ignites and so from doing this
thousands of times hopefully you
can create this experimentally
driven computation model to
understand the predictability of
a light in the economic wildfire
you combine that with the second
area of research is focused on
monetary and lightning systems
and so if you can better monitor
light instorms for the total
lightning current and energy he
combined that capability with
that computation model to see
predictability of like unignited
fires those two together
hopefully when there's a
lightning storm you can get a
good idea of whether or not that
lighten storm is going to be
igniting fires in that location
this can help with early
response to possible wild cars
from my.
Next is ark modeling this is an
similar light as the lightning
related work where on the grade
there are faults and so fault is
when you have an ark go from
for example across and
installator from the conductor
to the the steel tower and so
that ark as energy piece to it
and there's we want to
understand the probability of
arks like that igniting certain
vegetation so that is another
piece of this program at least
in the future as well there's
been less than this done so far
compared to the light being
related work in this program
space also the second piece of
this is
smoke debris can build up on
insulators and as that smoke
debris and other contamination
builds up on an insulator
there's a higher like the head
of those flash over as a caring
that means
a higher likelihood of
lower reliability because you're
having more outages and then
every time there's this ark
there's the small small
probability that if vegetation
is nearby there could be could
be an ignition of that
continuing
with our ignition modeling
related work on understanding
ignition of different vegetation
there was a five year campaign
on the solar tower it's india
where you could
take those mirrors and point
them towards the top of the
tower it would ignite a tree and
there's a small video on the
screen here of one of these
trees at nineteen
from the high flux being sent to
it on top of the siller tower
and the goals here was to better
understand how wind would cause
ignition events
a win with impact action of
different vegetation geometry of
that vegetation and the scale of
the vegetation would impact imp.
Activities.
The next piece is focused on
power system protection this is
actually very large area of work
at sandia
protector relaying what I mean
by power system protection is
on the electric grade there are
sensors that are monitoring the
voltage and current just about
everywhere and what they're
doing is they're looking for any
abnormalities and if there's an
avenue normality of some sort
they are going to quickly
identify it and detergize that
section of the line and so this
is for example a tree comes in
contact with the line
the sensors will see that
calculated and detergines online
and let's say a hundred
milliseconds of them very quick
and that hundred milliseconds
though is what we're trying to
even reduce further in this
program space there's a few
other technologies as well but
mainly focus on one specific one
to talk about today focused on
ai based protection
for distribution systems so this
is where
those sensors that are on the
grid
we want them to sample even
faster than they typically do
we can send those signals to our
machine learning about them
that's been trained on pass
faults
so we simulate faults on the
system
and from all these simulations
were able to train our relate to
be able to identify those faults
quicker so if that tree comes in
contact with the line you can
identify it and it would and our
protective relay in this case I
we've shown around one point
four million seconds instead of
a hundred million seconds so
a big decrease in the amount of
time that that art exists and
that by decreasing that amount
of time significantly reduces
the probability of an addition
of the probability of wildfire
connect night
and so there's been a lot of
interest in this work especially
with the utilities and coops.
We've done demos and new mexico
specifically in two different
locations we did on the kirkland
air for space demonstrating this
protective relay
on a micrograde on the air for
space back in twenty twenty
three and right now we are
currently demoning it in
rose about county co op in
eastern new mexico
and right now it's our
protective really sits in
parallel with traditional
protection methods so that we
can compare the two and see how
how it's doing so this is the
the next step in the area
process getting those
demonstration phases on a real
system and showing that it works
we've had one fault in the
system so far and we're hoping
to to leave it there for longer
and see see how it performs
right next to a briefly touch on
this one it's smoke modeling
related so there's
some scientists it's india and
throughout this presentation
i've also pointed at the bottom
left quarter there are names of
some of the scientists that
focus in these areas so they are
the real experts of experts in
each of these areas
and in the smoke modeling area
we're looking at
the smoke cloom itself and how
that is moving throughout the
atmosphere
during large scale wildfires and
how that would impact solar
power production in regions of
the country and there's also
interest in this type of work
for other reasons as well such
as impact to military
installations on their and their
missions as well.
All right almost to the end here
is focused on visualizing
uncertainty for public safety
power shutoffs and evacuation
events so what this is getting
at is how you display data to
either the public or to a
decision maker they will make
different decisions even if it's
exact same data so
the examples are used here
if you show someone a picture of
their house and so you have a
fifty percent chance of a
burning you need to evacuate
they'll do one decision but if
you show them a picture of their
house on fire and you say the
same thing then they take
different decisions so how you
visualize the data is very
important so this is a a map of
an evacuation map in new mexico
during the hermit and it's peak
fire when I first saw this my
mind went to red means bad for
fire and read means I should
evacuate but in reality what
they were going for is ready set
go
green means go as in green means
you should evacuate
so there's some confusion that
that can bring and we've seen
that that bring confusion in the
past so these decisions you know
they do matter and and can cause
confusion if they're not done in
the right way
here is even more recent maps
that all show on the next slide
one is
back in twenty twenty four they
did change it to red means
evacuate and so red means go as
an evacuate and then but on the
the left figure in twenty twenty
five they changed it back to
green means evacuate and green
go so this is something that
maybe should be looked at and
continue to be looked at further
in terms of standardizing this
process and making sure the
public fully understands what
these maps mean.
Some
with that i'm gonna wrap up the
last project that i'll discuss
is focused on the recovery
process after a wildfire so this
is optimising that recovery
and making sure that
once you're given the green
light to go in and repair system
on electric infrastructure
system are you doing it in the
most optimal way to make sure we
bring back service to customers
with the most need and critical
services
in the most optimal way
so thank you to my
funding organization do you e
caesar cut office and then also
all the dedicated staff that
work in this program space
there are a lot of them that can
make this program successful
of course I have a website and
i'm happy to take
questions thank you think of
your presentation first
questions are from a senator
pity
thank you madam chair and thank
you doctor for your presentation
in the discussion I might if it
was there I didn't I don't think
I heard it but are there
stationary batteries planned for
various areas to prevent actual
seller
yes
yes so that is some of the work
that's been done there's also
talk of putting microgrades and
specific spots and knowing for
example there's one spot in
colorado that has done this
recently where
they decided that there was a
community at the end of the
feet so long feeder that
they had to turn off a theater
guys do the public safety power
shops and also was a high
wildfire risk and so that
community had very bad
reliability metrics because they
have to turn off the power
significantly so instead of
investing in undergrounding that
line for example they decided
the best way to do it was to
build the small microphone or
have back up generation
basically at the end of that
feeder to help that community
make sure that they kept the
lights o.
When they were high wild pirace
times
thank you madame chair yes so
myself and the representative
retails were the ones that got
the micro they get the
micrograde built done earlier
this year so you're you're fully
able to go out and build all the
microgrades to your heart is
happy that's number one in
number two I I
is there already a plan of wear
stationary batteries could be
placed
because you could feasibly
see transaware these fires are
going to come from in the future
i'm assuming based on all your
research and data the children
will so you would know where to
put these so that you don't have
nine one emergency or something
like that that's not reachable
as that sound about writer
yeah
i'm sure senator thank you
so
i'll say that at this time I
don't think we're doing that
right now but I think that is a
possible idea in one of those
investment decisions that can be
made to medicate the power
outages that are impacted by
wildfires and so madam cherry
you said you met with p and m
yesterday
last week by speak excuses
I work every day of the year all
of us to two side but i'd then
surprise me for work on the
sunday what AP and m have to
tell you what at the coops may
be told you I see there are
their head guy over there in the
back so on the other hand guy
next to him and the
yeah this is one of their
highest priority areas and so
when when we work with them we
were demo in last week that hire
kit tool
and so that's still under
development but we want to make
sure we showed them where we
were at this point with that
bureaucrat tool and so
eventually hopefully we can
continue to work with pn on a
demonstrating that technology
and the cops yes yeah I mean I
think it's totally at this
juncture with what we've done
slatedly here but the bill like
to spoke up a little while ago
and what we know is but this is
totally avoidable now.
We can avoid having folks not
have access to emergency
services and all the other stuff
in you know and in school
shutdowns and all that kind of
stuff could totally be avoided
now now that we have a lot of
this in place I encourage you to
take a look at new mexico law in
terms of how we can help you
with this thank you chairman
thank you thank you senator next
to senator twice and.
Thank you manager
are there areas of new mexico
that are particularly vulnerable
to wildfire and you know lines
being compromised in the grid
yes yes so that is one of the
the areas that we've looked out
I think I showed some heat maps
earlier in this in this talk as
well specific parts in new
mexico that
have more forested region
have distribution lines and
transmission lines that are
going through forced regions
those are likely more at risk
compared to an area with no
vegetation around for example so
manager and could you give us a
couple like maybe you're top one
or two regions of the state that
are most vulnerable
i'm not sure I I know exactly
what is most phone
however a lot of our emphasis
right now has been in the
healing actual forest area as
that has we have seen some of
the most wildfires down in that
region of our state
thank you and managers there are
a specific level of vegetation
management that your model is
assuming
manager center thank you
no not in these models are
reassuming that would be input
that would be needed to be done
from the utility that's using
these models as well eventually
so hopefully they will know and
then they do know when they're
doing vegetation management
and they can have that be part
of this model as well.
Manager thank you that's
interesting because that
that that could be troublesome
in using that model rate like in
your programming because it's
it's arbitrary and based on what
knowledge that that department
or agency has an willingness to
put in timely information
and my correct and that
assumption yeah another port and
piece of this is for historical
fires if you can record as much
data as possible that can help
us in the form
are planning for future
wildfires as well
and so any time you can collect
more data especially in in the
world we are now we're data is a
key for a lot of things
having more data from past
wildfires can be very beneficial
okay thank you
in mountain so is there a degree
of vegetation management that
from what you've seen the data
you've collected would be ideal
especially in these very
vulnerable areas
thank you I I am not sure on
that one I don't know exactly
how much vegetation management
is needed it's a very dependent
on where you are in the the
region of the country okay and
madam chair you you actually
mentioned I think it was a
hundred milliseconds is what
your system is measuring now
rated to de energizer line
amendment chair and instead of
thank you so
on the distribution system
that's somewhat of a general
hundred milliseconds
it could be aware from around
seventeen on the seconds
hundreds of milliseconds
it depends on what type of fault
is a crew and what type of
protection system is enabled
and so that's currently how how
things are done so many churches
that is there still a potential
with that quick of a response
which I don't even know how.
Fast that is exactly right how
does the human I even determine
that
can something still catch on
fire countries still catch on
fire
matter chair sender it's
the probabilities are are very
low but it is possible and so
that is one of the reasons why
we're trying to make it even
faster so that that does not
happen
thank you I know I asked you a
lot of detailed questions there
and thinking maniferring down
fix it at her next senator
thank you madame chair thank you
for the presentation that I am
just curious since we this is
the second committee round where
we've had a fire research
presentation well the last one
we had was when we were up and
lent all and i'm just wondering
if you work with fire tech and
the that program system so we
we've talked with lane in the
past and a few other national
labs as well specifically even
in two weeks we are getting
together with dealing customers
and for of our national answer
getting together specifically to
talk about our wildfire programs
and how we can better coordinate
all those wildfire efforts
across multiple national apps
that's good to hear cause it
seems it's not exactly the same
and they were bragging about
their super computers
that were running the models
were like can we just do this
like yes on our super computer
only uhm but it definitely seems
like you guys are doing really
similar work and if we could
combine the two even seems like
a even better tool yep yeah
manager thank you
yeah the the work going on not
only at national labs but also
by a lot of utilities and and
coops in the space and then also
other you know US forest service
and other fire laboratories
there's a lot of this going on
right now it's really even taken
off more over the last decade
that's also good here and then
one of the questions that maybe
I should know the enter to but
who makes the decisions
regarding the rediseco.
Coloring choices
that it's a good question I I do
not know I know our expert in
the human factors related
decision making work law mats
and she's the one that pointed
me to these these maps and
I could ask her yes i'll be
great thank you hopefully I can
find the answer also thank you
that's all.
Anyone else.
The.
Thank you matter chair and thank
you for the presentation i'm
just going back to page think
it's thirteen that piral kit the
uh while per risk in mitigation
planning tool
this looks very similar to what
we'd use in the air force to
kind of planning tools on my
weapons systems using giants and
candidate helping us produce
kind of damage assessment and
things like that so is that
where this is kind of an away
kind of bill from something
somewhere to that
manager senator thank you
so yes this this tool along with
many tools that are our gis type
based
have a similar look to it so
there's layers on the tool where
you can populate the the map
with the layers that show either
the wildfire risk for example or
the electric infrastructure
or pre mitigation strategy and
post mitigation strategy what
the difference in your while if
I risk maybe things among those
things here
thank you matter share and thank
you for the response and so on
the next slide you talk about
these other tools sorry these
all these tools kind of use
together and the second question
I would ask is this piral kit
how you had on slight thirteen
was at developed here is a
specific to
our region and and the reason
why i'm asking that question is
just making sure that we're
really using a tool that really
kind of represents the southwest
new mexico and kind of the
environment and what we're
dealing with so just want to
understand that a little bit
yeah manchester thank you
so the pyracute tool right now
we envisioned to be able to use
it throughout the US right now
our demonstrations are focused
in in the new mexico area
and so that's where we've
started working with the store
the other tools listed on the
next map are also the each have
their own specific piece to it
for example flam map it's very
good it and wildfire spread
modeling.
Uh technology that's a a company
that sells
a tool that is
looking at this for I believe it
to insurance and and other
companies as well along with
market to large scale utilities
the US for a service has
vegetation modeling tools as
well that are are useful for
this
and then other national labs
have different risk related to
some of them are not focused on
wildfire specifically
but there are a lot of different
tools out there and that's part
of the reason we
need to keep on working together
as multiple national labs and
keep coordinating our efforts
thank you thank you matter chair
and thank you for the response
and the last question I would
ask is you know we're
sounds like this really just
assessed the risk current
conditions of what's happening
is there anything being done
with this information as far as
working with the state working
with insurance companies to kind
of I guess predict some of this
but also to help us maybe
mitigate what is happening now
to avoid what we're seeing could
happen and he's tools
at madame chair center thank you
so a big part of this the
program goal is to help with
this decision making to help
with future wildfires and
prevent those future while fars
from their happening or may get
in the consequence of those
we have not engaged with
insurance at this point in any
way
and so that is a a very
interesting topic area though
thank you and i'm trying to for
the response.
Alright I think that's are the
questions thank you for your
presentation very very
interesting thank you thank you
all thank you manager.
All right our next presentation
is the federal affordable
connectivity program for
broadband prospects of upcoming
years and needed to state
response i'm jeff lopez the
director of offers a broadband
access and expansion
the new director judge hinkel
chief executive off service with
badly bagly and guy trickly
chief operating officer of oops
with bagly.
Whenever you're ready gentlemen.
Whenever you're ready gentlemen
thank you madame chair made a
vice chair members of the
committee I am jeff lopez there
are nearly a point of director
of the mexico office of
broadband access and expansion
i'll be presenting first unless
you'd like to do a quick round
of introductions.
Thank you madame share of an
invice chair and the committee
john c e SB I dollars by our
commercial brand which is
cellular one of northeast
arizona most people just call a
c one
madam chairman by share
committee members my name is guy
turley i'm the chief operating
officer of the smith bagly
incorporated SB I
operators cellular one please
should be here.
If I may madam chair
so I have been on the job for
nine weeks before that I was
working for senator bandry luhan
in his obligation office and for
a total of thirteen years in
washington dc or is previously
the advisor on the subcommittee
on telecommunications so both in
my current position as the
director of office of broadband
in my past experience working on
some of the broadband
affordability programs at the
federal level i'm here to
provide some background on
broadband affordability and you
should all have my presentation
and turning to
slide three I just wanted to
provide a history of affordable
communications and this is going
back over one hundred years to
the creation of the bell
monopoly one single company
largely provided
telecommunication services
around the country with that
banana they were able to
subsidize service for low income
individuals with the nineteen
thirty four communications act
that established the federal
communications commission and
required affordable prices as
part of the federal statute.
Um ninety eighty four created
the investment of a tnt breaking
up the mobile into a number of
regional companies that made
some of that uhm
affordable subsidy very
difficult to administer and that
right into nineteen ninety six
with the federal
telecommunications act I will
get into details on what this
meant for a broad for
communications affordability at
the time but it created a system
where you could have competitive
carriers and still have some of
those subsidies for
affordability and additional
high cost in addition to
supporting
schools and libraries it was a
comprehensive system taking into
account the break up of the
monopoly creating more
competition and leading to
innovation and the space at the
same time a supporting
affordability
the next timeline is for twenty
twenty with the covered nineteen
pandemic and response to the
lack of connectivity and what it
meant for access to education
access to health care access to
workforce development congress
established as the emergency
bright band benefit this was a
fifty dollars per month a
subsidy directly to
telecommunications providers
on the priority of the household
so was up to the household to
decide how that broadband
benefit was spent whether it was
with one provider of or another
whoever provided either mobile
or fixed service.
A year later with the affordable
connectivity program congress
passed the infrastructure
investment and jobs act the
biparts and infrastructure law
part of that made the emergency
broadband benefit permit at a
thirty dollar per month rate
that was in combination with the
pre existing lifeline program
under the telecommunications act
which I will get into further
moving to slide for this is how
affordability subsidies
functioned under a monopoly
where one single provider can
use the long distance rates to
support local rates can use
business rates to support
residential rates and use higher
rates for urban populations to
support rural rates in rural
areas for households and
businesses that otherwise cannot
afford communication services.
Again this change of the
nineteen ninety six
telecommunications act where
contributions were collected and
are collected today from
telecommunications providers
around the country at the
federal level this is a fee on
telecommunication services
overall and it's a historic eyes
where forty percent uh is
assessed in a fee from your
phone bell whether it is long
just and services if you still
have a landline to your home or
the cell phone in your pocket
some portion of that is
collected at the federal level
under the uh jurisdiction of the
federal communications
commission using administrative
company to administer the
program.
Again the nineteen ninety six
telecommunications act also
authorized states to collect
contributions and distributed
subsidies which we do have in
new mexico today supporting uh
affordability so again starting
with the federal this is a
contribution factor on telecom
services on slide number six the
supports affordability in
addition to three other programs
high costs which is building
broadband and largely rural
areas the e rate program for
schools and libraries which
subsidise rates for our critical
education institutions rural
health care which subsidies
rates for our healthcare clinics
and lifeline which is today
available for row income
households at one hundred thirty
five percent of the federal
poverty level.
Um at a amount of nine dollars
and twenty five cents per month
so this is available to
households today through the
federal communications
commission and the federal
universal service fund program
moving to our state administered
uh rural universe of service
fund.
Ah again this is assessed on
your telephone bells today where
it's a per connection charge on
telecommunications connections
this is about a dollar sixty per
month on your cell phone bill or
your landline that goes towards
the state universal service fund
it supports three different
priorities the access reduction
support comparable carrier
support and bride band at ten
million dollars per year this
change recently in the last
legislative session
uhm increasing the overall
budget for this uh fine from
thirty million dollars per year
to forty million dollars per
year.
The.
Ah so they federal program
supports a fourteen dollars
currently the state program does
not
moving to slide number eight I
want to cover the affordable
connectivity program which I
discussed in the timeline again
this was passed in twenty twenty
one as part of the
infrastructure investment in
jobs act the biparts and
infrastructure law and congress
approached appropriate fourteen
point two billion dollars
overall this is a biparising
commitment and part of the
broadband programs that included
what I now administer into the
office of broadband the beat
program in addition to other
priorities including the digital
equity act so this was a
comprehensive bill that included
high costs it included a digital
literacy and included
affordability with affordable
connectivity schooling the
affordable connectivity program.
Again the subsidised monthly
broadband service at thirty
dollars per household or seventy
distinctly five dollars per
household on tribal lanes and
has per month it also included a
one time one hundred dollars
subsidy on connected devices.
Eligibility was restricted
households below two hundred
percent of the federal poverty
guidelines so this was above
what lifeline had established at
a hundred and thirty five
percent uh at two hundred
percent of uh fpg
the funds expired in april of
last year so where this provided
in an important component of the
overall broadband picture in new
mexico and across the country
congress allowed the the program
to lapse in april of twenty
twenty four not providing
additional appropriations for
this critical program that
supported our low income
households in new mexico
turning to slight number nine
this is what the acp program
looked like in the last month of
funding in april twenty twenty
four one thousand sorry a one
hundred and eighty four thousand
one hundred thirty one
households participated in acp
when it one funding lapsed this
is a participation rate of forty
two point seven percent
approximately four hundred and
thirty one thousand households
are eligible elsewhere this was
a very popular program in new
mexico and across the country
where households below two
hundred percent of the federal
party guidelines receive direct
support on their internet bill
whether it was mobile service or
fixed broadband the subscribers
my service type is the patrol on
the right forty three percent of
households chose to fund their
fixed broadband connections this
is fiber this is your cable
connection if it uses broadband
and another fifty six percent of
households chose to find their
mobile connection so this gave
the power to the household to
decide their priorities when it
came to mobile or fixed
broadband connectivity the
monthly cost in the last month
was five point six million
dollars directly to new mexico
anyways that's approximately
sixty seven million dollars per
year.
Ah turning to slide number ten
this is what we have in a post
affordable connectivity program
world in new mexico we still
have the wifi in program which
is established under that
nineteen ninety six
telecommunications act at the
federal level this is nine
dollars and twenty five cents
per month up to twenty five
dollars on tribal lands and
eligibility is a lower threshold
of a hundred thirty five percent
a federal property guidelines
today approximately fifty six
thousand households participate
in the lifeline program out of a
total of three hundred and
thirty four thousand eligible
it's a participation rate of
about seventeen percent.
Because in new mexico again this
is federal phones and that steep
funding is approximately ten
point six million dollars per
year there are also private
programs administered directly
by internet service providers uh
that vary from provider to
provider I want to talk about
any specific ones but again this
gets to one of the first issues
I brought up in this
presentation which is monopoly
if an at service provider has a
monopoly in a in a certain area
they're able to subsidize rates
because they don't fear a
competitor coming in and
undercutting that rate or taking
some of the high revenue
customers uh taking where their
ability to provide a subside for
low income households the
lifeline program is nationwide
and helps alleviate that problem
because you collect from every
single eligible
telecommunications carrier and
provide that to low income
houses directly the affordable
connectivity program was similar
where it is across the board
gave it to the household the
decide how that money was spent
that was just an appropriate
fund which we've now seen has
some risk involved if it's just
from general funding every year
and not part of a system of
support like the universal
service fund.
Uhm trying to last lied
this touches on other programs I
will be back here in october to
present on the office of
broadband in general but I want
to say affordability was a
important part of our broadband
picture in new mexico before the
affordable connectivity program
the beed program which we are
expecting to put into public
comment this week really would
have benefited from the
continuation of the forecast
affordable connectivity program
because it provides a guaranteed
rate of return for companies
that provide service to low
income households so are instead
of us just funding the capital
investment it provides
sustainability for the
businesses involved in the
beautiful program where they can
expect some
return where they are serving
low income households and in the
case of a cp it was thirty
dollars per month and seventy
five dollars per month and
travel areas so the
infrastructure part we are hard
at work we are expecting to
sign enforceable commitments
with internet service providers
by the end of next year that
will provide service to every
single unserved and underserved
household in new mexico so I
think the picture for
infrastructure is very strong
the picture for operations
support making sure that
networks that were funding with
the capital investment also has
the operations investment is a
little less certain
affordability now post acp is
very uncertain we do have the
wife line program but it is
under subscribed there are a lot
of households they're eligible
they aren't participating in the
program part of that is due to
the low subsequent rate of nine
dollars and twenty five cents
per hour per month excuse me the
last part I just want to mention
today is digital that receive
the little equity act also
passed with the bipartisan
infrastructure law that grant
program was canceled by the
current federal administration
uh this year so we do not have
direct funding in new mexico for
digital literacy or digital
opportunity but that also make
sure that the networks that were
building are supported that the
households that are
participating these programs
understand the benefits to
health care understand the
benefits to education and
understand the benefits to work
force development so i'm just
here talking about affordable
connectivity today.
Again I will be back here in
october to talk about the
officer broadband in general and
provide more details on a beat
funding and capital programs and
with that I will turn to the
other pillars
thank you very much madame
chairman and by share family and
continue offer that I also have
overview on here but he
eloquently did it right there
and I don't want to go and
repeat everything but i'll go
over some of the topics here
which as we know the affordable
current activity program has
lapsed and i'm a member of two
associations in washington dc
and there is no belief that US
reform is going to happen this
year or happened next year
with that being the case there's
no help on its way to help acp
so they're looking looking to
the states to take that on we
are proposing that there could
be a program here broadband
support and we have a mechanism
as well at the end of this
presentation of how it could be
done one of the things I would
say is there's already a program
of the low income telephone
assistance program in new mexico
and as we said earlier it gets
three dollars and fifty cents it
already has a mechanic that
works it's it's administration
of it lose very easily and it
also leans on federal support
and the documents they use to
process it which puts a lot less
burden on the state of new
mexico i'll go through that
mechanic at the end of the
presentation here but before
that my colleague here would
like to go a little bit over who
we are and what we do and then
i'll go into a little bit detail
about the a c p plan and what it
did and what the lapse has
caused their doctor so I correct
a lot has not gone over yet
so on slide for.
Manager men by share committee
members thank you just a a brief
of review of smith baggling
incorporated for over thirty
years with the parade in mobile
voice and internet services in
the four corners region.
In two thousand are founder
mister smith bagley was very
instrumental in convincing the
fcc to increase the monthly
lifeline
subsidy
to tribal lands adding a twenty
five dollars substitute on top
of that that addressed the
affordability portion that
director lopez mentioned.
That that program as has been
pointed out with the fcc under
the direction of the fcc is a
minister by uh usack universal
service administration
corporation.
Though these benefits of course
are very instrumental but
especially the twenty five
dollars increase that was
brought about in the year two
thousand very instrumental to
travel members nationwide and
especially here in new mexico.
Uhm in cooperation with the
these funding programs there is
a a qualified status called
eligible telecommunication
carrier that
any of us that want to have
access to these funding programs
and use them on the benefit of
the the customers that we have
or through the other programs
that that are are there for
infrastructure and so forth have
to go through a qualifying
process we become etc qualified
carriers.
Uhm
in two thousand one we reached
that we've also had that
qualification in arizona and new
mexico i'm i'm sorry in utter.
This of course brings the
ability for us to take these
subsidies through the programs
and directly to the the customer
there's number of programs that
that at the federal level and at
the state level some of the
mentioned uh that that come
through these programs high
classed and lifeline in
particular at the federal level
within the state of new mexico
there's a broadband program that
is ministered by the prc and
then of course lifeline
qualification here as well.
Through all the past several
decades with these programs and
the funds that come through them
smith bagly has been able to
invest more than fifty one
million dollars and building out
infrastructure in providing
affordable services to our
customers in new mexico i'm and
now move to slight five
the our service area focuses in
the north western quadrant of
new mexico in that quarter we
have over twenty three thousand
customers in nineteen thousand
households
as you can see the vast majority
eighty four percent are tribal
members.
Our network consists of seventy
six cell towers connected
primarily through microwave
network that the ties it into
fiber optic wherever that's
available.
The the cell towers and the
microwave have allowed us in a
very economical way to extend
our reach and provide coverage
into some of the most remote and
sparsely populated areas of the
state and in many cases we've
been the first
telecommunications that have
been available to the the
residents in those areas as well
as providing mobile access and
mobile broadband for those
driving through and and join the
the the beautiful scenery of the
state.
We have twenty three employees
that manage our stores to brick
and mortar stores as well as
maintaining our network
operations.
The
in the etc status that was
mentioned we as I said we go
through a qualifying process
that opens us up to
audits to make sure that the
funds that we are access senior
used efficiently and effectively
and without fraud and over the
past twenty five years we have
been able to go through many
audits with no significant
findings of non compliance
that's through a lot of hard
work a lot of dedication by
individuals and systems in place
to make sure that the the the
proper flow of funds is me
making it to the right people.
With that record that track
record of non- of no findings of
non complaints it is put us in a
place where we are able to
advocate at the federal level
for
good governance on universal
service reform or other programs
that can bring those
affordability benefits to the
consumer.
As
has been mentioned there's a
variety of programs especially
some that came about through the
pandemic and one of the things
that we like to to highlight
hopefully that pandemic is long
and our rear view mirror but
it's important to understand the
benefits that came and how
quickly the
carriers were able to respond to
that.
Uh with our mobile
broadband network that we
provide we were able to respond
within months to primarily the
schools in our service area that
we're now having students at
home and having or or teachers
students and teachers having to
be at home and we were able to
place over ten thousand mobile
hotspot devices with the in the
education industry to allow
learning to continue on as
smoothly as it possibly could.
Uhm that mobile aspect was very
critical as the feedback that we
got because
one day a student may be at home
but the next day they may have
to be at their grandparents or
at some other family members
place and
perhaps they needed to use it to
for work or in another
situation
the the affordable connectivity
plan program that we're talking
about here was extremely
instrumental in providing
additional bandwidth additional
uh data volume for these uses at
home adding going from where we
are
at at about five gigabits per
month to a hundred and five
gigabits per month and allowed
our customers to use
this data in whatever may
where they needed to whether it
be for schooling or for health
care or for work and i'll allow
them to take it where they
needed it and and so it was very
important that they had the the
mobile access to this broadband.
Thank you that insurance and
vice chair slight seven
so the few offer will be talked
about earlier it was a acp
program was found in another by
partisan infrastructure law one
of things that we missed earlier
was it was allocated at thirty
dollars for non travel but
seventy five dollars tribals
because it's much more difficult
to operate and maintain their
network on tribal lance as we
talk about what was given to the
household so they could afford
broadband i'd also like to talk
about the economic bit if it's
this created the browder group
stated that it was twelve
million additional teller health
business and the money saved
through that is four times with
the cost of the entire program
was so there is a lot of cost
savings a lot of benefits I can
tell you personally I see my gp
once a year now I have an app
that's provided through our
health service through our work
and if I have a question I go on
that I go to registered nurse
and I can get whatever medicine
I mean I am not charged for that
every one of our employees also
has a so I personally.
When the federal government
program ended the internet and
broadband used it became rapidly
I can tell you right now that
our customers eighty five
percent since they lost that
data do not use over five gb
they they cannot afford to spend
the money to get over five
gigabits well when acp was here
we were able to get an extra
hundred gigabits of four g data
but we didn't stop at that we
went ahead and allowed unlimited
after that on three g so they
can stay connected through
facebook and talk to family
member specially beneficial to
those travel members that have
family in the military and this
was very critical for them
during that time we were only
able to do this because we had
the extra subsidy coming answer
we could offer the extra data
and to expand our network
at our key we had thirteen
thousand customers on the acp
program at that time the average
usage of those customers was
over twenty gigabits each
on the slide nine
this is a breakdown of the
counties in new mexico as you
can see
there is heavy heavy
penetrations in the area as we
serve which are very rural if
you look at mechanic and if you
look at same one those are our
coverage areas in eighty eight
percent fifty one percent but
also in the cities you can see
the penetration may not have
been been as high but to take
great out exceeded ours and that
obviously would happen because
it's larger populations but new
mexico's in the mexican saw this
practice program and they very
much took advantage of it when
it existed.
I think it's believed by all now
that broadband is no longer just
i'd like to have service and
nice to have service or service
for those that have the means I
think we can all agree that it
is a basic service it helps
close the digital divide and
mobile households especially as
my colleague mister charley said
earlier if you talk to anybody
in our area and say would you
like connectivity at your home
with a fiber leak or would you
rather have it more where that
be on a hotspot or we can
actually load the data to your
phone and open it as a hotspot
everyone i'm says i'd rather be
mobile with this and take it
around wherever I go so we find
it critical that mobile
broadband plays a role in the
future of a cp
moving on it to slides well now
it is a recommendation of a
mechanic of how new mexico could
continue with an acp program our
recommendation would be the
authorized for five years or
until the federal ac program is
reintroduced as I said nobody
believes you have seven
performance going to happen this
year and next year but if it
does the program in the mexico
could be real evaluated if they
come back with the program that
has thirty dollars or seventy
five dollars again we also
recommend that only etc's be
able to participate this is
because they have already been
vetted by the p r c as very
as operators who can pass audits
eh and sorry there and move on
with that
i'd also say that any provider
in new mexico can't become an
etc as a matter of fact track
phone is in the process of
becoming etc right now I
recommendation as well is that
the program it should cost about
fifteen dollars to twenty five
dollars fifteen dollars for non
tribal and twenty five dollars
for tribal if all eligible
lifeline customers signed up for
that today that we around fifty
thousand customers around twelve
million dollars we say lifeline
customers because this mechanic
already exists to qualify these
customers to come through.
They're qualified at the federal
level and right now they claim
to three dollars and fifty cents
in the mexico as I said earlier
you take the report that you
filed at the federal level even
process it advantage point at
the new mexico level and they
can distribute the fines all
that would need to happen is to
adjust as amount of funds that
are distributed back and not
allow carriers like us to give
livable broadband I definitely
liveable broadband as around
twenty gigabits is very hard to
do what you need to do on your
daily basis of five gigabits now
many of you pulled out your cell
phone right now you look at your
last month usage and maybe it's
about two gigabits that's the
cars were jumping on wifi every
chance we get I know you can
jump on wifi and here today they
don't have that opportunity to
jump on wi fi everywhere out
there.
The way we could find this is we
believe there is going to be
headroom and the state us are
fine of the forty million
dollars it's allocated we
believe the twelve million
dollars could fit within the
spond and it could be
implemented and that's the
recommendation we make in today
of how new mexico could continue
to broadband support that those
that need it months.
Thank you we're all unable to
take questions now
thank you for your presentation
first will be senator soles
thank you madame chair.
Trying to figure out where I
have start with this
the affordability of thirty
dollars that we've had what
percent of the total cost does
that cover
because just talking about that
piece of its up three hundred
dollars that's not much if it's
a forty dollars about the whole
lot what is the percent
if I may manage her senators
representatives
it depends on the service that
the household choose to
subsidize so the
federal level of thirty dollars
per month was almost a shot in
the dark during the recovery
from the pandemic it does not
reflect everybody's connectivity
everywhere the congress also
elected to provide seventy five
dollars per month on travel
areas again understanding that
the cost provide bright band in
travel areas is higher.
It depends on what service the
low and come household is
subscribing to but again it
gives the power to the consumer
to decide where to apply that so
it varies on planned a plan I
will start let me direct
you you've talked about a
typical or livable amount yet
what does that cover that's
madam chair center is seventy
five dollars subsidy we gave
them unlimited data we gave a
hundred five gb at four g and
then we gave them unlimited
three g after that it covered
their entire phone bill they did
not have to come out of pocket
against a matter of chairing for
people who are not on the tribal
subsidy it's covering fifty
percent or so forty percent on
those we we did alternate plan
but it covered out their entire
phone bill of the plan they
chose if they chose that the
lower planet would cover it
completely yes if they chose a
higher plan they may have to pay
a little bit and almost everyone
about customers to the plan that
will cover completely because it
was higher than twenty gb most
in use most more than that
okay manager so
the affordability this
essentially covered the total
amount for for basic needs that
a family might have is that what
you're telling me for our
customer I cannot speak to the
fiber lines out there I cannot
speak to the other carriers for
our customer because we are only
felt that we should do it as an
obligation and to help us expand
our network we thought we had to
obligation to consumer to do
best we could for them through
covering
thank you and some out of chair
and I remember a couple years
ago we had some things like this
that we had the map of the
various carriers around the
state and rates went from and I
don't know what unit they were
talking about but like twelve
dollars to two dollars depending
on where you live for
connectivity and that might be a
wifi what is the variability
around the state for what the
costs are the statewide program
is for everybody not just the
northeast these gentlemen are
covering what's the variability
I can very very broadly
if you are in urban albuquerque
with a lot of uh options for
providers whether it is a cable
provider or a fiber provider or.
Uh fixed wireless you can get a
lower rate because there's
competition so you can see rates
for basic broadband service and
view anywhere from fifteen
dollars per month if you are a
low income subscriber to some
telecom providers in albuquerque
and if you're providing a
gigabit perspero download it can
be much higher so again it it
varies depending on choice but I
think compared to rural areas
which often only have one or two
providers they can see costs
much higher lower or but
satellite usually charges about
a hundred thirty dollars per
month for their basic tear of
service
and some of the rural providers
have similar competitive rates
depending on where you are in
how hot how much was to connect
that household thank you in
managers I recall from the
looking at that chart in the
past it didn't make sense there
were some urban areas that had
very high rate some rural areas
had very low rates and it kind
of seemed to depend on you know
whoever in government or others
had negotiated the prices uh but
if we have just a universal
thirty dollar thing yeah they
don't make sense when it's all
over the places to what the
actual costs could be.
Who sets the actual costs better
chair is that the company sets
it and then there is the rate I
mean is is there any oversight
of that and i'm thinking
somebody in electric utilities
they have to go to for a recase
before the p r c if they're
going to change things as a
regulator monopoly is this fall
under the same type of a
mechanism madam chair senator
there minimum standards are set
when it comes to the lifeline
program that you have to supply
with the subsidy you receive and
it's so on a mobile broadband
you have to supply at least four
and a half gigabits and to be at
least at three g and I believe
on a fiber side you have to
provide one point two eight
tablets and I think it's twenty
five down it is twenty four down
in three help is the minimum
standards as for the dated that
somebody wants the purchase
after those minimum thresholds
or whether that more is offered
that's up to the individual
company as you heard during
covered we offered much more
much more data than any of the
other mobile broadband
providers.
Thank you and managed your part
the reason I ask is people a
rural areas there isn't
competition there is a carrier
you know and there somewhat at
the mercy of whatever that
carrier chooses to provide and
it looks like the subsidy is
pretty standard regardless of
what they may be providing and
so that's kind of where some of
those questions come from is
there been an inflation
adjustment I mean we're talking
about in twenty twenty when it
came when these prices were set
up you know we're make talks
about there's been a lot of
inflation how do we adjust for
inflation from eating up that
subsidiary a director locals
will take the second part of
this but madam chair and senator
there has not been adjustment in
the lifeline subsidy in twenty
five years that's one of the
problems is there has been no
inflation adjustment yet
networks keep getting more and
more more expensive to run
especially come in alec of it
and and now the cost have gone
through the roof so as for you
know where to supply by the
federal government has been
adjusted in twenty five years
and mentioned senator
information answer your previous
question as well there is no
rate regulation on broadband
nationwide and there is to my
knowledge no rate regulation on
broadman with new mexico there's
been strong opposition from
providers to have that stick on
the regulation side mandating
the prices that broadband
providers can charge in the
state are the affordable
connectivity program was a
carrot providing a blanket
subsidy out regardless of a
service cost as you raised but
providing incentive to serve low
income households where there
wasn't an incentive before
the uh question on whether to
tie the affordable counting to
be program to
increases every year it's
definitely been proposed but it
was not part of the initial
program so I was just said at
thirty dollars per month uh
permanently which I think also
contributed to some of the
concerns with that program that
it didn't meet the costs man of
turn and thinking I think those
are kind of some of my concerns
is where there's competition in
multiple choices for consumers.
There's some consumer down
pressure on rates where there's
only one
there's nothing that they keeps
companies other than their own
uh public good will I guess to
to keep rates affordable and
when the subsidy is set and not
changing due to inflation or
other things yeah that that can
cause for some greed gouging you
know other types of things
and they get I appreciate you
indicating the feds you'll
haven't changed things not
likely with current
administration that we're going
to get a lot coming out of them
for a couple of years anyway and
so certainly I think in coming
upon the state to ensure that
there is uh connectivity for
people by the way just a little
personal thing I drive from was
crucials up here all the time I
can tell you right where the
three dead spots are along the
way adds very frustrating in a
state that has been working on
all this issue for so long that
along with our major interstates
that it drops calls and I have
to apologize to people all the
time for that
that I guess my last question on
the state on page ten and you
talked about the uptake on the
affordable on these
affordability and only seventeen
percent of the people who were
eligible we're taking part in
that how come is that a public
outreach them not knowing about
it them not wanting it why such
a low up take when it sounds
like at least it with your group
in the northeast or northwest
that
yeah we cover essentially the
whole cost the I would think
people would do that if they
knew about it what are where we
failing on the outbreach not my
questions venture manager
senator I think the
participation rate in the
affordable connectivity program
was above forty percent so is
much higher participation rate
when it was thirty dollars per
month and the lower seventeen
percent participation rate in
the lifeline program I think is
due to the the subsidy it's nine
dollars twenty five cents per
month that is probably not
meeting the needs are to connect
these households when it comes
to providing broadband so many
chair it's almost like that the
administration problem of
filling out the forms in turning
amendments at worth the nine
dollars a month.
The people just are bothering is
that what you're
the concern mentor center that
is my concern with the nine
twenty five.
It's great.
Think you senator next is
represented
thanks match i'm sure two
questions
are lopez what is the current
prognosis on e rate because that
has been completely beneficial
to our state.
Yes manager a representative it
is in a strong position after
the supreme court decided that
the universal service fund was
constitutional at the federal
level eight does continue to be
supported by the federal
communications commission
through you sec so the state of
new mexico will continue to see
some of those benefits from
federal dollars to our schools
and libraries I will say the
contribution methodology for the
federal
uh era program is putting strain
where it is a forty percent fee
on telecommunication services
that is not sustainable when it
provides a a very high cost for
some of the telecommunications
carriers nationwide and in new
mexico
thank you and in smith uh thank
you also for being here
you mention that you primarily
work in north voice to new
mexico nothing in southern new
mexico and i'm speaking because
highway nine desperately needs
it
you want to take a technical.
Madam chair representative here
yes we we only operate currently
in the north western quadrant
there's historical reasons for
that uh as a cellular provider
you have to have a spectrum
licenses acquired from the fcc
through open auction or others
and we focus that effort in the
north western quadrant as way to
expand our network out a little
more organically
it's it's quite a reach and very
costly to to look at going to
another quarter to the state
acquiring the licenses and
setting up a network when there
are other providers already
there.
Thank you.
Think a representative next is
the repair.
The.
I think you are madam chair and
thank you director
congratulations on your new role
thank you for reaching out right
away to speak to many of us and
you know this is the swim lane
that I spent enough a lot of
time in so I appreciate all the
work you're doing and jumping
head first into it I think we're
in good house so thank you
and to the smith bagly thank you
for the heads up you know on a
lot of what you have outlined
here I think this is very
important I immediately amount
of chair and i'm sure you were
too just.
Tackled in the hallway over you
know the the the funds and then
the the program ending and not
having a plan in place for it I
mean that's it's it's difficult
to do that to have a plan in
place not knowing you know from
what the right hand the left
hand are going to be doing with
each other or if they're not
going to talk to each other you
know i'm looking at that page at
twelve year
and the program outlined and the
funding options and in all about
and I think this is very
admirable that you've come
forward with a plan rather than
asking us to do it and
I was like you know it
leadership like that to show up
and say here's what's really
needed I am
well let me just start with are
there telecom carriers in new
mexico that don't offer robin
because I I know some of the
electric cooperatives are
offering broadband now so would
they are there that telecoms
that don't
yes there are some legacy
carriers that do not offer
broadband at least not what the
officer broadband were defined
with a hundred mbps download and
twenty five minutes per second
up on so then obviously which
which you're saying here or your
proposing here is that only the
companies that would have
broadband offering would be
eligible for this funding
because you wouldn't participate
in the program otherwise I mean
you'd have to have a broadband
option in your your tool of of
of services and products right
yeah madam chair center yeah
this is a broadband program it
would be a broadband offering
it's not like lifeline where
that you can still get the uh
subsidy if you provide a
thousand minutes and nobody
really files that anywhere
everybody files based on the
data usage that's why you have
to hit the four and a half gig a
bit threshold so essentially all
of the rural telecom carriers
would if they offer broadband
would be eligible for this
program fund
madam chair center the way we've
designed it yes absolutely and
especially those that are etc
carriers because they've already
been vetted by the p r c and
that's what we think it's very
good to go down the route and
what about the rural electric
cooperatives that offer
broadband would they be eligible
for this.
Sit manshare senator it depends
on the structure of the program
so I I believe that the prc has
the jurisdiction today to
establish this program it goes
through legislation then there
would be decided obviously by
the the members of the committee
and others
so it's it depends on the
structure of the program who
would be eligible but etcs right
now or not typically defined by
the world etc costs.
Well I just you know from my
perspective in and I spend
enough a lot of time on this I
would like to see anybody that
offers broadband be eligible for
this manager because I think
it's just only fair and it's
only right that they they offer
that service in their community
they should be eligible for it
so with all their being said I
would like to talk about the
figures and how did you arrive
at these particular figures what
what sort of economic analysis
did you do to to come up with
the fifteen and the twenty five
yeah the fifteen year twenty
five we feel get you to wear the
average standard is the united
states of america we thought
with those subsidies sorry madam
chair center we felt that
subsidy level we confirmed the
twenty gigabits that are needed
out there and and drop it back
down to unlimited three g I will
not be able to speak from my
peers and competition because I
doubt they'll do that i'll be
honest with you but we feel that
we can do at that level of
course if the funds went up we
thought we can offer even more
yeah I mean I guess i'm i'm a
little concerned that at for
fifteen and the twenty five you
know considering what what it
was previously um you know I
think it was what thirty and
seventy five before it said
about right
now so
how did you come up with these
numbers then yeah I I know you
just said because yeah but the
manager in center at the thirty
and seventy five we are able to
give unlimited what we also took
and consideration is what we
thought the head room would be
within the program itself of the
state us self so we look that we
thought they're probably be
about approximately twelve
million maybe more maybe less
the director would have to speak
to that so we looked at those
numbers what could we offer and
that's how we got to those
numbers that it's something fair
and equitable we could offer it
gets you to liveable broadband
standard of around twenty
gigabits and it could probably
fit within the budget
manager center if I may have a
disclaimer the officer broadband
is not
coming to the table with the
recommendation today and we are
happy to provide that if
requested uh my roles just
provide some of the background
and affordability so I did not
take part in the estimation for
the recommendation thank you
chair and think you director
because I was going to be
actually when I when my next
questions you know is but where
are you in this whole thing you
are you prepared to talk about
whether you can endorse the plan
like this or you are you not.
Wanting to do that at this time
I certainly endorsed sorry madam
chair senator I endorse a state
affordability program I think it
is critical for the broadband
and connectivity needs from the
mexican families across the
state to have an affordability
component for a broken broadband
programs okay i'm glad to hear
that I really am to madam chair
I would like to ask this group
to to get more people around the
coffee table with you around the
conference table to put
something like this together to
make sure he can support it as
you know I carry and sponsor a
lot of this legislation all way
back to seventeen when it was we
got those three really huge
bills down and it was a painful
exercise for me personally I
have to tell you and but but I
don't like to go into a session
are going to
you know like to make a change
like this without much more
involvement you know including
you know you have a whole
association that's here today
you have a you know you have the
large carriers you have the
internet companies you have a
number of folks that could help
you put this together and I
would like for you to matter
chair in order for for for me to
begin to support something like
this or to maybe even help you
carry the legislation is to see
a little more work and the
pencil but take a pencil to
these figures i'm not quite sure
if they're there where they need
to be
I I would like it to be it maybe
it's not thirty and seventy five
but maybe it's something between
what you have in that to get the
speeds to where they really
absolutely need to be
in a na also just one underscore
that I don't want to see a
single bit of square inch of new
mexico left out of this at all
period so yeah what's up done
young account do I
get and I know I want them but I
mean it's going to affect other
parts of the state beyond you
know the smith bang of the
coverage area or whatever but I
just love the fact that you came
forward and you said hey we
recognize there's a problem here
in new mexico we need to we need
do something about this so i'm
manager with your permission
maybe we could invite a larger
group of people working together
to come back again before the
year ends for your committee um.
Maybe it's gonna be tough we
have a pretty full schedule
already but we'll try i'd try
like to see it because we've had
this introductory conversation
and then I think you'd get a lot
more supportive if we could see
it again and understand what it
really needs to be you know i'm
happy to participate in those
conversations as I don't
actively every single year I
worked with you guys all the
time and then I think the
director should be a part of
this as well thank you chair
thank you senator next is then
it approvements
thank you madame chair just one
quick question which I probably
could have also googled pit
maybe you would have been
accurate what how many etc's are
eligible etc's are there new
mexico
manchester senator we can get
you that information I don't
know the figure of the top man
that's all
and I just have one question why
was it dropped initially in
twenty twenty four what would
happen or was it like madam
chair there's an excellent
question and I will say I am
answering as the director of the
office of broadband but in my
previous role I was the lead
negotiator for some loophole on
the universal service one
working group
it was an election year and it
was very difficult to move
legislation in in twenty twenty
four I think there's a major
factor there or many proposals
all the bipartisan to continue
the affordable connectivity
program we had support from
liberal organizations and
conservative organizations to
provide additional direct
appropriations but unfortunately
just wasn't in the cards for the
previous congress.
My questions nope well thank you
for your presentation he was
great thank you for the insight
percent and nice meeting you.
Oh we are now it put the comment
we're gonna start with online
with camilla.
Great thank you can you can you
actually hear me as we can thank
you
great thank you madame chair and
members of the committee i'm
communified will men i'm the
director of this year clubs real
grandday chapter representing
over thirty five thousand
members and supporters and I
just wanted to take a minute to
thank you guys for your service
even over the summer and with
all of your other obligations.
Taking the time to cover big
issues and like the one just
before us I mean in some ways
with the threats to public
communication having solid
broadband to facilitate people's
communications seems more
important than ever
but especially with regard to
the last
of wildfire electric grid
security and I just wanted to
take note of the pictures on the
front page of that presentation
extreme wild fires are more
frequent and fierce hurricanes
extreme winds
and just really take the time to
name the impact of the climate
crisis on new mexico right now
and the profound impact of the
screeching halt of federal
action on.
On the climate last week the epa
took public comment on what's
called the endangerment finding
which is the ruling that the epa
found that green house gases are
indeed a threat to public health
in the environment and then they
should be building regulations
on
the reduction of green house
gases but
the trumps epa has has basically
said we won't be taking further
action on protecting our climate
and so the cost to new mexico
and the country really will be
even greater so having your
attention to the huge and costly
climate disasters and impact
acts even just to are grid are
very important the week before
that there was public hearings
on the ranch of the whole
as solar and battery storage
proposal and that was just a
conditional use permit of
of solar and battery storage
nearer and electric load that in
the case of an impact to the
larger grid could keep santa fe
running in an extreme emergency
so I guess it all comes back to
the science technology and
telecommunications that you each
have at the center of your
mission in the center of and our
hope to see continued and
comprehensive climate action at
the legislature even in a thirty
day so thank you so much for the
time and attention thank you
committee next to be charles
good mocker.
Madame chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity on charles
good marker speaking on behalf
of healthy climate new mexico
would also like to echo the call
that came over from the server
club just made for support for
comprehensive climate
legislation in the accession but
specifically here to to share
with you and clearly different
idea it's related to
comprehensive climate
legislation but different uhm.
Just recently august fourteenth
new mexico environmental
department released the results
of a study
where they found it was a first
of a kind blood testing study of
people on the clovis area where
they found it ninety nine point
seven percent protest pence
living in her working near the
air for a space had one or more.
Per and polly flood the pifas
substances
or forever chemicals in their
board uhm
they release the results they
was a one point two million
dollars blood testing project
funded by me d with six hundred
twenty eight people
so this is very alarming that
the rates were so high um it's
very alarming because we all
know peafas are a major health
threat to all
and eight healthy climate any
mexico thanks they meet and do h
for conducting those tests now
people are also widely used in
fracking operations and oil and
gas wells throughout the state
with ongoing debate over set
backs
for oil and gas wells near a
sensitive areas that sensitive
areas defined as being places
where
are more vulnerable populations
lives thinking of students
seniors and so on
that without debate happening
perhaps it's time that the state
consider also testing for AP
fast and other major
contaminants in the blood of
people living in her name wells
thank you very much.
Yeah.
Thank you mister good much.
The.
Our last presentation before it
do that I want to see marco
gonzellas had gave us lynched
today it was wonderful so thank
you marcos for our alleged today
I last presentation is cyber
security office status update.
Um
pleasure when you ever you
already.
Every.
The.
All right we never read.
Thank you to chair and members
of the committee
my name is rogers and bin I have
overseas separate security
governance and it's
implementation for the state of
new mexico.
So based on some feedback that
we received
from other policymakers uhm
we put together an agenda so if
you go to page number two you
will see that we are planning to
be in front of the standard
august september and october
um and we want to take that time
and split it in three different
segments at two indicate what we
want to achieve in those are
time slides first and foremost
we want to start with that
activities than achievements.
And in september we want to do
that for twenty six plans and
beyond and then in october as
you get closer to the
legislative session we want to
talk about funding and any
legislative changes so we are
taking up a methodical at a
programmatic approach to you
know
how to go about an address this
um for the larger
agenda items so today however
what we wanted to talk about is
what is saber security you know
get it to the grand low level of
what it didn't was what is the
mission and vision of the office
of cyprus security what we are
doing and water and this water
cyprus security efforts and
stayed in the local cyber
security grand the federal grant
that we received and any other
significant events
we have a lot to cover and
before we get into the
meet of the presentation I would
like to take a moment into this
then garcia who's our senior
program manager and uh
gutters whose our our business
analyst and
i'm getting a text message my
data seemed to be in the
neighborhood and she may be
here.
I don't know it is but
so
what are start with the thinking
the support
this committee has provided for
office of cyprus security
and
rate from the get go from the
initial stages of assembling a
plan together are a program
together talking to all the
individuals and moving through
the process getting the
legislation with the legislative
support
uhm we have come a long way
that long way includes having
planning committee
and advisory committee and
starting with nothing to one
million and all the way up to
red rear to that so that have
been a significant progress in
that process so moving on to
pays number three here the
correct of the issue what a
saver security to define it add
a video uhm easy to understand
way it is an art of protecting
the information technology
networks that data and that
devices the networking devices
for example that makes the
network.
And the idea behind this is to
what is called yeah cia triod
which is confidentially
integrated availability to for a
way the necessary means.
And insuring that the
confidential be out the
information the confidentiality
of the network and the
confidential idea of the systems
that we operate is
are they are integrity is not
compromised and it's available
then be needed that that's the
car trout and underneath
that
definition we have some
common mulliabilities what of
the consequences of those
valuabilities materialize and
the differences that we
currently have in place to
control are to medicate the risk
are to eliminate that risk in
terms of differences and
controls so for example
credential missions so if
somebody were to miss you sacred
and child what can be do so one
of the elements that we can
implement is multi factor
authentication to minimize the
risk coming out of that with
that said further down in the
slight dog you will see
something going by that i'm
happy to report today one of our
last systems that does not have
multi factor authentication in
the state it is being
implemented that today as we
speak so chat will be on
multiple authentication.
Today would start at many of the
implemented that over the
weekend soil users are going
through the registration process
and getting it there.
So
our response is a multi faster
than approach
because it's ever increasing
tracks and
managing that risk by the
criticality and the opportunity
on how to get that.
Uhm
moving on to the next life
what is the mission so
this was briefly touched this
morning chair and members of the
committee um the statutory
mission for office of cyber
security is to promote saver
security care and public sector
in the state of new mexico
one thing that we can save for
sure based on the legislation
and the support of cs provide
services to all executive bread
and change and see it as you
know for the in the slide that
we have more details but about
seventy six agencies exist
seventy six agencies boards and
commission that is existing that
executive branch and we provide
service system all of them and
older that seventy six three of
them do not have network so you
will see seventy three further
down in the slide deck was
provided service to interest at
public entities such as gate
through twelve higher
educational institution counties
minister ball minister balabies
tribal entities water and waste
water assistant so this is where
it becomes while in terry right
we cannot mandate it so in this
morning discussion be briefly
touched on this topic so
there is a significant
difference between being
mandated and being you know
voluntary.
So legislative in judiciary um
into this have declined our
services so um just point of uh
note there and
the other aspect is ozious is
not currently funded to support
all public interview so that's
also something that you want to
make a note of
auto program objectives
was he has filtered mission by
providing interpreted level
cyber security program
what is that enterprised level
saver security program look like
what is the do
the first information is to
protect the privacy and the
security of state owned our
state operated networks
obligations and devices.
The established good
government's framework through
policies procedures and training
coordinates they were incident
response
services central point of
contact for anything cyber
related for public entities and
provide support and guidance are
to both advisory and planning
committees and help them walk
through informed the decision
making and themselves analysing
risk gap discovery mitigation
etcetera etcetera for each one
of those claims because they may
be from different sectors of
different.
So if you're more on the page
number six here are the key
services that we offer.
I'd accept his management today
morning be briefly touched on
this like you know outside and
and inside out kind of thing so
the outside in is that
acceptance management what can I
see in this building that could
be a potentially risk out as an
example right and from the
inside what can I see as a risk
things are that nature.
And how do we assess that how do
we quantify that is that the
discuss this man comes in
followed by cyber security to
use that i've had his training
then we do the voluntation by
doing penetration testing and
all this is coordinated by our
security operation center which
was one of the things that was
mandated by the law for us to do
and we currently have a security
operation center which will talk
in details and that the many of
these details in the slight deck
is coming from
so moving on to pays number
seven.
This is our portfolio of empty
piece that we are currently
serving so from being very
fragmented for coming from a
very federated tape in the admin
cyber is one of the fabric that
connects every single state
employees together.
In addition to few others that
we make currently have.
So state agencies as you see
there are seventy three counties
there are thirty three minutes
about these one or five k
through twelve a hundred and
eighty eight
and higher educational
institution nineteen tribal
twenty three judicial eighteen
entities within the judiciary
and legislative one and water
and was water currently we have
seventy three that we are
planning to provide services to
so this is the portfolio of
service sold five hundred and
thirty four entities is what
this body is supporting.
Do have you have better cyber
security posture for the state
of new mexico i'd accept his
management that's their outside
looking in that is a gap of
seventeen percent not everybody
participate because we cannot
make them right we have to go
through the walletary approach
as similarly you can see
volunteerability management as a
service this is what we scan
from the inside seeing what gaps
exist I could ask the ecosystem
and you can see there is a gap
similarly with penetration
testing similarly with that kind
of you know separate security
i've administrating etc etc so.
Uhm.
Doors gaps can manifest into are
one of the topic of discussion
that we had this morning which
is is that
absolutely the answer is yes it
is a res.
In dumps of subscriber
engagement what do we do with
those subscribers who subscribe
to our services.
Ah we do complaints reviews.
We do the monthly scans we do
the penetration testing and
report on them and do the follow
up actions on what is needed.
Ah we also do that technology
and saver security support best
of in that somebody calls in and
says this is happening is that a
concern we do the
I do down navigate through what
the issue is see if it is a
security concern and provide the
necessary support we do they
incident trious.
And we taken the incoming
information to add it and
provide the necessary sources.
Do
address those risky items we do
threat analysis we also touched
on this this morning
uh i'm very proud about what the
office of saver security debt
then now that was the imminent
threat from our republic of
iran.
Uhm v gathered all the
information because at any given
time we had dealing with one
terribite up data pretty much on
a daily basis that's a lot of
data if somebody were to say the
humans are involved in it
analysis part of course they are
but it is beyond their
complication do analyze one that
abide up data so we do used
machines and.
Automation to filter the noise
and get to the meet at the issue
moving on to slight number nine
cyber security standards.
Uhm as you can see at the
bottom.
Office of cyber security holds
out on new mexico executive
branch agencies to an estate and
the best fifty three moderate
impact security posture so if we
have the language and the
support they will extend that to
all parties interacting with the
state.
Just a brief sample of.
What is the same way security
risk assessment looks like on
pace number ten
this is the most comprehensive
discuss has been the state as
ever gone through um thanks to.
That administration support
unmandating every agency
complete this on time and all
agencies are complete at that so
here this a sample of war all
average complaints score which
is two point eight one out of
four which is about seventy
percent and down.
As you can see you know there
are areas such as governance
policies procedures can be
improved and part of that is not
new because we operated for so
long in a federated and
fragmented model this is you
know this is year three off
office of cyber security being
an existent so we are slowly
chipping away at it by issuing
those policies and procedures
uhm that is needed and more
validation has happening on the
field so if somebody says all I
have this we don't accept it for
face at face value we do the
value should say hang on a
second you said this but this is
what we are saying or here is
the gap will address the guy.
Um
next moving on to slightly at
eleven separate security user
about this training this is
awesome
this industry average in the
government's sector across the
US is seventeen point nine
that's how many
failures happen in during saver
security advertised training but
based on the training and the
adamation that we have
implemented and hope we can be a
response to somebody's
accidentally clicking our own a
you are amazon packages have.
We really have all to nail that
down to three point nine percent
so that you say huge.
Um win for us given the fact
where we were three years ago.
Three years ago I could not even
report on this.
The.
And
slight number twelve gives you a
snapchat up funding for
interpreting cyber program on
the top are the specials that we
received so far and you know the
bottom table indicates badly
spend our.
Scares resources on the
operating budget how we
categorize them into two hundred
three hundred four hundred
categories and pine that
categories the finder categories
that is the other finance uses
because we had administratively
attached.
Um that's the cost that we
provide to our parent
organization to provide us that
administrative support
for us.
Water invest waters sabor
security is something that we
picked up during.
Lasped all administration and.
Uhm i'm happy to report we got
kudos from the priority
administration especially pa and
office of the national director
and intelligence which deals
with infrastructure security at
the white house uh they were
really impressed with the
awesome work that we put
together on the plan for and we
are moving forward with that
plan this is coming out of our
budget to do the best weekend
and based on the risk and the
profiles to be have selected
seventy three water and based on
authority systems for us to
extend our services and this is
being done with in collaboration
with federal partners and state
partners on the state side we
are working with department of
end but I meant and d h s c m
and on the federal side we are
working with critical
infrastructure security agency
to make this happen and now
oceas engaged in the outrage and
we have implemented a g c base
system and cs since it's going
to administer the network
scanning and we are going to
work with them to provide them a
template for incident response
plans and do some desktop
exercise so that this critical
infrastructure sector can be
protected much better.
Uhm could be going over slight
number fourteen which is the
state and local separate
security grant to so forty year
one be received two point four
million dollars
this brief snapshot gives you
a representation of who's
participating about twenty six
local entities applied and be
closed out two of the projects
already and they came in and
dared this as female and since
uh came in and did a program
review of how good our program
is going i'm happy to announce
no findings both on the programs
they don't on the physical site
so he did extremely well.
What are some of the additional
attempted so so I talked about m
a
we issued working with the
collaborator leave it that
department of information
technology be issued the
generator we are policy.
We have streamlined our escovery
policies and the user training
associated with them.
State we also issued the
statewide saver incident
incident notification so that if
the incident happens they have
an obligation to notify our
office so that we can keep track
of how many incidents have been
what is the room because of the
issue etc.
Than we also leveraged they
interpret of security features
so that we can have a consistent
set of telemetry are metrics to
monitor how the agencies are
doing and adopted a unified
security platform and solution
so
but
that brings us to the last
flight.
Ah what I received significant
challenges right we'll talk more
about this but some of the
significant challenges that
happened in our space is the
federal changes.
They eliminated funding for
multi state information shatting
an analysis center which is isak
so this is an agency that slices
and douses data at the for level
and pass on the threatened
intelligence to us.
That is moving to a fee based
model because that's one
supported
that is reduction in separate
security what work for said the
federal level so we have to pick
up the tab and run with that
because there's not much
resources out there for us to
depend on.
Ah which includes threatened
intelligence concerning nation
state actors.
And reductions of cyprus
security agencies and services
for the pushes as to.
Take on more responsibility and
temination of the n c s r i-
which is that function that I
used to provide is to do the
review of the cyber security
programs that each one of these
entities so with that.
I thank you and stand for any
questions.
Do we have any questions.
Representative here
other things manager thank you
right really appreciate it
just a couple questions
on side four you mention that
legislative and judiciary
entities have declined office of
cyber security services what are
they doing aren't they may have
their own program I do not have
the insight that disability into
what they do they claim they do
but be have no way of validating
a very fighting what they do and
they affectiveness and the if
you can see up those programs
around.
But at least I can say on the on
the executive brand side we have
following these federal
standards out of the framework
and be out of holding every
single entity within that
umbrella to that standard and we
are constantly measuring and we
have tons subditapoints that can
be discussed in a more private
setting.
I think in my second question
madam cheers on on your final
side the illumination of thread
intelligence concerning nation
state actors.
Should not concern us I mean the
what's your name tossing
government I mean they're
closing down major intelligence
over sight of the known
identified international players
that have tried to do uh and
have succeeded many classes
against our country madame chair
members of the committee and
representative yes that is true
so our work as significantly
increased in the last.
Three four months significantly
right because we need to do the
analysis we need to do the
follow up and uh
look into our roster of
inventory of what we currently
have how that can manifest into
a valid ability that could
potentially bring us down so the
work load that are threatened
upon is has significantly
multiple increase.
Thank you and i'm sure it is
scary especially in a state that
has multiple national labs and
the my last question is
this morning are a I expert said
eight is more important in cyber
security and
how does that work I mean i'm
thinking of firewalls that a I
can start doing things that a
year ago we didn't even imagine
yeah chair and members of the
committee yes it is a scabby
equation for us to balance
because if we are using mission
learning to slice through
walliums of data they are using
the same techniques
that.
To do the penetration to to the
malicious act because at the end
of the day it all comes to data
right they want to make a bucker
to out of abusing somebody's.
Privilege to data and the state
is very rich what did and that's
that
they want to go so they may use
a I to.
What calls into out in the round
mental hour security possible we
may need to use the ai to.
Strengthen our defenses so it's
a it's a very
interesting balancing act that
we have to follow and.
Most of the
sick states based on my
understanding because I intract
with my tone reports and other
states.
Majority of this are states take
a very defensive approach they
are not into office you approach
and that is pretty much in the
bill house of the feds and that
this these changes.
That is being left to the states
do now deal with so we have to
keep a different supposed share
but also be ready to.
Make some often supposed to
respond
thank you very much thank you
ma'am thank you chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you representative next
senator bergman
thank you madame chair thank you
very much for the presentation
apologies to reply thank you
know at the button
and do it or do so.
My daughter.
Um unslow ten the third bullet
point
is it's about the same security
risk accession and said that
simple valedician indicates a
significant gap between reported
and actual compliance what is
that actual gap so or what is
the realistic number so
um maturity is the realistic
number so how mature is your
business processes and that
underlying id system step
supports those business
processes so for example if you
are supposed to have a password
policy want to get this is just
an example yeah we have a
password policy but is that
password policy also defined or
it needs to be these many
characters along with the alpha
new medical blood block because
it goes to.
Um I came from a added world so
there are controls you validate
the control thing does it exist
then you work on validating the
effectiveness of that control
right so it is one of those
things that what the agency
currently have and how
effectively it may be operating
is there some.
There may be some gaps are and
that gap can only be addressed
through education about this and
then upgrading our martinising
there and what i'm meant with
some of our.
That was a perfect description
thank you thank you chairman
members of the committee and
thank you senator burb on slide
fourteen
what is the
states wanted policy template
library development project
it's within that it's got under
governance and planning and that
they wanna take the top
i'd like to introduce thought
that it's our general council
and he was instrumental in
delivering the language and
dropped in and working with
marketport for the.
Somewhere security act.
Yes
okay
good afternoon chair members so
the policy development project
so.
There's policy in then there's
program in the policies are the
the the set of
standards that we're going to
hold their hold ourselves to as
an organization.
And in order to be missed
compliant you have to have both
the policies and you have to
have the implementation of that
policy what we have found during
our risk assessments and
conversations with the
subscribers to the services if
they don't have the the the the
written roadmap to how they're
going to implement cyber
security so we've contracted
with a a vendor we're working
with that fender to develop
templates that local governments
agencies other branches the
governments can pull in
customise to their organization
create their cyber security
policy for example yeah we
mentioned password policy just a
second go they will have a
written document that says your
password is going to be twelve
characters it's going to have a
number it's going to have a
capital it's going to have a
special character and then they
will use that to gauge whether
their actual practices are an
alignment with what their
desires are so we're developing
those templates for all public
bodies that keep what to use
them
thank you if I may add more to
that uh chair and members that
the committee
if I add more to the um I
probably some color to the
comments that are today it
brings consistency madam
chairman members of the
committee so that be now.
This is how the policy is this
is what the baseline.
Ah for that standard looks like
and it gives an opportunity that
too identified that gap is and
close the gap if there is any so
it helps with the
standardization.
Across the ecosystem because
one uhm local subscriber may
have a one based policy
uhm one of the mature agency may
have a forty page policy so we
are trying to standardize that
understand the baseline so that
we can improve upon the cyprus
security poster.
Okay.
Perfect and then my final
question is
what is the co issue generative
a I policy
um chair and members that the
committee
um there are two aspects to a I
one is generated I bad you use
it as a tool to gain some
efficiencies right so what is
the average weather and new
mexico now yeah i've based on
all that data that it has
injusted it can give you a more
annual response saying it like
you know.
Eighty seven point six decreases
what I sort something to that
based on the time but when you
that is one portion of the I the
second large component of the a
I is the I that policy makers
such as
you are all trying to regulate
which is the large language
model.
So that generally be a model is
being misinterpreted our miss
understood by many but then the
state organization so many of
the state organization currently
used some elements of a I and
majority of that some element is
generated way I such as go by
later chatty pd right so what
that policy provides is yeah
safe use policy for a lack of
better term for the correct me
our top because data night we
were ready instrumental in
working with department of
information technology to
collaborate to put this policy
together it provides the
necessary guard rail depth what
not to do on what to do right do
not throw sensitive data
adapt obligately available large
language model those are the
guard lines that the gardens
that we are talking about
because once that data is thrown
at that large language model we
have no way of pulling it back
or we have no way of undoing
that and now since it did data
is down the wall.
They do want to add anything
more to that
and i'm sure members
yeah so the policy is is.
Just like the policies were just
discussed that it's a set of
guidelines that agencies now
have the following the executive
branch before they can deploy
their generative a I so we're
not going to train them on
confidential data if you're
going to
anything that's public if you
want to use it internally and
train it on your data you have
to have data loss protection
measures in place
if you are going to publish
something that's public facing
and you expect members of the
public to rely on this this
thing that you've created you're
gonna indicate on the document
itself are on the advertisement
or in the brochure that this was
generated by ais so that the
consumers can know we're gonna
you know ask questions about the
origin of their so it's to
protect consumers it's to
protect her data immins to
ensure that everybody's playing
by the same rules when they're
deploying these systems
just to act of that chair and
members that the committee and
senator
this helps us get there with the
right mindset right we are
taking a data first our data
protection first and as much
approach rather than the a first
and jumping in it's a little bit
calibrated of an approach I
would say but it helps us.
Be cardinal sent off the
elements of risk out of any
surprise as that we may have to
deal with
great I was excited to learn
that that existed and I was on a
king I looked for it briefly on
I mean go into the door website
I don't know where else it might
be but can you send us that part
absolutely
members of the committee people
definitely send it to committee
members here thank you
senator next to senator pity
thank you chair and thank you
for your presentation ie as
you're not very involved with
you through this whole effort
madam chair site I guess I
misunderstood what you said
earlier versus what you said
just now I think I heard you say
just now that
you're not aware of what the
policies are in the other
agencies ie legislative judicial
etc then how are they based on
what you said earlier today
they're meeting the minimum
citizens how are they doing
transactions with the state
government now if we don't know
what they're.
A policies are unsecurity right
now so chair and members of the
committee very excellent
question senator so
does have a standard exist and
has the state pivot to a
standard yeah that said this yes
it's eight hundred dash fifty
three moderate now we are
working through the process with
them they executive branch to
see that the gaps are to meet
that standard right some exceed
some may not be there yet and we
may need some hand holding very
similarly if I have the support
of the policy makers I can do
the same with the that the
legislative branch are any other
branch aren't even the local
government to give you brought a
prospect to off that the larger
gaps are foot example if I if
once again this is just an
example if if what are
authorities are not using
multipact authentication that
could be a huge risk that we
need to focus on priorities to
mitigate.
And until we do that analysis we
would not know so most of the
policies should be public facing
documents and published
validated by independent audits
and what not but I do not know
how to I cannot or paying on it
as.
Okay so madam charis then my
next question would be you know
logical is there an automated
way that puts up a firewall that
doesn't let you do a transaction
with the state government if you
don't meet the state's minimum
standards.
Chairman members of the
committee are technology
do exist that can.
Um that can move us in that
direction.
But the destruction could be
impacting constituents in some
chip or fall so we need to
understand if we have that
authority definitely we can look
into that in moving that
direction so that we can provide
the necessary uhm validation
that all they entities
intracting with the states are
being held to that same standard
as they execute a branch
agencies so madam chair then I I
guess i'm really confused now
because it it just seems like it
really doesn't matter what
you're doing at the state level
at this point because if you're
loud let alone the legislature
and the judiciary to just
enter exit submit this required
request that payment that
whatever then that's a wide open
door and then that's a sliding
north of its wide open and and
any bad actor can just crawl in
the building from there.
Option I just told him
misreading that chair and
members of the committee um and
senator.
It it is currently open for
interpretation thought do you
want to.
Yellow break maybe there is a
better way to capture that risk
the kind of per senator so so
i'm really using example of of
another situation our vendors
they are.
Interacting with our environment
but we don't have any of his
ability into what their cyber
security posture is and there is
no
test that we can give them or or
there's no governing body that
has given them a seal of
approval instead.
They are compliant with expiry
you can do business with them so
far but we are going to work
towards getting something like
that for new mexico whether it's
a creating the test or sending
the vendors off to somebody else
to get the test so they can come
in and say this vendors meeting
x standard what we decide what
it is with respect to our co
branch as a government we have
zero visibility and we don't
have the ability to ask them for
that seal of approval the the
proof of compliance it's it's
not within our statutory
authority right now I appreciate
that and and so chair today you
know with this the slide that
you have that showed the testing
in the you know validation
whatever we do that too the
state government that is the
executive branch that is
required to adhere to this this
law that we create why wouldn't
we just give that to the to the
other agencies and say you know
before we we we are more than
happy to do a transaction with
you whatever it may be but
before you we do that with you
we're going to run a test on
your system make sure that we're
not you're not creating
vulnerabilities for us
what why wouldn't you do that
and it seems to be that there
would be a proactive way to keep
the bad actors out there that
i'm sure senator it it does
sound proactive and right now we
can look at all of our agencies
where they're all on the same
platform they're all getting the
same security stance they're all
getting there all complain with
the same risk assessment and
will push that off to vendors
and and and start expecting them
to give us that verification and
from a policy perspective it
makes sense to us that everybody
that comes into the state system
should be meeting those spend on
the standards that are verified
through consistently approved
processes
it doesn't make sense well i'd
like to know more about that I
know you want to keep more than
one but.
It just seems to me like it
really doesn't matter what what
the states doing I mean if the
the barn doors you know quite
open for anybody walk through it
and we're not testing them
before they walk in
the brain all sorts of lose
inside the bit all sorts of of
illness into the building I I
did I just totally that that
doesn't make doesn't jave at all
with what are intention of this
legislation was
so i'm gonna have to take a
little leep render this thank
you
thank you I agree we've been
discussing it a little bit and
maybe we can
bring more into the conversation
bring you to all right I just
have a question over the last
few years we've been trying to
get a cyber security fund
do we still need it or are
agencies not getting infiltrated
are they just working really
well
tell me.
Chair and members of the
committee
chair
the opportunity
and the need do exist right
because if you look at the brief
history of office of cyprus
security he have re single
legislative session and then
thirty day sixty days that
shouldn't be have come in for a
few asking for money
um
we have been plus
to some extent to have some base
operating budget but everything
has been run out of one time
money so given the fact that
it's been three years and more
stuff or funding are with the
specified time limit then for a
specific purpose that specials
we have implemented those and
now via and a critical juncture
that it does to better disturb
that's operations
so if we do not have a base
budget increase all the
valuable things that we
implemented
cannot be considered operation
because I need to come back and
ask for
money
to continue those operations and
those are the operation that
provides us with all these data
points and based on the data
points we are making data
central decisions prioritizing
based on risk and other factors
so if we do not get consistent
recording funding
and which we have discussed in
this forum multiple times in the
past we this is once again based
on available information we have
potentially looking at somewhere
in the mid thirties uhm million
for an operating budget but it's
gonna take
time unless you guys plus me
with the funding request.
So but the agencies are doing
okay I mean how are the agencies
really doing so that for for the
agencies at least if I can for
this example purposes chair and
members of the committee if I
can keep just the executive
branch agencies
we provide them the service so
they don't have anything for
them to react to other than when
we say hey you left that door
open or they'll are lockers not
working right can you fix the
lock then that's where they are
involvement comes in and fixing
that particular luck um so
that agencies also potentially
could be looking at chairman
members that the committee LA
large cost is outdated and
unsupported systems so for
example if i'm using this device
and it is not being supported
that's a large cost that's a
state would be looking at
because you'll need to replace
that whatever agency has this
type of device I graduate the
ecosystem so and we need to be
that's where the cost comes in
and has.
Such a
members that the committee this
is that
thank you members to answer your
question.
Yeah there is answer question
it's it's and I know roger can
say it but it's it's a ticking
time bomb we have I mean there's
hundreds of thousands of
honorabilities that we're
looking at we're looking at
things daily we're constantly
putting out fires you know every
single day every single moment
and anyone else fires
potentially could be millions of
dollars that we have to come up
with so we've been very very
lucky that nothing has happened
but the potential is there and
so there's two falsers how much
money we need to fix all of the
problems that we have and how
much money we need if one of
those I think it was twenty two
thousand dollar abilities
critical water billions we saw
last year gets through how do we
fix that and so we're we're just
we're just doing the best we can
to keep things contained
if they do happen
check chairman members of the
coming up chairman members of
the committee
the the some of the technicals
are details with some sensitive
date can be.
Denning a closer ship if
possible.
Yes I have we can definitely
yeah.
Okay sure
sorry didn't recommend
thank you very much manager
motion for a close session I
only have it emotionally in the
second.
Yeah.
The material for them.
