technology and
telecommunications committee we
are going to code and get
started since we do have a tour
later on today and we have more
people coming in
they're not obviously not
teachers or they would be here
going to teach
the educators are here
so
our first presentation is
sending a national laboratories
quantity industry collaboration
and educational outreach object
douglas quite a business
development lead it's an
essential national advertories
and make an ivory experiment to
quantum physics at sending a
national laboratories so
whenever you guys are ready.
Okay madame chair ends members
of the committee thank you so
much for the opportunity to
speak with you are my name is
making ivory I am a principle
member of the staff at sending
your national labs
so I have a page d and quantum
science I have worked for four
years in industry before coming
here and then two years in
academia and while it's india my
job has kind of two different
main rules one i've worked as a
technical person in the
laboratory contributing to
projects on quantum computing
and atomic clocks and the other
part of my job which is a little
bit more fun is actually working
with members of the community so
that we can make sure that we're
preparing the next generation of
workers to fill the jobs that we
have in this growing industry
i'm joined here by mister dick
douglas
as an madam chair members of the
committee my name is jake
douglas I serve as the quantity
business development lead at
sandia position of help for
about the last seven years on
the product of new mexico born
and raised in ralswill I have my
degrees from new mexico attack
in highlands and now based on
albuquerque
as a premier federally funded
engineering labs india conducts
innovative research and
development uh anticipate
insolved the most critical
national security problems of
which quantity information
science is one of those
we've spent the last twenty
years building the world class
continue program with a
significant capabilities and
people that help drive the state
of the art and we're excited to
talk to you today about what
we're trying to do to build up
the ecosystem and drive
innovative partnerships madame
chair we've act put together
slides for about twenty five
minutes would you like a slunch
into those now.
So.
So going add to slight to
we wanted to kick things off
just saying it you know bottom
line up front continue
information science is an
emerging technology that is
critical for economic national
security we're at that inflation
point where technologies are
starting to come out of the lab
and be commercialised and it's
going to be critical for
communities across the across
the world and new mexico has
that decades long history of
leadership and clabbation in
this field in many ways new
mexico helped launch the field
about thirty years ago and we're
going to contribute driving new
innovations doing rd for our
sponsors because this is a
national strategic priority uh
shrung by partisan support
large bills going through at the
federal level to help keep the
US on top
and sandia believes that
strategic public private
partnerships investments and
ecosystem support are really
going to pave the way for a
continued leadership and
prosperity
there are several large scale
programs that will talk about
today uh bringing in federal
dollars to help advance the
technologies there are new
innovative partnerships like the
one announced yesterday by next
economic development department
with road or intervention
studios helping bring in private
capital and establish some
innovation facilities here
and supporting all that is our
world class workforce we have
amazing programs in place from
cater career
that we built up over the past
few years and it's a case where
we're ready to scale we're ready
to pull other people and we've
found ways to make it work to
reach rural communities as well
as places like alcoholist and
famous cruises.
And with that we'll go to slight
three.
So before I launching into you
know the broader eco system we
wanted to give you a little snob
shot of what quantum information
science and technology is and we
really wanted to do that from an
application standpoint so quite
a information science broadly
falls under three main
categories right now there's
quantum computing quantum
sensing and quantum
communication so quantum
computer computing is using
quantum things so often times
really really small things like
adams or single particles of
lights or quantity concepts to
solve new problems and
completely new ways that our
current computing modalities
don't allow for and so when we
think about applications people
are really excited about things
like drug and material design
optimization of things like the
energy grade or even fraud
detection and financial markets.
Under quantum sensing we're
using tiny quantum things again
or coin and concepts and here
we're trying to enhance sensing
capabilities and the things that
we can sense with these quantum
objects are gravitational fields
magnetic fields electric fields
time itself and so when we go
into the applications that we
see there's things like
navigation but quantum enhanced
navigation or subsurface
exploration and then finally and
quantum communication we're
using these same things and
concepts in order to communicate
and inherently secure ways so we
have things like ultra secure
communications or even more
efficient so energy efficient
communications
if you go to the next slide with
highlighted that a lot of people
are excited about quantum
information science and a lot of
ways that we can see that
enthusiasm is all the money
that's been poured in so on the
bottom there is a a recent study
that just came out from the key
dc the quantum economic
development consortium and it
highlights the public
investments into quantum
technology by different regions
around the globe we can also see
this in the venture capital
raised on the right hand side of
this plot so the number of deals
by your as well as the amount of
money and where that money is
going something that's been
rather interesting over the past
couple of years is that we're
seeing an increase and funding
for a few word number of deals
which shows us that this isn't
just you know a bunch of hyped
up enthusiasm anymore these
technologies and companies are
becoming more mature and we're
seeing that and how the funding
is actually distributed.
Now that's a global picture if
we go to the next slide slide
five this is very busy and I
don't want to spend you know
time going into this with you
all here what I do want to point
out is if you look on the very
left hand side of that plot it
says nineteen eighties are
nineteen nineties this is new
mexico's contribution to this
field and it started way before
many of these companies started
showing an interest and so new
mexico has really been a global
leader for several decades in
this which gives us a unique
opportunity for us to capitalize
on this and really make you new
mexico the place to be in the
future as well.
Slide six shows that of course
we hear new mexico have pride
for what our seat is doing but
it's not just us that's noticing
new mexico there is a lot of
recognition that we're seeing
and the press lately so on the
top left albequirky was named as
one of tomorrow's quantum hot
beds among six other us cities
right below that there's an
article from the wall street
journal that came out earlier
this year that talks about new
mexico being the heart of
quantum computing so this is
garnishing really national
interest in our state and it
gives us an opportunity to
really build on that.
The next slide is sure it's
great to be global leaders it's
great to have national
recognition but any time we're
paying taxpayer dollars for any
of the stuff we want to make
sure that it actually benefits
our communities so this is a
figure that mr douglas is
prepared that shows the
difference ecosystems throughout
the state of new mexico where
that focus has been in the past
and where it is currently and
how quantum could contribute to
those different ecosystems so
for example in the top left
quarter of the state the
northwest corner oil and gas we
think that quantum could
contribute from the sensing
capabilities that we have so I
mentioned quantum being able to
sense things like gravitational
fields are magnetic fields so if
we're trying to do to really or
mining for gas or even for
minerals we want to know that
where we're digging is the right
place to do it and so we can
save a lot of money if we know
that there's something going on
subsurface and con and sensing
allows us to be able to detect
those subsurface anomalies and
really really sensitive ways
on the bottom right hand side
error specific defense is also
huge in the state so another
sensing application is things
like a tomic clocks are already
used for for gps navigation so I
was using google maps to get
here this morning so i've used
my atomic clock
but if we want to be able to do
better navigation it's good to
have things like like better
atomic clocks or even things
that can determine where you are
just based on where you start
and the acceleration that you
experience along the way and so
right now gps does really really
well we got here but for gps
denied environments which is
something that the military and
defense is very concerned about
these quantum systems can help
provide solutions where we don't
already have them
there are a lot of other
applications here that i'm happy
to talk more about later if you
have further questions but.
Thinking the interest of time we
will we will carry on and i'll
pass it off to mr douglas.
Some thank you so moving a
little bit into what c n d does
so we we won't spend too much
time but sandia is an
engineering lap and we have
significant capabilities in
quantum system engineering and
integration so for talking about
miniturizing those continued
sensors so that they can be put
on planes and boats satellites
things like that that's a a
specialty here and a lot of that
is enabled by our significant
fabrication and advanced
facilities where our masa
fabrication uh facilities here
can make working devices across
different quantum technologies
and modalities in a way that
almost no one else in the world
can do and a lot of what we've
produced over the past decade
has actually helped start
companies like I am in continue
in others and we're exploring
ways to continue leveraging that
really unfair advantage for for
new mexico we also have a lot of
experts we're looking into
algorithms and applications how
to actually use these computers
once they're ready um as well as
benchmarking in assessing uh for
a US government partners and
others if uh you know machines
are working in the way we expect
them to or people are telling us
that they're working and as we
mentioned earlier we think that
we'll be able to really thrive
through public private
partnerships and so we have a
lot of effort going into
economic development new public
private partnership models
things that that nature and we
want to do all this in the
service of the nation we want to
be thought leaders we want to
put our uh technologies to the
the use of the nation and so we
we do a lot to engage the the
national and sometimes
international communities as
well
if we go to slight nine you know
city is really exploring these
new models to accelerate
innovation rate in a big piece
of this is to to fill the
missing peace in our new mexico
ecosystem which is industry we
have amazing national labs we
have amazing universities we
need industry to come here and
collocate with us to get to
build those partnerships take
advantage of our expertise our
partners.
And do that that innovation and
commercial position here i'm
really pushing that the envelope
of what is possible and so i'm
the right of the site here I I
just included a graphic that
shows a few of the partnerships
that were were a part of helping
lead in many cases and who were
connected to across the state
and just to kind of demonstrate
the number of touch points we
have with our non profits our
economic development partners
the the state industry others in
in some of how we're doing that
is through the efforts I list
here in the on the left so the
quantity foundry facility we're
trying to understand how we can
fell current technology gaps and
really democracies access to
these quality technologies by
enhancing access to our
fabrication capabilities here
we think we can help industry
product type we can help our
government sponsors that really
get things through a lot quicker
so that we can get to those
technologies first and also we
want to enhance tech transfer
how can we get the technology
out of the labs into the hands
of industry partners.
Another way we're doing that is
through the quantum
demonstration facility
where we're looking to set up co
located space and this is
actually part of the
announcement that was made
yesterday by road runner where
they'll be establishing the
infrastructure for us to go
house space in which the india
landline UNM can come together
and work with industry partners
to really accelerate quite a
commercialization uh drawing
industry to the states to come
here grow here and stay here we
think that that will help us
demonstrate not only new
technologies but new business
opportunities let's say supply
cheap needs arise for new lasers
or optics uh we want to be able
to build those here so we can go
across the street bring him into
our systems and help accelerate
the innovation cycle
that was really made possible by
the state investment and ed
support to to road runner in the
coalition building there to
bring together private capital
with everything else in the
ecosystem
in addition to that we are going
to be watching a quantum lab
embedded entrepreneur program or
q leap I to really help support
that start up ecosystem how can
we spend out ideas out of the
labs bring founders from other
states here to take advantage of
our capabilities and our people
in our facilities and so again
working with landlord sandia and
road runner we're going to try
to find waste really streamlined
partnership opportunities
through programs like trigger
where we can collaborate more
closely and help accelerate
industry road maps to get to
that commercial potential.
In the last week I wanted to
mention the elevate cronin
packaging facility
this is a the public private
lead and operated chip based
packaging facility that's being
established in albuquerque as
part of the eda tack hub through
elevate corner
we see this is an awesome new
way to to really enhance tech
transfer pathways to take things
being produced by c n d and help
package and commercialize them
and again bring more capability
more expertise more
infrastructure to the state to
make us more competitive
so if we move to the next slide
I want to briefly touch on the
collaborations that are making
these types of things possible.
So on side ten I I want to first
talk a little bit about
communicator the partnership
with unm c n d and landlord
landlines helping really enhance
work force development promote r
and d and then drive some of
those commercialization efforts
i'll talk a little bit about all
the corner as an update to to
last year funding has come in
and we're continuing to work in
execute on that now and then I
want to talk a little bit about
the future and what's happening
in the new mexico corner
moonshot where we are one of
twenty nine seven my finalists
competing for a hundred and
sixty million dollars uh in
federal and s f program.
So driving into that if we could
go to slight eleven.
So the corner of new mexico
institute is really you know
where we're trying to understand
how we can bring partners
together to accelerate that
innovation train the next
generation work force and
commercialize here in new mexico
so we think there are multiple
parts of the ecosystem that are
really critical to actually do
this type of thing and place
based innovation as a shown to
work really well if we look at
silicon valley if we look in
boston by a tech things like
that so we have a a very strong
r and d team already we've been
leading for decades as doctor
ivory mentioned we have a lot
going on in education and work
force that she'll talk about
here a little bit but the
industry investment engagement
piece is really critical the ed
request for proposals that just
went out brought in and honestly
a shocking number of partners to
new mexico trying to figure out
how to get engaged from the
investment community from all
different types of continent
technologies computing enabling
technology's supply chain a
significant amount of interest
was generated from that and
we're going to see multiple
partners coming to the state
through that grant already and
we're having conversations daily
with other industry partners
looking to get engaged having
been doing this for seven years
I i'm incredibly excited to see
the amount of industry interest
in engagement um and the
opportunity to to build on that
and then the last piece you know
and i've touched on this and
that the steet needed system
partnerships are really critical
working with ed with our
uh economic development
departments in cities and our
partners like elevate corner
bringing together the ecosystem
to really push the envelope of
what's passport all together in
a way that is statewide and
cornated which is really
exciting to see actually coming
together.
So if we moved to sight twelve
i'll dive a little bit more into
elevate corner and so when we
talked last year there were six
or seven members in new mexico
who were part of this uh
regional coalition and as of now
overall there's a hundred and
forty plus organizations but I
wanted to spot light on the
right uh what the new mexico for
print looks like
over the past year so I
highlighted a few of the
partners
but that you can see visually on
the map of where we are working
with
cities with the states with our
economic development department
but also with labor and work
force organizations are
nonprofits and cater twelve stem
partners we have every research
university and seeing and i'm
really closely tied into how
we're trying to build that work
for second system here and the
way that we're doing that's
relevant crime is through the
packaging facility which I
talked about earlier in their
create
pillar where they're setting up
capabilities in colorado we're
setting up capabilities in new
mexico that can really be
complementary and drive people
here away from places like
chicago colorado sorry
california
that are kind of our competitors
right but I threw crime of new
mexico through elevate I I would
argue that we're a top three
ecosystem in the US and we
continue innovating and building
we can maintain that leadership
the other pieces on the
workforce development or include
pillar but all that make and
talk about that a little bit
later.
So going to fight thirteen
and
I I wanted to talk a little bit
about the quantitment shot
engine which is a new mexico
based new mexico lead and s f
regional innovation engine where
again we're bringing together
all those partners uh if we are
successful uh there'll be twenty
two funded partners over fifty
engaged partners that are going
to really focus efforts in the
mexico around three technical
grand challenges so how can we
get to that quantum sensing for
next generation navigation let's
say we want to go out in space
and know exactly where we are or
their environments where we're
in the backwards and don't know
where we are quite might be able
to help that we also want to
explore point of networking for
critical infrastructure security
how can we make sure that that's
being protected by leveraging
cronin mechanics and then lastly
quantum computing for the next
revolution and material science
and chemistry applications again
understanding how to use
concomputers once they're here
because the hardware is
outpacing the software a little
bit and so if we can lead in
that area bring the experts to
new mexico invent the things
here then the economic benefit
will will come here as well
i'm so underlying those three
grand challenges we have our
place based capacity building so
how can we build that that keep
a twelve state wide coordinated
strategy how can we make sure
that mse new mexico tack and
others can bring in new
undergrad course offerings store
engaging communities across the
state a little bit more
intentionally and so we have a
structure where each of the
universities is playing a
leadership role within our work
force development to build those
pathways at that level
and again I don't want to still
make and stund around there
communicate pathways.
And then next the strategic
investment in sustainable
capital so working with road
runner in in a few others how
can we attract private capital
to help the companies grow here
scale here in this sustainable
way luckily with the dd funding
we got a great jump on this and
so we'll adjust our plans a
first successful and how how
that pillar looks but we we
think that private capitals are
really critical peace and then
lastly the infrastructure and
how can we make sure that we're
translating our innovation to
practice getting technologies
out of the lab bringing stuff
founders here and the engine can
help really provide that driving
structure that national
recognition that we are the
place to be
so if uh if we are able to land
it it would be a hundred and
sixty million dollars over ten
years the partnership with the
state is a really really
critical piece for both this uh
and there's another new mexico
uh engine that's a send my
finalise from unit uh again
likewise the support there's
really critical for for the
success and we think that we can
really accelerate corner
minimation bring companies here
and keep new mexico and up
and with that i'll pass back to
doctor
average
all right so if we want any of
this actually happened then we
need to have the workers to fill
these jobs so let's dig in on
what these jobs look like that's
what slide fourteen is doing on
the left hand side we see job
postings from the same qdc
report that just came out by
role and yes there are a lot of
stem science tack engineering in
math rules but there's also
nonstem rules so things like
business development operations
education sales project
management and so we're seeing a
lot of those supporting rules as
well because those are also
crucial for actually building
this eco system on the right
hand side we see the work force
by degree and less than half of
those jobs that are out there
right now require a phd and so
as we see these projects move
from academia into actual
commercialization.
And productivisation we see more
demand for people with bachelors
and even associates or nondegree
holders and so we're really
trying to pay attention to that
and make sure that students or
people in the work force here in
new mexico don't have to be you
know a graduate student in
physics before they hear about
the opportunities they have as
in a coin career if you go to
the next slide it talks a little
bit about the numbers of job
opening so the plot on the
bottom is global numbers by year
these are our new job openings
and we also dug in a little bit
more here in the mountain west
is part of that elevate quantum
effort and so that reporting
found that there's roughly one
qualified candidate candidate
for every three open jobs and
quantum.
So there's a huge work for a
scope rate now eighty percent of
those job listings require non
quantum skills
as if we just look at this
region there's an expectation
that over the next ten years we
could see seventy seven thousand
workers needed a work for scap
of that amount in this region
which is huge the next slide is
actually all the same text but
it has a slightly different
image on the bottom left showing
that um as jeek hinted as mister
douglas into two right now we
are seeing a lot more jobs and
hardware because we are still
figuring out how we're going to
build these devices but in the
future we expect that to kind of
chris cross and we'll see more
jobs on the software and
application side down the road
if we go to slide seventeen this
is what we're doing about that
here in new mexico and so as I
mention you know often times you
might hear about quantum science
as late in in your undergrad
career if you decide to major in
physics or as a graduate student
and so we have a really strong
programs here in new mexico UNM
was one of those flagship
universities exploring this back
in the eighties and nineties and
so they've done a really great
job at those higher education
levels but we still have a gap
in the earlier stages and
especially if we want people to
enter the job market with
associates degrees or not even
having a jury in these fields we
need to let them know that
they're out there so we have
been developing a number of
programs over the past couple of
years i'm gonna talk about three
of them briefly there are
quantime which is a k through
twelve effort camp which is more
focused on high school and the
quantum learning lab which is
the technician training program
i'll note that we've we've been
rolling these out often times
for years the quad and learning
lab is a little bit new and I
think at this point we have a
good handle on how to do this
how to do it well and we're
ready to scale so we want to
make sure that we're reaching
more broadly across the s.
Okay so diving into these if we
go to the next slide quantity
new mexico this was an effort
that we tried for the first time
this past winter in january on
february leading up to
valentine's day and encouraging
people to get intangled for
valentine stay it was adorable
yes and so the way that we did
this was by a partnering with
this national organization the
national twelve education
partnership we found six
activities that are really hands
on and fit into a single class
period then highlighting those
activities we had six different
professional development
sessions for teachers they were
all on zoom so they could log in
at the end of the school day at
about a thirty to forty five
minute professional development
on a single activity and then we
found funding to provide the
materials for these kits to
about thirty teachers now we're
talking about materials that
cost less than five dollars per
student so this is not a huge
amount of money but it's still
really fun stuff that gets
students thinking about quantum
science we had a kick off event
here in alba kirky at explora
where we had not just those six
base activities but we also
highlighted some of the research
going on at u n at new mexico
tack at sandia accurately air
force research lab and we
reached over five hundred and
thirty community members just
during that event alone and then
we asked our teachers to please
implement in their classrooms
and they reported reaching over
seven hundred students so this
was a small short kind of rag
ragtag team effort and we were
able to make a really big impact
across the state now if you want
to go a little bit deeper can
ask you to flip to our cue camp
so you can't stands for the
connem computing math and
physics camp and this is a
little bit more of a deep dive
more towards the high school
level.
We actually have two different
camps we have one for teachers
and we have one first students
the goal overall is to reduce
barriers so there are no pre
requisites for this camp we try
to make it as fun and engaging
in hands on his possible for
teachers just like one time we
want to give them the tools to
introduce it in their classrooms
and for students we want to give
them the exposure to this field
so that they can make a decision
early on about whether they want
to go into it these are national
programs right now and so they
are funded primarily through the
department of energy although we
have received smaller grants
from things like and can taught
a foundation continue recently
pitched in for some stipends
this past year but as far as new
mexico goes we have this uh
image in the top right that
shows we for each sixteen
different counties there have
been seventy five educators from
new mexico alone and eighty five
students and so if we assume
that those teachers are
implementing in their classrooms
we think we've reached over
seven thousand students across
new mexico with this program
again this is this is ready to
scale we currently have funding
for one more year of the student
camp at the federal level we
have a proposal in for five more
years of our base week long camp
for teachers but sustainability
is is always a concern of ours.
And then finally the third
project here on slide twenty
this is something that just
began a so this is our quad i'm
learning lab and technician
training program so we had some
conversations over the past
couple of years with industry
leaders who are hiring these non
degree holders or associates are
bashes level degree holders in
technician roles and we started
asking them what are those jobs
actually what are those people
doing and what are the skills
that they need to do that and we
realize that they're very hands
on skills but you don't need
these advanced degrees to do it
and we start even questioning
whether you need an associate
surfacers degree for this and so
this is a first in the nation
attempts to launch a ten week
boot camp where in the students
or veterans or people re
entering the work horse work
force after parent hood can come
in for ten weeks get the skills
that they need to be immediately
ready to enter the quantum work
force now as mister douglas is
mentioned industry is a little
bit small here in new mexico
right now so one of the things
were being really cognisant of
is that these skills that were
highlighting and training in
this program are not just
touching on the quantimated
industry but quantitation
industries as well so we've been
having a lot of conversations
with other industry players to
make sure that they can fit into
those calls this is a
partnership that's being lead by
uh central new mexico community
colleges nonprofit research park
branch called CNN internet
and so they've been doing a lot
of the like work to make sure
that we're connecting to
regional industries it's been
funded by the economic
development administration hot
tech hub eleven quantum as well
as steep matching funds as well
as some education funds and I
think there are some little
funds and there is well and I
think mr douglasness has a
better breakdown of where all
the money is coming in whereas I
more the technical person um but
i'll i'll pass it off to you to
surround us up yeah just a few
more words on that so I continue
announced that they're they're
opening.
A facility and albuquerque
cunact economy networking
company is also doing that we're
inactive conversations with them
to hire our graduates of this
help us understand the efficacy
of the program and then working
with state partners like work
for solutions and others uh to
make sure students going into
that path there will support it
so very very excited about the
corner learning why.
And so if we move to the the
final slight just to close
things out
the future really is rate third
we we've heard about how
critical climbing technologies
are people across the world are
racing to get there because of
the amazing impact that they
could have we really believe the
interdisciplinary collaboration
collaborating with different
institutions industry others is
is critical for us to succeed in
maintain leadership both in the
state but also across the US
empowering innovation is and in
democratising access to those
quantum technologies will help
us really push the art of the
possible and we want to get
those diverse state holders
engaged to make those ground
banking advancements to get kids
from also like me engaged in
corner and then that that work
force if we invest now if we
invest across the entire
educational spectrum we can have
that work force that both draws
industry here but also gives our
our residence here awesome high
paying high value jobs
so madam chair with that we're
happy to answer any questions
that you in the committee have
been create presentation this is
very exciting it's great to see
how much you've already done in
and starting with our kids and
and seeing i'm i'm excited about
this so first question i'm
senator black.
Thank you very much here
it's great presentation
appreciate uh all the other
phenomenal information one of
the things of interested in is.
On the on the capability side of
this how do you tie in.
Quanta computing with doing
digital twins model base systems
engineering.
When you work with government
energy is like the lab
their force research lab if
we're simply a weapon center
when you look at the program
management piece of cosches will
performance how does this effect
cost schedule performance from a
quantum
perspective.
Madam chair center I think for
the question so i'm going to
defer on some aspects of of the
the answer there so quantum
computing technologies what are
the application areas that were
really interested in exploring
his legislatives and
optimization problems so if
we're talking at looking at
really complex systems that have
a ton of inputs tonight outputs
we we think that there there
should be a lot of potential
impact the quantum computing out
for themselves to have on that I
think it's important to note
that the time frames to get
there
five seven ten years depending
on what you're looking at the
complexity of the problem um but
that logistics and things of
that nature are a kind of
critical and core peace as we're
talking about bringing in other
technologies like a I like
digital twins things that nature
there's a lot of excitement of
how a I might be used to
enhanced quantum systems I
haven't had many discussions
around the digital twin aspect
of things but if we're talking
about you know building new
models and trying to find areas
for improvement you know there
might be some applications there
in connect I just haven't talked
to the experts about that
specifically thank you very much
i'm really going toward on the
operational testing evaluation
piece to get things out the door
faster to the the customer or
the military or whoever because
when you look at all the threats
out there today based you know
china russia when it comes to
especially cyber
how do you you know how do you
mitigate those.
Those threats with what I call
the legacy acquisition cycle of
trying to get stuff out the door
to
because what you get it out the
door you're already obsolete and
so I had his cry help us there
and I I would argue it helps us
will you do when you're doing
testing because you don't have
to go out to you know the old
big trestle out there and start
you know to inveviation testing
on on some coupons or whatever
but you could do it.
With.
Can't capabilities.
To get what she needs on
confidence level to start your
to cut down on your schedule is
that how you can is that how you
see quality helping as well.
The.
Madam chair started o thanks so
I think there are are a lot of
different aspects of this I
think if we're like there's
modeling that can be expedited
with quantum systems so if
you're thinking about different
kinds of research that would
involve complex modeling that
could be enhanced if you're
talking about like physically
getting things out the door then
that becomes a logistical
optimisation problem which could
also be addressed with some of
these quantum systems and then
there's also you know the
security like the digit highest
stuff that you're getting out
the door there are a lot of
security risks with that as well
and so quantum has also been at
the forefront of people's minds
and protecting our digital
information and so a lot of the
encryption technologies that we
use today could be a succeptable
to quantum hacks if we get these
big enough computers but nist is
also recently put out different
standards for how we encrypt
technology using quantum systems
for a post quantum era and there
are a lot of institutions who
are starting to implement those
as well so I think on many
levels we could see some impact
from from clinton systems thank
you better insurance lastly just
give you just two quick answers
here maybe you're not the rate
right person to assess but i'd
be interested in senator souls
might have uh some thoughts on
this training up our teachers to
teach quantum that's something
i'm very interested in and then
last year when you talked about
the logistics side how does
quantum help with
secure supply chain management.
Yeah so one of the kind of
classic problems that people
first started thinking about
when we had a release stage
quantum devices devices that
console optimisation problems is
like a traveling salesman
problem so in the simplest form
how do you get your amazon
driver to go on the most
optimized route from to deliver
all the packages but we could
start to think about that as
part of a broader supply chain
optimising not only the paths
that things get from one place
to another but the efficiency of
those paths as well and that
could be things like materials
development to make sure that we
have materials um whatever
whether those are wires or solar
panels are batteries that make
sure that the things that were
connecting our as efficient as
possible um mr douglas have you
talked to other technical staff
members who may have different.
Answers.
Yeah so madam chair I I think
this is a case where that there
are significant possibilities
right and I think as we're
thinking about what the future
can hold what the application
spaces might look like
logistics optimisation and
security using that the base
quantity mechanics to provably
secure technologies in assets is
something we're actively
exploring so I think all the
questions you are asking or
absolutely the right ones uh
application spaces that were
interested in exploring and so I
I think doctor I recovered it
pretty well but we're very happy
to take specific questions and
try to get back to you with more
complete answers.
Thank you both thank you madam
chair.
Senator kitchen introduced to a
quick introduction of i'm sorry
mountain j block senator
representing southern rental
northwest albucker key retired
lieutenant colonel air force and
I I work in.
This type of stuff in my
moonlighting time when i'm not
doing this thanks thank you and
represent little we do a quick
introduction certainly good
morning cher good morning
members and good morning
everyone here i'm sure that
little I represent uhm house
district sixty eight which is in
north west abercricky uh the
paradise hills and ton rich area
thank you good beater thank you
senator padea next
thank you madame chair and thank
you for the presenters this the
topic they have spend not a lot
of time on myself and did the
legislation that wonder getting
you some money out of the
legislature by the way for the
legislative members
by the way in the continue of
who is supporting you on page
nine I don't see the new mexico
state legislature there so you
might want to add that cause
that's where all the money comes
from my friend
anyway that no big deal but but
where i'm compressed is set is
so we ended up I think something
like two tranches of twenty four
million dollars some legal
somewhere in the neighborhood
around forty eight million or
somewhere in there does that
even get us out of the parking
lot with what we're trying to
accomplish here because we
really do we we really can on
this I mean we really do have a
lot of things that can be
brought together to make this
happen and that's why I got
behind it immediately when I
started working with them alexa
and the governor's office and
few others to get it into the
budget what do we really need to
do to get this thing moving from
a dollar standpoint you have any
sort of projection on that
yeah madam chair center thank
you for the the question so I I
want to first start by saying
that investment has already had
huge impact industry is already
coming here um I I think
we we are aiming for ten
industry partners within five
years and we're two years and
then we're gonna be at four five
which is awesome so so the
support has been critical and
drawing industry here and uh
starting conversations with
folks that I never would have
thought were interested in
coming to new mexico and through
there the edrp that was put out
for the twenty five million
dollar venture studio and
infrastructure.
An amazing amount of interest
that said we we did include a
backup site from last year that
talked about the state
investments and always made a
five hundred million dollars
investment texas just earlier
announced to two hundred million
dollars investment I think
within the last month there are
other regions who are trying to
get engaged I think it's very
important to know new mexico
does have unfair advantages we
have thirty years we have great
capabilities infrastructure and
so additional investments to
support industry engagement um I
think would be very very useful
watching what the other states
are doing to try to draw that
leadership away where we're
happy to provide some of that
information but that that's the
level that we've seen thus far
but I think that's exciting that
insurer and I I i'm really happy
to hear that I know that
a five hundred that I want to
just everyone listening up five
hundred million is what we just
you know versus what we just
dead just under fifty million so
so we really do need to take the
seriously because this is going
to just pass right through if we
don't you know if we don't do
something about it.
And that I love the fact you
know that you're thinking about
how do we approach the local
schools and annual the
educational stuff I was just
messaging back and forth the
center to bias and who was here
yesterday she's very interested
this you would like to reach you
by the way magazine if that's
alright maybe mark if you can
get a some contact involved in
manager that's alright with you
that'd be great but I want to
know proactively we did this
investment this year that I
helped me in a lot of us help to
get done for you are for this
industry we what really want to
be proactive going into the next
two years because we're gonna
to probably run into a funding
by sign a couple of areas but
this is one that we probably
need to make sure that this gets
us over the hump I think what do
you do what do you need in the
twenty five i'm sorry twenty six
and twenty seven sessions that
we could be doing for you and
thinking about right now.
The.
Yeah madam chair senator I I
think that's a great question I
policy that might be unfair to
you that might be more nora I
see her in the background there
but yeah so yeah so but nor and
then um we also have the
director of that corner new
mexico institute bob little he's
and that audience here as well
so we might deferred to them on
answering that specific question
I will say that the investments
made today have have a guy and
already been incredibly exciting
and impactful where we're hoping
that through the partnership
with road runner and others that
will be able to see that the
infrastructure facilities being
belts that before the next
session so folks can kind of add
see what the physical
infrastructure actually looks
like and and what those jobs
actually look like but that that
answering the specific school
will further.
Okay so we'll put a parent
season there for nor when she
comes up she can tell us what
she really needs to make sure
rental and continue to be on top
of I don't know uh making each
other and the comment or I don't
want to catch off anything
madam chair and senator things I
just want to say that something
that comes up you know not just
in this conversation but
conversations more nationally
especially on the education side
is there's always a major gap
for support for teachers and so
you know thinking about the
materials needs for this
quantimate um and the very low
costs I think if we can make
sure that there is support for
our kids and our teachers to
actually get it into their
classrooms that can go a huge
way
thank you madam chair and and
just require on the slides if
you can go back to slight
nineteen in the upper rate hand
corn I wasn't quite following
the numbers here and it could
just be mean by maybe i'm not
hitting all the cylinders this
morning or something but sixteen
county seventy five hundred
total reach but then it says
eighty five hundred qump
students.
Are the this eighty five qcam
students in the seventy five
eighty five number or i'm not
following that math right there.
I'm sure it's a quantum thing
that i've just not i'm not quite
there yet so madam chair senator
is not contaminated
no but I can explain that that's
that's common so one things that
we have heard from other folks
who are doing educational
outreach programs with teachers
they assume that you teacher
will reach one hundred students
okay and so that's seventies
seven thousand five hundred and
eighty five number is seventy
five times a hundred seventy
five hundred plus our eighty
five camp students yeah.
That's one hell of a word
problem right there
i'll pay a little more attention
ago senator block and I can be
back there with our chocolate
and trying to figure this thing
out but again I totally
appreciate everything that
you're up to I I really want to
continue to be as helpful as
possible I think we really got
the conversation going this year
and it we we can't stop now so
thank you.
Thank you sitter and I am gonna
have to jump on a flight so my
best years can take over and
next is reps and a little.
Safe travels madame chair
think you have got a one quick
comment in the uh
suggestion as well so I too I
really have been excited and to
learn more about this industry m
and looking forward to er to the
advances that are coming and
speaking of advances I know that
there are technological advances
that have taken place that
actually reduced the size of the
of the equipment used for
quentin mechanics at a content
for contempts and the effort and
what I just want to insure and
be on the record with is that we
are ensuring that the water
issues that come with this uh
industry are not lost in the
conversation as well in the
discussion so that's it and back
to my support for this uh
industry
for the future if you haven't
already a may have made that
meters
um request earlier but for your
future for the future and
reaching out to schools I wanted
to highlight the aviation
academy which sits on the north
west side of albuquerque um and
the santa fe indian school
in center fee um who is who are
making is making straights in
stem programs and doing quite
well as also and it may be a
good school for you to have into
as well so thank you that it
that's all that I have madam
chair thank you thank you and
just quickly to introduce myself
i'm how the birdman's i'm from
senate district fifteen next
we'll have representative
I think you madam chair thank
you i'm so excited I think there
is four teachers minus debate
here and two of them are method
not three of them are met
cheaters or were method
teachers.
So this is very exciting um i've
you know I think I would stop
their ibins last name at you and
m
ch yeah don't i'm just going to
call him doctor i've been for
pronunciation reasons but when
they had the first conference I
think it was three years ago
four years ago at unm one thing
that impressed me was that the
con and scientists all over the
country were educated at you in
it does we're talking about call
tech and my tea google private
and public industry that
impressed me dr where did you
get your phd
thank you madame chair and
representative I received my phd
in virginia at the college of
william and mary
when I actually got the job here
in new mexico I I honestly
thought I would stay for two or
three years and then go
somewhere else but i'm a victim
of the land of entrappement I
love it here i've been here six
years now and have no plans to
leave thank you and I want to
make a note to all the
legislators here you know I am
sick and tired of hearing people
put down the state including our
legislators saying crime bob of
education we have incredible
resources and we have to start
talking about what we have
instead of having this half cup
in fury already point because
this points out we are I like to
say capital tea couple age
capitally the economy state so I
just want to thank you for all
the work that you're doing and
our other directors in our ed
because this is incredible uhm a
couple questions in attracting
people has there been any effort
to establish any kind of
quantity facility at space port
america.
Madame chair representative
thank you for the question so
i'm not sure
specifically
if we've had any engagement
around space part we're starting
work a little bit more with the
space community with afril and
others to understand how quantum
I can impact their technology
areas and they're growth but
pulling people in I I don't have
a good dance free under
okay thank you madame chair work
space for america reports to the
new mexican finance authority
oversec committee next month so
be asking them the same question
but it's a you know logistically
speaking there is a lot of
offering there so we'll talk to
them about that and then.
In working with teachers some
people the cowrip can uh
institute its investments
demedication
it's reaching up now I think to
last lunas and belong
particularly in southeastern new
mexico but
in the stand programs has there
been any effort to contact them
about including this for older
students and younger students.
Madam chair representative
thanks for the question
specifically i'm not sure about
whether I don't think we've had
any outreach with that
organization in particular but
we're still learning about all
the amazing new partners that we
can bring in and we're always
really excited to work with more
especially because we really
need the boots on the ground
people to make this happen if
we're going to scale out um as
far as reaching younger students
one of the things we are really
excited about doing quantimed
this year was we had activities
that really started at
kindergarten and so there are a
couple of great groups
throughout the nation who have
been thinking about how to do
some of these activities and
concepts at the elementary
school level in addition to
middle school in high school and
some of those activities were
were hits yeah
thank you madame sure for all of
our literacy efforts well to
make sure people can read the
word quantum
and then my last question is
simply I understand in
relationship to represent a
little question that quantum
computing and centers require
less water than the aid data
centers can you talk about the
impact how we why that is
madam chair representative
thanks for that question yeah so
the idea here is that quantum
computing console new problems
in more efficient ways and that
can be more efficient on the
computing side and that you're
not using as many gates but also
we don't expect to have these
massive water cold systems like
you would see an a I and data
centers so we do expect that the
quantum systems will not have
the same draw and negative
impact on our water supply here
in new mexico and similarly for
the the electrical grid as well
yet madam chair just to add on
there where we're also there are
number of things that still have
to be solved with the
contectnology's actually scale
right so to make sure that the
the cooling solutions which can
be done by lasers by delusion
refrigerators so few others.
Ah they're going to require
different technologies but we're
not quite sure what that what
that requirement is going to be
at but like doctor ivory said
we're not going to need massive
water cooling like we see with a
ice centers we we expect that
it'll draw far less electricity
and we've heard that that's a an
answer that we need to get a
more satisfactory question we
need to get a more satisfactory
answer on so we'll take that
back and and try to deliver
something there.
Thank you and then my my final
point in relationship to funding
we used to get junior money
where we could give money to
programs as opposed to
you know buildings and
facilities but there are
five or six of us who are a
logic legislative committees
finance committees so do stay in
touch as we look at line items
that supply the materials
because it's just vital to our
future thank you madame chairman
respond so um so I I want to
make a few points first that
we're very excited to be working
with our partners at him at the
cunam institute we're just
having a conversation on how he
might be able to get a queue
camp student into a lab at you
and them to go play with some
lasers which would be awesome
we're also very excited through
the n s f regional innovation
engine to be able to better
engage our research universities
and CNN to build out two year
degree pathways new course
offerings and and things so that
nature so we're more than happy
to answer any questions that
kind of from the national lapton
what that is but uh supporting
those partners new pathways for
students to get engaged we're
very very interested and trying
to make that happen so um
appreciate this important and
questions on that.
Thank you
thank you representative growth.
Thank you share looked around
very like youi was here I was
coming here for a couple of
years her niece has been make
home for twenty five so I
understand that
um I have a question about
education and the correct one
science is a may seem to hear
that um that is extract
recommendation is to reach out
their students
I went to school some people in
this room where not boring yet I
live in a lot of the six a lot
of map
and and held me out here I don't
think physics has changed a lot
in all this time and I don't
think I don't believe when the
me something just for the
stories who can we should extra
could connectivities
education somehow I feel
something we got really slow in
in adopting to the changes I
still have some app on my former
principles where are you in the
world my students they called
good aid when I just table to
remember for technology so these
have changed by which change
slowly so in your understanding
of the physics
how behind we are in our state.
Yeah madam chair representative
thank you for that question this
is something we've thought a lot
about so a couple of points to
make here one is the I agree
with you that that the extra
curriculars are great but
they're not going to be
accessible to all students if we
really want to be reaching all
of our students or give
everybody the opportunity we
have to have it in the classroom
and to get it in the classroom
often times teachers are
pressured by teaching to the
curriculum that they're given so
quantum does exist in the
curriculum today it's not
highlighted
but the national economy q
education partnership that I
mentioned earlier that supported
the quantities effort they've
actually been doing a lot of
work to figure out where is
quantum already in the
curriculum so that we can make
sure that all all six of these
activities we highlighted were
tied to curriculum standards and
so we see a lot of climbing
chemistry that's kind of a
golden opportunity cause we're
already talking about really
tiny things like adams and
quantised energy levels but we
also see it a lot in physics
when we're talking about late
and waves um and so there is a
lot of opportunity to kind of
squeeze it in a where it's not
particularly loudly highlighted
right now but I agree that there
are a lot of places who are
specifically looking at how they
can infuse quantum into their
existing standards so that
teachers actually have a better
time teaching it and so we see
that texas and ohio are already
states who have introduced
quantum into their standards and
I think virginia has been
talking about it as well and I
know there is there's someone
from nevada that I run into a
conference is regularly who's
been thinking a lot about how to
do that in their state as well
thank you I think we need to
catch up with this estate so we
want to continue the number once
i'm I will be more than happy to
to war with any of the groups
to.
To to to reach how to the state
to review that the could
recolumn to see how can we
corporate in a big stronger way
and and his car because that
would be quite a lot of the part
the teachers a lot of training
for us but we need to catch up
and and I think we we can just
wait to see what happened thank
you.
Thank you if there is no more
questions
than thank you very much for
your presentation this morning.
And we'll go onto our next
presenter.
Thank you madame chair
I think you committee for having
me today
as the chair said my name is
nora sackett and I am director
of the technology and innovation
office at the new mexico
economic development department
know if joined this committee
previously am happy to be back
we have had a lot going on so
have it have year to provide an
update
so today madam chair i'll be
giving an update on
the technology innovation office
and some of our resent
announcements and projects
a little background who we are
we are the states science and
tech economic development office
within the economic development
department so we focus on
growing and supporting the
states technology and end
innovation sectors
supporting home grown technology
commercialization start ups and
attracting so answer tech
companies to state and building
the ecosystem that allows all of
that to happen
you previously hurt for me under
the title of director of the
office of strategy science and
technology also within the
economic development department
and earlier this year and the
legislative session the
legislature are passed and the
governor signed house or twenty
which created the technology and
innovation division within ed
and that is what I am serving as
the director as of we are
calling it teoh
because it rolls off the towing
a little bit better frankly
than tid which is already also
something else so we are the
technology and innovation office
and also within house build
twenty
there was the creation of the
technology and innovation
network advisory board so this
is a new board to support the
officers engagement with the
private sector
we were in the process of
building that board out by
saturday or not sat that
positions don't exist quite yet.
By the timeline set and statute
and so where the process of
building that out and doing rule
making for that border and the
research development and
deployment fund which the board
will help the office administer
and also created an house built
twenty
and a seated with a an initial
investment of forty million
dollars this is a non reverting
fund intended to support the
efforts of the office provide
matching funds for federal
coalition funding applications
grants for businesses support
the general advancement of
saints and tech in new mexico
as part of the creation of a the
office yeah twenty we were also
very great for to receive from
the legislature approval on
funding for additional staff
positions in the office which
are very much needed to oversee
all of this new programming and
funding overseeing so we have
added associate director and we
are in the process of adding
three additional program
coordinators at communications
and data coordinator and an
administrative position to
support that growing team we are
very excited to be having
additional people joining us
when I start started in this
position at osst it was a team
of one was just me
and I would say we were lucky to
grow that to a team of three
which we are currently and then
we will be adding all of these
positions so a lot of growth but
so really needed to to grow our
capacity
in house built one either four
focus sectors set out that
you've heard we talk about
previously they're not new their
advanced computing advance
energy it will space and buy
your science I know you just
heard from my colleagues at
sandia who I am lucky to work
with frequently and a quantum
falls into that first category a
bit events computing we're gonna
talk a lot more about that in my
presentation as well.
So what have we been up to teoh
there's been a lot of recent
news
um
these headlines are I believe
i'll just from the last month so
we have had a lot rolling out a
lot happening and i'm excited to
dive into that a bit with you
here today.
So what do we do how do we do
how do we carry out our mission
we have several programs at
the include grant funding for
early stage businesses in our
target sectors
grant funding for ecosystem
programming and support systems
that are allowed start up send
technology to grow in new mexico
we provide sector specific
contractors that provide
business assistance for start
ups and those target sectors and
we do a lot of ecosystem
coordination and support so that
we're all roaming in the same
direction
we have been able with the
support of the legislature and
the administration to
significantly grow the programs
that we are able to offer from
teoh so on slide number seven
this list of grants and wards
when I came in to this position
two and a half years ago only
the first two programs listed
here existed the rest have all
been new additions over the past
two years which is really
exciting because it was sorely
needed and has had a very
positive response from the uh
from the community and from the
industry
we have added a quantum
technologies award one of those
headlines on that side was the
result of that award
that was really geared at
increasing the start up
presence in continuing to use
the new mexico um and with that
grant we were able to support a
company based in colorado to
establish a presence in new
mexico called misaquantam they
are working with india on their
technology and have hired here
in new mexico and they wouldn't
have been able to make that move
and that growth without the
support from the office we have
added a university research
commercialization award this is
a program designed to
specifically support
technology developed within our
new mexico institutions of
higher education.
And back who
have developed a technology in
their rule and need a pair shoot
to make that leap of faith to
commercialize that technology so
this great providers grant
funding and also
entrepreneurship consulting
because these are often folks
who have not started a business
of forum here familiar with tech
business world and so we try to
provide all of those resources
to support the commercialization
of the technology that they've
worked on here in new mexico to
stay a business here in new
mexico
we have watched in advance
energy war were on the second
round of that award that was
worded earlier this year that
has really been wildly
successful
the thing I must excited about
with this award this was the
first time that we really
increased the amount that we
were making in our words
buyer by a significant i'm out
and it really has shown the
impact that can have in
companies really able to scale
to higher to really advance
leaps and bounds to
commercialize their technology
here in new mexico so that has
been has proven to be a great um
example of additional ways that
we can support our
commercializing tech here in new
mexico
we also awarded funding i'm
similar to you at synergy ward
for pilot demonstrations of
technologies in energy and water
we were looking to support folks
who had a technology that was
proven at what we call at bench
scale arm so the science was
proven but it hadn't been done
at scale or piloted
and so we supported two programs
in
southern new mexico both in
donate county
working with water treatment are
and one also was working with
energy production so those are
just continuing to move forward
and have been a really exciting
roadmap for additional potential
projects.
Then we launched two new
programs
recently just a couple weeks ago
with new funding that was
appropriate about the
legislature and twenty twenty
five.
And those funds are really
intended to support the
ego system the infrastructure
that the entrepreneurs and folks
in science and take your new
mexico are working with it so
the innovation hubs grant is
providing funding for physical
infrastructure for folks
providing services
for saying to tech
commercialisation and company
advancement and the
entrepreneurship programmatic
support grant is as it sounds
are provating funds for
programming and support services
branch printors and folks
commercializing technology.
We are also looking at as soon
to be launched irrespace
specific programs similar to our
advanced energy award and
piloting one specific for error
space
I mentioned one of our programs
is our business assistance
program so this started as a
pilot last for school year and
has continued this fiscal years
but program
so as I mentioned earlier where
a small team and so to expand
our capacity in the resources
that teos able to provide we
have four sector specific
contractors
who provide business assistance
to new mexico start ups in those
sectors and that has been a
really arm positive impact.
In the
twenty.
Twenty four sorry i'm just
checking my math in my head I
think
legislative session yes
we were ed was appropriate
funds
for strategic plans for our
science and tech focus and we
are through a competitive
process selected firm called
economy
there had quoted in ohio
they originated as the in house
economic development group of
batell who some of you may be
familiar with the television
national labs
and that was part of what really
appealed to us about them
besides the rest of their
proposal but
as many view are familiar at the
national lobs are a very central
part to new mexico science and
technology strength of it is
very orangey heavy and so
folks who understand the
opportunities but also
limitations of what it means
when labs and render the center
of a other states saying to take
equal system was really critical
and so they recently completed
their science and tech roadmap
for us we asked them to answer
the question of which science
and tech sectors is new mexico
best suited to and what levers
do we need to poor to advance
those and it was just recently
committed are sorry completed so
will be officially rolling out
all the details of that very
soon and getting it to all of
you of course
and i'm really excited about the
results of that it really
affirms the direction in which
were headed but also lays out a
framework for continued in
future investments
that roadmap found a identified
three existing
growth opportunity strengths
those are a quantum systems and
applications advance energy
technologies and space error
space and defense systems so
again this is great that's a
affirms that we are going in the
right direction with a lot of
the things that we are doing
and it also identified to
emerging growth opportunity
areas these are areas where the
inherent strength aren't.
As great but there is
opportunity there if additional
elements and investments come in
and those are buyer science
innovation and agricultural and
water tech and excess.
One of the key roadmap
recommendations
is to establish targeted
industry center for those three
identified strength areas
offering comprehensive economic
development services and
coordination
I was really excited to see that
as a recommendation because
again that is what we were
appropriated funding to do
in the twenty twenty five
legislative session specific to
quantum and so that's kind of
our first step down that path
and that is what we have started
to do with our quantum hub and
so I think many of you who
hopefully have sar our
announcement yesterday and so
earlier this year the state held
a competitive process requesting
proposals
to deploy twenty five million
dollars for a quantity in video
studio and quantum company hub
and selected a proposal lead by
robert venture studios uh in
that process and made that
announcement yesterday
and I go tell you i'm so excited
about what this is going to do
it's really going to be amazing
so it's a twenty five million
dollar investment from the state
thank you to the legislature
it's gonna create new quantum
start ups here in new mexico and
attract quantum companies to the
state for private capital and
clab I think you just heard from
jakin and our driver about why
this is exciting why this
matters why this makes sense in
new mexico
and I know in conversations with
jake and other folks that's
india and folks at the labs and
the university is that v
interest that they have received
separate from the interest that
the state has received but that
they have received from
companies and leaving
researchers in this field when
we announced this investment has
been huge and so folks all over
the place in this field are
really excited about the the
work that's happening here in
new mexico and the investment
that's happening here new mexico
so this awarded proposal is a
coalition.
It's flooded by road runner of
interest studios but includes a
lot of folks
it comes with an additional four
million dollars in a private
capital commitment which was
really critical
quantum technologies are a
capital intensive field as are
many you know hard tech science
and tech fields but particularly
quantum and so to be able to
properly
create new companies in this
field there needs to be the
state needs you know assurance
that there is are also
additional private capital
commitments who are interested
in willing to make investments
in the start ups that are
created in this building new
account
and that was part of their
proposal which was great and so
what is this quantity hub going
to do
it's going to have a variety of
elements going to have a multi
node quantum network dilution
refrigerators acquaintant test
bad quantity packaging facility
a demonstration facility and
rapid prototyping center one of
the great things about this
proposal why it was selected is
because it does a great job of
integrating and collaborating
with the existing assets in this
field that are already taking
place in new mexico so we're too
small to be duplicating efforts
and I think we all hear this a
lot about indicatives in new
mexico where things are siloed
or do plicative and so we really
wanted to try and get this rate
from the get go on this one and
not duplicate efforts not to
have folks you know going to the
same destination in different
lanes we really wanted to carpon
so this campus is going to co
locate the packaging facility
that was ordered funding in the
federal big quantum tech
and is also going to serve as
the headquarters for the
recently announced quantum new
mexico institute
this hub has immediate effect on
the size and presence of the
quantum in street in new mexico
so
last year we had arguably zero
quantum industry presence we had
incredible assets rate that you
all have heard about.
Many times but we didn't have
the industry presence and that's
what the state has been working
to do is to turn those assets
into industry to have economic
impact and tax revenue and
growth for at the state
this program this hub ah an
awarded proposal immediately
brings three new quantum
companies into new mexico quera
maybell in connect really
excited about all three of those
have a really great presence
in the field and the coalition
is very bright as they mentioned
earlier so it includes all their
quantum it includes both of our
national labs are includes the
university of new mexico at only
mention those capital
commitments which are from nat
nation leading venture capital
firms dc playground and
continuation which is a quantum
specific focused firm
so this have was just announced
yesterday thing or so a lot to
be done a lot to kick off a lot
of movement happening so it will
include a quantity venture
studio which means venture
capital investment funds
founders and residents so kind
of wrap round services for
company founders and it also
include a physical space where
all of these labs are going to
be house
of this physical collaboration
space we're really excited about
you know we we call it collision
right where folks from maybe you
not working on the same things
but are working in a shared
environment
and that creates new potentials
new possibilities because they
run into each other have
conversations and so this
facilities get a comedy up to
eighty
people working there once it's
completed it will be located in
downtown albuquerque
at five twenty three commercial
it's right in your bill immerial
coffee if anybody knows where
that is very near broadband or
studios headquarters
and we are really thrilled about
this being really an anchor for
the quantum industry in mexico
for company creation for
researchers to come and clab
rate though that's the other
thing i'm really excited about
is the way it will unlock
collaboration between folks.
From the university and from the
labs so if you work at the lab
very hard to bring folks behind
the fence to collaborate with
you on things this facility will
allow and the this facility and
the collaboration from india and
land all will allow research is
to come outside the fence and
work in this area to collaborate
with researchers from the
university
individuals and they're start
ups and really allow for that
cooperation and advancement of
technology
i'll leave you with just a
little snippet of of the office
in action I think this is a
great just sort of example of
deposit of impact that we can
have this is that a small level
but it's a great example
there is a company called yo ego
safe they are making an
environmentally friendly
larger side for mosquitoes
targeting mosquito born illness
and it's based off of technology
from the receive new mexico and
the folks commercializing this
technology were fully planning
to take the company to florida
and commercialize it there
but then they learned about the
grin offerings from our office
and they applied for and
received our university
commercialisation grant which
also requires that they stay
here for these are tax per
dollars we want that businesses
to stay here
and that was the start for them
and for that from there they
have received
this grant all of these
resources connection with the
community and have explicitly
said you know they wouldn't be
here building that company in
new mexico worried about for the
resources from the state and so
we're really proud of that as an
example of what we're doing the
efficacy of what we're doing in
the continued potential impact
of what we're doing and are
gladly take any questions
thank you very much will start
with representative.
Thank you thank you ignore it's
really exciting to see how
spilled twenty from the twenty
five legislature actually
zooming into employmentation
thank you I just can you tell
everybody what you're the vice
chair the vice president of in
that entrepreneurial nationwide
group.
Yes thank you
matter chair and represent it
for renting me
there is an organization called
right to start that time you may
be familiar with that really
focuses on supporting an
enabling business creation and
entrepreneurship across the
country and they have lunch
something called the national
entrepreneurship leaders network
and that is comprised of folks
leaving offices at state levels
that focus on entrepreneurship
and business creation
and so I joined that earlier
this year and they recently
asked me to be a co chair of the
group on alongside my colleagues
from michigan and kansas and
spend a really wonderful
opportunity to learn from other
states and another folks doing
some more work in other states
of uh you know what has worked
what has not worked to make
connections or the national
organizations that can be
supportive and also has really
been a great opportunity to
highlight the work we're doing
in new mexico um a lot of states
are facing budget crunches and
we have been very lucky to have
new funding coming in to this
kind of work and so frankly we
are kind of the envy of this
group because they're really
excited about all the work that
we're doing think you represent
thank you and and i'm charges
think it's important to realize
when we have state officials
working on this level
it put us on the map and yet in
another way so thank you just
thank you for all the work
you're doing
thank you senator block.
Thank you madame chair i'd like
to think representative
guarantee for a sponsoring
legislation here that I support
it is phenomenal on it should
have passed through unanimously
in both both houses quite
frankly
on your slide nora I and slide
ten.
Existing growth up to the areas
space area space and defense
systems.
I think one thing that you
didn't mention in your briefing
maybe because your superstitious
I don't know but there are some
incredible news going on right
now and i've been working with
secretary black with some others
on uh a game change here for the
stated new mexico.
In new mexico
specifically real rancho my home
town has
the inside track to land.
A company that's going to
provide four hundred but about
four hundred jobs in this can be
a company that's producing
hypersonic missiles for
nondashnuclear deterrents and
one of the things that is
critical to our national
security.
Is we are way behind the chinese
when it comes to hypersonics so
this is a huge game changer
where new mexico is going to
have national implications in
our in our defense.
Because there's a huge thread
out there we got to get this
going quickly in secretary black
long with i'll say the area
economic development team in
albuquerque uh county manager
wayne johnson as well and
there's one or organization i'll
leave out the not happy with uh
I think you probably know who it
is but also want to think the
governor.
Uh for her help because on.
Tomorrow were vote the county
commission is voting on a
hundred and twenty five million
dollars b.
Um to really put the nell on the
coffin to land this company that
beat up midland texas in two son
arizona and this is a company
that broke off or some people
that broke off from spacex to
build these hypersonic missiles
are going to be building the
missiles out here they're going
to be building and mading the uh
r v's and they are on a very
very tight schedule to get these
things out the door to get him
on alert for our national
defense.
And maybe you left that off
because you're just waiting for
the company that say yes but I
think we're going to be having a
a great announcement.
Out here and real rant out there
and real rancho so I don't
really have a quite well maybe I
do have one question but I want
to think your department for all
the help rob black has been
phenomenal so thank you for that
my question then is how do we
based on like this particular
incident that i'm talking about
with a lot of frustrations
how do we get through some of
the state government agencies to
get things a lot quicker where
we're not at risk of losing
companies like this one that I
think are coming here thank you
madame share.
Senator thank you for the
question and thank you for
bringing out that example
absolutely is very exciting and
very close
yeah I think that's a great
question I think that's one of
the things that we are.
Trying to address and and part
of what we examined in our
roadmap is how do we best
insurer
no wrong door
for companies to access all of
the information they need all
the people they need but also to
have streamlined one single
front door rate so that they
don't feel that they have to
chase through so many different
agencies I will fuel I said I
will say that I feel we have
started to make some progress in
that so for example
and the environment department
have really built a very strong
relationship with that with when
companies are need to come in
to talk about permitting
requirements that they're going
to pursue absolutely in this i'm
sorry manager in the state land
office is that's where we need a
lot of help absolutely
absolutely so I think that is
something the status keen the
aware of.
It does have its difficulties
but I I fully agree with you
that that's something that we
need to continue working on
thank you very much in and i'll
say this publicly I think
landing this company is probably
the most impact for the state in
mexico probably since intel.
Came here it's that is
establishing the game changer
for new mexico thank you madame
chair and thank you nor to all
the work you do.
Thank you next we'll have center
pedia.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you for all the work you do like
I think we're all very pleased
with that office and it that it
takes real leadership I mean you
stepped into that you made a lot
happen in and it could have gone
very differently had we not have
the kind of leadership that
you're bringing to it so thank
you
with regard to what I asked
earlier you know what we did
make an investment this year but
I know that there's simply sort
of start scratching the surface
can you give us some sort of a
preview of what the twenty six
and twenty seven sessions are
going to look like for your
office and what are you wanting
us to know about it this
structure.
From the funding in the other
way standpoint
manager center thank you for the
question
a few things come to mind.
One would be so obviously the
legislature and the state has
made this initial investment in
this quantum hub
and I think it's really
important the funding for that
investment was one time funding
was one year funding and I think
it's really important that we
don't you know
dig a big hole and walk away we
have to continue to invest in
that and so I think continued
operational funding
for that venture would be really
important to give it the best
chance for success
and for continued growth
I think additional opportunities
for investment in some of the
areas identified in the road map
so in those strength areas and
additional hub and coordination
efforts and stick won't
initiatives in those strength
areas to do a little bit of what
I was just answering to senator
block about of being
a clarified front door for
industry in those areas and to
be able to best coordinate with
that sect with the sector across
the state
the other thing that I would
call out from the roadmap is
commercialisation it's not
included in my
wides because we're we're still
working on it frankly
but one of the things
specifically addressed by our
contractors in this report is.
New mexico's
need to
modernise I think child say
there
tech transfer and licensing from
the her education institutions
and I think that's something my
office they don't have a full
answer through you yet right we
have taken this information in
and we're working to best
identify how to go forward and
what steps we really need to
take but I think looking to.
Twenty twenty sixth maybe more
twenty twenty seven uh but
ideally twenty six legislative
sessions to really have some
crystalised
recommendations and and steps
forward to improve that.
Okay that sounds great I I think
I caught about twelve percent of
that but i'm glad you know what
you're talking about so that's
good
beyond that have you been
scheduled or are you scheduled
madam chair to present to the
lfc.
Manager senator I that's a good
question I don't know if tap my
head if so secretary and deputy
secretary would certainly know
so that might just be me not
being up to date so madam chair
let's make sure we find that out
I can help you with that if you
need a little bit of that help
it just seems to me like we need
to make sure that your front
center in front of that
committee also because that's
where you're going to get the
dollars that you're going to
badly need to to keep in the
building in the office and the
step that you're doing so again
just want to say thank you want
to make sure that we understand
what you're up to and then also
that you get to lfc to make sure
that we can continue the funding
train that's going to need to
happen to make all this happen
so thank you.
Thank you senator pope.
The.
Thank you madame chair thank you
director sackett
just a couple questions for a
staffy I think this is great and
I appreciate the leadership in
the work that you're doing.
Um could you talk a little bit
about this grant funding and
just
a quick synopsis of the process
of
when you decide to make an
investment I think
I understand that all of these
start ups they're not gonna be
successful there's going to be
failure but just want to
understand what that is
and then the money that we do
have I i'd like to see more but
just want to understand that a
little bit and then second you I
think you brought up the
opportunity of what we have
going on in our state
then having some funding
resources that other states
might not have and I think it's
just a huge opportunity for us
to diversify our economy and so
if you can talk a little bit
about how we're maybe going
about doing that outreach around
the country with start ups that
are even outside new mexico
bringing them in thank you
manager.
I am chair senator think you
both great questions
so to first question the grant
process what that looks like
we go through a process of if
we're creating a new program of
identifying what our goals are.
Who are we targeting who are
reseeking to support with these
funds we could agree manual and
an evaluation process
and seek applications once those
applications come in
so they are competitive grants
proposals that as part of our
agreement making ability and
seat role
so those applications come in we
have a scoring rubric that we
compile of what the state
schools are
with the sponding and we
currently work with the up to
your sea board the technology
research collaborative board
which includes saturday
representatives from the
universities and the labs as
well as appointed members from
the private sector
and they assist the office with
evaluation and scoring so that
it's not just the office making
this decisions
we also receive technical
guidance from the labs because
we're not scientific experts in
all of these builds so it's a
competitive process that we
evaluated we value with the
grants on once they're awarded
there are a number of
requirements to be on the grant
and the amount of money there's
different requirements in terms
of requirement to stay in new
mexico for x amount of time for
any expansion of relocation
there has to be certain rules
about that but we're really
working to ensure that these
state funds continue to have
state impact so they've stayed
in mexico
have a majority of their staff
in new mexico etc
they have to meet certain
milestones that they have
identified as part of their
application of what they're
going to do with the funding um
and we have a stringent process
insuring you know they have to
keep all records of how they're
using the funds and give them to
us so the work confirming how
the funds are being used
and that they are meeting their
milestones and if those masters
aren't being met then they
aren't able to continue
receiving funds and we receive a
final report from all our
grantees about.
How the funds were used what the
impact was additional highers
etc so there is quite a bit of a
process in place which is why
the additional hiring is very
critical for the office because
as we're having additional funds
with additional programming.
And for your second question
under respond economy absolutely
so I think that is the the sort
of um what is the underline of
all of this work that we're
doing is to grow the sectors in
order to to diversify the
state's economy um I think we're
seeing real success I mean we've
had some great examples of
success recently continue nation
leading quantum company
expanding to new acts ago estate
turning up a standing up at r
and d facility
the hypersonic vehicle a company
that senator black mentioned
pacific fusion we are also very
closer uh you know they're
considering albuquerque for
there are indeed facility also
would be several hundred jabs
and so I think we're seeing a
lot of advancement and success
in new mexico bringing in this
projects
I will also give us to the state
investment council which is
often you know referred to as a
potential tool and and asking
how it's being willed it for
this diversification and and
company bringing in process
and I think we are seeing real
results with that there are
a number of sac invested funds
who we work with regularly
because they understand that the
sic have invested in the bc
funds and that the sic wants to
see results for new mexico and
so we are are getting more and
more outraged from those funds
to talk about their company
their portfolio companies what
they're looking for and how they
can expand to know we get a lot
of new mexico curious and then
we take those from mexico
curious to new mexico committed
and so we are seeing a lot of
success kind of pulling on
operative levers.
Thank you madam chairman that
you for the responses I I just
think it's important and I think
with what we've had with your
only gas resources I think being
able to invest those the
diversify.
Understanding the cost of that
to our environment our health
and just the volatility of it
and what's going on around the
globe there no matter what
happens when I can build relying
on that so I appreciate the work
you don't thank you manager
thank you.
And if there is no other
questions I have one quick one
but it might be better for the
next presenters or it might not
even relate at all
then we were gonna talk about
the technology reading this
gross receipts tax.
Next deduction next arm are
their tax incentives that you
guys focus on rather than just
your funding.
Pauls are their text incentives
you will get also from your
department manager a good
question so we I think I would
say the ones must applicable to
us are also applicable on a
broader sense to the work that
ed does and the manufacturing so
are in d tax credit is a big one
for us
high wage job tax credit
manufacturing investment tax
credit
I will also say i'll let the
following percentages you know
speaking detail on trigger but
trigger a is tied to edit as
well and are i'll just say it
has been a fantastic program
that we have seen incredible
results from a and strongly
supports it and it's
continuation it's really a
unique tool that the state has
and we reference it and connect
companies with with it very
often
because we're able to say that
you have this unique opportunity
to get technical expertise from
two national labs there is no
other state where you can do
that and have that opportunity
and so it's another kind of
arrow in our quiver of why new
mexico why it makes sense to be
a new mexico company in one of
the tools that they're able to
take advantage of.
Great that's what I was looking
for thank you very much and
there is no other questions and
thank you or move on to our next
presentation.
But quickly committee
um
what's
prove the minutes from our last
meeting if I could have a motion
I moved that we approved the
minutes from our last meeting
second thank you is there any
objection.
The minutes are approved in.
Would you like before we go
really quickly before regard
next presenters we're going to
get a brief comment from the
former director for more secret
former sorry former secretary
of do it.
Thank you madame chair my name's
peter rantos and today I am
wearing my
board member hat for the new
mexico tech council aware having
the
premier.
Tech.
A event in new mexico at a sandy
of resort and casino september
seventeenth called the new
mexico tech summit and.
You've each received an
invitation each member the stcs
are received in invitation to
the summit in their inbox in
your email
along with the code to register
we happen to have with us dave
kissed in the past president of
the new mexico tech some day can
you say why they might like to
join yeah this is a great event
so the mexico tech council is
pretty bride it brings together
a lot of folks from the national
labs universities in industry
and this is a great event
because once a year we get
everybody together in one room.
Which is a great way to just
meet everyone and hear about
what's going on in the state
madam sure I forget if I
introduced myself i'm peter
mantas and thank you for the
support.
The.
Great thank you so much.
Sure yeah okay now we'll move
under next presenters.
To talk about talktalks about
the technology reading this
gross receipts initiative
thinking man chair and members
of the committee my name is
david kisten i'm the manager of
technology and economic
development at sending a
national laboratories i'm joined
here today by canter stephen
though
manager my name is even though
i'm with the fineman center for
innovation at least almost
national app.
And so together we help lead the
trigger program the text analogy
readiness initiative the full
name was the technology
readiness gross receipts tax act
credit which is mouthful are so
we have shown that to trigger
so really at its core
triggers intended to help take
inventions and know how out of
the laboratories that were
sending unless almost and into
the private sector in new mexico
this is funded through one
million dollars per year per lab
tax credit
it expires in twenty twenty
seven and so right now the way
that this program works so
provides a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars ceiling for
technical assistance to
businesses that are located in
new mexico and have either a
license or a cooperative
research agreement with one of
the two apps
since its launch we have worked
with thirty four mexico
companies that represent twenty
three licenses and eleven of
these cooperative research and
development agreements.
So our.
Asking kind of what we're
looking for this program is to
increase trigger funding by one
million dollars per lot per year
for the next five years and then
to keep that steady at five
million dollars per lab per year
for the next five years after
that so through twenty thirty
five.
We believe that there is a rise
in demand in the cute that we're
seeing and in the companies that
were working with
as the programmatures and people
start become more aware of the
opportunity but also.
An increase in demand and up to
the receipts a cooperative with
the sit on mexico so on programs
like the studio downtown are to
work with the fence companies
like we're seeing in san
francounty
and through programs that the
universities are running so one
great example
we're collaborating right now
both flaps with new mexico state
error had
and they're working with
utilities in southern new mexico
to provide access to a live
grade first start ups to be able
to come in fly their new
technologies on a live system
that can get validated and put
into active systems like p n m's
more quickly and normally the
sticks a number of years we
believe that with you know
technical assistance and access
these resources we can cut that
down our significantly so we're
really excited about the
expansion
potential expansion but i'll
suggest the the impact that
we're seeing to date
ultimately trigger has been
delivering results we seem
companies scaling raising
capital and creating jobs.
And it's been it's been
incredible we actually i'd like
to introduce so kyle gwen is
going to be trying to say he is
the founder of fast vision
which is a company that offer is
an inventory management and
access asset tracking platform
that was less since out of san
dier is the beneficiary of
trigger and so we could pause
here maybe for questions but
we'd love to have killed join us
up here and yeah i'll thank you.
Okay.
So
madam chair members of the
committee my name is called when
I am the cofounder and chief
executive officer of that vision
technologies.
I've deep route here in saved
new mexico my family actually
homesteaded land on the
beautiful august in planes and I
was raised born and raised in
northern mexico went to as to
high school graduated from there
in twenty fifteen where I went
to the university of the mexico
and was really introduced into
the
eco system that the state new
mexico has to offer for each
prenewers so much so that from
my dorm room I started a company
that agreed to a million dollars
and your occurring cells that my
dormant was actually above lobo
rain forced kind of a great
innovation center right downtown
and from there I felt like that
really kick started my career
into where I am today uh I
eventually spent two years at
sandy and national labs learning
about tech transfer and taking
some of the great innovation and
work that happens at these
facilities and how it can take
that and bring it into the
private sector to improve the
lives of not only the nation but
also us as new mexicans
eventually I left the laps
started vast vision license to
technology from the labs which
enables us to create a very
unique autonomous capability for
tracking physical objects in the
world so with a trip about the
size of your finger we can do
things like locate an item we
can
uh we can detect things like
humidity gas pressure
shifts and temperature and we
can do all of this without a
battery and we can read through
metal we can read this through
liquids we can read this through
the ground and deploy in
radioactive and incredibly
hazardous environments allowing
us to track objects and places
that objects have not been
tracked previously.
So over the past twelve months
we actually just finished up
with our trigger projects back
in april
during that time we wanted to
take our sensor which you know
like I mentioned it's about the
size of your thumbnel and we
wanted to ensure that we could
read gases so what we did was
used that time and that funding
to collaborate with two
scientists at sandia to
functionalize our sensors so
that we could read hydrogen and
each to gas and over the twelve
months we successfully prove
that so now we have a really
unique capability and if it
works for hydrogen it works for
each to us we can functionalize
it to work with many other gases
enabling us to one of the main
areas that we're looking to
deploy and is actually
radioactive waste tracking so we
can prevent incidents that
happen that the whip facility in
twenty fourteen so our
technology can help prevent
things like that.
The trigger project was very
successful not only did we find
these findings we also improved
are redistance of our of arch
chips once again you have to
read them from a certain
distance because they don't have
an onboard battery and they
don't operate off of wifi or
they don't operate off of
bluetooth it's completely a
passive mechanism.
And prior post trigger we have
made three highers one software
engineer higher and to too
higher directly out of the labs
who actually collaborated with
on the trigger project and for
the original creators of macage
with that being set i'll take
any questions thank you.
Here you read are you already
for questions absolutely
little.
Representative little.
The.
Thank you think you madam chair
think you've for the information
i'm curious in the the chip that
can detect all of those a gases
you talked about it madam chair
uh he talked about it in in
detecting them at the with
facility for example that you
gave I was just wondering if
these might also be used to
track those
the transfer of of nuclear waste
as they're making their way to a
site.
Thank you madam chair
madame chair representative
little thank you for the
question yes this is kind of the
the exact purpose of this
technology so one of the
challenges when tracking a
canister of radioactive waste is
that you have this intention you
have an intense metal housing
around it and on the outside of
the container you can put
tracking chips things like ultra
frequency r fifty g PS and low
energy bluetooth and that works
fine because it's on the out
outer housing of it and it's not
being exposed to
radiation and not only that you
can also maintenance so sensors
you can change their batteries
but for the the instance that
happened at the white plant was
kitty litter was mixed into a
container of radioactive waste
which caused a chemical reaction
which was pressure built up
inside of the canister and it
eventually erupted so are
proposed solution that were
currently working towards allows
us to place our centers and side
of the canisters so we can read
through the metal we can monitor
what's happening on the
environmental aspects on the
inside of it while also
providing those same autonomous
tracking capabilities that an
external tracker could provide.
Thank you very much for that
response that's the end of my
question thank you
thank you.
Representative carried
thank you madame chair so that
ask is extending the one million
per level.
Er for three more years and then
upgrading it or increasing it to
five million a year correct yeah
thank you so many representative
so that the request right now so
the program expires in twenty
twenty seven what we would like
to do is to increase starting
next year by one million dollars
a year per lot for five years
and then at five years just
maintain the set amount of five
million dollars per live for
another five so it would be a
ten year extension essentially
and as going up to.
To the five million per lap and
so the idea I think is that
we're seeing to increase the man
we want to make sure that we're
scaling responsibly here
and that we're growing into it
but we we do believe that we can
get to the point where we are
fully expending five million for
a lot per year.
Thank you thank you.
The.
Thank you senator pope
thank you madame chair
I I think in on fully supportive
of extending this and increasing
this can you talk a little bit
about I guess the demand for
this funding has there been some
start ups or.
Um
of these programs that maybe
you've had to turn away that
look promising he talk about
that I guess just really the
need for this funding thank you
manager thank you madame chair
asked and I report so what we've
seen now i'd through since the
beginning of trigger it's been
an escalation so as companies
become more aware of the program
and as we're connecting with
some of the the great work that
nor a second and her team are
doing so this was the first year
that us we got right at san dier
we reached full allocation
and so we did have to put
projects off until next year and
so this was the first time we
saw that I we believe we're
going to get to full allocation
across both labs in the next
year
which is very exciting
but we also want to make sure
that we are growing and not turn
away projects like best vision
they have the potential to you
know at new jobs and and
creative ventures in the same.
So yes we are starting to see it
and we think with programs like
the quantum studio
we are going to have to turn a
lot of folks with next year.
Manager and senator pope if I
may talk a little earlier about
you know not all start ups being
successful in trigger is really
one of those programs that can
do risk the technology so that a
company can be successful
and so just to kind of follow on
and that one of the the programs
we run that call as a part of
his new mexico lab embedded
entrepreneur program and trigger
it supports the technical are
collaboration
and what work we've seen in the
last year is a hundred and
twenty nine percent increase in
start up supplying to our
program and so we had to turn
away about twenty company is
that i've applied this year to a
program.
Thank you madame chair this i'll
have
thank you represent a little
thank you madame chair I have a
cook follow up question and are
you able to give us an estimate
understanding of the cost of
those tracking devices I
understand that they are they
will to technology will improve
and as production comes out but
can give us an estimate thank
you manager.
Think you made a chair and think
you representative little so the
cost of the centers were using a
pretty standard micro
electronics and mechanical
system manufacturing process
where we can utilize six inch
soul can wait for its all the
way up to twelve inch silicon
wafers and then we use a
lithography mechanism to place a
tiny resonator made of a magnet
to a lastic material on the
surface of the resonators and
then we are then we cut those
out and dice up the and then we
dish up the waifers
so at skill I mean even in small
batch production like we're
doing now we're actually in the
process of building a small
facility rate here in
albuquerque where uh this
manufacturing will take place
and even in small batches rate
we're talking less than a dollar
per percent and then if you were
to take that to scale your
talking sub twenty cents subten
cents depending on what the
center is functionalities to
deal.
The.
Thank you very much I appreciate
that information thank you
madame chair.
Thank you.
If there are no other questions
I have a few I also serve on the
senate standing tax committee in
the interim tax committee and at
our last meeting weeks ago a few
weeks co.
We had a
the legislative finance
committee I was doing reports
now that they called tax e which
is a tax expenditure assessment
and they had just published one
about this credit.
And it's on the legislative it's
on the legislative website on if
you've seen it.
Sunlights that website under the
legislative finance committee
and under economic development
and something else it's not the
easiest place to find on our
website
but the way this report breaks
down the tax credit.
Doesn't.
Make it sound as beneficial as
this does and from what
everything you're saying right
now.
There's I don't think it's
conflicting or anything I just
feel like the way the lfc looked
at the data is analyzing it just
differently than the way you
guys are presenting it um and
you haven't seen this rate this
no okay that makes sense it
would be published in july so
it's pretty recent but I guess I
would just suggest that you guys
definitely try to present the
same thing to the two restaurant
the revenue stabilities station
in tax committee.
There's something else in there
for
because I I feel like one of the
things rest up is looking at
also this interim is the
benefits of all these different
types of tax credits across the
state so it'd be really good to
have this type of presentation
for the members of that
committee as well.
Thank you I don't and I don't
think I have any questions
because those have done a great
job explaining everything and
it's also really good to know
you said you didn't have you
were you had to turn on twenty
applications and have of resend
here I have to look at the exact
number thank you
okay and then if there are no
other questions
then thank you very much for
your presentation you think.
Yeah.
The.
Ian just a few minutes
learn about our offsite tour and
then we'll have lunch and we
will stand in recess once we
hear what we're our gender will
be like.
The.
Just kidding me will stand in
recess now as we learn about
what else the committee will be
seen today thank you.
