Good morning, everyone
It's our pleasure to be here at
Western. I'd never been here
before, and I am just so
impressed with this campus. It's
absolutely gorgeous. I was
sharing earlier that I thought
that
Western would be out in the
desert somewhere and flat land
and kind of boring, it's totally
the opposite, so I'm really
happy to be here. I'm sure the
members feel the same way. But
we're gonna start off with uh
Representative Terazas and
Representative Doo going after
please educate us about the
district or anything you feel
that you need to share.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You want
to go ladies first or you want
me to?
So
you want me to go? OK.
so Mr. Chair, thank you very
much, uh, committee, uh, members
and, and, uh, audience, thank
you for being here. I think, uh,
you get a sense of how far we
have to drive and over that
treacherous mountain of the
Black Range, which really we
like it, isn't we're not afraid
of it, but um it's a beautiful
area and uh we had a nice dinner
last night at the Buckhorn, and
I, I wanted to share all the
different things for people that
are, that are, that don't live
here, uh, about our district.
all the beautiful things that we
have like the cliff dwellings.
Uh, we have, uh, we have the
City of Rocks, we have a um
we have so many places that you
can go here at we have a
beautiful university. We've got
the copper mines two copper
mines here. Uh, uh,
with uh Freeport.
and um just just so many things
we have I talked about the, the
big tree last night in Fort
Baird in the National Cemetery
and I talked about, um, Billy
the Kid and Billy the Kid's, uh,
mother being buried here and uh
Pat Garrett's, uh, uh
horse John Hearst that was owned
by Dink Tash, that was, that was
in in their real real close to
the it was it was in Pinos Altos
for many years until it was
donated to uh the museum there
in Las Cruces so many, many
things to do and see. We got the
contents of little divide trail
and so um
and we appreciate where copper
comes from in New Mexico, so I
just want to remind you that
where it comes from and uh this
is my district. I was born and
raised here. This is, I, I
graduated here with an
accounting degree and, uh, uh,
blessed to be one of the Hall of
Fame people here. It's a
beautiful, uh, place to live.
place to raise your family and,
uh, Mr. Chairman, I really am
very happy that you guys uh were
able to see the construction on
your way up from Demming. You
can see all the work that we're
doing and whether you guys that
the DOT is doing and uh the
fruits of all the labor of this,
of this um uh committee in, in
this area and I think we're
planning to have that done all
the way to Demming and so we
appreciate the efforts and work
that you guys are doing today.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, uh, Representative
Trossas for leaving me something
to say. That was the so short.
That was so short. I thought I
should have gone first, but that
was like, that was so short. Um,
um, yeah, no, I'm just joking.
They, uh, it's so nice. I told
him he could run buck wild. I
know. I heard you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and I want to
acknowledge that our lieutenant
Governor is here. It's great to
see Howie and back in 16, he
served in the Senate while I was
in the House representing Grant
County and it's so great to see
the road
work getting put into action
because it was something
critical that this district's
been asking for for a long time.
And, uh, you know what, if we
had a road budget, if we had a
permanent road fund, uh, we'd be
able to keep those projects
coming and not have the mishap
we had this time with the, the
lack of funding for Department
of Transportation, which I'm
very, very concerned about, and
I'm sure we'll talk about that
more, but I, my kids both took
concurrent enrollment classes at
Western New Mexico and completed
I don't know, I think my
daughter did 30 some credits and
my son did, uh, around the same.
And then my daughter ended up
getting her master's at Western,
but Western holds a special
place in my heart because
they're an early childhood
demonstration site. That's my
background, and I would say that
right now in tier C there are
probably several dozen early
childhood educators, as well as
probably dozens of social work,
social workers in our community
that got their degrees online
and visiting the campus at
Western New Mexico University.
It's a great partnership between
Truth
or Consequences schools and
different key partners, the
hospital, the veteran's home,
and the early childhood
providers in tier C and I
really, really thank Western for
building that capacity.
Um
I also, uh, hope that I hope you
don't know about it yet, but,
uh, Representative Trossas and I
have been working on a
paraprofessional certification
for archaeological surveys. It's
something that the federal
government allows a waiver on,
you don't have to be an
archaeologist when you have a
catastrophic events or cascading
events, extraordinary
circumstances, and I'd say that,
uh, that's definitely the case
in the Gila. And so we are about
to launch in partnership with
Cultural Affairs, a
and Forestry Service, a 6 to 8
week paraprofessional
certification. And that will
allow us to have more boots on
the ground to thin and to do
recovery and to prevent
catastrophic fires and of course
the, the floods that happened
afterwards. And Western will be
able to add a course as well. So
I know we'll fill it up in
Western. It will be a full class
because my mom is 73 years old
and she's ready to sign up
because she's like, tell me
where to walk, what am I
supposed to mark? because I
don't want another fire in the
Gila. So thank you so much for
having us today.
Thank you, Representative
Moving on to the agenda, first
we have a welcome from the
Western New Mexico University
and local updates Mr. Maples,
Mr. Cruz, will you come to the
table, please?
When you speak into the
microphone, please turn on the
little button with the little
person on it, but when you're
done speaking, please turn it
off because we get a horrible
echo.
Good morning everybody, and
thank you all for being here. It
is an honor to have you on the
campus at uh Western New Mexico
University. I am Chris Maples.
I'm the interim president and uh
I have a background in being
president at uh engineering and
art colleges and so um being
here on
New Mexico's Applied Arts and
Sciences campus seems an
appropriate place for me to be.
um, I'm just finishing up my 3rd
week, 4th week, um, and, uh, and
and and I will tell you it has
been an absolute delight to be
here. Um, they're wonderful
people, they're wonderful
programs, the faculty, staff,
students are absolutely
magnificent here. Thank you for
the comment about the, uh, early
childhood development, um,
because
that was one of the shining
stars that certainly popped up
when I was looking uh at the at
at western New Mexico online
from a distance. I live in Reno
normally, um, and I am here
until a permanent president is
hired, and I've told the Board
of Regents, um, which is, by the
way, a wonderful group to work
with. um, they're all new as you
know.
and uh they've been a delight
and as I've told many people
there are 5 of them. They have a
single employee, me, um, that's
it and so, um, um, the job here
has been exciting and good and
we have great things coming
forward, um, what I
particularly happy about is to
see the transportation
uh group here because if there
is a place where there's applied
arts and sciences. It's in
transportation.
You apply all of those things
that you learn, um, to do
infrastructure of various kinds
and it doesn't matter what kind
of transportation and
infrastructure you're doing.
they all get applied in that way
and so it seems appropriate to
me for
New Mexico's applied arts and
sciences university to to host
this group.
um and we're honored that you're
here and it's interesting to
hear about the archaeological
thing because in a former life I
worked at a place called Desert
Research Institute and um in, in
Reno in Las Vegas and we had the
largest collection of of
high security clearance
archaeologists I've ever seen
because they had to do a lot of
the walking around on the Nevada
test site to look for things,
um, and they were busy they were
continuously busy, so it's
really good to hear that, uh,
going forward, so I thank you
all for being here. It's an
honor to have you here and I
would love to say more about
Western New Mexico, but I, I, I
I would get into a long, long,
long discussion about the things
that are good here that I've
already discovered, so thank you
all.
and I'll, I'll take questions if
you have any for me.
Anybody have questions? I, I'm
curious, what is the, uh, number
of the student population
Um, we're, we're at about,
assume it's around 3000 or so
and, and honestly, uh, and thank
you for that, that question um
uh
Chair de la Cruz, I,
most of our classes turn out to
be online classes. Most of our
students take online classes in
some form or fashion and so we,
we have a great deal of people
involved with us and reaching
out, uh, across the state and
outside of the state actually
for a lot of online classes and
we have a, a fair number of
faculty who are teaching online
as well, and they are either uh
in New Mexico or elsewhere.
Representative Jones.
Hi, I didn't get to introduce
myself. I'm Jennifer Jones.
I, I represent District 32,
which is Hidalgo, Luna, and
Pardigonian. So I'm your next
door neighbor and I'm, I'm also
I have uh a place in my heart
for Western as well. I um
I attended here for a while,
about a year and a half, right
out of Demming High School and
uh and I've lived in Ridge Hall
at that time, which was the same
dorm that my grandmother lived
in in 1930, and maybe it was 32,
but anyway, um, if that was back
when this was uh the teacher's
college, um, New Mexico Teachers
College, so yeah, long family
history too, love being here.
Thank you so much for hosting
us. And I do have a question
about um the Demming John Arthur
Smith campus, um, how,
what kind of activity and what
kind of connection are we having
right now with, with the main
campus.
Uh, thank you for that question,
Representative Jones. It's a
pleasure to meet you. Um, I, I'd
like to talk to you about maybe
going looking at our nursing
school while you're here perhaps
um, so anyway, um, we have plans
to continue to to work in
dimming and develop dimming. Uh,
we're going to be, uh, probably,
uh, doing some construction next
to where we have, uh, some of
that going on and, and one of
the things that I want to make
sure is that we have that
presence, uh, both there and
other places in uh particularly
uh southwestern part of New
Mexico.
so I
I'm still working on exactly
what those are gonna look like.
I've had 2 or 3
proposals put forward about what
we were going to do and how we
were going to do it, and I'd be
happy to talk with you a bit
offline about that and, and find
out from you what you feel like
is needed there so that we can
be responsive. I think one of
the great things about being in
a small comprehensive university
like ours is that we have the
opportunity to be responsive. We
can be quick. We can be nimble.
and, and that's the kind of
thing that makes us perfect for
a more rural area of the state
like we're in.
Thank you so much. I, I agree
with that, and I would love to
get with you and and talk more
about how we could expand and
and do more in dimming.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Miss Lucero, Priscilla
Oh, I'm getting ahead of myself.
Representative Doo, thank you,
Mr. Chair, and, and thank you,
Chris. That's hard to say. I
feel like I should be, um, thank
you for being here and in the
interim, and I learned last
night that there's like, you can
actually look for an interim
president, which is very
interesting to me, but I want, I
just to bring you up to speed
and there's people in the
audience as well that I would
like to be up to speed. I, I did
make, uh, Capital Outlay and
appropriations for the nursing
program in Dimming with the
caveat that it would reach truth
or consequences. And so we do
have a critical access hospital.
We do need that support. And so
I'd love to follow up with you
on that. And I, and I do want to
just acknowledge the value of
the partnership
between the university and the
charter school. I appreciate
that and also just looking at
the generosity that you guys
have provided in the dual
credit. You, you know, dual
credit's free for high school,
public school kids, but
concurrent is not free for
private and homeschool kids, but
Doctor Shepherd always saw the
benefit of those numbers and
what those numbers did to your
formula and provided those, uh,
you know, students had to pay
some for fees and books and
things like that, but kept the
tuition reasonable for home
school and private school. It's
very
high population in this
community and um I, I, I hope
that Western will continue the
trend of serving all students.
And thank you very much for that
comment. I greatly appreciate it
and um one of the things I've
learned at at various stops and
route that I've had is that so
many dual enrollment um uh
students finish they finish at a
higher rate and a higher
percentage then then those who
don't do dual enrollment. Uh,
partly they're motivated and
partly even if they aren't
motivated and they're taking
advantage
they are getting out into the
workforce sooner.
and so one of the ways that
people
that students can decrease
potential student debt and it's
not talked about as much as it
should be is to decrease the
amount of time they're in
school.
um, yeah, if you get done in 2
or 3 years, you're not having an
extra tour a year or two of, of
running up debt and that kind of
approach is, is just terrific
and I know there are some
conversations that a few of us
are having here on campus about
can we actually do a 3 year
degree is 120 credit hours
really what has to be done
anymore.
um, or can it be fewer set set
of credit hours so it's just a
discussion to have, and I think
it's worth, you know, if, if it
is 120, then that's fine.
but I'm not sure it's been
revisited in a while.
Mister Chair and Chris, I think
that is so ironic that you're
bringing this up because we have
a workforce crisis in our state
and uh LFC just this week in Las
Cruces, heard a presentation on
Higher Ed. We are spending
taxpayers. We're not talking
about tuition, but the price we
pay per student in New Mexico is
$53,000 per year on average.
That's without capital, with
capital, it's closer to 70, and
it's taking 6 years for the
average New Mexican to get a
bachelor's degree,
6 when it should be 3. So
accelerated graduation programs
would allow us to save taxpayer
funds and build our workforce.
So I am totally, um, aligned
with what you're saying, are
just
I thought it was also noteworthy
that, um, less than 50% of the
folks that are getting the
opportunity and lottery are
graduating.
and the majority of those
degrees are in general studies
and humanities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again, I
appreciate that comment very
much. The uh the added
the added advantages once they
graduate and they're working,
they're contributing to the
state in very many ways, not
just local economy, but to the
state coffers as well and so I
think that's an important aspect
of this. Thank you,
Representative Therasas. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
uh, Interre Maples for the
presentation. Um, I'm gonna kind
of run through because I don't
wanna
run a late, but um, I'm on your
foundation board. I don't know
if you know that yet, but, uh,
and I think that's very
important. We've seen that that
portfolio grow and, and not just
in, in funds but how we were
distributing those funds to more
and more students, um, one of
the things that I think is
important since you brought up
students and and being a part of
the community afterward and
I've, I've, I've told Mr. Chair,
or, or brought this up, Mr.
Chair, to our colleagues. I
think uh we as, as
legislators in New Mexico and
schools have to do a better job
of keeping our
students
at home
and I, you heard what
Representative Dow just said. We
spent $53,000 a year, yet we're
basically educating, which I
want to educate our our our our
youth and our the next
generation, but we're educating
them for other states,
neighboring states, and I think
that's one of the biggest, uh,
the saddest things to me, um, I
think we, I would love to see a
way to ask students in in a way
uh in in a.
in a way to give back to the New
Mexicans that paid the, the,
the, this, you know, price for
them to go to school to at least
give 2 years back to the state
of New Mexico, keep our
teachers, keep our nurses, keep
our whatever, you know, I, I
think that is such a important
part, uh, of, of our education,
uh, if we're not because we're
not gonna grow our communities
we're, we're short of nurses,
short of all kinds of things,
whether it's teachers, whatever,
and, and enough of that, but I
think that's very, very
important. The other thing, uh,
Mr. Chair, um, uh, Mr. Maples is
us continuing the conversations
and work toward a good trade
school, um, and it, it being.
fluid from maybe junior high
we're having conversations maybe
there's a test or something. I,
I, I kind of remember a test in
9th grade. I wanna say 8th or
9th grade that we took that kind
of gave us what were strong
points are. Lieutenant Governor
Knight, uh, did you take that
test,
yeah, I passed it too.
but do you remember what they
said you would be good at? Was
it this?
So
you can tell we're friends.
We've been, we grew up together,
so, um, uh, the point that I'm
making is you, you take a test
to kind of give you your strong
points of what, what you're,
what you're, what you think your
strong points would be and, and
kind of give you a little
guidance and then from there
maybe have that trade school
where it's not, you know, it's
just fluid they're, they're
learning the trades whether it's
electrical, plumbing, whatever
it is, you know, and and move
forward forward and Freeport,
um, just, I don't know if you've
had those
conversations, uh, is willing to
work with uh with supporting the
trade school and have made some
offers. So those are some of the
things that I wanted to talk
about, uh, uh, quickly and, and
I'll move on because I we got a
big agenda. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
OK
thank you, Representative Fracis
if I may just very quick, a very
quick response. Thank you for
bringing that up and it's
interesting about the career
technical educational aspects of
this, and we are looking at all
kinds of ways of doing that,
including one that as a new
person here that I've learned
that we do out of our school of
education. We actually have an
education focus where people
learn how to teach the CTE
things and get people tracked in
the high school areas and during
that
time when it's so critical where
people are where where students
are thinking about what am I
going to do?
Um, what am I gonna do with my
life? I don't want to go sit in
a classroom all the time.
and so we have teacher education
that that focuses on that is one
of the programs that we do and
it's very interesting to find
out about it.
so thank you
Finally
We're absolutely fine. So good
morning. Please reintroduce
yourself. Sure. Good morning
and, and welcome. So my name is
Priscilla Lucero. Today I'm
standing um in in for Romeo
Cruz, who wasn't able to make it
today, and he was not feeling
well, but, um, I'm kind of the
2nd vice president of Grant
County Prospectors. So I'm feel
I'm gonna, I'm fill those shoes
today, but I also want most of
you to know that I am the
executive director of the
Southwest New Mexico Council of
Governments. so it kind of ties
in
right back into prospectors. So
what I wanted to share with you
in regards to Prospectors is um
a, a really valuable process
that we have here, but before I
do that, I wanna acknowledge any
prospect just to please stand
that are in the audience and
acknowledge of the teamwork that
we do to be able to provide um
capital outlay and any other
potential funding sources for
projects that have been vetted
through this process and so
we've been very successful then.
I think our very first Grant
County day started in 1975
so that just goes to show you
that every year we just refine
the process and it becomes even
better, um, every year and so
one of my involvements through
the Grant County Prospectors is
really supporting local
legislators as well as local
governments, uh, ensuring that
the capital improvement plan
processes are completed as well
as their capital outlay
requests. I am very fortunate in
this region that my legislators
here allow me to work with them
when it comes to looking at
legislative language, anything
that may be with respect to New
Mexico grow to ensure that
those funds are getting out
directly where they want to go,
and I don't think I could do the
job today if I didn't have that
partnership. So I just wanna say
thank you from the bottom of my
heart because I think that's,
that's what really is success is
teamwork and collaboration. So
I'm very grateful for that. um,
I think there's been many
successes as a result of this
legislative forum because what
it does allow the legislators to
do is that these they receive
these vetted projects and so we
have uh several sectors that
we present on one is local
government. The other one is
education. The other is
healthcare and then nonprofits.
One of the things that was so um
such a a value in 2023 was with
the, I'm sorry, 2024 was the New
Mexico Growth Funds because we
had already vetted all those
nonprofits and what their
requests were. So that really
did support some of those um New
Mexico grow requests and how I
was able to work with
legislators to move that
forward. To date, I just want to
give you an
update on the monies that I've
received and where we are, we
are 50% expended. I have 37
grant agreements that I'm, I'm
responsible for and ensuring
that those nonprofits are doing
the services, and I just gotta
say in these rural areas the
nonprofits play a critical role
in providing services. And
sometimes is that if it wasn't
for those nonprofits, we
wouldn't have these kinds of
programs and services in our
area. So very grateful to all of
you for, for that. The other
piece
I just wanna mention as we move
forward as the value we are
already preparing for our 2026
legislative session we'll have
our legislative forum in
December where we go through
this process again, and it just,
it's just a beautiful way of
preparing so that legislators
don't get bombarded with so many
requests, and it's always been
where you have a request, you
have to go through Priscilla,
right? And so that has really
helped, um, alleviate the
number. I also put limitations
on my
local governments when they're
seeking capital requests based
on the dollar amount that I know
that you might be receiving as a
representative or a senator, and
I'm say, please don't come in
with 10 projects. Please do not
come in with a request of $3
million when that might be the
total allocation. So I'm kind of
strict with my local governments
in that sense, and they give a
limit and I'm gonna say please
no more than 3 projects because
let's be realistic. The other
portion that I do along with the
prospectors and is making sure
that there isn't another funding
source.
to, to, um, actually, uh, fund
that because what I don't want
is capital dollars being used
for something that can already
be funded elsewhere.
or maybe it's already in the
pipeline. And so that's the
wonderful collaboration I have.
I think in closing one thing I
do wanna share is one of our
greatest successes and I'm glad
the lieutenant Governor's here
today.
when I first met, um, Howie when
he became senator, he worked
diligently to allocate $100,000
through CYFD for the purposes of
doing the imagination library
and literacy program. Joe, I
know that you remember that and
so what I wanna tell you today,
that was in 2008.
Since then,
uh, we are now
representing and I am now
administering those funds for 33
counties.
so I just wanna let you as
legislators know I feel like I
do represent you.
So just know that I'm, I'm
always available to you and
whatever we can do to assess. So
33 counties. I have a budget.
We're now we're gonna be able to
hire an executive director.
and as a result, if you know
anything about Dollywood
Foundation, the minute you get
the entire 33 counties covered.
Dolly Parton will visit New
Mexico, and I believe you saw
the executive order signing.
and as a result, um,
the um
Dolly Parton will be visiting
New Mexico next week.
So those are the successes I
think that I wanna share that
prospectors brings is
commitment, collaboration, um,
education and training pieces
and so just know that if we can
ever share any of those
processes with you, we're happy
to share that and I'd be happy
to answer any questions I that
you may have in regards to
prospectors or any other
question. Thank you, Priscilla.
First we havesent Te Razas.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Priscilla.
She's a amazing filter.
at it when, when, what, like she
said to put realistic things
when they're doing
presentations, Mr. Chair, um,
legislators, honestly, uh, uh,
I'm gonna be completely honest,
having a strong cog and
relationship with the cog
definitely makes us very, very
successful in our capital
outlay, um, and, uh, you know, I
was thinking Katherine Brown was
the your ranking member was the
House sponsor for that, uh,
imagination library and I
remember the two, the little
couple that started it that came
around that go to our businesses
and, and, and we'd all support
and do a little funding, you
know, fund the deal. It was
really neat, but, uh,
yeah, uh, Priscilla is uh is uh
the cog has been an amazing
thing. Thank you for all the
years that you've put in the
however many years I give her a
compliment yesterday. We didn't
want her to retire till she's
90, and so, uh, but she's does a
wonderful job that I just wanted
to share that with you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Borrego.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
good morning, everyone. Um, I
just want to thank you both, um,
Mr. Maples and Ms. Lucero it's
really a pleasure talking with
you guys a little bit last
night. Um, what you don't know
about me and I just want to tell
you is that when you were
developing your little main
street, um, they would come to
the city of Albuquerque to talk
to us and also um, Las Cruces,
so we kind of had input and I
was delighted
last night to stay in one of
your little, uh, older, uh,
facilities, the palace, which
was really adorable, um, I saw
it online and I was like I've
been wanting to stay there for a
long, long time, and I finally
did. It was a very sweet little
place, um, I just wanted to
mention also Mr. Chair, that um
we have also uh Mr. Holguin in
the representative, um, Olin in
the audience who,
um,
I remember him when I was a city
planner because we used to go to
the legislature and beg them for
money, um, representative, uh,
let's see, it was, uh, Kiki
Savera Dan Silva, Raymond
Sanchez, and then of course
Senator uh Manny Aragon, um,
who, you know, they were some of
our mentors when we were working
in, in the planning department
and with uh capital improvements
and so on. So, um
I want to say also that I was
born and raised in a very small
town.
and I went to, uh, the
University of New Mexico at 17
years old and my first semester,
my dad took me back to Espinola,
but we had branches of UNM in
Espinola Taos, and Los Alamos
and Santa Fe. Now those don't
exist anymore, Mister Chair. Um,
so my first two years, I got a
lot of my credits in my small
town cause I went back to my
small town at 17. I wasn't ready
to be in the city of Albuquerque
at UNM
and then I went back to UNM, but
it's such a, it's so important
to have these universities in
our small towns. It's so
important for kids that you know
I mean I came from a graduating
class of '56. So going to the
University of 2500 was culture
shock and um I can totally
relate and I'm really glad to
see that we're encouraging these
universities, and this is my
first visit to your university,
um, and I, I'm just so
delighted.
to see kind of the camaraderie
and
I mean just walking into this
building, it was so positive,
such a positive experience to be
here. And by the way, on the way
driving up, I, I had to do a
double take because I was like
how are Morellis what Park or
and I think if I had blinked, I
would have missed it, but I did
see the name very prominent,
and, um, this morning I was
Googling your history, um, and I
saw all the famous people that,
uh, and many more that have come
from this area and so it's, it's
really, um, including one of our
most famous astronauts, um, and,
and also a woman, uh, one of the
first black women, um, in
the country that made history,
so I just wanna, um, acknowledge
some of those things that I, I
read about your history
yesterday and um thank you all
for being here and thank you for
encouraging our students to do
better.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett
Thanks, Mr. Chair. I'm Joe
Garrett from the west side of
Albuquerque, where the volcanoes
are. I, I just have to say, uh,
Pauline Lucera, one thing I know
who she is. I know what she
does, and I'm in Albuquerque
because she mentors people
across the state. So I want to
thank you for not only caring
about your local area, but
really raising up the cog
leaders, legislators, um, we're
hoping to have you next month
for NMFA oversight. Talk to you
later on, and I also, while the
president
yeah,
um, can you explain, oh, before
you explain something, I wanna
just salute the logistics effort
to get us here. There were signs
I could not miss the library and
my logistics nerd, so Mr.
President, thank all of your
staff. You had someone out in
the parking lot. It just, it's
important.
and people often don't do
logistics and the other thing is
the culinary stuff, thank you
for the small burritos. Um, we
could have 3 instead of 1 big
one, so it
it's another logistical thing
that, you know, I appreciate,
but how did you get the um
the Grant County prospectors, of
course I'm from Bernna Leo
County, which is huge, but we're
hearing from the county we end
up having 10 meetings with
different groups, but you've
brought representatives from
those groups to one place that
isn't just the county manager,
isn't just one person. How long
have you done that and how did
you, uh, logistically get that
together. So Mr. Chair and
Representative Garrett, that
actually started in 1975, and
that was an initiative
that was really started by our
former Senator Benal Tamirano.
and I think, you know, he was a
senior senator and we understand
that one of the one of the
challenges that he had, right,
as he was being bombarded by
individuals for different
requests, and I think what he
found difficult, which I'm I'm
assuming you all deal with the
same thing as people come to you
all the time for specific needs
and he found this way and it's
really his doing to develop this
process. I came into it about 25
years ago, and I think how we
expanded that
process is by me ensuring that
all the checks and balances are
there. Number one, are they EO
compliant? Number 2, I do the
capital improvement planning
processes even though I'm an
executive director, I'm a
hands-on person. So I do the
capital improvement plans. I do
their capital outlay requests
and maybe uh one of the things
that I'm really passionate about
is ensuring that language is
correct, right? Because I said
if you don't know, I said I
wanna check everybody's capital,
and if
you want me to do it, I'll do it
for you. And so I've been, I
kind of am considered a mama
bear because I really want to
take care of everybody and I
wanna make sure it's done
correctly and that we're not
missing any opportunity that
we're entitled to. So, so those
are some of the processes that
we've implemented every year. We
just refine it and continue to
refine it as we deal whatever
challenges we had in the
previous year and so we're
seeing now that I want to ensure
that now as a person, as I see
things being funded, number one,
that
we're getting the word out
there, was it taking to get
those dollars expended and as an
implementer of New Mexico Grow,
even though
in the bill, it said we didn't
have to track the data on the
people we were serving. I did it
anyway.
So I'm here to tell you for the
money that I got from New Mexico
Grow we have benefited in one
year, 15,000 individuals with
your dollars.
So I want you as legislators to
know that because if it wasn't
for all of you, sometimes to me,
I, I talked about last night
about being data-driven because
sometimes we don't stop long
enough to determine what an
impact you have, and I just want
to know from the 1.2 million
that I receive from my region
Currently we have served 15,000
individuals and we're only 50%
expended.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you
Thank you for your
representative, uh, your
presentation. We don't have any
other questions, but really
appreciate your hard work. Thank
you for having us.
Before we go on with our regular
agenda, I would like to have uh
Lieutenant Governor Howi Morales
come up to the table and and say
a few words.
We are in your stomping grounds,
Lieutenant Governor.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman,
uh, honorable members of the
committee, it's so, so good to
be here with all of you. Welcome
to my hometown to Grant County,
New Mexico, land of copper of
cattle, but most importantly of
community, and I'm proud of this
community and I'm glad that some
of them mention that was done
really paid tribute to the
history of who has made up our
community and what we've had the
fortune of having leaders
throughout our community. Uh,
going back, I can remember my
time in the early part of the
Senate that I was there uh with
Chairman Ed Sandoval.
When you have, uh, a chairman
Dan Silva, who was there as
well. Um, remembering, uh,
Senator Phil Griego, who chaired
this committee and the work that
was done that really helped pave
the way whether it was grip or
Grip 2 at that time to seeing
where we're at today, um, coming
here on behalf of the
administration. I don't usually
make it practice to come into a
legislative committee. I always
respect my brothers and sisters
of the legislature because I
know the work that you do. I
know the grueling travel that
takes place with the interim,
uh, to go all around the state,
but you do it, uh, but I also
know that coming from the
executive that I want to make
sure that you have the
opportunity to do your work, but
this week alone, I've been
blessed to have the opportunity
to be part of two legislative
committees, Legislative Finance
Committee and your committee
today and, and what a wonderful
opportunity it is to most
importantly, to welcome you to
the area that I'm so proud of.
And when I say that I'm so proud
of looking back at our history
and seeing uh members like
Senator Ben Altimirano, members
like, uh, Representatives Tommy,
uh, Foy, uh, representatives
like Murray Ryan
Diane Hamilton, uh, Rudy
Martinez, who sat on this
committee and recognizing that
what really made politics so
special in this community. It's
something that we still build on
with Representative Terasa as
Representative Dow,
Representative Jones, Senator
Brantley, and Senator Ramos is
that we learned many years ago
that regardless of political
affiliation, we know we have to
work together in rural New
Mexico to ensure that we have
the results that we need. So now
whether we're working on trying
to save our senior citizens
programs across the Southwest
to make sure that we have the
proper funding for road projects
like Highway 180, which you guys
approved and we're grateful for
that expansion that has finally
taken place and it shows just
the amount of pride that we have
from people like Jeff Binghaman
right here, graduating from
Western High School, Harrison
Smith was mentioned. Uh, and if
that's not enough for you, when
you have the names of Priscilla
Lucero, Alex Brown, city
manager, who's in here, and then
Tony Trujillo, that alone shows
just the amount of, of, uh,
representation that we have
within our community. So I'm
proud to be here and again on
behalf of the administration,
uh, Department of
Transportation. I'd like to
thank Secretary Serna, who's
here today and his staff as
well. uh, Secretary Serna came
in yesterday and we had a
breakfast because
we have an issue when we talk
about emergencies and one of
those emergencies that we're
seeing that's really developing
is the dust storms that we're
seeing along I-10 and trying to
find solutions of how we can uh
approach that in a way that is
life saving. Uh, we also see
that uh we have with us is
District one, engineer, uh,
Aaron Chavarria, and I wanna,
uh, mention Erin specifically
because he does a great job. He
represents us well, but it's
also very difficult when Aaron
has a District one, which is the
district that I reside in.
but also the lieutenant governor
and so he gets the phone calls
at times. He represents the
district so well, but who gets
phone calls from me saying,
Aaron, I'm driving on Highway
180. I can't see this, the, the
markings, and it's raining and,
and he gets on that or we call
and say there's too many
potholes, uh, between Silver
City and Demming, and he gets
those phone calls, but
nonetheless, um, you know, I'm
grateful because he is
responsive as well as all the
departments of transportation as
you guys continue to have the
discussions, you know, it's
important that we recognize when
we talk about District
One, the importance of what we
have in the representation and I
mentioned Aaron and uh
Representative Latta. Just
recently we had the floods that
took place in Bado, and those
floods that really impacted that
we were fortunate to have the
Federal declaration that was
given for us in the fires in
Riidoso and the floods in Rioso,
but also the add-ons that
included Watto and we're working
today to try to make sure we can
have the add-ons that would be
there for the trout fire as
well. Uh, we're hopeful that's
going to be, uh, be coming in
what gives us the ability to
have the opportunity for more
funds to
come our way. At the end of the
day as we see a prosperous New
Mexico and I would hope that the
committee, as you guys continue
to have discussions that we can
continue to have discussions on
the bonding, uh, on, on the
bonding authority uh discussion.
I know we didn't get it through
this last legislative session. I
know that it's something that we
worked on to try to get that
done. Uh, but I'm hopeful that
the committee will take that up
and have a discussion on
reforming that bond and
authority because it gives us
the opportunity to move those
projects forward in every single
one of our com uh communities.
So again, I wanna say thank you
and I want to thank Doctor Ma
ple s for, uh, his leadership
and being here at the university
because there's always one thing
that we take pride at Western
New Mexico University is our
students and one of those
students who is here in the
audience with us. He's also a
student, uh, border regent, and
that's Giano Huerta. Souana's
not only a nursing student here,
not only a student board regent,
she's also a Tejano music chart
topper, and we see the pride
that we have within people of
our community right now as we
speak, the Miss New Mexico
pageant is taking place in Las
Vegas, New Mexico.
The representative of the state
in Mexico from Mr. New Mexico is
right here from Grant County. So
you can see that I've been with
a lot of pride when we talk
about our community, uh, and
recognizing that there's special
people that come from here and I
really appreciate you as a
committee.
taking the time to come to our
small area of the state and to
recognize the value that they
bring. So thank you so much for
this opportunity, uh,
Representative Cruz and Mr. uh,
Mr. uh, Chairman De la Cruz. I'm
happy to answer any questions. I
know we're 20 minutes behind
schedule
but I also wanted to come here
to specifically say thank you,
Lieutenant Governor, uh, first
we do have a question or or
maybe a
comment Representative Terrazos.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You
know, uh, Lieutenant, we hadn't
had a chance to talk about this,
but I'd like to read a statement
that
I'd like to read a statement
that we that I received it was
supposed to happen yesterday,
Mr. Chairman, but we ran out of
time and something that I think
it involves the executive and uh
it normally just
for all purposes, the
lieutenant, uh, Governor and I
and, and the, um, senators have
very common uh talks on our own,
but this I thought was be
something that
to address the the funding, uh,
the bonding capacity. I, I'd
like to read this. My name is
Sterling Hamilton, which was
from Hamilton Construction. I'm
a, I'm a 5th generation New
Mexican and 3rd generation owner
James Hamilton Construction,
headquartered in Silver City,
New Mexico. I represent 250 jobs
which over 100 of them, uh, who
are residents of Grant, Luna,
Hidalgo, and Sierra counties.
I'm also a board member of the
Associated uh Associated
Contractors of New Mexico. James
Hamilton Construction has
built tens of thousands of miles
of roadway bridges, airports,
earthwork, environmental cleanup
projects throughout the entire
states and for our native
nations and pueblos in our 80
year history. I come before you
to present you an opportunity
for this body to have immediate
and lasting impact to address
many of the concerns voiced
voiced yesterday in yesterday's
meeting. The immediate need for
funds of the for the Department
of Transportation that was
severely underfunded during the
last legislative session can be
addressed by helping to
pass a one-time appropriation
during the special session.
This is where you come in, uh,
the executive, um, uh, let me
see, I one time appropriation
during the special session to
support not only the
transportation department but
also the vital matching that
occurs between department and
municipalities, counties and
other local governments. Many
grants are at risk of expiring
without the vital dollar match
New Mexico DOT provides to these
communities representing
millions of dollars of hard work
by small and dedicated staff to
secure grant funding for vital
local
projects that will be lost. Nixo
DOT needs one-time funding
during the special sentence of
at least 200 million to help
their vital work continue. In
addition to the one time
appropriation, there's no
regular and predictable level of
funding for New Mexico DOT that
provides the stability necessary
for them to plant, implement,
and, and best meet the needs of
New Mexicans. It forces the
department to have uh to go to
the dire need, uh, to fill out
the most desperate as they
appear as there's no way to know
what the next year of funding
will hold.
Our neighbor states have
committed constant long-term
funding of their infrastructure,
and it provides a basis for
economic development across
their entire state. One of the
best features of this constant
adequate funding levels will be
better projects more logical
plan and with better trained and
equipped workforce to accomplish
the projects of workforce that
supplies design, supports, and
builds New Mexico infrastructure
represents over 10,000 jobs in
highway sector alone. The jobs
are high paying and often uh
provided for families.
I am grateful to have had
generations of family work for
my family owned business, and I
have, uh, had the whole family's
work and travel with us we buil
as we build New Mexico, some of
the uh them are also on their
2nd generation with us, our
indus industry partners with
OSHA and other regulatory bodies
to ensure the safety and
training of our workforce
facilitiesciated contractors of
New Mexico and DOT have a long
partnership at trains and grows
their workforce and their
capability and helps empower
upward mobility for, uh, anybody
who
wants to succeed in our industry
you're supporting the upcoming
special session to secure the
one-time appropriation needed to
shore up funding before the the
legislative session next year is
critical. Your sponsorship of
Bill's, uh, would secure these
necessary levels of regular
recurring funding for critical
infrastructure during the next
session we'll have great like
legacy for generations after we
fulfill our motto, uh, and let's
grow as it goes and uh I'm happy
to answer. Anyway, the, the
point that I
was making, uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
is I heard from some of the
contractors because we didn't
that bonding capacity didn't
pass. Not only are they gonna
possibly lay off people, but
they're talking about losing
their companies because they
can't sustain their debt that
they they thought we're gonna
have this sustainable bonding
capacity to continue the road so
they've got a lot of these, uh,
contractors, Mr. Chair, um, uh,
lease these or purchase huge.
uh pieces of equipment that that
that you know are a huge
investments but can can lose
their, their, their bus
businesses so I think, I think
what I've heard from several
people and it was after the
meeting because they ran out of
time, Mr. uh Mr. Cherry,
Lieutenant Governor, is the
possibility of of during the
special session to maybe address
something of this caliber, uh,
because there are a lot of
contractors that are on the, uh,
the verge of losing their, their
people and their and and their
equipment and their businesses.
Any any comment to that Mr.
Chair?
Thank you so much, uh,
Representative Rassas, and, and
reading that and recognizing the
importance of the the um bonding
capacity and the, the authority
to have that reform take place.
I think that demonstrates some
of the concern that we have,
and, and I know I worked hard
those last days of the Senate to
try to get it through. We didn't
get it through, uh, but no final
decisions have been made on
special session at this point,
so that could be something that
we'll take forward as well as
part of the discussion and I
just uh want to mention in
closing, um, just again how my
appreciation for the Grant
County prospectors and
the warm welcome that they
provide as Western New Mexico is
always known for welcoming our
legislators and that's uh in
collaboration with the
prospectors, as was mentioned in
1975, the prospectors were
formed and uh I mentioned Tony
Trujillo and another, uh,
gentleman by the name of Dougan
Anderson, who were very much
spearheading, uh, that and get
us an organized approach to
Capiate to ensure that whenever
it gets to the agency level and
executive level that we've done
our homework to justify what
those projects are necessary and
in closing I'd like to also give
a shout
out to uh graduate of Silver
High School, a graduate of
Western New Mexico University. I
was, uh, interim Department of
Transportation Secretary Justin
Reese, who's not here, but just
to recognize just the caliber of
people that we have within this
community and just so proud to
have represented him for over 21
years.
Lieutenant Governor, it's our
pleasure to be here in your
hometown, uh, I'm, I had been
particularly familiar with
Silver City, but what I've seen
so far, I can see why you beam
with pride.
And so thank you for hosting us
and thank you for coming and
saying a few words. It, it, it
matters and we appreciate it.
Thank you Mr. Chairman
OK, moving on to our next item.
We have a noninvasive, no cost,
no resolution to the uninsured
motorists, we have former
Representative Michael Holguin
and Jonathan Miller, chairman of
diversion Management.
Please reintroduce yourselves
and, and proceed when you're
ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Committee members, uh, you know,
uh, I'm Michael O'Ddean. Uh,
some of the discussion brought
back so many memories
of the time that I served in the
legislature, you know, the
names, uh, I got, uh, involved
in legislature was a relatively
young age, and it reminded me
how, you know, in Mexico to me
is community, really is.
You know, I don't care where you
live and Farmington, Roswell, or
wherever the case might be, but
the state in many respects is
community and, and you're
representative of that. You
really are, you know, I just,
and I'm just very proud to say
that uh that I was a part of
that for the 14 years that I
served, you know, uh, and
bringing up the names that were
brought up by Representative
Borego.
and the Lieutenant Governor Roy,
lieutenant Governor, when, when,
uh, Ben Altorano was a state
senator and he was getting ready
to go ahead and retire. And he
was in Socorro, and I was a
state rep at the time, and he
says, I've handpicked
who I want to be the next state
senator.
And I said, Who's that? Howard
Morales. I said, Who's Howie?
You know, and, uh, so that's how
much he really respected Howie
when Howie got elected to be a
lieutenant Governor here in New
Mexico. So, and uh it just one
of those things where people
don't appreciate the efforts
that are done, but thank God for
people like all, all of you to
sacrifice your time, you know,
and devote on the road all the
time, you know, uh, going places
and doing things on behalf of
New Mexico. Uh, I'll say one
quick thing and then I'll get
into this program because I know
we're running late here. Uh, we
talked about Kiki
Savera.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, you knew Kiki
very well. So did you,
representative, uh, senator, uh,
you know, you talk about a
character and uh you never knew
what was gonna come out of his
mouth.
and we're getting ready to start
the session one day and uh uh
Speer calls it to order, and
Kiga stands up and he says, Mr.
Speaker,
and Raymond Luce's a
representative from Bernal Leo.
For what person reason do you,
do you, do you rise? What's our,
uh, you say he's a uh.
What's our format today? Not
format. What's our format, OK?
And I go, it sounds like Kiki,
OK, but just all those things.
So let's get on with the same
because I know you, uh, you're
behind schedule right now.
Again, I'm Michael O'Gee. I'm a
former representative. Uh, I,
um, been in the insurance
business for like 36 years. I've
been with the New York Life. In
fact, I just retired from New
York life as a registered rep
and uh financial advisor.
and uh I started a property in
casualty business about 12 years
ago, and my son Michael Junior,
I brought him into the business,
and he now owns that. It's an
independent company, so it has a
number of independent companies
like Progressive, Safeco,
Travelers, whatever. And so I,
I've been able to see what goes
on in the insurance part of the
business.
and so I reached out to Jonathan
and I said, you know, I want to
find a program
that we can be able to bring to
New Mexico
uh, like the title says it's
non-evasive
It's at no cost
and it's a no resolution dealing
with uninsured motorists. The
last session there was a bill on
both your committee and also in
the Senate, uh, they got to the
Senate floor and laid dormant
till the end of the session. Uh,
so the awareness is there in New
Mexico right now, about 1/3 of
our driving population is
uninsured.
and it's a growing problem.
We're number one in the country
in that, in that category. And,
and the issue is not getting
any, it's not lessened. Last
week I was at a doctor
appointment and the medical
assistant said, what do you do?
And I said, Well, I'm in a
program now dealing with
uninsured motorists, and she
says, I got hit by an uninsured
motorist two months ago, and
it's been a nightmare.
And so what I wanna do now is
basically, uh, it really is more
of a crime fighting uh solution
to a number of things that are
in there and crime, as you all
know, is number one going on
right now with a special
session. It's an ongoing thing
every day. It's not going away.
Yesterday, 6 kids in high school
in Albuquerque, you know, were
arrested for bringing weapons
onto campus, so there's so many
issues from, I mean you go from
Dona account, no, no matter
where you're living in Mexico,
it's a growing problem. So what
I want to do is introduce
Jonathan Miller. Uh, he is the,
uh, chairman of our national
company out of Atlanta, Georgia,
and it's a, uh
I'll let you introduce yourself
and, and, and, and, and the
program.
Mr. Chairman and
Representatives, it's a great
honor to be here. This is a
beautiful facility. I always
love being back in New Mexico,
uh, what I'd like to share with
you more than anything else
today is the fact that there are
options and alternatives to just
more fees, more fines, higher
prices, adding uninsured
motorists. We're very familiar
with what happens around the
country. We work nationally, so
we see what does and does not
work well and frankly, you know,
there's just better answers that
have emerged over the
last few years. I, I'll just
give you a couple of examples of
how extreme some things are, um,
in Wisconsin in West Virginia,
the, the cost, the fine for an
uninsured vehicle can be as can
be up to $5000 is 1500 is the
minimum in Delaware. It averages
over $22,100 in New York, New
York State 2750 to DMV 750
local, then $8 a day. It just
really adds up.
Um, what's happened is is that
there the other states which
have a very low per capita
revenue incomes. Alabama,
Mississippi, West Virginia, and
so forth. They have the same
system that you do. They have a
much lower uninsured rate now
because they've implemented new
policies. Those policies have
made a huge difference and
reduced over time the cost of
insurance. There are great
research research documents that
have been generated a set a
research that was done
between Michigan and North
Carolina, which have almost the
same demographics and
population, and yet in Michigan
they pay half again more for
insurance because it's
uninsured. There there's such a
high uninsured rate.
This uninsured vehicles cost you
money.
and over time I'm not suggesting
for one moment that the
insurance industry has an
ethical compass because we
disagree about that. I don't
think they do, but market
conditions will drive down the
cost of insurance over time.
It's happened over and over
again. It's and the studies are
everywhere. It's Belgium versus
Netherlands. It's Quebec versus
Ontario. It's all over this
country. We're good programs
have happened that are
respectful, and this, I want to
really emphasize this, it has to
be at no cost to local
government.
What we suggest and what we
propose has no cost. It has very
little cost to the violator. The
violator actually saves money
over time, does not go to court.
It, it dramatically reduces
court time. It takes care of the
adjudication issues. It relieves
the stress and the frustration
on people. There has to whatever
the program is and there are
programs available now that we
can talk about. They have to be
less stressful, less onerous to
the people who were
involved, and everyone must be
treated with full respect. No
one can be treated like a
criminal simply because they
have an uninsured vehicle, but
the path forward for them to
become compliant must be there
because otherwise this problem
will continue. So, and I can
tell you for a fact, I mean, if
Alabama can do it, or in New
Mexico can sure do it. The issue
here is that the, I should also
tell you the data that you get
is terrific. New Mexico, it has
probably the best data that's
coming in with its system in the
country.
You have something called
IICMVA, which there's 27 other
states that use that same
system, including all these five
states that have low per capita
incomes I'm mentioning, and
they've used that to solve their
problems. We can help give you
the pathway forward to make that
work, um, and so we're not here
asking for money or funding
doesn't none of that's required,
uh, this can be done locally, a
local jurisdiction can pass an
ordinance. If you look at
Snyder's smart justice plan
s what happens is that when
insurance is enforced, the
community prosper
the the community is much safer.
The roads are safer. The schools
are safer. Things boom. I hear
the stories about, about
businesses and so forth and it
really hurts me because I love
New Mexico. I, I've got some
bones in the ground here. It's a
long, that's another story, but
I really care about it, and I,
and I think we all do.
Uh the other thing I'm hearing
is about, about school schools
and and uh children. One of our
board members is a fellow named
Lou Bovina and Bovina Center is
the number one rated child
advocacy center in the United
States in Rochester, New York,
so we, we part of our money goes
to support child advocacy. So so
again that's another issue but
something we'd really like to to
talk about. I have two little
videos that I brought with me,
both of them together will last
last less than 4 minutes.
They're very, very
short. One is one of them is,
uh, and I've so greatly
appreciate Martin's you, you're
terrific. I mean, you, you, you
really appreciate the way you
did all these things, but the
the it's very short. One is
from, um, there's an
organization called IACP. IACP
is operational in 72 nations.
The, the, the police chief of
Moscow, we shouldn't talk about
Moscow. I'm talking.
what a, what a thought Putin is,
but he probably his police chief
is too, but anyway, he, but he's
a member of IECP all over the
all over the world, this offices
in Bangkok in Dubai, and so
forth, but the, the national
organization, 3 of the past
presidents work with us. One of
them's going to speak to you in
a few moments. He's, he's from
some years ago, his name is
Paul, uh, Sell. He's from New
Jersey, so he talks kind of
fast, so I I I'll warn you in
advance, um, the other, other
one is just a little de
mon s t ration we've done and
we've done this in various
states where if you can't
connect with the people so that
the people really understand
that this is very much about
protecting them and their
families and reducing the cost
over time for everybody, then
you can't be supported. Some
states like Texas next door has
done an awesome job with that
with their Texas Sure program,
but the medium message is
absolutely critical, so
everybody needs to know that,
you know, they can pay $50 a
month and they can get out of
trouble. They can get
insured, they can drive safer
and, and that everybody can
benefit from these, this sort of
an approach and that these other
things which grammatically add
cost to insurance policies are
frankly not necessary. There are
better answers than that.
So if I could ask that we turn
that
on, could you do that now
And also we've got a little one
page handout that we've left
behind and it's
thank you so much yes and we so
much appreciate that also.
And then, and you know it goes
without saying, but we so
appreciate, you know,
Representative Doo and and uh
and all of you, the fact that
you've allowed us this
opportunity to speak to you
today.
Yes, please, thanks
Hello, my name is Chief Paul.
Many of you may remember me as a
2018, 2019 president of the ICP.
Today I want to tell you about
an exciting new program that
helps promote positive community
relations and safer roadways.
It technologically based,
uninsured motor vehicle
diversion program.
through this proprietary
program, photo
s of your vehicle's license
plates are captured on video and
fed through a database to
identify whether or not the
vehicle was insured.
More than ever, it is time when
we are working to build trust
and positive relations. The
program is the perfect fit.
The three main benefits that
sold me on this program were one
it helps to keep our community
members out of the courts.
2, it led to creating safer
roadways.
and 3, there is no cost for
participating police agency.
I believe it is time for us to
think outside the box and how we
interact with our community
members while creating safer
living environments.
Uninsured motor vehicle
diversion program is the right
choice.
I invite you to speak with a
representative to see how this
program can benefit your
community, and I thank you that
little video was intended for
law enforcement decision makers,
I invite you to speak with a
representative to see how this
program can benefit your
community, and I thank you that
little video was intended for
law enforcement decision maker
obviously this one is just a
general purpose. We have a lot
of these different sorts of
things.
Yeah, yeah, go ahead, sorry. Hi
there.
You know.
I just paid for insurance. Well,
nobody likes having to pay that,
but
having to also pay just so
somebody else gets a free ride,
someone not willing to respect
me
and my family, the way I respect
them is disgusting.
Respect can't be a one-way
street. The politi civil so that
everyone can get along, means
that we must honor the same laws
that treat everyone equally.
That's what we've always been so
proud of. You're so
why can't that work for vehicle
insurance. Now I'm
fine with paying one of us for
insurance.
like registration and gaps.
That makes sense and it's fair.
Driving is not a right. It never
was, and we all need to respect
the basic rules.
Now that said, the cost of
vehicle insurance is just
ridiculous, and the only way
that can change for you, for me,
for everyone
It's for the law to be enforced
and for folks to register their
vehicles
to drive insured
for all of us and also for, for
everyone here from somewhere
else using our streets and
roads.
The wall is there to protect us
all. It must be fair, the same
for everyone.
and it must be enfors now
I know that you wanna feel good
about yourself, your family,
your community, so
do the right thing
basic insurance should not be
expensive.
but if it is for you
it's only because you've not
kept your car insured and
insurers suspect you won't, or
got a bad driving record.
maybe both
The solution is to start today
down the road to respect for
others and success for yourself.
Diversion programs must be about
positive change. Take the
course, save some money, and
drive insured.
together.
fairness and respect
works for everyone
The other thing too is this,
this is actually a crime
reduction program because the
this program identifies stolen
cars, outstanding warrants. It
supports law enforcement broad
based, the insurance part of it
is what pays for it, but there's
a, a, a great many factors and
benefits from this system, Mr.
Chairman and Representatives,
and I think that there's really,
you'll find that there's really
no downside. And what I want to
share with you as we leave today
is is a great sense of
appreciation for this
opportunity to speak to you,
obviously, but also to, to tell
you that there are increasingly
all around the nation, there's
bitter pathways than just adding
on more and more fines and more
and more bits and pieces that's
just not frankly, a good answer
when a better answer is smart
justice, which stabilizes
especially small communities. It
brings security and peace, and
that in turn brings economic
development, and that's what the
state needs, and we all
care so much about the state. We
strongly support this, so we, I
thank you again.
Representative Garrett
Thanks, Mr. Chair. This sounds
very exciting, and my question
is, have you contacted the muni
municipal League, New Mexico
counties or the Association of
New Mexico, uh, sheriffs and
chiefs of police.
uh, because this directly
involves those people besides
this committee.
Mr. Chairman, the
representative, uh, yes, I have
been in contact with the
municipal League. We've had some
preliminary discussions, but
that's about as far as it's
gotten, you know, and they were
preparing for the legislative
session.
and those discussions will
continue. Uh, we've also spoken
with the director of the
association of Counties.
uh, and made her aware of the
program. Uh, they operate a
little differently because
cities uh can establish
something through ordinance, but
the counties, uh, is done
legislatively. It was by statute
that created everything with
magistrate courts so there would
have to be some tweaking going
on with counties to allow them
almost like a home rule like
Bernal Leo County to be able to
do things, you know something by
ordinance there, but we have,
we've had those preliminary
discussions. I just saw there
was an opportunity of talking to
Representative Dow to be here
today and just wanted to, I want
to create, you know, an
awareness, uh, that there are
some things that are out there
that can be done, and it can be
done individually by each city
and each county.
you know, so it does not have to
be something that has to be
dealt with legislatively. Uh, it
does not require an
appropriation or a budgetary
item and again if, if, if I
didn't really believe in talking
to Jonathan and and seeing what
they're doing around the
country. I would not, I, I would
not be involved in this, OK,
because something needs to be
done, something that has, uh,
proven records that shows
results and is not, is not
invasive, OK? So, uh, bas but
just to answer your question,
yes, we've, we've
had those preliminary
discussions and hope to have
further discussions with him.
Thank you
Thank you so much
I like one thing, the driver of
the vehicles never known with
this program, this portal for
the ACLU, not that, you know,
I'm not here speaking with the
ACLU, but the bottom line is, is
that what we're talking about is
something that is entirely
respectful.
and uh supportive of everyone.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Rassas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenter for that, uh, you
know, uh, Mr. Chair and
committee, uh, what I was doing,
I was just, I have a fleet of
cars and I was sitting there
negotiation negotiating my, my
uh
insurance and they happened to
hit because in in this state we
can purchase uninsured motors on
that covers all.
They happen to hit it and it
went on every car. My, my rate
went up by like 40%. It was like
it was another $4000 just to
cover uninsured motorist and so
that just shows the impact that
it has. Uh, it just, I just
happened to be sitting there
when they did that. But you
know, Mr. Chair, um, I just
wanted to understand so when
these license plate readers,
that's basically what they are,
uh, identify these cars, and I'm
sure it's through some program
AI program that
identifies ties the card to the
to the plate to identify this
hasn't been moved. I'm assuming
you could clarify that here in a
little bit. Does it then
how do you
reach that person? I, I just
can't, I, I don't know, so it
reads it, this, this license
plate, let's just say it's uh uh
outdated or maybe it doesn't
have insurance or whatever or it
doesn't match the car. How is
that? How do you get to the
owner of that car so that you
can so that you can I guess sell
them insurance or offer
insurance. How do you, how do
you, what is the process, well,
first off, he's the insurance
guy. We're, we're not. OK share
this so we don't support any
insurance company, and we also
don't support any particular
brand of
license plate reader or anything
like that. We have to be very
distant
uh, so basically what happens is
that a car goes through the
system, a car is identified
through the system and and it's
only the rear plates. We don't
ever see front plates because
without that we might be
challenged to that we saw
somebody's face, can't do that
so we see a rear plate. The
plates ABC 123. If that place
not on what's the daily hot list
that comes from the government.
So in other words, if it's not
identified as something that's
of concern to law enforcement.
It's, it disappears. It, it's
not in the system
if it's uh a stolen car, then
it, it issues a warning and law
enforcement's notified and so
forth. If it's wanted for some
other reason, it notifies law
enforcement, but if only if the
plate is ABC 125, and that
happens to be on a hard list of
uninsured and and the hard list
of uninsured vehicles is
provided every morning from uh
Sane, so that exists now works
fine and works it works great,
but if it's on that hot list, so
it comes up and it's the license
plate number and matching VIN
because you want to be sure it's
not a stolen plate or a stolen
car, so it has to match that's
all that happens, so it goes to,
and it has to be a law
enforcement officer who sees it.
It has to be law enforcement
controlled, so a law enforcement
officer then makes a
determination of probable cause
through NCIC to the inlets
Network on his system, so it
verifies that yes that vehicle
is identified by the insurance
companies, but also by law
enforcement as as uninsured. I'm
taking up too much time. No, no,
you're good, sir. It's right
around the corner.
So, so that's what it is, but,
but the answer to the question
is only law enforcement can make
a determination of probable
cause with this system.
And then what happens is, is
that uh I notice will go out or
it could be a citation,
whatever, whatever is decided.
to Jimmy Smith. Jimmy Smith gets
that in the mail. Jimmy Smith
sees the back of his car, sees
that, you know, I'm, I'm caught.
I mean, it's got the details of
everything there. He can either
go online and and uh uh pay a
fee, not a fine. There's no
taxes. There's no fines involved
with any of this. It's a
diversion program, so he has to
take a course, the course is
free. It's part of the program
and so forth. He, as long as he
pays 50 bucks a month. He can
get rid of his obligation with
the
fee. Half of the money goes
every day and all the
collections go to the local
agency. The other half goes to
pay for all this system and all
the equipment that's involved in
supporting. So it's meant to be
very simple and straightforward,
uh, if he calls the help desk
that runs constantly with very
well trained staff. They're very
friendly. They treat them very
respectfully. Let me help you,
help, you know, help us, help
you take care of this. So that's
basically what happens, but
diversion needs to have a
course, there needs to be a
behavior modification. Somebody
has to say, and all they have to
do is say, and they can strip it
with their, their finger on the
little pad or on their
smartphone, but they have to say
that they're not going to keep
driving that car on a public
roadway in the future while it's
uninsured. That means they park
it, they buy insurance, none of
our business, but they just
can't keep doing what they're
doing, which is violating the
law.
Mr. Chair, I think that's a,
it's really, really good. I, I
think, and it's $50 a month,
as little as they wish that the
the the total total price
normally in most states. In New
York it's higher, by the way, in
New Jersey, but it's normally
$300 but they can, but, but half
the money, so 150 goes directly
to the agency. The other 150
pays for all the services and
everything and all the equipment
and every and all of that stuff
and but they can pay as little
as $50 a month if they have any,
you know, we don't care.
see.
You know, I think, Mr. Chair, I
think this is a good program
incentivizes definitely to
purchase insurance instead of
paying this fee, um, uh, you
know, you can get, uh, sometimes
some of these for liability for
less than that, um, but anyway,
and I know a lot about it
because I just did this for like
for like two months messing
around with it, so I, I think
there's a great program. I, the
more people we get insured, uh,
insurance is
basically a pool of money unless
people are putting money in the
pool.
The
higher we all have to, that we
are those those that are
participating in the higher
rates. That's where the higher
rates come from. So if more
people participate in that, um,
it definitely would lower the
rates for New Mexicans,
uh
we, we had one of our company
vans just rear-ended and it was
an uninsured motorist and it, it
happens a lot. So thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much Mr.
Chairman, could I just add
something to that just very,
very briefly, uh, Representative
also there's a political aspect
to this as well too. When you
look at whether it's a
magistrate judge or a municipal
judge, they're elected
OK, and so, and I've talked to
several already. I won't name
names, so I won't implicate them
at all. But anyway, uh, they say
what they basically do is that
they come in, they appear, they
say, OK, go, go get the
insurance, bring me a copy
and uh show it and we'll go
ahead and just pay court costs
and that's basically it. And I
ask, do you do that more than
not? They go, yes, we do. So we,
we really don't want to offend
the families because, you know,
politically, we stand for
re-election.
So you have that political
element that's in there as well
too. Now police officers, you
don't see as many uh roadside
stops anymore, but you still see
some. We saw a few state police
coming over yesterday and so
when, when they, whenever the
hearing's going to be held, they
are supposed to be there.
but 9 times out of 10, they
don't show
and so because of that, the
judge has the discretion,
whatever they want to do in
regard to that, OK? So they're,
they're other underlying uh
things that go on there as well
too. We want to take all those
elements completely out of it.
The political side, the police
side, uh, you know, and just,
it's, it's adjudication. That's
what it's all about.
Thank you very much. That's
great, great answers, uh, great
program. I, I'm very much
interested in it, uh, in, in
supporting that.
Thank you, Representative Dell.
Thank you so very much. Thank,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and just,
I mean, I just want to give a
little bit of background
information because we were
hearing bills, there was
multiple bills during the
session, um, identifying a 39%
uninsured motorist rate. And the
bill, the solution to the bills
was to require everyone who is
insured to pay uninsured
motorist on every vehicle and
immediately I thought of my
household. My husband has a
Jeep. We have a, some off-road
vehicles
I mean, we don't put very many
miles on them at all, but the
what those of us who are insured
would see a 40, it was like a
49% increase in our insurance
rate to cover the uninsured
motorists. Well, my question to
the presenters from the
superintendents of Insurance
Office was, well, if insurance
is going to go up for anybody
who chooses to be insured, won't
we have even more uninsured
motorists because if I'm barely
hanging on to the car that I
drive to work every day. And now
I have to ensure, you know, the
motorcycl
e or the off-road vehicle or the
Jeep that, you know, we may
drive if we're going hunting or
up in the mountains for the
weekend. And I'm going to see a
48, well, I, there's no
consequence for being uninsured,
you know, so, uh,
Oin called and said, you were
watching the hearing and said
there is a solution that other
states use. That's a nudge, and
it's not punitive, but it gets
people insured. Representative,
and thank you so much for that,
and I'll just jump in and say we
can give you stats, we can show
you what's being done nationally
and so forth, but adding that,
that, making mandatory and
making it mandatory to have
uninsured coverage is not really
an answer that people are
embracing anymore. It just isn't
happening that way.
there's that we think there's
better answers that are
certainly more respectful to the
uninsured, not just of the
insured
Then, yeah, and, and Mr. Chair,
and, and I noticed
I, I hear what you are saying,
and the idea is to get more
coverage, not less
And so I, there's a lot of
low-income, moderate income
people who are paying, that
would be priced out of being
able to continue to pay.
And so that, that was
concerning, but also the fact
that we don't need a law
necessarily. This can be done
through local ordinance. So it's
not the answer to everything
isn't a new state law. And I
don't know what the solution is
here, but I appreciate the chair
allowing us to have time to
think beyond just creating a new
law.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, gentlemen for your, uh,
presentation. Um, I was just
telling, uh, representative
Latta on my way up here, um, or
I don't know if it's up or down,
but um, down, down here I guess
from northern New Mexico and
Albuquerque. I, uh, encountered
uh 3 vehicles that didn't have
license plates, um, on the road
and um I also encountered two
vehicles that were
completely blacked out the
windows
So it was, it was odd to me. I
always noticed those sorts of
things, but one of the things
that I used to say when I was
uh the president of the city
council in Albuquerque is that
we have to be smarter than than
the criminals because the
criminals are really using
technology to their benefit, and
we just had a meeting recently,
uh, Mr. Chair and gentlemen with
um the, the DA in Albuquerque
about the gun situation
with our juveniles and uh you
were there, um, Mr. Chair, um,
and one of the things that that
really struck me.
is that they're using this
technology, um
to exchange guns. I mean, that's
how they're getting guns, a lot
of them, and it was, it was
really and, and, you know, how
do we interrupt, um, these sorts
of activities and so that those
are some of the things that I
think about is like how do we
interrupt that flow of guns? How
do we interrupt that, um, uh,
you know, flow of stolen
vehicles or and, and my bill
last year was part of the
governor's init
i ative for uh vehicle auto auto
theft and, and I don't like to
increase penalties, but
sometimes we don't have a choice
in that. Um, I, what I, what I
find interesting about this
program is that it mentions in
here that it is part of a
community policing program and
having come from a city planning
background, um, and working with
law enforcement and many of my
neighborhood meetings and true
community policing
um, you know, that is what
struck me about your program and
I think um I would like to know
more about it because I think
it's something that, you know,
we need to start really as a
government, and I know some
people talk about it, you know,
it being invasive and uh
especially when it comes to
privacy issues, but I think that
we also need to get ahead of the
of the hook
of the stream and find ways that
we can um get a a handle on
stolen vehicles on, uh, and, and
that's why I mentioned the
vehicles that I saw driving up
here. I just noticed
the windows were all blacked out
on two of the vehicles, and I
was like, God, I can't even see
who's in there, you know, I
mean, they could be pointing a
gun at me and I wouldn't even
know it, you know, so I, it, it,
it, it's really, and I, and I
understand, um
you know, it, if they don't have
a, a license plate, you can't
read it, but the police can be
more aware about those things,
so I, I kind of appreciate that
this came forward, Mr. Chair,
and I think it's a, it's worth
our discussion and uh how you
know, um, and I like the
suggestion about going to the
municipal league because I used
to sit on that board. I think
that would be a great way to,
um you know introduce this. I
know, um, and I'm going to
mention this, Mr.
Chair, because a couple of years
ago, my, my, one of my family
members got lost in Colorado.
They were coming back from uh uh
Telluride area and they took a
turn to go visit a lake, and
they got stuck there and we were
looking for her everywhere cause
we, it had been days that we
couldn't make contact with her.
We called police departments and
sheriff departments in Colorado.
I called
Farmington Police and you know,
Farmington police has the the
license plate readers, and they
were able to kind of tell us we
never saw that vehicle come
through here. Um, they finally,
thanks to a camper, found this
person stuck at a lake in
Colorado, and she had been there
for 3 days, so, um, I had a
little bit of experience with
that, Mr. Chair, because I
called all these different
um, including Ria Ripa County
and you know, uh, Utah,
Colorado, and a lot of those,
uh, states have license plate
readers. So I just wanted to
mention that because um, you
know, we were able to find her
with the, the help of a camper,
not so much the license plate
reader, but we knew where she
wasn't.
So I just wanted to mention
that, Mr. Chair, I think, uh,
it's definitely worth
investigating. Thank you.
Senator Maestass, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So
so essentially this would
involve no traffic stops, this
program.
it doesn't impact traffic stops
in any way. It just interfere
with those, but what it does is
it would certainly over time
reduce the number of traffic
stops that are required because
if it's a compliance issue and
it can be handled in a in a
different way. You don't need
the traffic stop. OK, Fergive
me, thank you, but just so I'm
clear, if I'm a police officer,
I'm driving, I, I, my technology
reads a license plate
The technology tells me that
vehicle's not insured. Do I pull
that car over?
or I don't pull that car? Well,
I'll tell you what, what
happens. First off, the officer
can always do that, and that the
person who's charged with our
system or anybody's whatever it
is, they always have their the
the right to a day in court.
Nothing ever changes with that.
The reality is different,
however, because what really
happens is very early on, the
law enforcement officers, if
they, if they, if their ALPR,
their license plate recognition
system says that the car's
uninsured, they don't bother.
because they figure that sooner
or later that's gonna get caught
anyway. They focused on serious
crime. They love the idea that
they're not having to do
something like this, and they
can be more focused on things
that really matter to the
public.
Thank you, Mr. Chima. I think
that answers my question. So in
other words, the, the police
officer obviously can pull him
over if there's reasonable
suspicion or they can that use
that information and, and
essentially that person would
get noticed or a citation in the
mail. And if there's been a
roadside, is it OK if I
if there's been a roadside stop
that automatically takes
precedent on the docket, so it
bypasses. The other thing I
should also share with you is
this the last thing we ever want
to do is to create any trouble
or bad image for anybody. So
what happens here is, is that
there can be only one, only one
citation statewide within any 45
day period. You cannot have a
situation where somebody is
riding around and they're being
like a different jurisdictions,
different whatever it is, and,
and they're angry.
That's bad press. So nothing we
would ever suggest would create
bad image, bad press, um, even
though it means that they're,
yeah, they're abusing the system
and they're they're illegal and
they're creating crime all the
time. But if you
we, we know
that
within 45 days, there can only
be one active file and one
active account.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, gentlemen. I, you're,
you're trying to persuade me on
the, on the utility of the
program. I'm just trying to
learn the nuts and bolts of the
program, and I think I got it. I
think I got it cause what,
what's gonna happen, Mr.
Chairman, is that
it, you can hold people
accountable without involving
the the the labor of the police,
the labor of the courts, the,
the comeback next month type
stuff. This is, this is in real
time, holds folks accountable,
reduces traffic interaction with
people that may
that may, uh, you know, concern
people with injustice or
profiling or whatever, uh, and,
and uses modern technology in
the modern world, so I hope we
can embrace.
the real world, uh, and realize
that this is much, much more
efficient and effective than
than what we're doing now. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your presentation.
I really appreciate it and Mr.
Holguin, I appreciated the
little story with uh Kiki
Savera. He was a, a dear friend.
I knew him many years. He was a
parks professional. I was a
parks professional. He was in
the city side. I was on the
county side, but he was a
character, a very capable man,
but he was a character and
funny, really funny man. I could
share so many stories about so
many members, but we could do
that at another time, OK? But I,
uh, I'm gonna hold you to that.
Uh, well, thank you. I, I, I
look forward to that. Again,
thank you for the opportunity. I
really do. If you have any
questions, my phone number is on
that, on that two page sheet. If
you know of anybody within your
community you would like us to
reach out to as well.
We would love to have that
opportunity and again, just
thanks uh for allowing us to be
here. We really appreciate and
have a safe ride home today.
Thanks again. Moving on to our
next
presentation. We have DOT major
construction projects funded and
unfunded. Mister Quintana
Manulio Maestas and Jolene
Herrera, would you please come
to the table and reintroduce
yourself and begin when you're
ready, Mr. Chair, thank you for
having me. I, uh, I, I let, uh,
Manuelito and Julian off the
hook today. Um, so, so Friday
and I'm a nice boss.
So, um, just to start off, I
wish I, I wish this presentation
was called, um, uh, an update on
funded construction projects and
not funded and unfunded, right?
Um, unfortunately that's the
reality we're in based on uh the
happenstances of last legis
legislative session, so I'm here
to kind of um go over um all of
our projects both funded and
unfunded um, this isn't the
correct
this isn't the correct, um,
presentation here.
It's a presentation before this,
yeah, but you all have my
presentation, hard copy in front
of you.
Oh, that's right.
All right, thank you
OK
All right, Mr. Chair, uh,
members of the committee, again,
my name is David Quintana. I am
the chief engineer with the
Mexico Department of
Transportation. Um, I'm going to
go over a little bit of before I
start the major major
construction project update. I
want to talk a little bit about
our statewide transportation
improvement program and how
projects get programmed into our
STI.
um, and some of you, this might
be some, some information you
already know, uh, but our, uh,
our STIP is a six-year program
containing all of our federally
funded and regionally
significant projects per 23 CFR
450. This is required um by the
by uh FHWA and DOT uh for us to
uh make sure that we have our,
our plan in place for our, for
our construction program. The
1st 4 years of our SIP, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, our fiscally
constrained, meaning we are
supposed to have the money
identified
and programmed for these
projects that are in the 1st 4
years of the STIPP. Um, the
first two years are reasonably
are, are committed funding while
it's year 3 and 4 are reasonable
assurances of funding, OK? Um
typically you're 3 and 4 are
pretty stable. Um, you know,
we've had to make adjustments
with this year's, uh, STI, year
3 and 4, which is actually this,
this is we're in year 4 of our
sI right now as we speak, or
excuse me, year 3, so we did
have to make some changes. Um,
we had to move some projects out
that became fiscally
unconstrained due to the lack of
funding, um, so
our, uh, outer two years of the
STI as you might, I'll I'll be
aware, is for planning purposes.
We do a lot of our study, our
our studies for corridors, um,
things of that nature in, and
we, we, we programmed those
projects in those outer two
years and they're really a wish
list for the districts and, and
they tend to be um heavily
loaded with some major
investment projects that
typically take time to get
constructed over phases.
Um
what we do is we update every,
we update our step every 2 to 4
years, and it's amended on a
quarterly basis or as needed.
So, um
we also can make some step
adjustments, uh, very minor and,
and, you know, we can, we can do
a one-time increase or decrease
in the funding amount as long as
it's below 20%. Anything above
that, we need to go through a
formal amendment process, so we
typically um hold those types of
of of um changes till the very
last minute when we get our last
engineer's estimate, we might
have to add a little bit of
funding at the end. Um, we, we
do a good job of making sure
that if those engineers
estimates um
are increasing, we, we make sure
that we do get those changes
done through a formal STIPP
amendment.
Um, so the STIP also includes
the transportation improvement
plans for all of our NPOs,
right? We have um 5 MPOs in the
state, Santa Fe, Farmington, um,
Mr. Cog Albuquerque, Las Cruces,
and El Paso. Um, so all of those
areas are responsible for
programming their their
transportation, um, their
transportation projects and
those roll into our step. All
the MPOs are um in in areas that
have a population of 50,000 or
greater. So that's the
difference between an MPO and an
RPO. So the
r ural areas, they, their plans
come through the regional
planning organizations and we
have um about 5 of those as
well.
So
SIPP requirements, projects in
the STIP must align with the
goals from the long range plan,
long and our and our asset
management plan, our our our
transportation asset management
plan, we call it our TAMP, um.
it must assist with meeting
specific performance measured
performance measures and targets
that are identified federally.
Our long-range plan aligns with
7 national planning goals, and
those seven national planning
goals, their safety,
infrastructure condition
congestion reduction, system
reliability, freight movement,
and economic vitality.
Environmental sustainability,
and lastly, reduction of project
delivery timelines.
Um
The PM's safety, the, the, the
performance measures, there's
they, they are around safety,
system condition and system
reliability.
Um, we work with the MPOs to set
targets to ensure their projects
meet their goals and targets as
well. Typically the NPOs adopt
what the state adopts as far as
our performance measures, um,
and, uh, so we work with them
when, whenever we're updating
those performance measures, um,
our project selection process,
it varies from funding source,
right? So it depends on the
color of money. If it's HSIP or
Highway Safety Improvement
Program. We do a call for
projects to our local entities
and to our districts that let
them know that there's some
safety money available and some
of their projects typically
um, you know, not all of it, but
there's a portion of it, it may
be up to 100% of it that could
be eligible for the safety
funds, right? And those um
safety funds are really
identified to um mitigate
obviously safety concerns and
enact proven countermeasures
that have been identified
nationally um for safer roads,
um.
Another example of CMAC funds,
congestion mitigation, air
quality funds, right? Those, um,
those also are, are um
identified for areas such as
Albuquerque, El Paso, where
congestion mitigate mitigation
really is important imperative
to improve the air quality in
the area. Farmington is is close
to that as well. They, they're
eligible for CMAC funds because
of the um the, uh, you know,
the, the air quality in the Four
Corners area. So those are the,
you know, those are two examples
of the different kinds of
fundings that that we
um um target for for types of
projects. So um
bottom line is once we do, uh,
once we do um identify these
projects, the DOT secretary
approves the projects in our
SIPP on behalf of the governor
and then ultimately FHWA,
Federal Highway Administration
and Federal Transit
Administration approve all of
our STIP adoptions and
amendments.
So
connecting the dots between
performance and projects, right?
We, uh, we use, we, we're very
centered around data and making
sure we make our decisions based
on data. So, um, the first and
foremost thing obviously we're
concerned about is safety, um,
and right after that though is
our asset management. We, we
want to make ensure that our
infrastructure, um, is, is in a
state of good repair. We, we
want, we work, we strive to, to
keep our roads and our bridges,
um, at least
in, in, you know, the far
majority of them in a state of
fair or good. Um, so with our
TAP program, our asset
management program, we uh deploy
a van every year. It's, it's
continually, continually
traveling our roadways, um,
using LIDAR technology to uh uh
determine what the pavement
conditions are on our roadways
to help us identify where we
have good, fair, and poor
conditions on our pavements to
help us identify priorities for
our payment
prevent preventative maintenance
programs and rehabilitation
programs. Same thing with our
bridge programs we have, um,
our, our, um, inspectors go out,
we have district uh bridge crews
that inspect bridges. We also
contract with New Mexico Tech
and New Mexico State University
to help us with our bridge
inspection programs. We don't
only inspect our own bridges, we
inspect locals bridges as well.
So we make sure that um all the
bridges, regardless of their on
our system or not, um, their
load rated if they have to be.
They're closed when they have to
be, and we let the locals know
um, you know, when they might
have to, you, you know, a bridge
might need to be load rated or
closed or, you know, what, what
have you, but bottom line is we
let them know that um they have
an issue with their structures,
um, you know, honestly, it's
very difficult for
municipalities and counties to
keep up with their bridges, the,
the resources simply aren't
there for them financially, um,
TPF program has really helped
with that. I'll be honest with
you, um, that the, the
implementation of that program
is, is offered, uh, a good
resource for the locals
to tap into to take care of
their bridge structures, and we
do prioritize those types of
projects when we, when we do,
um, identify local local
projects for the TPF program,
um, another, uh, uh, another,
like I said, safety is number
one, as far as when we're
looking at at our transportation
system. So we're, we, we, we
analyze crash data, you know,
we, uh, we do road safety audits
as, as Miss Whitfield explained
yesterday in her, in her uh
presentation on, on, uh, you
know, target zero,
we uh we have our highway and
safe, our highway safety
improvement program, you know,
we have proven countermeasures
that will help us identify ways
to mitigate safety concerns, um,
and a lot of tools Amy spoke to
that eloquently yesterday. I
won't go on about that. um, but,
uh, bottom line is safety is our
number one concern and we make
sure that that is what we is
front and center when we're
doing any projects that we're
putting out to the public in
design.
Um, and lastly, economic
development, right? I mean, we
can't have any economic
development without roads. We,
if we're not, if, you know,
road's got to be built before we
can do anything else. So, um,
as, as far as that goes, we're
looking at added capacity both
in the existing network and
potentially new roads, right?
The border connector, for
instance, um, and multimodal
facilities, right? Walkability,
bike ability, you know, business
districts and allowing this
downtown, uh, downtown business
districts to have that
pedestrian, pedestrian, um, foot
traffic, you know, helps with,
helps with
uh, with their business as well.
So
next page, what we do is um are
we put all of our projects
through what we call our car
form and this is, it's not, it's
not the best the way it came out
here, but we're looking at all
those aspects that I just
touched, safety, um, conditions,
and mobility, and it's awaited,
it's awaited, um, analysis that
kind of ranks our projects,
ensures that we are putting our
resources where they're supposed
to be, um, and, and it's so like
I said it's weighted the asset
management portion and safety
portion and
weighted a little heavier than
than other portions of it, um,
because again, we wanna, we
wanna make sure we keep our
assets in a state of good
repair, right?
So can you um
so
ultimately what happens is, uh,
myself and my SIP staff, we, we
meet quarterly with the
districts and um the districts
are the ones that are
responsible for their step.
They, they manage their st step,
they identify their projects
through the tools that we
provide through the tools that
are available, the tamp, the
card form, um, and, and they
really, they're really the ones,
you know, they're the ones that
have their boots on the ground.
They, they know exactly where
the priorities are in their
district. So, so it's imperative
that the districts do identify
their priorities, you know, so
that they're the ones that that
really do have the
the best sense. Um, so we meet
with them on a quarterly basis,
um
we review all of their, their
SIPP projects, um, make sure
that they are fiscally
constrained. We help them with
that. If they need to identify
other colors of money that, you
know, need to fill a gap,
whether it's, you know, some
portions of the project can, you
know, utilize safety or or pro
protect money or CMAC funding,
whatever the case may be, um,
uh, we help them identify those
types of fundings to fill those
gaps, um
so sips stuff, you know, works
with our planning division as
well and, uh, and our, and our
bridge bureau to program
appropriate funding sources
based on the needs for the
districts. And again, the
districts, you know, and I was
at the district in District 5, I
was going to MPO and RPO
meetings on a monthly basis. So
the districts really are, um,
the folks that that have a good
handle on what the needs are,
not only for the the state, the
district, but also the locals
within the district, right? So,
so, um, so that, that
collaborative process has always
been there, um, and continues
to be there, um, in general,
federal funds can be used on
roads functionally classified as
major collectors or hire. So
those are roads, you know,
you're not gonna, uh, uh,
neighborhood streets obviously
minor minor collectors that
don't generate a lot of volume,
um, that don't, uh, you know,
just, just smaller rows really
aren't eligible for federal
funding, um, and that used to be
an issue when I, I'll go back to
the bridges that used to be an
issue for locals because federal
aid dollars weren't available
for bridges that weren't
on, on, uh, um, bigger on bigger
roads, right? Now with the new
bipartisan infrastructure law,
federal dollars are allowed on
some of those smaller bridges,
so we're able to leverage some
of those funds to help our
locals too. So we've done, done
a good job to kind of bring down
our, our local bridge conditions
as far as um a bad condition
goes. We've helped them, we've
probably helped about 4 or 5
municipalities take care of
about 67 bridges, um, local
bridges that otherwise wouldn't
have been done, so.
moving on with our um actual
major construction projects that
we have on a district level,
starting with district one.
Um, we have the New Mexico 2
213-404 interchange and down in
uh Dona, well Don Donana County.
They're right near El Paso, um,
those improvements are gonna, if
all, all of you, any of you that
are aware of that intersection
currently is a roundabout, we're
gonna do um uh semi-interchange
there. There's a lot of traffic
there, so we're gonna do some
some major improvements to that
and widened 213. So it's gonna
be, it's a big project, um, it's
coming out in October of this
year um for a total construction
cost of 126 million
dollars. Good news, it's fully
funded.
Um, the next one in, uh, next,
uh, project in District one is
the Nogga Canyon Bridge. Um,
that construction cost is
approximately $146 million. The
funding gap we have there is
$74.5 million. We did receive a
USDOT uh bridge improvement
grant grant award in in the
amount of $7171.5 million.
and there's an obligation
deadline, meaning we have to
request
FHWA to obligate those funds by
next September, um, in order to
to realize that's that that
funding. If not, um, there's a
potential we could lose them. So
that gap is um critical and
you'll see that some of these
projects are bold are in bold,
and these are the ones that are
um that did receive grants and,
and do that do need to get these
gaps filled or we lose that
grant funding. So um
I'm, I'm, I'm really bold,
boldening those to, to emphasize
the importance of additional
funding, uh, this year,
hopefully for the special
session, the regular session
because um we, there's some
projects that are at risk if we
don't. The next one down, E
10391, that's a new border
connector highway. It's new road
construction down Santa Teresa,
um, construction cost is $170
million with the funding gap of
125 million. We received the US
DOT Infragrant award in the
amount of $45 million and its
obligation
deadline is this September. So
we're scrambling to figure out
how we're going to fight, how
we're gonna fix that gap.
Assuming we do, it's gonna let
in November.
Um
District 2, moving on to
District 2's major construction
projects
uh, control number 210-4333 and
34. They're two separate
projects, but they're both on
New Mexico 128 down in the jal
area, reconstructing and
widening uh of uh New Mexico 128
to include intersection
improvements, lot of oil and gas
traffic um down in Gallaon, New
Mexico 128, so it's a huge, huge
project for that area, huge
safety project for that area.
Construction costs for both the
projects is about $100 million
and they're fully funded, uh,
they're letting this this fall
in Oc
to ber
Uh, the next one is Downtown
Clovis, Phase 2 project. It's an
urban reconstruction, um, and
downtown close US 60 is a
downtown Clovis. Uh, the
construction cost for that's
48.6 million, and it's fully
funded and it's gonna let in
October of 2026 next year.
Um, the next one down is another
project we received a grant for
New Mexico 128 reconstruction
widening intersection
improvements, the construction
costs for that is 45.2 million.
The good news is the funding
gap's only 6.4 million, so
there's not a huge, huge concern
on that one.
USDOT rule grant award for 36.1
million, um was identified for
that and the obligation deadline
is September of 2027, so that's
on track. We're not too
concerned about that one. the
letting date for that one's
going to be
December of 2027. Lastly, we
received, um, what they call
arisie Award from uh Department
of uh uh it's uh
oh, it's RFA which is um I'm
sorry, it's the railed rail
Administration FRA, excuse me,
um, and these are to eliminate
at grade crossings at rails. So
this is a huge bridge project
that's gonna go, it's downtown
Texaco, it's going over the
BNSF, um, we received a grant,
uh, in the, in the amount of
73.1 million total construction
costs 93.1 million. We have a
$10 million gap, um, and we're
working, uh, closely with the
text. on that project is a
portion of that project is
within Texas as well.
um,
and that Chrissie Grant, the
obligation deadline. Well, and
really those obligation and with
these, with these um uh Chrissie
Grants, these, these great
separated grants, they're there,
there really isn't an obligation
deadline for these projects,
which is good news because we
did receive another grant for
Allison Rhodes, same type of
grant in District 6 we'll all
speak to later, um, but there
isn't an obligation deadline, so
that's good news on that, on
that front. So it gives us some
time to identify that gap. Um,
the letting date for downtown
Texaco we're anticipating is
gonna be December of 20
28.
Moving on to District 3
um
I-40 Carniel bridge replacement,
um, that is uh construction cost
of about 36.5 million. It's
fully funded, and that's going
to go out next October 2026.
Um, New Mexico 500, Rio Bravo
Bridge replacement, that's
fixing to take off any minute
now. We actually um awarded
recently awarded that contract.
Um, it's a total construction
cost, Azlet cost of $133 million
and the letdding date was this
past April.
Um, lastly, uh, 8301-891, that's
I-25 Gibson Boulevard,
Interchange reconstruction.
Right now, the anticipated cost
is about $150 million. We don't
have any construction funding
identified for that right now.
Um, once we do, uh, this was
really one of the major
investment projects along with
all of the ones that are gaped.
These were these were going to
be the ones we sell bonds for,
right? When we if we got that
bonding package through last
year, um, these were going to be
the projects that we would have
sold some of the bonding
packages, some of those bond
bound proceeds for, um, assuming
we
get, uh, the funding in place,
this project will let after
Montgomery Comanche gets
completed, so we'd be looking
around 2028 time frame.
Um, just don't wanna have too
much construction on I-25 at the
same time, right?
District 4,
we have a coup we have a couple
of projects, um, the biggest one
we have is South Raton
Interchange reconstruction, it's
um the highway to Clayton, uh,
that is a construction, total
construction cost at 27.3
million, and that is fully
funded and that's going out next
summer.
Um, and lastly, uh, New Mexico
104, the Contrast bridge
replacements, bridge replacement
along New Mexico 104. It's
construction cost of $20
million. That is also fully
funded and will go out December
2026.
Uh, district 5
project coming out this this
fall I-25 rehabilitation, um,
this is basically I-25 through
Santa Fe from Old Pecos Trail to
El Dorado, roughly, um, so that
is a construction cost of 46.6
million. That's fully funded and
that's letting this December.
We have um
the next project is phase 4 of
the US 64 um project between
Arizona and Shiprock.
and that's a construction cost
of about $50 million. It's fully
funded. Um, we have a USDOT
Infragrant award of about $29.5
million the obligation deadline
is next September for that and
the letting date is um actually
um March of 2026. So we're not
concerned about, about meeting
that deadline. Um.
that US 64 project, you've heard
a lot about it. It's, it's, it's
Arizona to Shiprock. It's 5
phases. Um, we received a grant
award in 20, I want to say like
2020 was the first one we
received and the amount of, uh,
gosh, I think it was like $40
million or something like that,
um, at the time costs weren't,
you know, construction costs
were very reasonable in 2020.
And then once we started
developing this project costs
got out of hand. We applied for
another grant, got it. So, the
next project
uh, well, actually the next
bolded project is um phase 5.
That's all state funded. That's
33.8 million. That's the match
for this for the corridor for
those two grants. So that is a
that's a grant gap for us. Um,
so that 33.8 again was going to
be part of the bond proceeds.
Um, the one I skipped between
those four phase 4 and phase 5
is a great project in front of
the Shiprock schools, Ship for
Shiprock High School, Shiprock
High School, middle school, and
Dane College, um, safety project
for, um, HSIP funded. There was
a road safety audit done back in
2010, a long time ago when I was
at the district, um, and finally
this project's getting the the
kids walked to school on goat
paths. There's no pedestrian
facilities whatsoever, and 64 is
a very busy road, so this is a
great project for the schools
and for those kids that are
walking to school.
Um, the last project down on
District 5 is uh New Mexico 14
Serrios Road. That's the stretch
right in front of the general
office there in Santa Fe, Urban
reconstruction, um, construction
costs right now is estimated
about $48 million and that is
the gap. It's a fully, it's a
100% state funded project, um,
the design, all the design
development has been um right
away acquisition has been done
completely 100% with state
funds. We'd like to keep it that
way because of Buy America, to
be honest with you, and utility
costs and lighting costs and,
and it, it'd be a significant
increase if we did have to ask,
if we had federal dollars to
that project and then have to
follow by America and, and, and
obviously it just would increase
those construction costs.
um, lastly, districts not last
but not least, Lisa District 6.
I-40 corridor drainage
improvements near Church Rock.
Uh, that construction cost is
$68.3 million. It's fully funded
and it's letting this next
month.
Um, the next project, uh, I-40,
uh, the I-40 over the Rio Puerco
bridge replacement, uh, it's a
$49.2 million dollar
construction costs. We have a
$12.7 million gap, and we did
receive a an infragrant in the
amount of 30.44 million. Uh, the
anticipated lighting date for
that is next October.
Um, and I spoke about Alison
Road previously, that was the
other Chrissie Grant award
project that's gonna take a at
grade at grade intersection and
make it an overpass at the BNSF
there in Gallup, um, total
construction costs 56.1 million.
Uh, we got 44.9 million, leaves
us with an $11.2 million gap.
Um, anticipated landing date,
uh, approximately 2028. We're
still in the early stages of
development on that so
um
the next page kind of just
summarizes where we are with our
priority projects and funding
gaps, um, so our total, and I
apologize for the misspell there
total priority project costs is
$1.48 billion
total grant funds that are at
risk if we don't meet these gaps
or don't feel, don't meet our
match requirements, uh, $330
million.
Um, and then we have other
funding that's obligated to
these projects as well to the
tune of $678 million.
When you look at our total gap
just for our priority projects,
um
that's $471 million for all of
our projects right now. Almost
half a billion dollars, um, and
just the grant funds alone were.
quarter of a billion dollars
in GA, um, so
I wish I could have ended on a
lighter note, but with that,
I'll stand for any questions or
sit for any questions.
Thank you. I don't see any
questions. Beautiful. Appreciate
the report. Thank you.
Next we have, uh, Secretary
Serna
Hm
Mallory Manzanares.
and Michael Morrison
Please proceed when you're ready
and reintroduce yourself as
well.
things
Thank you
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Riki Serna, Secretary for New
Mexico Department of
Transportation, and I have with
me Michael Morrison, and he's
our chief economist, and we'll
just kind of um hand off these
slides.
Um
as we go through them
just to give you all, uh, you
know, a, a reminder about the
magnitude of uh DOT as an
organization you'll see here
more than 2500 employees. Uh, we
do really well, uh, relative to
the statewide vacancy rate. Uh,
we've been able to come down
from 19% to under 15% in the
last few years. One of the
things that I do want to point
out, um, under that bullet, of
course, is this figure right
here, $256 million of annual
costs for personnel
Just to put that in perspective,
our state road fund in total is
just over $500 million and so
half of it goes directly to just
paying DOT oper just DOT
salaries and benefits.
Our budget for um FY 25, which
distended is just over $1.3
billion. Um, and revolving
projects at this point $1.4
billion and then you'll see here
the centerline Miles
construction crews, construction
officers, great footprint.
On the next slide, I'll try and
keep up with these here.
Um, something we present to the
House Transportation and Senate
tax, uh, Business tax
committees, um, is the annual
trip report, The Associated
Contractors of New Mexico
partners with, uh, third party
organization that prepares a
report that identifies what the
funding gaps, um, uh, are for
improvements on existing
infrastructure and what the cost
is to drivers in the state as a
result of that infrastructure,
um, not being, um, a
maintenanced on a regular basis
and so that gap, um, when they'd
completed the January 2025
report was $5.6 billion in
unfunded transportation
projects. Um, the percentage of
acceptable roads in the state
decrease slightly from 75% to
just under 70% when compared to
2003. And so you'll, you'll take
a look here at what the uh um uh
study found in terms of bridge
improvement multiplier, that's
essentially for every $1 we
invest in roads, the output is
just under $3
50 cents. And so, um, I'm gonna
hand it off to Michael so he can
talk a little bit about that sac
metric that the trip report
prepares, which is the cost to
all of us for uh being on our
roads in their current state.
Good morning. And uh, so after
doing some calculations based on
numbers provided in the TIP
report and are on vehicle
registration. We, uh, actually,
well, the TIP report found that
uh deteriorated roads were
responsible for $3.6 billion in
costs to Mexicans annually. So
that's broken out between $1.6
billion for vehicle operating
costs.
$800 million for safety costs
and then 1.2 billion in
congestion costs. In the table
below that we have broken out
into average costs per uh
registered vehicle in uh our
metropolitan y uh MSA is the
statistical areas, um, as well
as for all New Mexicans, and you
see that on average for all New
Mexicans across the state,
that's about $2000 a year in um
added costs for vehicle
ownership within New Mexico.
And so this, uh, I know we gave
a similar overview of this going
to uh uh vice chair uh Maestas
here was
what is that comparison between
needing to, you know, buying
tires and that cost to New
Mexicans, and so you arrive at
that $2000 figure, right? And
um as, as uh, as a measure for
what New Mexicans are, are
contributing here.
On the next slide operating
budget, state and federal, um,
just to give you a sense of from
where that $1.3 billion dollar
comes. Uh, we'll go into a
little bit of detail, of course,
we've provided an expensive, um,
sheet, which is a really neat
addition to what we've done
here, but at the very, very end
of your presentation, I believe
you have, um, this slide which
kind of like unfolds a little
bit so you can read a little
more easily, but that kind of uh
itemizes the tax distributions
that
come from, uh, the state, uh,
Road Fund revenue that's
generated by a number of uh road
user fees and basically the
other half of our budget, the
550 million comes from our
annual federal apportionment,
and so some of those two really
comprises our $1.3 billion
budget.
And so we wanted to talk a
little bit, of course, about um,
you know, the federal funding
piece, um, and then we'll, we'll
dive a little into the state.
And so just to um kind of fast
track to the next slide and
we'll show you this high level
here, as you all probably
recall, um, you know, from your
10 years and your roles is as
federal administrations change,
they essentially establish and
pass what is called the surface
transportation bill or funding
mechanism. And so what we did on
this slide is kind of take you
back to 2012
uh surface Transportation Bill
MAP 21 and then it changed to
fast act and then of course IIJA
included BIL which is set to
expire in 20026 in 2026. And so
that surface transportation
funding bill for State
Departments of Transportation
ran from 2022 to 2026.
And um it authorized $1.2
trillion in federal spending
over five years. And if you look
at the table to the right,
you'll see that going back to
2012, we certainly have seen an
increase in federal funding, um,
as a result of, you know, cost
escalations, increased programs,
and, uh, metrics that state DOTs
are responsible for. And you
recall going back just a couple
of years ago when BIL uh was
first passed and became that
funding mechanism for us all.
There was a lot of discussion
about
the increases that it provided,
not just year over year, but
immediately, right? There was
this general sense that now
money is reigning and we just
had to go outside and catch it
and then we would fix all of our
roads.
And so what we pointed out over
the past few years is that money
came by way of 2 real big
changes, right? Increased
programs that DOTs were
responsible to administer, but
also commitment from um from
USDOT funding for competitive
grant programs and in this piece
of legislation, it also
authorized local governments to
apply for those federal grant
programs and so now we're
working in 2025 for the next
year with other state DOTs to
est
ab li sh that framework for what
the new surface transportation
bill will look like and what
we're proposing as one of our
core principles is how do we
translate that commitment to
transportation from real
unpredictable competitive grants
to more formula funding, right?
As you know, Mr. Quintana
pointed out to you earlier, you
receive those grants, identify
that they cover a portion of the
project by the time you apply
for the grant, receive the
grant, get the project ready for
letting your commitment to the
project goes beyond that
required match. Now you have
another budget shortfall that
you fall that you have to fund,
and we don't see that coming as
predictable as formula funding.
So this shares with you that
over time that service
transportation um uh bill has
been increasing in funding BIL
for the first time provided 2%
annual increases year over year,
but we've seen, um, cost
escalations that you've seen a
little bit um exceed that, uh,
by a whole lot.
On the state road fund funding
overview, we share with you, uh,
I know a lot of you are familiar
with this. I'll just go over
very quickly. We have our, our
biggies here, our gasoline tax,
um, generating.
21% of total state road fund
special fuel tax or diesel fuel
tax, 25%. Weight distance taxes
is is a big there and that, of
course, is the 20% of our state
road fund what our, our heavy
commerce uh traffic is
contributing to a state road
fund, vehicle registration fees
at 17% of motor excise tax at
11%. Those are the major sources
they comprise about 95 94% of
the total state road fund.
We also, uh, want to recognize
that in addition to the federal
and state funding that we
receive on an ongoing basis,
going back to 2019, the UA is
legislators and the governor has
provided us an additional 2.3
billion in one time
appropriations for not just
roadway construction and
maintenance that's been the
lion's share, but to be sure,
other programs of interest, um,
to us as as a partnership,
including commitments to
transportation project fund,
which is a grant program that we
talked about yesterday for
local governments, aviation,
wildlife corridors, litter
beautification, equipment, ports
of entry, rest areas, EV
charging stations, etc. And so
what we did here is prepare a
table that shows you the 2.1
billion from 2019 to 2024,
understanding that that last um
189 million just became
available about a month ago in
July. And so you'll see of the
2.1 billion from 2019 to 2024.
We've been able to expand our
obligate
about 97% of total funding, um,
and so what we will continue to
work on is the um encumbrance,
the assigning that additional
revenue to projects, uh,
encumbering it and then of
course getting those projects
under construction. In many
cases, in other cases, um,
administering program funding
out to other locals, etc. So,
um, we appreciate that funding
and we're hopeful that being
able to share this update
demonstrates our collective
capacity to get that funding
spent in
pretty short order
And here I'm gonna go over the
uh short run forecasts developed
by uh NMDOT economists,
including doctors uh Kuake
Boacchi and GupXiongs along with
myself. Uh, as you see on line
21 in the highlighted line at
the bottom there. Go over the
total recurring or total road
fund funding forecast for FY 25,
we did see an increase of about
$30 million from $532 million to
562 million or 563 million
really.
Uh, that is expected to go down
or remain flat, just a little
bit going to FY 26, going to um
$562.1 million from FY 27
onward, it's going to go up to
570 million and continue growing
to the end of the horizon, uh,
forecast horizon for to just
under 500 or 600 million, I
apologize.
And uh well, let's go on to the
next year. I did want to take
some time just to talk a little
bit about the different tax
programs that we offer that are
feeding into the state road fund
that way gives um little context
to what's going on and how that
might be influenced by world
events and uh national events
and
such things. Um, first off is
the gasoline tax, which is the
most uh visible or um the tax
program that most people know
about, that's right now set for
New Mexico at 17 cents per
gallon, and we'll talk about a
little bit about state
comparisons later on, um, of
that 17 cents per gallon, about
13 cents goes to the state road
fund, which is, as the secretary
mentions about, uh, actually 113
million in FY 25. The last time
this tax was changed was
actually 1996. The tax was
lowered from 20 cents to 17
cents.
um, as a side note, if, uh, that
had kept up with inflation that
would now be about 35 cents per
gallon. Uh, next we have our
special fuel tax, that's a tax
on diesel, so that's uh paid by
diesel tax sales as well as buy
heavy trucks that are consuming
diesel in the state. That's
through our uh international
fuel tax agreement or IFTA. That
of the 21 cents per gallon tax
on diesel, 19% of that per
gallon or 19 cents per gallon
goes to the state road fund.
That was last changed in 2004.
We did raise the tax by 3 cents.
This um
kind of coincidentally like um
gasoline tax if it kept up with
inflation would be 36 cents per
gallon instead of 35.
Additionally, we have, uh, one
of the other big four tax
revenues. It's our vehicle
registration that uh the annual
biannual fee for registering
your vehicle goes from $21 for a
vehicle under 3000 pounds more
than 5 years old, all the way up
to $172 per year for a heavy or
semi truck.
that uh among that almost 75% or
74.7% goes to the state road
fund. That was last changed in
2004 along with the special fuel
tax and vehicle registration
fees were increased about 35%.
Next, uh, go on to the next
slide in 14. That's uh
kind of rounding out our big
five program, tax programs. We
have the weight distance tax,
and that is a tax on uh semi
trucks traveling through New
Mexico that it goes from
anywhere from 11.01 mills per
mile all the way up to 43.
8 mills per mile, 100% of that
goes to the state road fund, um,
to receive the um or to pay the
wait distance tax trucks do need
to be registered with the
International registration plan
or they must have an practical
terms, the apportioned written
on their license plate. So if
you see a new truck with a
portioned on it, they're paying
wait distance tax. Um
that was, uh, also last changed
in 2004.
Motor vehicle excise tax kind of
rounds out our top 5 at uh
that's a 4% tax paid on the sale
of motor vehicles, uh, 20,
almost 22% goes to the state
road fund that was increased in
2019 or increased from zero in
2019 all the way up to the
current level. Um, along with
the increase in distribution to
the state road fund, the rate
itself was increased by 1%.
Just to make a, a kind of um
quantify that first um
that first tax that might go
went through here, the gasoline
tax lowered 3 cents, just, just
to kind of get a glimpse of what
that does monetarily. Every 1
cent, um, equates to about $6.8
million a year in revenue to the
state road fund. That's that
percentage of the 17 cents that
we get, right? So if you take
that back to 200 to 1996, that's
29 years multiplied by that
about $197 million right, is
what the repeal or that
reduction in gasoline tax costs
the state road fund.
The next slide that we're
showing you here, um,
essentially was um presented by
um by this organization, the
NCSL about a couple of years
ago, I believe the presentation
was done to this committee and
it was a springboard for us on
how we um engage in some ideas
about how we could address the
long term forecast for the state
road fund.
So, uh, what we did is we pulled
together a group of key
stakeholders, policy makers,
some from the Association of
State Transportation Officials
and, and consulted with other
states to essentially identify
strategies for increasing our uh
ongoing capacity, um, at the
Department of Transportation,
not just through the state road
fund but by other means. And so
just to give you all a sense,
this slight shows that of
course, just you know,
regionally where we fare with
other states and in a little
bit, you're gonna
in terms of reliance on gas tax
for state road fund revenue for
road infrastructure, and a
little bit, you're gonna see
that really there's just 4 or 5
different buckets that state
transportation departments are,
are looking at from fuel tax to
bonding and other things like
that, but you'll see, of course,
that our reliance on fuel tax is
not unlike other states, uh,
neighboring other states and the
same is true nationally. And so
what this, what this group set
out to do was really identify a
couple of things. What are other
states doing that New Mexico
could be doing to increase
state road fund revenue and what
are things that we have
considered up until this point
that we maybe haven't had a lot
of time to digest and and
analyze and um we'll talk a
little bit about how that played
into last year's legislative
priorities.
OK, just, uh, I'm sure most of
you have seen, uh, maps like
this before we've shown quite
often, but I want to go over the
updated for our gasoline taxes
within uh compared to the other
states. So right now, New Mexico
is um
at 17 cents is the fourth lowest
in the nation and the lowest
among our states, but uh as the
secretary mentioned,
in one cent increase would work
out to about $6.8 million or $7
million annually.
Uh, that's also compared with
our uh diesel tax.
to the next slide. This one
we're not quite as as slow in
terms of the ranking. We are 9th
in the the nation. And uh 4th
lowest among our neighbors, I
believe we're looking at
um Texas and Oklahoma are both
lower than us in the diesel or
special fuel tax. But um
kind of coincidentally, like,
um, gasoline, a once cent
increase would raise about $6.7
or $6.6 million in revenue.
Um, in case you're interested in
this slide, the next slide,
slide 18, shows you how our, um,
holding firm on on tax rates for
gasoline and diesel taxes faring
with other states over time. So
what you'll see here in 2013 for
um
diesel fuel and gasoline tax,
respectively was 17, um, ranked
17th in the nation and 8th in
the nation. And so what's
happened since 2013 through
2025, if we cut that ranking in
half, meaning that as we stay
firm on those tax rates, other
states increase them, and so
that rate nationally is starting
to move closer to the bottom in
terms of affordability and so
the implications there, of
course, is that
the further away we get to where
they have to go, um, then the
harder it is to catch up there,
right? And so, given that we're
sitting here at a university,
right? You can kind of connect
this, for example, to tuition,
right? If an institution says,
OK, we're gonna just keep
holding our tuition the same,
the same, the same as utility
goes up, the cost of paying
faculty goes up, the cost of
meal plans and, and things like
that. At some point, the
institution says, well, now
we're going to have to charge
more to uh keep up with all of
that. And if they do that all at
once, and they're looking at a
really
high percent of tuition increase
as opposed to saying we did it
incrementally to keep up with
the pace of things and we don't
shock anyone at once. And so
you'll see we, we, we basically
are holding firm all other
states are, are moving the
needle to keep up with um
inflation.
I do wanna mention just uh
quickly here just talking about
while the tax rate is one thing,
the actual revenue is probably
the more important aspect. So we
did want to map out the gasoline
revenue per lane mile, so things
are comparable across states and
so we do have on slide 19, the
map, but if we go to uh
slide 20 maybe it's a little bit
more, it's easier to see New
Mexico's position, uh, compared
to the rest of the nation. Um,
in terms of gasoline revenue per
lane mile, Mexico is the lowest
among our neighboring states and
6th among the nation. Largely
this is driven by our lower
population relative to Lane
miles and low gasoline tax rate.
Uh, we're going to move next to
the diesel revenue per lane
mile. We have our map on 21, but
then on next slide in 22, we
have our table, um
this New Mexico is the 2nd
lowest among our neighboring
states, 9 or 16th lowest in the
nation, so we're a little bit
better off than with gasoline.
That's largely due to the
importance of uh I-40, uh um
I-10 is not on there. It should
be IN I-25 as freight corridors.
So most, the majority of freight
coming from ports of Long Beach
in LA going to the rest of the
country are coming across on 40,
10 and 25, so we are collecting
much more revenue
on that aspect, but we're still
in the bottom, uh, quarter more
or less.
So look at uh next going into
our aspects of uh vehicle
registration. We have a map with
uh vehicle registration broken
out by newer and older vehicles
since New Mexico does have a uh
a discount for vehicles that are
more than 5 years old. So if
we're looking at newer vehicles,
we are the lowest among our
neighbors and 19th lowest in the
nation. Uh, look at the older
vehicles and on it's like 26th,
Mexico is still lowest among our
neighbors, and this time only
21st lowest
in the nation, so a little bit
lower but then uh middle of the
pack.
Next slide, if we look into this
is um slightly modified from
earlier presentations. We have
our heavy truck registration and
added with on our weight
distance tax by state. So there
are currently only a few states
that do charge a wait distance
tax, so we, um, I think 5 states
overall that we've uh
folded into our heavy truck
registration, which is what most
other states charge instead.
And if you look at the table on
slide 24, or 28, I apologize.
Thank you.
Uh, that's where our
for heavy truck registration, we
were the lowest in the nation by
a fairly large margin, charging
$172 I believe for um
heavy truck registration, but
with weight distance tax added
in, we moved up to this um
5th lowest in the nation, 2nd
lowest among our neighbors,
um
but we are still much lower in
both registration and the weight
distance tax, if we're looking
at that comparison.
And next we have our uh vehicle
excise tax rates, so we have the
green map on the slide 29 and
then slide 30 has our vehicle
excise tax rates. We are in this
case, the 6th lowest in the
nation that includes New
Hampshire and Montana that don't
have a attacks on the sale of
motor vehicles at all. So we are
among our lowest uh across the
board as well, are among the
lowest in across the board.
And then I believe we're moving
on to, yep, slide 31, uh,
members of the committee, you'll
see here, kind of, uh, taking a
chunk from our portion of the
country here and are looking at
some of our neighboring states,
those 5 buckets that I was
telling you essentially comprise
the strategy for funding road
infrastructure in states. The
motor fuels, uh, fuel taxes,
motor vehicle and motor carrier
taxes, other taxes like tolls
and mandatory fees, general
fund, federal and local, and
then
um, bonds and, and so you'll
see, of course, that uh in New
Mexico, um, right in the middle
of that map is a very reliant,
of course, on motor vehicle,
motor carrier taxes, and, and
motor fuels, um, but, uh, only
at the, you know, 26% and 16%,
but even if you look over at
Nevada, they're higher than us
and both those in in that regard
combined. And so we are very
much um working with the same
kind of tools in the toolbox, if
you will, in terms of um funding
types. One of the things that I
want to point out both as a US
average and and and calling it
out for Oklahoma in particular
is this data is current as of
2023, but you'll see US average
about 5% of total road
infrastructure funding is coming
by way of bonding, and those
come in different forms, whether
it's, you know, transportation
authority or legislative
authority, uh, to bond projects
for um.
for road infrastructure
This last slide is a great big
roll up of the total revenue,
um, that states received by
Langmile, uh, so you'll see on
slide 32 here, this is basically
when we went to the first tables
at $1.3 billion budget comprised
the state and federal dollars,
what we're receiving per lane
mile and for New Mexico it's
about $1600 and you'll see here
relative to our other states,
um,
uh, sorry, this is the total not
lane mile. OK, the total
revenue, and then let's go to
the lane mile map actually
on 34. And you'll see here
22,000, um, and uh where we fare
here, 8th lowest in the nation
when measured by lean mile and
the lowest among our our
neighboring states. And why is
that important? Because you all
travel and if you do that, just
regionally or you have um family
that come in regionally, you
might hear that comment, right?
You know, we came in from Texas,
we came in from Arizona, we came
in from Colorado and you know
the roads this and they they got
rougher here or they got less
rough when we left and and
entered here. And so
you'll see that, uh, regionally,
how we're faring, um, there's
been a lot of, um, coverage
recently. I want to share this
with you about the state of
Oregon. I don't know if you all
have been following that from a
transportation perspective, but
about 2 or 3 months ago, the the
governor for the state of
Oregon, um, issued a public
notification that they were
looking at uh laying off
hundreds of their DOT workers
and then eliminating another 400
positions that they weren't
going to be able to fill, and
that served as kind of the
carrot for a special session
which is taking place, I
believe, exactly a week from
today in Oregon to close at $300
million gap in transportation
department budget, but if in,
and it's interesting because you
look at uh the map on page 34,
and you see that for our 22,000
of total revenue per lane mile,
they receive about double that
at 40,000 per lane mile, right?
And this $300 million gap comes
on the heels of them having
already cut 3
0 $0 million of operational
expenditures, right? And so it,
it points to the fact that
there's a number of things we
have to do, which is budget
resources efficiently, right?
And but two is we need to
identify with uh increased
revenue that helps us address
some of these challenges before
things um become too expensive.
OK, so now it's uh time to look
at the uh less rosy picture, uh,
which is our long run forecast.
Um, we're looking at here the
top 4 revenue sources for state
road fund. Do you see that uh
right about at the end of our
short term forecast horizon in
2030. There is going to be
expected a downturn in our um
motor fuel taxes. This is
primarily due in the short run
to more fuel efficient vehicles
and not alternative fuel
vehicles. Those
well, although we do expect that
to have an impact as we get
closer to 2050, vehicle
registration is expected to
remain somewhat stable but slow
growth, tied primarily to
population growth within the
state. Uh, way distance taxes
are expected to grow steadily
and remain somewhat stable,
If we look in the next slide,
um, in 38, we see the total road
fund forecast and that's um
looking at about a 13% decline
between now and 2050. That is in
nominal terms.
So, uh, but if we do look going
forward into uh in real terms,
so accounting for increases in
prices. We are looking at about
um or general prices, that's
about a 50% decline in our state
road fund revenues between now
and 2050, coupled with that,
that's an increase. There's also
going to be an expected increase
in road construction costs, not
general costs, but road
construction costs by over 136%
by 2050. So we're looking at
seriously declining revenues as
well as increasing costs along
that same time period as well.
So going back to um what Michael
said earlier about why we're
gonna see the decline in some of
the revenue from tax gas, um,
uh, generated, um, there's been
a lot of discussion, of course,
about the implications that
electric vehicles or plug-in
hybrid vehicles are going to
have on the state's revenues,
but the focus needs to really
kind of shift from there to what
we're gonna talk about now,
noting that right now only 1% of
the vehicles, less than 1% of
vehicles registered in the state
of New Mexico are electric or
plug
- in hybrid. Here's what's been
happening, however, um, since
2024, what we project will
happen as a result of just more
fuel efficient vehicles, right?
And so the average MPG is
expected to grow, um, 7.8% from
2222.14%, right, this is MPG,
223.87 by FY 30. So what does
that mean? That total impact
equates to about $6 million a
year in state road fund revenue,
right? So this isn't just
about, well, what is a, you
know, we estimate and, and we
shared this the last time we did
this presentation, about $150 of
this what you all are paying if
you have 22 MPG and you're
driving 15,000 miles a year,
you're contributing, right,
about $150 a year in fuel tax to
the state road fund. But what's
happening here, right, is if you
get a fuel efficient vehicle,
and you're increasing from 22
MPG to a more
efficient than that amount
starts to decrease over time.
And so the impact will be about
$36 million between 2024 and
2030 just for those individuals
who are being conscious and
more, right? You don't have to
be so picky to find a vehicle
that you can get above 22, 23
miles a gallon. And so that's
what, um, the focus is, and
because it's difficult to um to
address that from a policy
perspective, how do we address
it? We've got to find other
levers besides just tax,
right? So if you go back to the
discussion about electric
vehicles, there are things from
a policy perspective that you
can do, like, say if you're not
going to contribute to fuel tax
at the pump, you're going to
contribute to it at the point of
registration. That's fine. But
here what we're seeing is
your're paying less because
you're at the pump less, and so
how do we, how do we address
that from a policy perspective
without saying
dealerships or auto
manufacturers are making more
fuel efficient vehicles and
consumers are buying them. We
got to find other ways to, um,
to generate revenue for road
construction.
So going back to kind of
summarize um what we had been
working on prior to the 2025
legis legislative session again
where two things. What are other
states doing that we can
leverage to address the long
term forecast of the state road
fund relative to cost of
construction, and two is how do
we kind of dissect a few things
that have already been
considered so that we can give
them, you know, either a thumbs
up or down or tweak them in a
way that does address some of
that, some of the concerns.
uh.
And so when we boiled it down to
was uh good news and bad news,
the, the good news is that, um.
we're not really missing a lot.
There, as you saw from the, the
chart before, a lot of states
are functioning, if not all of
them are functioning much like
we are, right? The bad news is
there's nothing we can steal
from them, right? That's the bad
news is what are other states
doing that we can rip off and
duplicate over here so that we
can do things in short order,
and we don't see a lot there,
except for some creative
solutions around generating
enough revenue that really is
contributing to debt service,
meaning allowing states to
generate revenue, allowing them
to bond
and use that new revenue to pay
back bonds, and I'll give you an
example. There were a couple of
states, one of which we
consulted with, uh, Minnesota
and Colorado who established
what's called a third party
delivery charge, right? So
whenever you order something
online, third party, there's a
surcharge added to that, and
that revenue goes from the tax
and revenue department in those
states to the state road fund.
And in both those states, it's
generating roughly between $55
million.65 million dollars a
year at the cost of $3 million a
mile for
new construction. That's not
breakthrough math, right? What
they're using that revenue for
is debt service so they can go
out and bond for really large
projects and pay it back with
this new money.
And so we believe that when we
introduced in the 2025
legislative session, House Bill
145, we were trying to address
two fundamental problems that we
have here in New Mexico. The
first problem is or challenge,
we do not receive recurring
revenue from the legislature. We
receive recurring revenue from
the federal government and from
road user fees, right, that are
set and static and policy, but
as you saw in other states and
as you know with other agencies,
they receive recurring general
fund that helps offset costs,
meaning that we can then appeal
to you all to increase that
number on an annual basis, but
we can't do that, and that's
challenge number one. Challenge
#2 is
in the appropriations that you
can make to us, the ones we
talked about from 2019 to 2024,
that 2.1 billion, you can't make
long term appropriations, right,
that address or adjust for
capacity. So when you gave us
$2.1 billion. Every dollar you
gave us was attached to a 33
year appropriation timeline,
right? And so in this debate
about, well, we have so much
money. Why are we borrowing?
Let's just give you $2 billion
today because we can afford it
and you go use it, right?
The problem is that $2 billion
will be attached to a 3-year
appropriation deadline, OK? You
give them to us today. They got
to be spent in 3 years.
Otherwise, they're subject to
what? Be taken back and used to
backfill in other areas that the
state may have. So let's just
say for example, in 2025 you had
given us $2 billion and then 3
months later, we hear about a
federal bill that's going to cut
resources to the state. The
first thing you're going to do
is say, well, who did we give
all the money to and
do we need to claw it back to
backfill some of these
reductions in state and federal
investments, right? And we
become part of that list, and so
we can spend $2 billion in 3
years. We don't have the
capacity to do that. And so when
we crafted House Bill 145, it
was our way of doing, of
addressing both those
challenges. One was
predictability. We knew that if
we could bond up to $1.5 billion
based on our calculations by
project, it was going to take us
8 years to spend that money.
And for contractors going back
to the letter that represented
Terras Terasas read earlier,
they see predictability to make
investments in equipment and
staff and don't see them in the
near future, doing work in
Texas, which is what was
reported to us just last week.
Number 2 is because it's bonding
authority that was attached to
new revenue by raising vehicle
registration fees and raising
way distance tax and
establishing an electric vehicle
surcharge, we were then using
state transportation commission
authority to issue bonds that
were going to be paid back with
the new revenue. And so it
didn't touch non-recurring
revenue for the state. It didn't
touch recurring revenue for the
state, and it didn't touch the
state's STB GO bond, or
spongebond capacity
at all. And so in the discussion
with the state's economic
picture starts to take a
downturn. We don't ever become a
drain on that, right? And we
don't ever become a clawback
discussion because we were
appropriated money that can now
be used in other areas.
And so if you see on slide 41
just a high level, the House
Bill 145 essentially provided
that 1.5 billion bonding
authority generated 72 million
of new revenue with which the
department would pay back debt
service, and it allowed for us
to ensure that in the future,
other administrations would
continue to have to attach
priority projects to our SIPP.
As Mr. Quintana presented
earlier, projects that are
focused on
safety, on poor deteriorating
infrastructure conditions based
on data and of course
commitments to community and
economic development.
And so on the next slide, some
of the other things that our
group looked at, of course, were
all of the, the road user fees
that we have here in New Mexico,
including new taxes like
delivery, surcharges, road user
charges, additional registration
fees, all things that are
fundamentally come back to us as
road users. And then you'll see
on, see on slide 43, we just
kind of pulled this as a
reminder for you all. In fact,
it's done like the, the best way
we've done it so far. We didn't
get cheap with an 8 by 8.5 by 11
people on this one.
And you'll see basically where
not only where the state road
fund generates from in terms of
taxes, but also where those
taxes go outside of the state
road fund, right? So if you
take, for example, motor vehicle
excise tax, 3 from the, well,
uh, somewhere towards the bottom
there, motor vehicle excise tax.
You'll see of all the taxes
generated by motor vehicle
sales, only 22% roughly come to
the state road fund, right? And
so for the last couple of years,
there has been discussion about,
well, we don't necessarily have
to raise the motor vehicle
excise tax? Could we just shift
from 22% to 80 or 90%. But the
consequences then you all have
to backfill that because that
money comes from somewhere and
probably the recurring general
fund. And so if we don't steal
from one to give to another.
the solution is either leave
them whole, leave them flat, or
generate new revenue, right? And
the only way that we identified
as a short measure is from where
do we generate new revenue to
pay for roads. So, um, in House
Bill 145, we identified with
registration fees, uh, an
endorsed measure by the Trucker
Association for a 35% increase
to weight, uh, distance tax, and
of course addressing the
likelihood that um electric and
hy br id hybrid plug-ins would
increase over time is
establishing that surcharge, so.
that's uh
that's how you get through 42
slides in 10 minutes, Mr.
Chairman. Um, and so we'll
answer any questions you may
have. Thank you Secretary. uh,
Representative Doug.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary for the presentation.
Um, I, I have some questions
about the other states. Well,
well, first, let me ask you, the
fact that we have the highest
percentile of aging vehicles.
I'm just thinking about the
medium per capita income in New
Mexico.
And what the meat based on the
medium per capita income in New
Mexico, that those folks with
the aging vehicles, they're
paying more tax anyways because
they're they're getting less
efficient fuel. Would you agree
with that?
Um, chair, that is likely to be
very true. An older vehicle, not
as fuel efficient as a newer
one. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you, Secretary, but they
can't afford a new one because
they're likely low, moderate
income, maybe they're a senior
citizen on a fixed income, and
so they're not, they're not able
to replace the vehicle. But for
those folks that have the newer
vehicles
the hybrid or an electric
vehicle
I mean, I'm making an
assumption, but I'm assuming
that based on New Mexico's per
capita income, they're probably
more moderate or higher income.
Would that be true?
Mr.
Chair Representative, it's, it's
a good assumption. OK. So thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
Representative. And I'd say
almost every single meeting that
we're at, um, in this interim
committee has been about
uncertainty around Medicaid
changes, SNAP changes, what's
going to happen to what we do to
supplement people's income. So
the idea of raising taxes on
fuel costs is not attractive to
me. I really am very interested
in, though, the amount of money
that we send back to the general
fund, and you gave us these
figures in other states, but you
didn't tell us, are those other
states sending the majority of
their fuel taxes back to the
general fund, or what are they
doing with it? Are there fueled
are what they tax for roads,
staying for roads, or is it
going to general fund?
Mr. Chair and Representative, so
what you're asking is if we
received 80% of total vehicle
registration fees, how does that
fare in terms of percentage with
other states, we can, we can
pull that for you to see if, um,
of the taxes that are, um,
feeding their state road funds,
what percentage of those taxes
are going there or going
somewhere else. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, because that should be,
I, I do see the change in
distribution is, is
on there, but it'd be nice to
see a visual, because if the the
dollars that are taxed the pump
or, you know, all those things
are staying for roads, then I,
I, it would be, it would be
important, I would think for
this committee to know that, but
I also, um, know that we're
pretty unique in the fact that
we have a $58 billion permanent
land grant fund. None of those
other states have that
Is that correct, Mr. Chair,
Secretary? Mr. Chair Ribson, I,
I can't answer that. Well, they
don't. And then in addition to
that, none of those states have
a permanent land grant fund
that's going to exceed oil and
gas revenues, the interest on
those funds, growing in compound
interest
to exceed what we're getting
from oil and gas. We're also
privileged to have that. So I
think that
it's just really hard to think
about taxing folks when we're,
when we're in a pinch, they're
in a pinch. And we're really not
in a pinch. We have an 11
million dollars budget. I get
what you're saying about the
permanent fund, but I don't
think it's a this or, I mean,
just the legacy fund. I think we
started, it's just a few years
old, the land of enchantment
Legacy Fund, we started with $50
million and I think it's had
350 million in appropriations.
I'm not sure. It's a small fund,
but the interest on that that
they're spending in projects is
around 15 million. Um, what
they're spending out of the
interest is $15 million but they
still have grown the fund by $38
million in interest. So I don't,
I don't, I'm
I'm just talking. I'm just
thinking that if we could
get reoccurring funds that would
at least secure our federal
match.
What I mean,
we've created hundreds of funds
over the last 6 years.
and none of them are a road fund
I mean, I, I just, I can't
fathom why we're not doing that,
no matter what we start with.
But also, it doesn't make sense
to me that if you're saying less
than 1% of their users are
electric vehicles.
that we would prioritize tens of
millions of dollars to building,
I mean, you spent your report
says 10 million, but you can
look at the PED budget, you can
look at every agency's budget,
and they're also spending $10
million on electric vehicle
charging stations. For 1% of the
users, and they don't have to
pay a tax. So to me, it may seem
small, but I think it's
significant when you think about
the tiny squeeze here and there
on the everyday New Mexican.
Thank you. I guess I'm more just
ranting, but thank you, Mr.
Chair.
That's OK. That's the point.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
and I just have to repeat, I
have so much respect for our
state economists. It's like the
sexiest, most important job.
No, really, really, I, they're
amazing and I never knew until I
became a legislator. What
happened to House Bill 145, the
Senate Finance that passed the
House. It's an incredibly
excellent bill.
What happened? It unanimous in
house transportation unanimous
in house appropriations
unanimous on House floor,
unanimous on the consent
calendar and Senate tax
um, one dissent vote in Senate
Finance, um, concerns with the
EB surcharge.
and um then we didn't get her on
the Senate floor.
so we ran out of time. OK.
It, it got, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, we got to the
Senate floor, I believe, the
Wednesday before, um, the end
before the final Saturday and so
it, it
for whatever reason it didn't
get hurt.
OK, thank you, because that's
really, really frustrating. I
want to point out that Senator
Gonzalez introduced a gas tax
increase of 1 cent. That was
argued. A 1 cent gas tax for 15
gallons of gas would add 15
cents. If you filled your tank.
30 cents
for
you know, if it's 2 cents
uh, it's like it just seems a
no-brainer to me. And then the
other thing is the eves, hybrid,
and then the regular, which was
in
House Bill 145. Another
no-brainer, I mean other states
went to um
user miles. It gets so
complicated, you get privacy
issues. If it's on your vehicle,
registration, so it just seems
we have to do this again. And
then the other bill is the deli,
I have a bee in my bonnet about
Amazon, um.
and the money that goes to
certain people, but the delivery
surcharge, it seems like that's
no, another no brainer. We
haven't done that yet, have we?
The delivery surcharge? Um, Mr.
Sher, we, we haven't, we've
looked at their policies.
There's exemptions that ensure
that um it doesn't add hardship
for the delivery of prescription
drugs, food, essential other
services and materials that
those um uh users would uh
access and so we have frameworks
to lean on for those things, but
we haven't
actually done a bill yet,
correct, Mr. Chair Reps said we
haven't, but it's probably would
be a year of just a lot of good
discussion ahead of that to make
sure that that came across as
something digestible. Thank you.
And, and Mr. Chair, I think we
ought to explore that. I think
my house alone would probably
contribute $100.
because of my husband, not
because of me. Thank you very
much. If I may, well, first,
thank you for the compliment. I
appreciate that.
Um,
but I also want to mention that
there are things with the right
vehicle surcharge. I know there
is some research now being done
for um similar charges in uh New
York and Toronto that are more
addressed towards um
a more targeted for fighting
congestion within those cities,
and that is some benefits that
might also accrue to us for the
benefit through those uh
charges.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to say to Representative
Garrett, it's probably more than
$100 re because we're never home
to cook, so, um, yeah, um, I
wanted to go to a page, um,
38
and I wanted to look at your
projections here. The state road
fund revenues are expected to
decline by 13% by 2050,
increased by 5 by 2030, declined
by 7 by 20
30 to 40, decline another 10.5
and obviously the decline is
higher than the income earned.
Um,
so,
does that, do those numbers, and
I guess this is for the
economist, um, do those include
interest income?
in the revenue projections? or
did you not calculate that?
Sorry we have to confirm that I
am 92%, 90% sure that it does
include the interest, but I will
confirm that and let you know.
OK, if you could just let me
know on that. Um
and then on, um, well, I mean,
obviously it's not a, it's not a
pretty picture, and I, and I do
take some uh caution when we
start comparing funds to other
funds because in my mind,
transportation sort of stands on
its own, and it's more of an
infrastructure and it's really
hard to compare it to social
programs or other programs like
that. Um, and that's just my
own, um, concern.
So on page 40, the total impact
is a -35.8 million between FY 24
and FY 30, and that that's on
your page here on page 40.
Um
so
what percent is that 35.8
million just out of curiosity.
Mr. Chair, I know you probably
don't have that on here, but I'm
like I predicted it that you
were going to ask that. So I've
calculated what 2% is and so 2%
is um
10.4 million.
um, so you multiply that by 3.5,
so about 6, 6.5%. 6.5%, and
that's only in actually that's
um because we're already 2025.
So that's in 5 years, I guess,
um, 6.5% and then
actually, if you look at what I
just talked about on page
OK, are these two different road
funds. The state road fund long
run forecast, and then what I
just read the MPG growth of the
state road, they're the same
fund, right?
So actually 6.5% in, in those
six years
and then what you talked about
here on on page, um, 38 actually
the decline by 2050, 13%
actually that decline is
actually higher, isn't it, than
what's shown on these two pages,
Mr. Chair, that's OK. I'm not
picky about stuff like this, so
it's included. So calling out
the fuel efficiency is calling
out just one of the drivers of
that overall increase, so it's
included in that it's just one
of the drivers that's shown, OK,
that's important.
Um, and then I just, you know,
when I start thinking about
compounded interest, and I think
somebody mentioned that earlier.
I mean, it, I get very concerned
about what's happening here
because we're not, and then the
gap that you talked about
earlier, that you've already
calculated up until this date,
the gap.
in the future, I mean, it's just
growing and so Mr. Chair, it
seems to me that um this trust
fund that we're talking about
and we've been talking about it
just becomes more and more
important to how we're going to
deal with um
the, you know
lack of funding that we are
typically getting at this point
and that we will not be getting
at that point. One of the other
questions that I have, Mr.
Chair, is with regard to um
the different um
categories that you, you, your
committee looked at with regard
to how to make up some of this
funding.
um, was tourism discussed?
Mr. Chair, Representative,
that's a great question. Um,
when we consulted with other
states, several of them asked
this question.
What is something your state
does really well, and how do you
leverage that
to benefit Rhodes and
tourism was one of those, um, on
the shortlist of those things,
especially outdoor recreation.
Then when you start to untangle
that, you have to get to a
secondary question, what is
something that your state is
really good at that nobody
really is watching.
because the minute you generate
revenue from tourism, I know a
secretary that's going to say,
well, shouldn't that come to us
to continue to bolster and
support tourism in the state of
New Mexico.
And so the challenge is, is that
no matter what you do as a
state,
to do it, you need roadway
infrastructure, right? But
because there's more direct
connection between what you're
doing and what you're generating
revenue from, then those
industries can come and say,
well, that's really for us,
right? So we could argue too
that you got to get on the roads
to get groceries. Should we be
getting some tax for, well, not
for groceries, we don't charge
it, but for whatever else we
buy, that's taxable and so we
could build that argument very
quickly for almost any single
industry, right?
or commerce or whatever.
it just, it just then starts a
secondary conversation about,
well, if we're going to charge
these folks this.
tax, should we then invest it
back into what they are doing,
right? And so that, that's the
secondary question that kind of
pushes away from some of those.
We'd be, you take for example,
in the city of Santa Fe I think
or in Santa Fe County, they were
looking at charging an
additional tax, property tax for
any home valued, I believe, at
above a million dollars, right?
Well, that lawsuit has been
going on for years because
everybody in that bracket said
you can't do that to just us.
And that hasn't been flushed out
yet, right? And so,
in some cases, it's not really
when you get to that sacking
question that nobody's really
watching, they start watching
the minute you start proposing
it, right? And you start to
identify with those, um,
challenges. And Mr. Chair, I, I,
you know, I, I pointed that out
because I think that we really
need to be looking at those
numbers as they're increasing
and how that interest income
that we're not gonna get in that
gap and how we're going to be
making that up and um I mean I
I think that at some point we
are going to have to talk about
that, um, trust fund, and
because, you know, I mean,
we still, we have those that
capacity for infrastructure and
infrastructure is such an
important part of tourism, of, I
mean, in short of adding another
couple of dollars to my hotel
visit, uh, for gasoline, uh, you
know, to make up the road fund.
I mean, I don't know, there's a
lot of creative ways, I guess,
that we could address it, but I
think that
I, I really do think that that
trust fund is something that we
need to be looking at as um
you know, I
I don't know. I, I, I, I don't
think any of us want, uh, a gaso
another gasoline tax on our, on
our population, but I don't
know. I mean, you know, it's
hard to say, but we've
definitely have to make up those
revenues.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Maestas.
No, thank you for that. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you, gentlemen. The um
the uh
so I appreciate the rant, uh,
because.
because, uh, you know, let's
just not talk about the
permit the
the, the permanent school fund.
Let's just not talk about that.
When you combine all the other
trust funds we've created,
there's and then you combine the
excess on the general fund. The
state of New Mexico has $34
billion. So it's, it's, it's
almost impossible to propose any
tax increases when you're when
you have $34 billion cash.
Uh, unfortunately, it's not
liquid as liquid as I would like
because we, we create these
ridiculous trust funds. We're
the only state in the history of
this country to take general
fund cash and create a trust
fund.
So we're gonna put this money in
the mattress.
never spend it
and then take, take 5% off the
interest.
and you know, save it for 20 or
30 years down the road, pardon
the pun, um
uh, to fund government like I, I
have a better idea. Why don't we
build an economy that funds
government 20 or 30 years down
the road.
So, but anyway, as it relates to
the gas tax, I'm a big fan of
the gas tax because it's, it's,
it's a closed system. We got
people on this committee need to
educate folks, our, our
colleagues.
uh, that it's a closed system.
It's not part of the $10.5
billion dollar appropriations
Act. It, it's different. It's
House Bill 3. we don't include
it in our
you know, when we tell our
folks back home we just passed a
$10.5 billion budget. That
doesn't include the road fund,
um, and so it's just been a, in
my opinion, just a failure of
government not to
incrementally and reasonably
increase the gas tax over the
past
30 years
Um
it, uh, we raised it, you know,
we state government raised it in
the early 90s, but it had a
sunset provision
and instead of realizing the
utility of that increase the
sunset lapsed, and it went back
to 17, um, and it stayed
remained at 17 in which, as you
mentioned,
adjusted for inflation, it'd be
somewhere in the neighborhood of
35, 36 cents.
um
but, uh
so we we're gonna have to make a
I'm really proud of my friends
in the minority in the House
that voted for 145
because they realized we got to
do something, um
but, uh, even if we did a one
cent tax and and it increased 1
cent
you know
for the next 20 years, it would
still be 37 cents in 20 years
and then inflation would.
would, would suggest it should
be like 45 or 48 or whatever,
but without Rhodes, this state
is nothing and um
it's, it's fundamental
government to build roads.
That's what government does,
man.
And so we've got to figure out,
uh, we've got to find the
political will to
to uh
to increase the gas tax, uh, so
that it does not hurt the
consumer
uh
but it builds roads because
buying
you know, paying an extra 5
cents a gallon.
sucks, but paying $1200 for four
brand new tires, such worse.
Um,
and so, uh, so lastly, Mr.
Chairman, uh, the, the gas tax
is a is a is a user fee. If you
don't drive, you don't pay it
So that's kind of cool. It's
also elastic, so you gotta look
at the elasticity of the gas tax
in which if we were to raise the
gas tax 10 cents.
The price of gasoline would not
increase 10 cents.
uh,
it would increase about 7 or 8
cents. So we're getting 10
cents' worth of tax dollars.
uh, and the consumers only
getting getting hit like 78
cents. Um, so that's, that's
cool as well. So, um, another,
uh, thing to keep in mind is
it's dollars and cents for
budgeting purposes. We can
economists can say how many
gallons of gasoline is going to
be sold next year, so
governments put it dollars and
cents. If we were to do a
percentage
I think, uh, I think it might be
more palatable to our
constituents.
for budgeting purposes, it would
be kind of weird, but we have so
much excess cash that we, we
don't, you know, if, if, if gas
prices were to plummet, uh, and
the road fund isn't what we want
it to be. We could just sub sub
subsidize it with with general
fund money. So I think we should
consider a percentage tax,
uh
and uh, and, and we have to uh
we need a governor or a
or a attorney general, whoever
to sell it to the, to the people
of the state that it's in their
interest for us to do it. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative Lara.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary. Um, so as
we're having this discussion,
I'm going through my mind, you
know, what, where can we add on
or work and work and we target
to obtain more funding for the
for the road fund and I wanted
to ask you, our port of entries.
do commercial, does commercial
traffic get charged a fee?
when they cross over
Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative, yes, yes, they
do, and I can have Michael
expand on the touch points
there. So the, uh, there are two
fees that that that a commercial
vehicles could pay as they enter
in their texts, I guess the
taxes on mileage driven in New
Mexico. The first is the wait
distance tax that I described,
uh, before, and those are, uh,
vehicles that are registered
with this international
registration plan and have
specific license plates for
that. Uh, then there is also
the, uh, tripa, which is a
higher tax that is charged for
vehicles that are not registered
under that program. So any
commercial vehicle, um,
I think the, uh, trip tax, the
minimum is 12,000 pounds, and
for weight distance is 26,000
pounds. Any vehicle over those
weights entering the state does
have to pay a tax per mile
driven, and that is also
variable based on weight of the
vehicle.
I do not believe so, but I'll
double check to make sure about
that. Thank you for that. So now
my next question, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Secretary, is there a fee
for non-commercial traffic to
come across.
Uh, Mr. Representative, not that
they're aware of that would come
to the Department of
Transportation.
OK, so Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Secretary, is that something
that we can consider since that
traffic is using our roadways
and that traffic is moving back
and forth, uh, that traffic is
increasing at the port of entry
is specifically San Teresa. I
know a lot of commercial, a lot
of non-commercial traffic is
increasing due to the, the
closures in in Texas due to
other things making it more
convenient, it's faster to cross
through there. So would that be
something that DOT would
consider is adding a fee
to non-commercial traffic
Um,
let's see, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, so there's
almost, to answer your question,
there's a third tax, right? And
that's the fuel tax. And so
everyone pays. They come through
New Mexico, they got to stop and
put gas, and they're gonna pay
to use our roads, and that's
kind of how the fuel diesel, the
diesel tax materializes for
heavy truck traffic going back
to.
the presentation about it, not
it being kind of in the middle
of the pack because of how
reliant we are on I-10, 25 and
40 for commerce moving through
through the state of New Mexico.
Uh, it is isn't something we've
directly looked at to determine
whether or not that would be a
deterrent, uh, for truck traffic
to move through other ports, um,
but we could certainly look at
it. I imagine we would in short
order have the data on the
number of vehicles passing.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Secretary, and uh, you know, the
commercial traffic that, that's
fine, you know, we already have
that establishment. I was
curious about non-commercial
traffic and, and vehicles coming
from Mexico into New Mexico
through the Santa Teresa port of
entry there's only one gas
station. There's another one
that's gonna be built
and usually those non-commercial
vehicles end up in Texas and
getting gas in Texas, because
it's like not even 2 or 3 miles
from the from the port of entry.
So that I, I, I don't see a an
immediate benefit to to the
state because those
non-commercial vehicles are just
gonna go into Texas and get
gasoline there.
Uh, so I, I don't know, I don't
know if that's an option, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Secretary, or maybe
something that we can study to
see what not if we, if that's
applicable to non-commercial
traffic, and maybe that's would
be another source of revenue
that we can have for the for the
for the road for the road fund.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Representative. Once
again, Borego. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, for giving me another
opportunity. I just wanted to
say something about, um, you
know, I don't think there's like
one silver bullet. I think we
have like a variety of probably
um, you know, recommendations
toward increasing that gap, um,
and the, and the reason that I
say that, Mr. Chair, is because
I was thinking about the
Parafund, especially, you know,
in 2009
when it collapsed and then um
how we've been trying to make
that up, um, you know, it, I
mean, both the ERB and PERA are
are only 67% funded, but they
have a goal to increase that
that funding, um, and it's
through a variety of different,
um, uh, financial investments
and so I think this is and
listening to rep representative,
I'm sorry, Senator, um, I asked
us, um, I mean, it may be a uh
uh
sort of like
a recommendation of several
different factors to consider at
the end.
Thank you.
If I can, Mr. Chair, just to
comment briefly.
Um, we've, we've heard a couple
of times kind of going back to
permanent funds and trust funds
and other types of um
funds and so one of the ones
that, uh, again, the second goal
of the, the task force was let's
look at things that we've talked
about and flushed them out a
little bit, OK? And so one of
the funds that uh a lot of us
have pointed to as something we
should do is the um early
childhood fund, right, but he
points to that and say, starting
with $50 and now it has $1
trillion or something like that,
like, how did we do that? Can we
just do the same thing, right?
And so there's something unique
about that fund, right, that
would have to be considered in
order to keep generating that
amount of revenue, right, and
growing it and that is
distributions from other
permanent funds, right?
And so if you just take some
simple math around the
legislature would give us a
billion dollars and we would put
it into a fund, right? And let's
just say that would generate 8%
annually, so 8% annually is $80
million and you would say, there
you go. And so that's why I
pulled up this slide right over
here, right? And so the one that
talked about these project gaps
and in good policy of trust fund
management so that you don't
move to the corpus, right? That
80 million, you don't want to
touch your billion dollars is
you're going to take 1% of the
rolling average of that annual
distribution, right? And you say
to yourself, OK, we're gonna put
a billion dollars in a
transportation trust fund and
you're gonna have this and
you're gonna yield $70.80
million dollars a year. There
you go. And every year when we
come to you and say that you
know that's not enough. Can we
have some more? Then we'll be
combating a debate about we
invest
ed a billion dollars in you two
years ago. Where is it? Well,
going back to the senator's
point, it's not lick we can't
touch it. We're getting like $70
million a year.
And so even with that notion on
the table, it serves as a
revenue source for debt service,
right? The idea that $80 million
now becomes a debt service.
Um, uh, revenue debt service for
us and so those, those are some
of the things that we flushed
out. We can talk more about. You
could double it to 2 billion and
say, OK, what can you do with
$140 million a year when we come
to you all for one-time
appropriations. This is what we
ask you for $470 million at a
time. And so I come
back to this slide because it
doesn't just talk about how it
expensive.
it is to do this work. It talks
about the liabilities that come
with us going after other
federal funds for these
projects.
and so you'll see when Mr.
Quintana went through his
projects, we've secured $330.5
million
330
million dollars, OK? But if we
don't come up with the 273.6
million in the next couple of
years, then that 330 million
goes away, and with it comes
this mark on the state to the
federal government that says,
you know, we gave you money, a
lot of it, once upon a time, and
you can't shore it up, right?
And one of the projects sitting
in front of us right now, so
that, you know, I'm not being
accused of being overly
dramatic.
is in that 330 million is one
project in this part of the
state.
that we need $125 million for
in like 2 weeks.
or because it's attached to a
$45 million grant. It's called
the Border Highway Connector.
Right? And then when you combine
that with representative Lara's
point about the commerce and the
potential for state revenue
going to this bigger picture,
like how do we just grow the
state exponentially.
Well, that road would kind of
help.
And so those are the struggles
we run into when we go after the
federal funding. It's not
predictable, but it's there. We
get it. We have obligations on
the non-federal match. And if we
don't come up with that, then we
lose the federal stuff and, and
that doesn't just leave the
project behind. It leaves the
state's legacy behind in its
ability to spend money and do
well by our federal grant
requirements and so that those
are just a couple of things that
kind of tie the conversation
together.
Thank you, Representative Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for letting me do the
redirect. Um, I just, it's more
than that, because the, the
impact on the economy if we're
talking about growing a healthy
economy is greater because the
contractors have no
predictability, and we lived
that firsthand right here in
Grant County when there is no
predictability on the funding
for thinning or for, um, you
know, defending the defensible,
building the defensible spaces
and preventing the forest fires,
we don't have loggers in Grant
County anymore.
They, they couldn't afford to
keep their equipment. They, the,
the monthly lease on the
equipment, I don't know, you
know better. What is it, a piece
of equipment? What is it costing
a contractor to keep that on
site or ranging,
right, like loaders, millions,
but yeah, do you have them
mobilized and sitting there
idly, they can't pay their debt.
No it's, it's a lot. So pretty
quick they're broke, pretty
quick. So their predictability.
So then if we did get an
infusion of money, we wouldn't
even have the contractors, they
wouldn't have the capacity to
hit the ground running. So the
gap becomes greater
than just, oh well, we'll fix it
next session, you know, because
they, we will lose capacity to
implement the projects. Is that,
that's correct, isn't it, Mr.
Sher Ripson? That's it. We in
meeting with contractors earlier
this week, they, they've got to
find work so they can do two
things, pay the debt service
they've accrued right to do the
work here and to hang on to the
workforce so that they don't go
find careers in other
industries, and then it's harder
to pull them back. And so, so
they do work in other states.
And then the question we get
asked regularly, which is do the
contractors have capacity, the
discussion has to now include
the capacity relative to what
they're doing for other states.
Mr. Chair, and this is a
not to get caught up in silos,
but to think globally about our
budget to think holistically
about our entire state budget
because I think the early
childhood exam, uh, early
childhood fund is a good
example, and I'm, I'm an early
childhood expert. I, I
am so grateful that we're paying
Quality reimbursement rates and
providing um
so much the increased quality. I
think it's the only thing that
we, I think last week they told
us we're ranked 5th in the
nation for our early childhood
outcomes. That's something to
celebrate. But at the same time,
we have a half a billion dollars
interest on an early childhood
fund, and we're still funding
early childhood out of the
general fund.
Like at what point is it enough?
Or, or for example, with the
permanent fund that's for K
through 12 and higher ed in our
special schools, we're still
supplementing those out of the
general fund. Like at what point
do they need to be using those
very, very, very nice funds that
no other state in the union has
access to like we do, to fully
fund their projects and when
does it make sense to stop
building million-dollar projects
in counties that have, you know,
15 births a year, and then we
have to fund the
operations and we have to fund
the maintenance and when
everybody can agree on roads.
And so it's a bigger holistic
look at. I think we can keep
funds that are generated by gas
taxes for roads.
Are you done? Yes.
Yes, Mr. Chair, I don't think
that was a question there. Well,
it's just, I mean, we do have to
look more holistically. I think,
I hope we can do that. We, we
are the choir
Thank you, Secretary. We have to
circle back to District one.
Uh, just to give everybody a
heads up, there's going to be a
fire alarm here in a little bit
Can we continue to work through
the fire alarm, or do we just
hold off? Um, in theory we can.
It's gonna be loud. Um, so just
a sound, we don't have to leave.
We can stay here. OK, so it's,
it'll be sound, but we don't
have to leave unless it's, well,
I guess we'll make a decision at
that moment.
Let's go ahead and proceed
Mr. Chair, members of the
subcommittee, thank you for, uh,
having me here today, um, you
know, yesterday I was, I was
ready to present and I was gonna
show up and say, uh, last but
not least, uh, save the best for
last, but it happened today, so,
uh.
so but you know that's OK, it's
a, it's a great pleasure for me
to to sit in front of you guys
and and present, uh, specially
being in our district.
um, and it, and it's good to
see, uh, our, uh, my district,
uh, representatives here.
um, they, they do a great job,
uh, they work well with, with
the department so thank you
guys.
We'll start on uh, on page, uh,
page 2.
Um, District one,
where the southwestern part of
the state, uh, we encompass six
counties, uh, Socorro, uh,
Sierra, Donana.
Hidalgo, Luna, and Grant County.
um, and just, uh, I wanna
acknowledge that uh our district
commissioner John Malccaroy,
he's been, uh, he's sitting back
here, um, he was here yesterday
as well listening, so
uh, it's a great to have him
here and, uh, listen to to
what's going on and being
engaged with our department.
um, those tables, uh, down low
we show our our employee
breakdown first table, um, we
got 297 positions here in
District one. we currently have
22 vacancies.
Uh, the table to the right is
our, uh, our district budget.
Uh, it's a breakdown of our
district budget, but, um, uh, we
have a total district budget
this year of 45.8 million.
and I want you guys to remember
that number because I'm gonna
come back to it later, um, and
then we have a current contract,
uh.
uh, construction contracts, uh,
just under 300 million here in
District one.
on page 3.
All right. Just go ahead and
just keep going.
Page page 3 and and page 4, we
begin with the loss of 2019.
um,
and then halfway, the second
table are the laws of 2021, uh,
I just want to let you guys know
that all that funding here in
District one, we've expended
already.
um, a total of 78.4 million, uh,
loss of 22, uh, we have our US
180 project which you guys all
drove through this uh morning or
yesterday, uh, that project is
um it's probably going to be
completed early this coming
year, uh, I had a schedule
We have our laws of 2023, which
we have our New Mexico uh 213
corridor, uh, that that is on
our eastern uh southeastern part
of the district, it abuts to uh
Texas. Texar is gonna tie into
it with a new road as well that
will bypass uh I-10.
page 5, we have our laws of 24
um
we, we've expended most of that
money we have, we still have 33
ongoing projects, um, and then a
couple of those projects are in
New Mexico 549 which is uh the
old uh Las Cruces Dame Highway.
uh, we use that route, uh,
whenever there's an incident on
night 10 and then we have to
close it. uh, we use New Mexico
549 as a as a detour route in
those instances.
uh, we, we made it a 12 ft lane,
and 4 ft shoulders, and this
year we're gonna complete the,
the rest of that quarter, um,
and then, uh, I think our, our
smallest table from a
historical uh um one time
appropriations is uh this past
uh legislative session we
received the 2 million for uh
equipment.
which uh we've we've already
been, uh, we've ordered our $2
million worth of equipment.
uh, and then we have a $10
million project which is New
Mexico 26. We talked about that
a little bit yesterday. This,
uh, 10 million is gonna be used
to resurface the 1st 15 miles of
New Mexico 26 from Deming
heading east towards uh Hatch.
um
it's, it's, it's, uh, this past
year we had, you know,
significantly less than we've
had previous years.
um, you know, unfortunately our
construction program didn't get
any any funds.
um, it's, it's a little bit of a
setback for us. Um, I'm gonna
say that, uh, and I'm not trying
to be, uh, ungrateful, you know,
I appreciate any any amount that
you guys give us, we appreciate
it. um, but I do want you guys
to know that we do count on your
gene generosity to supplement
our maintenance and construction
programs.
um, you know, this last
presentation with secretary. I
mean, you, we went on about how
much more money we need, so.
page 6 is just a a map of where
all our house bill money has
gone, um, we, we kind of
concentrated where the urban
areas are for the most part, a
lot of work on our interstates
I-10 and I-25.
page 7, we move on to our, our
contract maintenance
um, our, our, our maintenance
program is, uh, is state funded
money.
um, and you can see on that
first table last year we were
able to complete a little over
28 million.
Most of that money was house
billed to money, which came from
you guys.
Um, the next table is our
upcoming, uh, maintenance
projects for this year, um, you
know, we're down to 5.6 million.
um, so, and uh, you know, again,
those are maintenance program is
funded by state funds.
The table at the bottom is our
completed construction program,
uh, these are mostly federally
funded projects.
uh, we, we were able to close
out, you know, close to 160
million.
um, we have one in New Mexico 26
and hatch, that was a hatch
interchange bridge preservation
project
um, and then, uh, we have a
couple on I tend between uh any
Hidalgo County, uh, one of them
was a state line 0 to the 15 and
the dust uh Lordsburg dust area.
uh, and the other one is, uh,
between Demming and um.
uh Lordsburg
PageJ we continue with our, uh,
these are ongoing uh
construction projects again
federally funded.
We have just under 300 million,
uh, and those are active
projects that we got going on
right now in District one.
um, you know, we have, uh, the
I-10, another I-10 project
between Demming and Lordsburg,
uh, Malmark 34 to the 44. We
also have, um, another US 180
project aside from the one I
just mentioned, but we have one
between here and Santa Clara,
which is going to address some
uh intersection lighting, uh,
for safety issues.
and then our, our upcoming uh
federally funded projects, it's,
it's a pretty much a cutoff of
our step for the fiscal year 26.
Uh, we have close to 190 million
uh projects uh that will be
bidding this coming year, again
we have New Mexico 26, which is
gonna be supplemental to the,
the hospital project that we're
doing we're adding the center
line rumble strips, uh,
striping, and that's gonna go
from damming all the way to
hatch.
Um, we have, uh, New Mexico 35,
uh, here in Grant County we're
gonna be replacing 3 bridges,
uh, they're small bridges, uh,
but they're really old timber
bridges, so we're gonna be
replacing that and that's gonna
be completed with a flap, uh,
grant.
Page 9
and these are, these are also
step projects and they are
fiscally constrained, but they
go beyond our our fiscal year
26.
uh, so as you can see, we have
uh I-10 exit 24, uh, if you guys
aren't familiar with that
bridge, it got hit this year by
a excavator, uh, so, so that
bridge has been out of service,
uh, uh, for a few months.
Um, we're, we are gonna repair
it, uh, here this month we're
gonna start repairing, uh,
putting the that portion of the
deck back in place, but the
bridge will be replaced as well
here in the near future.
Um, and then this, this second
table that I have here is our
projects that our engineering
and design, and these are
unfunded projects
Uh, the first two are our I-10
and I-25 and I left this because
as a district we've
strategically always had a
design, uh, uh, payment rehab or
payment preservation projects so
we could have them shovel ready
just in case we get some
funding.
um, we've been very successful
with this, um, hopefully we
continue uh with that strategy
also listed as our border
highway connector, um, again,
you know, like Mr. Quintana
mentioned and and secretary, we
have, we have a funding gap of
125 million.
um
and we're on a really short
timeline to find that money or
we're gonna, we're gonna lose
the $45 million grant.
um
and then we're gonna end up
paying the full project amount
which is uh.
uh, it's gonna be, uh, it's
gonna hurt. I mean, it hurts me
as a district engineer, uh
but
well, uh, I'm, I'm pretty
confident we can, we can get
through that. Another, uh,
another grand project that we
have and again Mr. Quintana
mentioned it was our Noga
Canyon, uh, bridge replacement.
We did receive that, uh, uh, uh,
bridge, um, investment program
grant, uh, 71.2 million our, our
total project cost is about 146
million, so we're around $75
million gap on that project.
Um, one of the, some of the
issues we've had with uh with
grants is, um, you know, we,
when we apply for them
we have uh it's at a conceptual
time.
we don't, uh, we don't have a
lot of details on the project
yet, so we, we estimate what a
project cost is gonna be
uh, as we get into the the
details of the project design
and and because of the time from
application to notification to
when we start the design those
escalation in cost, uh, are
significantly higher than what
we had anticipated, um, so
those, those are kind of a, a
challenge we we face.
page 10, we move on to our local
government program, um, FY 26,
uh, this is the, the
distribution
um, for all our entities and
counties, municipalities or co
op, map, cap, and safe, uh,
routes to school.
page 11, we continue our local
government program with the
school district, the co-ops and
also the others program which
this this year uh NMSU was a
recipient
and then the last table on here
is our transportation project
fund last year in statewide we
received 54.2 million.
Um, we were able to fund 8
projects, uh
8 entities, uh, um, and then,
uh, next week we'll, we'll get
uh approval from a commission on
their recommendations for this
coming this coming year's, uh,
TPF projects.
and then page 12, um, this is a,
a reiteration of what, uh, Dave
Quintana, uh, at least the first
two projects is our border
connector highway which, uh,
we're in a really tight
timeline on this one. We also
have uh Noga Canyon.
uh asking for $75 million to
fill that gap, but I've also
added a, uh, another project,
uh, in Las Cruces. It's an
interchange ramps, uh, those,
those uh
uh angler
Road, which is just a couple of
miles north of the US 70
interchange.
Uh, we need to add ramps to
that, uh, that bridge because
it's gonna help with the
congestion at US 7925 and some
of the other uh inter
intersections on US 70.
um, so that that's a good
project, not just for us but for
the city and the county as well,
and it's gonna help with some
development on the East Mesa.
And then the last thing I put on
there was uh $30 million for
maintenance.
um
you know, District one, we have
I-10 and I-25.
Uh, that's about 350 center line
miles of interstate.
um,
that equates to about 1400, uh
lane miles.
uh,
so it, it's a, it's a challenge
to, to keep up with the with
that much uh interstate.
uh
it's, it's time consuming, it's
expensive, um, you know, and
sometimes, uh, it becomes a
little hazardous, uh, for our
workers for people traveling for
law enforcement, I think, I
think we heard from enough law
enforcement yesterday, uh,
especially for the dust
incidents.
um, but Mr. Chair, last, uh,
last meeting we had, you, you
made a, a question about how we,
how it compares to to Texas, uh,
when Mr. Romero and Mr. Padilla
were uh were presenting, um, I
don't know for the state of
Texas, but I, I, uh, I contacted
my counterpart in the El Paso
district for Texta.
so, so they have roughly the
same amount of centerline miles
that District One has.
and their maintenance budget is
$50 million.
um, that's what our, uh, our,
uh, district, uh, budget is 45.8
million.
uh, and 25 million of that goes
to salaries and and benefits. So
just to put that into
perspective and
um why, why we face some of
these struggles.
um
um, Representative Jones, you
asked about in New Mexico 9,
that was a higher priority for
you.
We are gonna be submitting a, a
grant application for New Mexico
9.
um, you know, conceptually we
would love to to add capacity to
increase, uh, you know, add
shoulders, um, it is 150 miles,
that corridor, uh, so it's, it's
a significant amount of money,
but we're gonna start with a
with a grant uh to do a study
and see what options uh we can
come up with.
um, and then, you know, we
heard, we heard enough about
dust storms yesterday, um, I
just, uh, uh, you know, we're
not, we're as a department as a
district, we're not as at a
standstill with some of these,
you know, at the Lordsburg
Playa, we've we've implemented a
lot of uh what Arizona does, uh,
we have a, a warning system, you
know, if it detects a, a, a dust
storm coming we have flashers,
we have a variable speed, uh,
electric variable speed signs,
uh, you're supposed to reduce
We have
we have a, a bunch of signing
out there, you know, it tells
you what to do, you know, you
pull over, uh, stay in your car,
keep your seat belt on, take
your foot off the brake, turn
off the lights, um.
we, we've had campaigns to we
passed out pamphlets to truckers
cause I was, uh, most of those,
uh, crashes do involve a
commercial vehicle, um, we had a
campaign where we passed out
pamphlets to truckers, so they
knew what to do.
um
so we have message boards now
we're expanding uh our ITS
system to address some of the
notification.
um, we've done a lot of, uh,
outsider right away we've done a
lot of work, uh, trying to seed.
We've done the uh federal land
transfer with BLM to to isolate
areas to keep the cattle off and
we seed, um, so, so we have to
work, uh.
with, with the ranchers because
it is their livelihood and you
know, you ask them to keep the
cattle off their land. It it's,
it's
it's a hard pill to swallow
Um, you know, from, uh, this
year specifically.
it started, uh, February 27th we
had our, our first dust storm,
uh, we had a crash, uh, I
believe that first crash had 3
fatalities
um
since then
we've had close to 50 road
closures, uh, around Demming
I-10 all the way to Las Cruces,
all the way to the Texas line
just due to storms, uh, dust
storms.
um
it's, uh, you know, we, if we
know about them, our, our, uh,
law enforcement, uh, request
that we stand by, uh, we man
those locations that are gonna
be where we close the roadways
sometimes they sit there for a
few minutes, sometimes they sit
there for 8 hours waiting for
that storm to get here.
uh, so it is, it is very time
consuming, it takes a lot of
manpower.
um
uh, we've also discussed with
the with with our local counties
some of the dust sources that
and they're not the sole source
of dust, obviously, but you
know, solar farms, uh, they go
in there and they clear, you
know, hundreds of acres and
maybe doing a more robust, uh,
dust mitigation program in the
interim while they're working,
um, that way, uh, we, we can
help us control, uh, some of
that dust and the incidents that
happen.
um, and with that, um, I stand
for any questions, uh, I'm sure
there'll be a few
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Erin. I, I
really related to the lieutenant
governor talking about how
he, you know, just texts his
district engineer because you're
always um very responsive and I
can only imagine I'm just one
person that you get a lot of
complaints, concerns constantly,
and I appreciate you always have
a good attitude. You always get
back to me and uh I so I I just
wanna say thank you for what you
do, um, I've got several
questions. First of all, I wanna
say
I appreciate your, um,
presentation because you
answered a lot of my questions,
um about yesterday's concerns,
um, and maybe I might have one
question that is really geared
more toward Amy, but you, you
may be able to to answer this as
well.
you know, I'm concerned about
how um I talked about how
Highway 9 really has such a
potential for tragedy. It it's
not just, it's more than just a
crash statistic.
uh because that the crash stats
may not really show the need for
action to prevent a terrible
tragedy.
So when we look at priority
projects and I'm glad to hear
that you're doing a study. Uh, I
hope that we're looking at more
than crash data because I can't
imagine
you know, what a school bus full
of the entire Animas high school
on a statistic would look like
and that that's really hard so
and it and we got a lot of that
yesterday I appreciate you guys
being there and listening.
but, um, so, so yeah, I'm hoping
that we're looking at the big
picture. I do have some
questions, um
you know, I, I got to be here
for the, the governor's cabinet
in the community, which is great
to have all the cabinet
secretaries here
uh, but during that, um,
meeting, the hatch mayor got up
and spoke about the Canal Bridge
and hatch and how is desperately
needed in hatch every
truck that comes through all
those chili trucks, all the
commercial traffic has to go
straight through town. It's a, a
safety hazard or it's uh an EMS
hazard because they don't have
that bridge.
for many reasons um, it's, it's
really a priority and so the
governor said that she would
fund that herself.
I don't know if anybody else
heard that, but I heard it. I'm
sure the mayor, the mayor of
Hatch heard it, yes, um, did the
secretary hear it? Did you hear
that that the governor's funding
that canal bridge. Have you guys
heard from the governor about
that? That's one of my
questions. We can't talk about
it.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
you're, you're correct. And so
the, the process of the follow
up process after a Camden
community is really robust and
by by the time I got to the
hotel room, it was like this is
for DOT follow up. And so we
believe that we can get the
bridge funded partially with the
governor's commitment and with
DOT, not that she can't fund the
entire thing, but it aligned
with our TPF application
process. They had already
submitted an application.
It had already been vetted
through the district and is
ranked a high priority. So I
believe what we'll be able to do
is get it funded through two
different sources, one being the
governor's, uh, capital outlay
commitment.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you Secretary. I
appreciate that information. I'm
glad to hear we're already
working on that. It's been 20
years they've needed that bridge
redone, I think.
and uh so that's one of my
questions answered um
and I did also speak with uh Mr.
Quintana on the way in. I got
kind of an update on the bridge
and Hidalgo County, the south,
it's right on the east end of
Lordsburg.
and that is a critical, um, exit
on ramp to I-10 for Lordsburg
and we've talked about the um
the consequences of not being
able to act quickly, and I know
a lot of that is contractor
issues and so forth, but in the
time that that bridge has been
out, um
a lot of people have lost their
jobs in Lordsburg, um,
businesses have closed down on
that end because no one can can
get in, you know, no, no,
there's no traffic there anymore
and so um that's just been a
real issue. I just wanted to
point that out that
you know we have this issue all
over and Lordsburg didn't need
one more hit, but
I hear, I'm glad to hear it's,
it's on the way to being fixed
now, is that correct? Um, yeah,
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
was, I was there, um, about 3
weeks ago.
and to see, to see where, see
what's remaining of the bridge
and to visit with the
businesses, but before I did
that, I had a conversation with
the mayor about making sure that
we surge the Department of
Workforce Solutions to Lordsburg
for those businesses in
particular to help them with the
um uh with for those that were
eligible, the unemployment
assistance during that gap. I
did interact with some of the
workers directly about, you
know, the, but you can basically
math it up to say only half of
the traffic can now get to that
site.
or you have about 5 businesses
and so they did see pretty much
a reduction of 50% in the total,
you know, um
uh, in the number of visits that
they had there, so we, we did
work with the mayor connecting
with Workforce Solutions to make
sure while we get the bridge,
um, up and running again. Erin
has committed to getting it
done. I'll say it like he's, he
made me a bet that he can have
it done by September 1st, um,
you have that bridge reopened,
which is impressive, um, but,
um, since we're getting things
on the record, uh, we'll, we'll
get that one too.
He's
that, that is a holiday, by the
way, so.
Well,
thank you, um, I, I know we're
laughing, but we all know it's
very serious, and I appreciate
your work so much and uh
I won't say anymore. I, it's
just good to have all these
numbers and, and right in front
of us and
um thank you
thank you Mr. Chair
Mr. Vice Chair. Thank, thank
you, Representative Blatter.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you, Erin. I'm gonna echo
Representative Jones's comments.
You know, you've always answered
my calls. You've all you've been
very receptive, and I appreciate
that and I'm still gonna bug you
about 28.
Uh,
so, can you, and I know we, I
know the secretary mentioned
that, uh, I know you lightly
touched on it, but can you give
your uh uh your professional
opinion or opinion on the
importance of that highway
connector in Santa Teresa.
Mr. Chair Representative Lara
um, yes, um, first of all, New
Mexico 28, uh, it's gonna be,
uh, included on that, uh, grant
study as well as the same as uh
New Mexico 9, I know, I know we
talk about it every time we
meet, but hopefully we, we
submit it and get some funding.
study that. Thank you for that.
I can get all those monkeys off
my back.
Um,
yeah, the, the border highway
connector, you know, right now
we have a New Mexico 136, which
is the only the only access
route into Santa Teresa into the
port of entry. It connects to
New Mexico 9, which New Mexico 9
connects the other two ports of
entries, uh, antelope Wells and
Columbus.
but there's also the Santa
Teresa Industrial Park, uh,
which is, uh, they're employing
I think close to 3000 people or
more, uh, most of those come in
from El Paso.
uh, so, so it would be a benefit
to, to those, uh, bringing in
more, more employment, uh,
easier to get to work, um, but
the city of Southern Park as
well, they're right in the
middle of it, they're they're
gonna benefit economically, uh,
you know, they, they got big
plans to expand, uh, do some a
lot of infrastructure as well,
so, uh, they're gonna be a big,
uh, benefactor of the border
highway connector, um
uh, we're building, we're
building a bridge, uh, you know,
we're we're going across the
railroad which uh isn't easy to
do if anybody's worked with a
railroad, uh, but we're gonna
have, uh, it's just gonna create
a second year axis and
especially for emergency
services, uh, if we have, uh,
136 it's a freight corridor, so
if we ever had an instance
where, you know, there was a
hazard hazardous spill or
something on 16 and it's got to
shut, be shut down. This, this
would act as a secondary route.
If I can, Mr. Chairman, also
Representative, apologies for
cutting you off, but we also are
anticipating the truck traffic
closure of Bridge of the
Americas, um, at that port as
well, right? And given how
advantageous, uh, the goals are
for Santa Teresa Gro.
growth. This is an opportunity,
right, to leverage that truck
traffic to support.
economic development that we
know is going to reach the
states, you know, pockets, uh,
very, very quickly. And so the
route will not only serve as
that quick route to I tend, uh,
for that truck traffic, but
it'll facilitate business
development along that corridor
as well. And so that'll park
business and industry right in
New Mexico. um, there's a lot of
land to be developed there and
um I think discussions with the
economic development department
only create a bigger sense of
urgency that we, that we look to
get that this
road funded and, and then just
so you're aware too, this is
that first phase that gets us
into Sunland Park. We'll be
looking for funding to get it
from there to the i-10
connection.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Secretary. I know we just saw
numbers and I really wanted to
to have, uh, have, have it
demonstrated the the economic
impact of the state and to to
the region, uh, Mr. Chairman and
uh
one of the things as I was
driving over here this morning
from from home.
as I was coming down the
interstate and I saw 3 of the
wind blades coming up.
and I thought of Representative
Jones and Highway 9 in those
wind blades coming around that
way and using that way and and
it just really hit me and it
just, wow, this is really
happening. Look at them,
they're, they're here, they're
here and they're coming through
here, um, and, uh, think and so
and another thing Mr. Chairman,
and I apologize, but this is
previous to my previous question
so I checked about the
non-commercial private traffic
that comes across
the internet then so that the
support of entry and last year
781,000
private non-commercial vehicles
crossed north from Mexico.
and I think if we could just
charge a $1 each for any of
those, that would be a, a, a
huge, huge uh plus for us in New
Mexico so I don't know once
again I'm, I'm advocating for
that. Maybe that's something we
can consider. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Mr.
Cavailla. It's like you're
bilingual, right?
And that's such a blessing for
this district. I'm so glad to
hear that, um.
I mentioned to you yesterday he,
he hires a company called Tresco
and they hire intellectually.
uh.
disability people and others to
clean 12 of the of the district
one rest stations. How many rest
stops do you have altogether in
your district?
Um, District 1 has 12 rest
areas. Oh, so they do all 12,
and that's $3 million and I
interviewed one of them and he
talks about how people flush
down rolls of toilet paper,
rocks.
and so it's immaculate and then
I talked today to our engineer
from District 6, Lisa Vega, who
one of my, um, constituents
complained about hanging sinks,
so we have a huge problem of
vandalism, and I know we all get
complaints, um, so I, I guess
what I'm really asking for Ricky
is if, if we can get a report
and and Mr. Chair, I'd like to
get a report of, you know, how
many rest stops in the whole
state.
um, and especially I know we had
the prairie dogs eating the
septic system in the entrance to
New Mexico from Arizona I-40,
you know, I used to go back and
forth a lot and think what the
heck is happening and then you
find it's the prairie dogs. It's
not even human vandals and Miss
Vega was standing up to close it
because of Vendel's Vandals, you
know, in the middle of the
night, so if we could just
report on the cost.
um, I think I'd like to share it
publicly so that New Mexicans
understand it's not because DOT
and people are not taking
responsibility. It's because of
issues beyond our control issues
involving people that are out of
control and and what it really
takes. So I, I would like to
request that in the future, near
future, um, Mr. Representative,
that's great. I, um
and, and it, it's getting a
little bit more costly. I think
we short, we're gonna, we're
gonna shore up about $150
million 150,000 dollars gap to
make sure that District One
keeps all the rest areas open
and functioning with that
contract, um, you know,
custodial service. One of the
things that we put up on all the
rest areas, um, was a large QR
code and feedback sign as well.
That way we're both, we're
getting two things. One is
immediate feedback about needing
to deploy out teams to go
address an issue, but two
is long term feedback about how
well our custodial uh crews are,
are doing, uh, keeping the rest
areas clean, but one of the big
challenges we have, not just
with our patrols. We also
support uh maintenance at the
states, um, um, not the patrols,
not the rest areas, but the, uh,
the others that the tourism
department helps us with.
What are the any anyhow, the
visitor centers.
is the need for on Capital
Otley. Last year was the first
year as far as anyone at DOT can
remember that we received
capital outlay to help with
maintenance in our patrols, but
we also would need the capital
outlay to do the repairs, and so
at some rest areas, it's getting
the water issues fixed so we
don't have to shut them down.
Um, we have some rest areas, for
example, the one,
going into Albuquerque after La
Bajada, where we have 24 hour
security to ensure that we don't
have a lot of vandalism, and so
we probably just need a report
and, and a little bit of time to
strategize what the long term,
the long game would be, but some
capital outlay to really improve
some of those facilities like
we're doing with Rattlesnake
now, um, would be really good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, because I
think I, I went to jail. It was
immaculate, but it had a broken
thing, I think the Department of
Cultural Affairs and Tourism
again did their best, but it
would be good for us to know the
best places or the needed places
for capital outlay.
but, but thank you. I, I just,
uh, I happened to meet the tra
the resco supervisor, uh, who
supervises Gustavo Menepeu, who
does 4 of them, so thank you.
Representative Borego
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm,
I'm not gonna speak long. I just
wanted to say there's a lot of
challenges down here. It's been
really insightful for me to come
to this part of um of the
country and to see and I wanted
to thank umpresentative Jones
and also Tony for, um, hosting
us and taking us around and the
mayor of Demming and I mean,
it's been a real eye opener to
see what's happening in Demming.
and I know there's a lot of
challenges and to see what's
happening in Silver City, uh,
but
you know, I always say
challenges or opportunities
turned inside out. So, um
I just wanted to thank, uh, DOT
also the staff has been really
great and you guys were very,
very, um,
just.
like you didn't hold back and
you just gave us everything
that, you know, we could
understand and um
I think that you guys always do
a really good job with DOT and,
and I wanna thank Mr. Thovado.
It was nice to meet you as well.
Thank you, thank you to the
staff.
Representative Jones
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have one
more question. What did you
think about my um idea to just
open that rest stop between
Demming and Lordsburg without
water, without facilities,
because it is the only place
that people can pull off safely
and people who travel that
stretch of road or, you know,
they, they're asking for that,
they miss it. It's been closed
for 2 years.
Mr. Chair Representative Jones,
um, we, we, even though the rest
area is closed, is currently
closed. We actually have that
scenario going on, um, uh, and
honestly, um, we have to send
people out there because there's
uh.
uh
lack of other words there's uh
fecal matter in all the shelters
and, you know, if we don't, if
we don't have water running
toilets and it, it's, it's just
gonna continue, uh, it's an
issue, you know, our, uh, um,
we've been working on, on the,
there, there is water at the
rest area. It's got high levels
of nitrate, um, so that's why we
can't, uh, we can't open it.
It's not safe to open it. We've,
we've, uh, replaced the, the
reverse osmosis system the we
thought it was um it was close
to
the water source, the water
source, the well is like 0.5
mile away.
Uh, we're gonna be replacing the
leech line system, um, it is
getting better, but, uh,
hopefully when we replace the
leech line system which um
it'll, um, it'll fix that, that
nitrate level and then we can
open it back up.
Thank you I appreciate that
explanation because people keep
asking me I can tell them we're
working on it. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for your presentation.
Appreciate all your staff, very
professional, very
knowledgeable, including you,
secretary. I think we're done
