And I'm very close to Rio Rancho
and Corrales and uh I'm a former
city councilor also, so it's
great to be here today and see
so many people here.
Thank you, Representative Jones.
May I go last, um,
you, OK, thank you.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I am really excited to be
here. I've been wanting to go to
the Columbus border crossing for
like about 10 years. Uh, I'm
Joey Garrett. I'm from the west
side of Albuquerque, uh, where
we just celebrated the
thirty-fifth anniversary of
Petroglyph National Monument. So
if you fly or drive, it's where
all the volcanoes are on the
west side of Albuquerque.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you all. My name's Antonio
Maestas Armo Maestas. I'm a
state senator from, uh, District
26, which is just south of
Representative Garrett on the
West Mesa of Albuquerque. It and
it's, uh, both, uh, north and
south of Central, west Central
Avenue, which as you know, is,
uh, the old Route 66. So next
year, 2026 is the 100 year
anniversary of old Route 66
from Chicago to LA, but, um,
it's great to be here, uh, and
your wonderful town and uh look
forward to the dialogue. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Martin. You
want to introduce yourself and
your staff.
Good morning everyone. Martin
Fisher, staff attorney with the
Legislative council Service. I'm
gonna have with me
Aaron Bond and Gabriel Swazzo.
What about our media guy? We
always do the media guy. Why
don't you
sorry, Roberto.
And Roberto with our webcasting
team. Sorry, Roberto.
He's quiet, but he's amazing and
I'm representative de la Cruz.
I'm representing the South
Valley of Albuquerque. It is an
unincorporated area largely that
I serve, and I always appreciate
coming to little towns, uh,
because you really get a feel of
old USA, right? So, I really
appreciated the old main drag
with the, the old businesses,
storefronts, that kind of thing.
Uh, my district is 12, I think,
is it on there? Yeah, it's on
there. Thank you.
We'll uh
go to Representative Jones.
Thank you, Chair de la Cruz and
Vice Chair Maestas and thank you
committee members for being
here. Appreciate it. I want to
explain to everybody that we've
had some overlapping of
committee meetings, which is why
we have kind of a small crowd
today. There are other meetings
in Las Cruces right now and uh
so I think we'll be joined here
in a little while by a couple of
them at least coming from
Crusus, but I just wanna say
welcome everybody. um, I'm
Jennifer Jones, um,
s er ving District 32. This is
the population center of my
district, Demming, but it, it,
um, also includes Hidalgo
County, which is, um, well,
almost all of Hidalgo County
except for the very northern
part, um, so we're all the way
to Arizona and then my district
also includes the hatch, part of
the Hatch Valley, the chili
fields. So you were in the land
of green chili and grapes, which
is wine, um, we're mainly an
agricultural community, but I
think it's
appropriate uh as well that
that um
um, this is a railroad town and
so we are the transportation
committee and uh I think it's,
it's, it's nice to be, yeah,
you've got your railroad pin. I
love that, um, so it's an honor
to me to serve on this committee
because I know how, how
important transportation is in
our rural communities, and we
have, we have many issues we
have a great opportunity to, um,
put forth some projects, some
concerns today to committee
members. I see some folks in the
audience here.
that are kind of new to the
process, so I want it as a
homeschool mom, I have to
explain this. I'll and I love
getting the opportunity to to
connect rural New Mexico with
what's happening in Santa Fe.
and so
yes, our IT guy is probably,
he's one of the most important
people here because we can't do
these meetings without being on
the webcast right now. Every
word we say goes out to anybody
who wants to see us. This is
transparency, and we can be
involved even from rural New
Mexico with every meeting that
goes on in the legislature. It's
a way to hold your elected
officials accountable. It's a
way to stay involved and speak
up for our needs as um as
citizens, um
so
so in, in the interim, this is
our interim, you know, we need
every January for a session
where we, um, we introduced
bills, we decide how to spend
your tax dollars because
government doesn't have any
money of our own.
We spend your money, but in the
interim we are dedicated to
certain committees. I have 3
committees I serve on each
legislator serves on at least
one committee.
and we travel around the state
to get, um, bird's Eye and
firsthand view of um of exactly
what's going on in in all of the
parts of New Mexico we go to
try to go to every area. I
forgot to mention that, um, I
think, I don't know if if
Representative Lauda will
maybe be able to confirm this,
but I think I have the
southernmost district, Hidalgo
County's the boot heels, so
yeah, we're, we share the
border, but it's, it's great
for, for all of our legislators
to see our border community,
our, um, we have a unique, uh,
culture here that is different
than any other place in New
Mexico, so I really truly
appreciate you all being here
and getting to to take part in
in what we have here in our our
district, um, one other
thing, another thing
And you'll see
Palomas, Mexico, they're
inundated. I mean there's 2 ft
of water in their streets,
there, and you know their sewer
systems are not quite like ours.
They're, they're getting sewer
in the water that's flowing down
the streets. I mean, it is a
mess down there. You can see the
port of entry as we go around
That's
right there is a, I think that's
the
we put about $5.5 million worth
of infrastructure into the
roads, into the industrial park,
they're flooded with water and
then we just finished that
project, so the port of entry
2016, the federal government put
about $85 million into this port
of entry. They raised it 3 ft.
to prevent some of this, but as
you could probably see when and
we can stop it on that section
of the port of entry.
In this 1.5 inches of rain,
there's a foot of water standing
around.
the actual building, the federal
building for the port of entry
there. Um, it is
it's a nightmare. We've got the
funding from the, from the state
and the governor's been
extremely gracious to us. We've
got about 21 million that turned
out to be about 9 million short
of doing this project, um, so
we're, we're looking for the
remainder. We're looking at the
water russ board and some other
avenues for, uh, for that, but
you can see
in portions
the water tops New Mexico 11,
uh, even the culverts that are
going under it are literally
completely full with water
pushing through onto the east,
um, that's probably our biggest
concern right now. You know, we
can't do any kind of
we can't get people to come in
here and do business in our
industrial park and and create
business for the community if we
can't get this out of a flood
zone. They're not gonna come,
um, and again that's, we have
other projects that are working
on the north side of Columbus to
prevent flooding there. This one
in particular, um
is, is probably what's going to
be the biggest boon for this,
uh, this whole place is to get
that traffic through to start
opening that port for more
business and whether it be cold
storage or just regular stors
for these people coming through.
We need to get these things
fixed and we need to get that
flooding under control. It's
imperative for the, for the
future of this county, really,
um, that we start building out
down there again we don't want
to be senator Teresa, we don't
want to be this, you know, giant
beast, um, but we do have parts
that we can take from them, take
some of the pressure off that
port, so the pressure off their
industrial park, some things
that make more sense, westbound
loads make more sense coming
through here. They can hit 10
from here, and they can go
straight. They can hit 26 and
onto, uh, the northern part of
the state. So, again, if I can
leave you with anything, this
would be the, the impression
that
it's an international problem,
um, you know, we've, we're
working with both what the
equivalent of the county
manager, um, down there, the
Bayor of Palomas, the governor
of Chihuahua. Everybody's
involved in this. Everybody's
concerned about it, um, and it
protects two complete
communities from this type of
flooding so that and again I
know this is the infrastructure
transportation, but it does
affect 11 and it affects, you
know, some of the things that
I'll have. Chuck, you want to
come up real quick, Turner and
talk about what happen
s with the schools
Uh, if you didn't know we have 6
to 700 and uh Charles can fix,
correct me if I'm wrong, about
600 700 students, 6 to 700
students that live in Palomas
but traveled here for school
every day.
So
needless to say, the crossing is
extremely important to us in
that respect. So I'll let, I'll
let Charles Turner, he's
essentially the
under superintendent for Deming
public schools, um, if you want
to speak to that quickly.
Good morning, Chairman De la
Cruz and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Charles
Turner, and I serve as the
government affairs coordinator
for Deming Public Schools. As a
county manager Chris Brice
mentioned, uh, we do have, uh,
about 800 students that we bring
from the port of entry every
morning
Uh, and then we take them back
in the evenings, um, our overall
enrollment though is about 4900,
um, and we, we have these
students that cross this port of
entry every day looking for a
better education opportunity,
uh, these students are citizens
of the United States, uh, and
we're
we're different from the rest of
in New Mexico in the sense that
we have 15 buses that we bring
up from the port of entry every
day.
Uh, with this large amount of
rainfall that the county manager
has discussed, there's times we
have to cancel those bus routes
and all of you guys know that
standing water also leads to
mosquitoes, uh, and, and then
the running water and I, I do
have a packet in front of you
with a map of the port of entry
and then our photos from our bus
stop, and you can see that in
some areas, as Mr. Bryce
mentioned, we do have large
amounts of water on, on an adult
that's maybe ankle deep
mid shin, but on a little kid
that's up to their knee. That
could get dangerous depending on
how fast that water flows
through, uh, and, and when
we have these potentially life
threatening environments and
situations at the port just
based on weather, uh, it affects
our, our attendance rates on a
major storm in July when we shut
down those bus routes. We had a
nearly 10% decrease in
attendance and participation
that day from the four schools
that have students from the port
of entry.
Other things that we have seen,
uh, as an issue from the, the,
the flooding down there is the
mosquito infestation, uh, in
fact, last week, Representative
Jones shared with me a photo of
one of her, her friends just
absolutely covered in mosquitoes
and we get those complaints
daily.
I called our school nurses this
morning, uh, and they told me
that they have seen an increase
in student visits based on these
mosquito bites with the recent
emphasis on education in this
state, you all know that time in
the classroom is vital. It is
important, uh, and at the
elementary level that they're
learning the basics. They're
they're building those
foundations and then when we get
into middle and high school,
we're perfecting the skills for
graduation and post-secondary,
uh, life choices, whether that's
college or career technical, uh,
but these students need to be in
the classroom. And, and for that
reason, uh, Deming Public
Schools supports any project
that helps address the flooding
at the port of entry. Um, you
guys will be down there later
today. I did talk to our
crossing guards, uh, that, that
help our students cross the
road. They're still standing
water down there today. So
bring, bring your bug spray and,
and I hope you enjoy our, your
visit and our bus that takes you
down there.
With that, I'll turn it over to
the mayor of Columbus for a few
comments.
Uh,
I was a little bit surprised to
be invited up here. So I, I, I
didn't have comments prepared
for you, but I'll be with you on
the tour this afternoon and I'll
be able to, uh, answer lots of
questions at that time. Thank
you.
And again, I just want to close
with part of the, part of the
standing water issue, you know,
through the Water Trust board,
TPF funds, some other things,
you know, we put again 5.5
million into some road
infrastructure, some drainage
infrastructure down at the at
the port of entry and the
industrial park, uh, a lot of
which is underwater, but the
drainage worked for us. That
drainage then goes to a
retention pond that the
government, the GSA pond
essentially which is just the
west side of when you're going
south, uh, just to, to the side
of
the the port of entry.
Well, the federal government,
and I know we're not the federal
government, but they never
finished that project, so that
retention pond is supposed to
flow underneath the road to
another pond that's on the east
side, and there is a pond there,
um, but then there was supposed
to be a lift station and pump
installed to remove all that
water and push it out into the
desert and just kind of flatten
it out and let it dissipate.
That was never finished. So now
what happens is when we have a
rain event and again this was a
1.5 inch rain event. This is not
the 2
5 year storm. This is not the
50-year storm. It's certainly
not a 100-year storm. That water
backs up in those ponds, backs
up to the new ones we just built
and backs up everywhere. And,
you know, we really need to work
and, and I will do the, the leg
work with, you know, Senator
Heinrich and those two maybe
come back and revisit what the
federal government never really
finished when they built this in
this port of entry, um.
but that water sits there. I
mean, again, this was a July
rain. It's probably been a
month, at least, if not longer,
uh, I think it's 72 hours is the
requirement to have that water
out of there.
We're looking at, you know, 30,
40 days already, and it'll be
there in another 30, I promise
you. Um, so we've got some real
problems down there that we need
to address. And again, I will
stand for any questions. I'm
sure they will as well, but
thank you for listening to our
issues down here.
Uh, did the city manager want to
come back up and
present city issues? Could I,
could I just, um, add that I
think we've got so many people
here that that need to add to uh
county manager Bryce's
presentation and I think Carol
Ness of American Magnesium kind
of fits with what you've been
saying. You mentioned the bypass
and so forth, um, would you be
OK with having her speak right
now and then after we're
finished with Carol, um, we
could go to the city manager.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Go ahead and please introduce
yourselves again.
Thank you. Hello, I'm Carol
Ness. I'm managing member for
American Magnesium, and thank
you to the subcommittee for
seeing us today. Uh, I, I, I
think timing is, is, um, so
important in projects like this
and uh uh magnesium is a
critical metal.
There is no magnesium production
in the United States, in Canada,
or in Europe. 87% of this
critical mental comes from
China.
Needless to say
the federal government,
especially the Trump
administration, has been waiting
for a report that was 2 years in
the making, but we have it, and
it's the technical report on the
magnesium project near Deming,
New Mexico, and it's an NI
that's national instrument.
Don't ask me what that stands
for, uh, 43101, but it's a
bankable report
of the, of the uh value the
economic value that this um that
this project will bring to New
Mexico, not just Luna County,
not Deming, not Luna County, but
all of New Mexico. Uh, we don't
have any oil. We're not the
Permian Basin, but Aluna County
was blessed with a high,
um,
uh, purity magnesium dense
dolomite. It probably one of the
best deposits
in North America, if not the
world. Um, it's 100-year project
at least
and it got from the BLM a
finding of no significant impact
when the environmental study was
done. There's no pit
The two-foot hills which with
which have no overburden. You
can see them. It's on page 2 of
the flyer that I, that I, I gave
you. You can see it's totally
exposed
and uh it just takes it's, it's
basically um
hard rock sand and gravel, if,
if you will, and it would be
taken to a mill and, and
hopefully in the industrial park
and Demming, which is perfect
for it because it's got rail,
it's got electric, and it's got
a pipeline of natural gas.
allocated in that area, so we,
um, we're very excited, but so
is the administration. And if
there was ever a time to get the
federal government involved, um,
uh, President Trump had an
executive order that said that
the federal government will help
with any impacted communities to
help start
mining projects that are
essential for this country, and
that's why I think I was talking
to, uh, um, city manager Bryce
about it. I think this is the
time that the federal government
could be involved. We are
working with a group from
Washington that uh I discussed
this problem with. I said, look,
the biggest problem we have is a
truck route. We've got to get
our trucks, which are regular
size over land trucks. They're
not the big dump, the big trucks
that mines have. These
are just end dump trucks that
would have to get from 12 miles
south of Demming to North
Demming where the industrial
park is. Uh, we could take
whatever route that was planned
for the port of entry
because it's basically the same
route. We would take that, but
it's important because it will
be nothing compared to the
trucks that will be coming
through when our project. And
our project is going to bring
incredible economic development,
not only to one of the poorest
counties, Luna, in it'll make it
one of the most prosperous and
but also for all of New Mexico
because $438 billion net
for the life of the mine is
pretty impressive for taxes and
employment and it will bring
those jobs that they're going
to, uh, Silver City for we might
bring them home so they don't
have that commute.
Any rate, that, uh, uh, that's
why I wanted to come here today
was to say the timing's
beautiful because one of the
people that's working on our
project is really good friends
with the manager of the truck
routes for all of the United
States, so I think that um
I think conversations with the
administration, and I will keep,
uh, uh
county manager Bryce informed as
to who to talk to when the
timing's right.
So, uh, thank you, um, I'll
stand for any questions. I will
not be on the tour.
Thank you
Representative Jones, uh,
I'm letting you take the lead on
this. OK, thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Yeah, we have a lot
of ground to cover, so to speak.
We have a lot going on down here
and uh
so
I, I, uh
I think I would like to say just
to add to um Carolness's
presentation about American
magnesium that this is a project
that's been worked on for many
years, it's gone through all the
hoops with BLM, um
they are at a stage now where
it, it, it's very sure that
there is the need for them to
use a bypass route, so that was
the main reason I had hurt come
it's not only so that you all
could see that we have, we have
an opportunity to be very
prosperous and to really make a
difference not just for us like
she said but for New Mexico but
we just need those targeted
projects addressed the berm
and this truck route are um are
essential for us to move
forward.
uh, for, for many, many reasons,
lots, lots of um of reasons, but
that is just one of them uh and
the fact that we have could have
a partnership possibly with the
federal government for that
truck route that's no doubt will
be quite expensive is is just
another piece of the puzzle
So that's why I asked her to
come and and county manager
Bryce agreed to that.
Um, are we, are we ready for
questions?
Uh, did you want to have the
mayor go first? Yeah.
manager. Mayor, did you want to
add something? No. City manager.
I'm sorry, city manager.
So are we talking about Chris's
son
OK. No, no, Mr. Chair, I think
we can go ahead and address your
city of Demming beautification
Project. Is that what you'd like
to if you don't mind, I'd like
to bring the city mayor, um,
Michelle Shilato to introduce
her and the assistant manager
Cassie Atius.co one down.
OK.
Go ahead and proceed when you're
ready. And, and if you would
have your guests introduce
themselves again.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee,
Cassiotius Ward, Assistant City
Manager for the city of Demi.
Hi, I'm Miki Shillito. I'm the
mayor of Demming and I'm late. I
apologize. I've been running
like crazy. Opened up Marshalls
this morning, which is a super
event for us, so, uh, and I, I
also have a full-time job, so it
makes it kind of tough to meet
all the things they need to do,
but I'm really very excited for
you to be here. We're so happy
that Jennifer is representing us
and whatever you need from us in
the city, please let us know.
We'll do our best to make sure
things run, run smoothly
for you. Sometimes that's not an
easy task, but we certainly do
our best, so.
Thank you. Nice for having you
here
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, um, before I start
into the presentation that I put
up here, I'd like to reiterate
some of the things that uh Mr.
Bryce is saying, the, um, bypass
project immediately down at
Columbus, the city of Deming
supports that 100%. We
understand we have a lot of
people traveling back and forth,
um, but we support getting that
first leg of that thing around
Columbus, it's a critical
project for them, and I
appreciate you all, uh,
supporting that, um.
and
the next thing I wanna talk
about is the New Mexico DOT has
funding opportunities for local
governments. One of them is a
local government road fund,
which is kind of small projects.
There's a municipal arterial
program, a little medium
projects, and there's a
transportation project fund that
transportation project fund is
essential to local governments
and smaller communities. If that
thing is not funded, we're not
able to do big projects, um,
and the New Mexico DOT District
one, we have an absolute amazing
relationship with them. We all
worked together, the city,
county, DOT, um, there's a
planning organization as well
through the Council of
governments, but we, we ask that
you continue supporting that.
Um, it is the only possible way
that we can do a project that
costs more than a million
dollars. Uh, uh, the revenue for
the street department for the
city itself is only off of gas
tax and excise tax for motor
vehicles, which amounts
to about $400,000 which might
get you the striping on a road.
So anyway, uh, having said that,
I appreciate you all being here
and the support that we uh are
receiving from you. This is,
this project that I have here,
there's a presentation that I
gave to you is a beautification
project that we've been working
on for quite some time.
Um, a few years back, District
One
uh,
District One came to us and
said, hey, we, we may be getting
some money reverted to us.
And if you guys can design this
project, you pay for design,
well, we'll give you that money
if it comes back to us. So
in the process of this whole
thing, we have a design done, we
paid for it. These are just
conceptuals in front of you, but
we had the design done, it's
completed, it's shovel ready,
and during that process,
that money didn't get reverted
back to District one. So we went
back and talked to him. I
actually went and visited with
Secretary Serna, and he said,
you know, we need to get this
back on the radar so that we can
try to tap into this funding.
This project right here is not
only, you know, just
beautification. I mean, I'm sure
that you've noticed the trash
all over the place, um, so, but
it also creates economic
development. When people are
driving through this corridor
right here. It doesn
' t look that great. So they
don't, they tend not to get off
the interstate. Hey, let's drive
to the next place and see what
that looks like. This project
right here, we absolutely feel,
will take I-10, turn it into an
ATM machine for Luna County in
the city of Deming. Um, we've
gone through a bunch of
different public meetings of
iterations of this as far as
picking out welcome signs and
different designs and stuff like
that. This is a $2.5 million
project.
um, and we still feel that we
can get it done. We
2.5 million was estimated about
3 years ago, so that could be 3
million, but anything over $2.5
million the city of Demming, the
city council, the mayor have
agreed that we would go ahead
and fund that, make that match,
and, and try to get this project
done. We're just asking for your
support in this if this comes up
in the legislative session, and
uh, we thank you for your time.
If you have any questions about
it, it would be more than happy
to answer those. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee.
Representative Jones
Thank you, Mr. Chair
uh, and thank you, city manager
and mayor for being here, Cassie
for being here. I, I would like
to know, I, I'd like to
understand a little bit better
how much, what, what is it is
exactly that we can add to this
to make this program, uh, this
project happen. I know you've
done a lot of work on it. Maybe
I missed the exact amount and
how can we help with that?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, this, this, when we,
when we designed this project,
the city spent $168,000 for the
design.
Um, anticipating somewhere
around 1.6 million that was
getting reverted back to
District one and since that we
expanded the project to include
not just the exits, but
everything in between, that's
where the 2.5 came from.
But if that money is not
available, then we'll scale it
down or we'll add to it to
continue the whole thing because
this project is from one exit to
the other and everything in
between. So the, the ask has
been $2.5 million. We've
discussed that with um
Senator George Munoz, who chairs
legislative Finance and Senate
Finance, and he 100% was about
beautification in New Mexico and
I know there's a lot of work
done by all of you to get money
put into beautification of the
state of New Mexico and we're
asking for the 2.5 out of that
and if we can't get that, we'll
take what we can and we'll
slowly piece it away and try to
complete it over the next 5 to
10 years.
OK, that, that helps. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Borego
and.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, ladies and gentlemen for
your
insight into your community. Um,
as I was sitting here listening
to you really kind of pained me
to hear about some of these
public health and safety issues
that you're dealing with, um.
particularly, you know,
of course the roads, but also
the drainage issues, um, Mr.
Cherry, as you know, I sat on
the flood control board in
Albuquerque for 6 years, and,
um, I, I had a couple of
questions regarding the
drainage, and I don't know if
you're the appropriate person to
answer these questions, but I'm
gonna ask them anyway, um
so at what level is the Corps of
Engineers involved with the
drainage issues or
or are they
Because I didn't hear any
reference to them.
Yes, ma'am, um, they are not
involved. They were involved in
the original building of the new
port of entry, um, and again,
that, that's what resulted in a
3-foot.
3 ft rise that they build 3-foot
pad height to put the new
building on, but since then, the
federal government's pretty much
uh
to some degree it's
it's us too. I mean, we went for
congratulally directed spending,
um, Senator Heinrich got us a
1.5 million.
to do some of the project, but
again, as you know, once you
touch federal funds
there's a lot more that goes
into it, the cost of the
projects go up dramatically, so
we're doing a small portion of
this berm right at the border on
the west side with that money,
um.
but as far as the rest of the
Fed, we have heard nothing from
anybody.
Um, was that the berm that you
showed on the slide and how big
is that burn? You said it, it
would handle
quite a, quite an area, I think.
It protects about 1800 acres
south of it, um.
we had to do it in 3 phases
because of the funding. So
with the 21 million that we got,
um, again from the governor and
ARPA funds and, and through some
other avenues we were able to we
started phase one. You'll see
that today if you're going on
the trip, it's begun. Phase 2 is
on hold for another 9 to $10
million. Phase 3 is the small
land state land office portion,
um, and that one has been funded
through
federal funds
So there we go. So that one,
that one's been funded through
federal funds. That's why we
kind of made it its own project
so that we didn't have to fall
under the Nipah and all the
other requirements the federal
government does.
um, Mr. Chair, and, um,
gentlemen, just
any of your property tax funding
go toward drainage control?
None of ours at this moment, no,
no, it doesn't. Have you at all
had any conversations about that
possibility. We've looked at
kids, um, and other avenues. We
just don't know the
we have a lot of people
interested in the, the mayor of
Columbus can speak to it in
coming into the industrial park.
Most of those lots and
everything have been spoken for.
I don't know what the return
would be on a, a tid down there.
Um, I think that we have avenues
that we can
we can tap into that will help
us finish it without going, you
know, into the tax taxpayers
again.
although it's all taxpayer
money, I get that, but you know,
the local ones, I mean, we're,
we're still struggling with how
we're going to handle the, the
veterans exemption. um
being a veteran myself, you know
what I mean, it's, that's a,
that's a big hit to a lot of
communities and a, and a good
one, but we're still trying to
figure that out as well.
Um, Mr. Chair, and, and, uh,
gentlemen, I'd love to have you
come up to Albuquerque and meet
with our flood control folks to
see how our, um
flood control works in
Albuquerque and how it's funded
because I think and also the
relationship that we have with
the Corps of Engineers, um, and
the city and the county as well
because I think, um, you know, I
think about, um, we were just in
Riodoso recently and um
extended the same invitation to
them. I think it's important
that we start looking at, uh,
flooding
throughout the state because we
have major issues happening. We
see it on Los Lunas in Bilan and
Secorro and Ridoso and now
hearing this, it's, it's very
concerning to me, especially
when we know that there's public
health issues related to, you
know, disease, um, and, uh
you know, I just, I would love
to extend that invitation that,
um, maybe I put you in touch
with some of those folks so that
we could really look at how we
can address some of those issues
and where, uh, needed funding
can come from. So thank you for
that presentation and I'll get
with you maybe after this is
over.
Yes, ma'am, I'm more than
willing to meet with anybody I
have, uh, my hands are open and
so's my mind. So I will take out
every bit of help I can get.
Mr. Chair, just because
I'm, I'm probably the only
planner on the, uh, in the
legislature. So sometimes I look
at things a little differently,
um, but I know that when roads
are built and, you know, if we
don't have those drainage
facilities incorporated at the
same time that the roads are
built, and we have major issues.
So, um, appreciate that.
Thank you. Just to remind the
members, please, uh, I know
we're talking back and forth
with, with our panelists, but
please remember to turn off your
mic because we got this annoying
echo. So if you would do that at
the table as well, please.
next week
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
there's a lot to say and I know
it's been a little disjointed
because we do have so many
concerns that all fit together
actually, but I do, I wanna
highlight one thing that I think
is so important about this BERM
project as county manager Bryce
has said we have 3 phases to
this project. The first one is
funded and it's in progress.
The second one is only $9
million. It's the smallest
amount is not funded. The third
one is funded.
but as we, we see so often, if
we don't, if we don't have money
right when we need it this other
money, this phase one money,
could, um, the work we've done
can deteriorate and then the
phase 3 money could actually be
lost in the process of trying to
find that.
what seems like measly $9
million that needs to go toward
that phase two part of the, the
whole process. So, so I just
wanted to call attention to
that, um, how it's a minor
amount compared to what we see
often and it's just a huge
return on finding that 9
million. The other thing I, I
wanted to mention too since
we're
we're back and forth with the
berm and the truck route is that
I don't know if you all remember
this, but, but I did introduce
House Memorial 55, we did.
um, Represent Trossis, I don't
know if you noticed he came in,
um, yes, for the, the truck
route just to call attention to
that and I think that was 2
sessions ago we introduced that
to the committee and it was very
well received. I believe that um
it hasn't gotten a lot of
attention, you know, and so this
you, you guys have a copy of
this that gives you all of the
reasons that very good reasons
from different perspectives for
the need for the truck route,
and I wanted to call attention
to that as well. I don't think I
have anything else to add. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
folks, just to let you know,
there's coffee in the corner and
water if anybody's interested.
Moving on to our, our
representative questions, uh,
Representative Garrett.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you everybody for being
here. I'm so exci I'm the chair
of New Mexico Finance Authority
Oversight and we will be here
next month on September, I think
it's 9th and 10th. So if we
don't address it now, um, the
colonial board, the colonius
Board will be reporting to us,
uh, the border Authority will be
reporting to us and then the
water trust board is under NMFA
oversight. So I'm already
realizing there'll be some
follow up. Uh, my question
Mr. Chair, is what's the
estimated cost for widening New
Mexico 11.
Do we know
Ma'am, we, we have not look, we
have not done any engineering
cost study on that yet. That's
just a proposal right now, uh,
that seems to make the most
sense to us, but we have not
done a cost proposal.
OK, thank you. Um, and then, um,
on, on the erm has there been
efforts to approach the governor
for her capital outlay funding,
which is a lot of
she gets a third of the capital
outlay and then 1/3 is divided
among the senators and 1/3 is
involved uh
uh, divided among the reps. So
reps
in the past got about 2.5
senators got about 3.5, 3.5, and
then she gets a bunch, so it's
just sometimes people don't
realize you can directly talk to
her about that phase two of the
berm, just, just wanted to uh
mention that, uh, that's all my
questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Terasas.
just briefly introduce yourself
and then, uh, then you have the
floor.
Mr. Chair, I'm at home, so.
thank you Mr. Ts listening on
the webcast. OK, Mr. Chair, I'm,
I'm, uh, Luis Terazo state
representative for District 39,
Catherine Grant Hidalgo
Counties, um, this is a
neighboring county. I work with,
uh, Representative Jones very
well and, uh, Senator Brantley
and ramos in this area, you
know, we love the Southwest and
we'll always support you guys,
um, as you can see, uh, well,
before I go into things of
introducing myself, you know,
I'm one of your local business
guys and, and, uh
I'll always support Luna County,
uh, because I, uh, I, I'd love
the people there. My, my
grandmother still lives here
103, uh, and, uh, and that
pretty neat, huh? So you know,
I, I'm glad to be here. um, I
don't sit on your committee, uh,
Mr. Chair, but being that you're
in our, in our neck of the
woods, we, I definitely wanted
to be here. Um, a couple of
things, Mr. Chair. um
I want it in committee, uh
you know, I know you're looking
at, uh, House Memorial 55. I can
tell you, you know, living here
and doing commerce here, you
see, you know, a lot of what has
been said as the funeral
director in one of the funeral
directors here in in Luna County
we hear all, you know, we see
all the, the, the, um, fatal
crashes we deal with all that,
uh, both on I-10 and and these
other highways that we're
talking about.
and on house house Memorial 55,
you know, if you, if you just go
to, to the border if you ever
get a chance to go to the pink
store we'll just throw the pink
store out guys, um, and you sit
there and you and you look at
all of the
trucks that are coming through
with onions and chili and so
forth they're lined up
I mean, you can get in line for
2 hours
and it's, it's massive and they
literally drive right through
there and then come through
Demming and then they come over
here and they, they cut through
hatch is usually where they go,
so you know that's another
highway. I mean our highway
systems here all need to be, um,
widened, um, for safety. We just
had a fatal crash of an 18 year
old, uh, young man on, on the
Hatch Highway just of not, not a
week ago I think on Sunday. This
is, this is a
seems to be a more common
thing anymore and um and so
obviously we'd we'd like to
support anything that we can in
studying and supporting future
expansion there in in the
highway highway system as far as
the, the, uh, berm and stuff, I
mean, if you just look at the
pictures that they provided, I
think that was a, I don't know
the exact date, but it just
shows you how devastating it is
for, for the people down there.
My question, Mr. Chair, um, is
on the beautification is, uh,
for the panel are.
is this, can this be phased out
over a period of time or maybe
you get funding over a period of
time and we do 13, 1/3, 1/3, or
a half and half. Would that be
something that could be used?
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, yeah, we, we can
phase this out at any time the,
the theory behind the original
plan was
if we do it now, it costs 2.5%
if we phase it, it'll cost 5
million. So we're trying to see
if it was available to get it
done all at one time, but if
it's not, we're just gonna have
to pick away at it through the,
the next 5 to 10 years. Um, but
as you know,
as a local businessman that I've
dealt with quite often, um, you
know the cost of everything has
been rising, uh, tremendously
20% or more every single year,
so that was the initial thought
process behind this when we're
working with the District one
engineer and um but if we have
to phase it, then we're
perfectly willing to do that.
And Mr. Chair, you know, I'm
glad that's why I asked the
question. I wanted you to say
that I don't know if you had
said that kind of walked in out
of another meeting here late
and, uh, I, I think that's
important to know. I mean, we,
we've seen it through COVID.
We've seen how, um, we get
that's the biggest problem we
have, Mr. Chair, um, for all
these, uh, um, capital Oley
projects where we say, hey, you
know it's going to cost us, it
doesn't matter what it is, what
the number is, a million dollars
for whatever project it is, and
by the time we the grant
agreements come through by the
time all that happens,
it, it's no different than
anything if we were to go try to
build a house and I say, hey, I
wanna build a house today, Mr.
Chair, and I get the plans and
all that, and they give me a
bid. The bid is probably good
for.
if 30 days, uh, if you get
somebody nice, they might do 90,
uh, outside of that, you're
gonna have to get it's gonna
have to get rebid again. And so
that's what happens to us and so
that's why we have this it's
kind of
when we use the word
dysfunctional because we're kind
of shooting sometimes and, and,
and saying, you know what, we
only need $800,000 but if we
don't ask for a million, Mr.
Chair, this project can't be
done. And, and so you see a lot
of that throughout the state of
New Mexico and, and I agree with
that. Now my next question, Mr.
Chair, is, is this on your high
priority list? Is it on your top
10 priority where, where we can
possibly garner support from the
the governor and ourselves, and
we can all try to pitch in to
make something like this happen.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I believe this
project on our infrastructure
capital improvement plan falls
around the, within the 10, top
10 of the priorities. I'm not
positive about that, but I, I
believe that we tried to get it
there, um, at some point during
our public meetings, um, in
order to expedite the funding on
it.
Mr. Chair, um, committee, I, I
would also, I would recommend
that you put this up on the top
5. I, that would be my
recommendation because it really
helps us, uh, legislators show
that that's a high priority for
you guys. um, I don't know what
the other priorities are that
you have, uh, but I think if
this is something that you
could, you know, um, that you
really want done, um, it's
something that I think the
higher it goes up on the on on
your scale it, it, it helps us
garner support for that, uh,
moving on, Mr. Chair, the last
question I have is for all the
flooding that you have here has,
have, have you tried to apply
for colonias infrastructure
money because they, they do,
that's one of the things that
they do, anything above, uh,
anything north of the highway,
what is it? 100, 1
100 miles. I don't know what
the, what the 150 miles, but
the, the key is have you asked
Colonias, Mr. Chair, uh, panel,
for possible support with
flooding like this because that,
that is one of the initiatives
that they, they support.
Mr. Chair, members of committees
representative Therasas.
this particular area does not
fall within the county's
designated colonius area, um,
the, the village of Columbus
might be able to. I'm not sure
exactly what their boundaries
for their colonials are, but it
does not fall within our
boundaries of colonias.
And so, Mister Chair, that,
that's kind of where I was going
with that. I think I don't know
how you work with, um, Columbus.
I'm not sure what relationship
you have there, but I think that
would be a avenue and being that
they fall under that um the
purview of, of being, uh, a
place of need, uh, they would
probably, it would probably help
you at least garnish some of
that support so that maybe you
can reach your goal a little
closer.
That's all I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have Representative Ulara.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and thank you for the
presentation. I, you know,
there's a, there's a lot of need
around the state.
and, and this is just a small, a
small piece of it, and I, and I
appreciate you all explaining
this to us and and bringing it
to the forefront. I do have a
question though, Mr. Chairman,
is, uh, have, have you, either
the city or the county in the
past or is currently considering
a geo geo bond.
to make up for or to at least
help with these projects.
Mr. Chair, members, um, we have
considered it.
Again, going back
the design was not it was not
designed in phases. Uh, we had
some problems with the landowner
who
would not
uh, a major landowner in the
Sanders Group that would not
sell if we did it in phase
because he didn't believe we'd
get the funding for the next
phase. So we programmed this
money at $21 million. That was
the cost estimate for the entire
thing, um, we got the 21
million. And again, this is not
the engineer's fault. The amount
of dirt work that has to be done
for the size of the retention
pond.
hadn't been done in this area or
even the state in a long time,
so we, we calculated what we
thought it could be, came out to
be a lot more, and again, as
Representative Tarasa said, this
has been a long time. I mean,
the border authority has been
instrumental, you know, they,
they've had money for it. So
over 5 years, the cost just
kind of got away from us, um, is
really what happened. So now,
now that we're looking at, at
the phasing, we have that phase
2. We are open to pretty much
any, any means of funding. We've
been talking to the NAB bank,
uh, they have grants, they have
low interest loans. They've
mentioned that they would be
willing to
lend the money through the state
if the state would guarantee
capital outlet over a certain
number of years. We've looked at
everything, so everything is
open to us for sure.
Thank you for that because, you
know, as uh um
I think Donana County is
currently working on, on getting
uh public input on the geo bond
that they're working on.
and so I was, I always believed
that, uh, you know, that, that
we have to have skin in the
game.
and uh by looking at other means
of funding these projects and
not just depending completely on
the state because it's been my
experience, Mr.
Mr. Chair, is that we, if we
depend on Capelale, it's gonna
be always gonna be phases and
piecemeal.
and this way if we have other
sources, you know, we can, we
can consider those as well, uh,
and the reason I asked that
because, and Mr. Chas because I,
I've heard, uh, talk, uh, that
you know, the, the state is
going to be looking at, you
know, the local entities putting
up their share or putting up
their, their part of, of these
for capital improvements and not
just depend on the state for,
for, for the complete funding
and so that was just my question
I was wondering if you know you
had in the past or in the future
are considering geo bonds, you
know, to complete these
projects. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mayor,
managers, the, uh, just
the safety issue we'll deal with
here in a second, so I'll just
save those comments for that
presentation came in on 26th
this morning.
but just some general comments,
Mr. Chairman, uh, I'm really
enjoying learning about, um,
Luna County, uh, I'm in the
Senate now, but back in the day
I was in the house and uh you've
already had tremendous
representation from this part of
the state and so I so for some
of the old timers, I learned a
lot from uh Donna Irwin. So I
loved her tremendously. I just
wanted to give her a shout, um
the, uh, someone mentioned the
gas tax, you know, that's how we
pay for roads in this state, uh,
now we have cash. Now we have
just literally billions of
dollars of additional dollars.
And so we take the money that we
get from the gas tax and we put
cash and and and that's our
transportation budget um
at some point that cash may, may
not be there, uh
you know, in the next year, 2 or
3 or 5, we're gonna have to, uh,
raise the gas tax. It's gonna be
incredibly difficult.
The you're, you're, you're, uh,
folks down here probably
probably gonna have to go vote
no on that because of the, the
people they represent.
uh, but the folks in this room
have to understand that that we
have to do that as a state, um,
that when, when we uh
you know, if and when we, uh, go
4 lanes on 26th or we do passing
lanes uh on 26th and 11 that,
that, that comes from that gas
tax. It'll really increase the
ability of Demming to grow.
Demming was 14,000 people, 30
years ago, I'm sorry, about 25
years ago and and it's 14,000
now, so we, and it's, it's
statewide. We haven't grown as a
state we're gonna have to grow a
little bit even though we love
it the way it is, we're gonna
have to grow a little bit just
to so that our economies grow
and our and our young people
stay in
the state, but
but let us know how we can help,
um, obviously the
uh, we're from Albuquerque, but
we, uh,
but we have money. We, we, um,
state government has money. We
have 34 billion with a B dollars
extra. Uh, we've taken $31
billion and put it into what I
call the mattress. We've put it
into various trust accounts.
So we tell folks we have $3
billion extra, but we really
have $34 billion extra. So some
of these priority projects that
we don't know about like the the
photographs from from um.
uh
you know, from the village of
Columbus, that, that's just, uh,
that's shocking to me being from
Albuquerque, but that's just
good government stuff. We have
got to solve that problem and
state dollars need to go to that
project. So let us know how we
can help
uh, and we'll push for that in
our respective committees and
with the governor because that,
that we need to solve that
problem like
in, in the immediacy, um
but anyway, just thank you for
your work and look forward to
the.
to today and tomorrow. Thank you
Yes, uh city manager
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, as you know, I,
I, I believe most of you would
have known this, but the late
Senator John Arthur Smith was
actually proposing an increase
to gas tax.
um, and you, I agree with you
100%. If, if we don't do
something with that, the
electrical car movement thing,
we're just losing more and more
money. The city of Demming has
um representative lotto has
mentioned earlier about GO
bonds. We, we do a revolving
series of general obligation
bonds just for street repairs.
Without that funding and without
the district one helping us out
with that funding. There just
isn't enough to keep up with the
infrastructure that's been here
for hundreds of years and now
we're trying to play catch up to
get it done. So, uh, thank you
for mentioning that and, and I
support that 100%.
Thank you, Mr. Turn
Thank you, Senator
I'd like to hear a little bit
actually it likes, uh, Secretary
Cerna to come up. I'm gonna have
some questions in just a minute,
but I'd like to know a little
bit more about the fatalities on
New Mexico 26.
What are we talking about in the
last couple of years? Does
anybody have an idea?
The show, let me get my brief
and I'll, and I'll let you know.
So while we wait, uh Secretary
Serna, can you
give us a rundown a little bit
or a little, a little education
if you will on what funds NMDOT
has that's available to local
municipalities. They were
referenced earlier, and it
seemed like they were separate
little pots. I'd like to know a
little bit more about that.
Absolutely, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. uh
members of the committee, there,
there are a couple
The local government road fund
is the first, we call it LGRF,
um, the acronym Local Government
Road Fund is supported by tax
distributions, um, it's a grant
program for local governments.
and it provides funding for
projects at a 75, 25% match.
And that makes it, um, difficult
for some smaller communities to
apply for.
The other, um, stipulation in
the use of that fund is that by
statutory, um, by statute, the
fund has to be split up into
different types of projects, OK?
And so a percent of ait will go
to, um, um, bus routes, um, to
cooperative projects, etc. and I
can provide the breakdown even
by tomorrow when I present and
so we break the bucket up into
smaller buckets, and then it
creates uh a project ceiling
that sometimes is too low to do
anything meaningful with, and so
for example, there's a bucket
that tribal governments
typically will apply for called
um other other partnerships or
other projects and the ceiling,
I think in this last year was
about $300,000 right? And so
after it kind of gets through
the maze of the different
percent distributions of
projects, it gets tricky.
The second one, which is more
straightforward, is the
transportation Project Fund TPF
also created in Statue receives
tax distributions from motor
excise tax, and every year that
fund is now at about $58
million.
The, um, the ability for the
legislature to grow that fund
one year at a time exists, and
it occurred just last year, I
believe last year the
legislature added about $38
million to that fund. So that's
just a one-time surge on top of
its 58 million.
And so this year we're giving
about $98 million of that fund
out, and it provides for project
support at a match of just 5%
for the local governments and it
also allows for the local
government to apply for a
hardship waiver to that match,
and the process is simple so
they could potentially if they
have a financial hardship, get
100% of their projects funded.
When we see that, that total
amount of $98 million that when
then we can start funding
projects anywhere from, you
know, about half a million
dollars all the way on up to 23,
even $4 million projects, but we
don't, we don't receive that
surge and we're doling out the
58 million. The simple math is
that's about 60 million bucks,
every transportation district
will get about 10 million bucks,
right? You back 5% out of that.
And then they're doling out
something like, you know, $9
million worth of projects to
we're talking dozens of
communities, at least 33
counties, the municipalities,
tribal governments, etc. And so
when we don't get that extra
surge, then the districts start
funding projects in the space of
550 to 1.5 million so that
everybody, I guess the the best
way to do it so you can kind of
spread the love around to some
communities whereas you could
have large municipalities, say,
all right, we have a project for
$5 million
and in the district's mind
they're thinking, well, if we
fund that big one, then we have
$5 million to give to the
remaining of the communities and
so we prioritize our projects
with the districts in a few
different ways. One is it's a
safety project, meaning we're
addressing crash data, you know,
very poor payment conditions,
uh, pedestrian-related
fatalities, etc. 2 is poor aging
infrastructure on bridges, any
bridges that need immediate
repairs, they have, they're in
poor conditions, failing already
closed.
And then next, we have phased
projects, meaning that we've
already funded part of the
project and they need the
remainder to finish it off.
Either they got funds from
Capital Outlay or somewhere
else. And so that's the way we
work on those projects and then
of course it's not a grant that
or a program that we administer,
but flowing through DOT is over
$400 million of capital outlay
that you all and the governor
appropriate to communities that
flow through us, and we provide
project support on those as
well.
Thank you. How does
this
fund dovetail with existing
funds that, that a county may
have or, or a municipality may
have. Is there any change in, if
it rises higher on the Que
related to existing funding.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members, it,
it, it absolutely can. And so if
we see, and we, we have, we have
all that data when they submit
the application. When we see
that they basically are piecing
this together and the other
funding that they're providing
for the project could be lost if
we don't shore it up, then it
floats up, you know, the
priority chain
and so those are the things that
the district considers what
we've been doing to better
understand
those types of projects is for
the past couple of years I've
requested that the districts
actually treat the application
process much like an ISIP
process where the locals come in
and they actually present. This
is what we're trying to achieve
here. So because in the
application process, everyone
seems to be, you know, just as
in need as each other and so in
that back and forth and, and we
even bring in our commissioners.
We have our commissioner for
District one here. We even
invite them to be part of the
process because they're
ultimately the
group that approves the final
grant awards.
Thank you
We're on the precipice of uh a
special session, I think.
Are you hearing anything
secretary that there may be some
bill or or res uh resurfacing of
a bill of the lapses that we had
for DOT in the in this session
that just happened.
uh, Mr. Chairman, we, we
certainly have put ourselves on,
on the radar, um, and that would
be the radar of agenda items
that the governor would, would
ask for you all to consider, um,
and tomorrow afternoon you'll be
hearing about, um, major
construction projects and we
have a couple, one really in
particular in this part of the
state that is attached to a
federal award that we need some
resources to shore up so that
that Federal ward isn't, you
know, um, gonna be compromised
in the near future.
and so to, to, to be sure, uh,
because we did not receive any
construction funding special
appropriation funding this last
year and, and you can hear also
from our contractors who are
here, it, it did
slow things down for them, and
it certainly pushes projects
back for us and, uh, a year that
you don't get a project done
based on the index of cost of
construction, you're looking at
12% escalation costs and so a
project that costs you, you
know, $100 million today is $12
million more next year.
and so I certainly have asked
the governor to consider
transportation funding either
special appropriations or
reintroduction of our bonding
bill as, as a potential measure
that she may discuss with you
all.
Thank you, County manager and
secretary talking about uh NM
26, and I wanted to know a
little bit about fatalities on
that road. I'm certainly
experienced it yesterday and
been on that road through most
of my life on various occasions,
and it is absolutely a lot
busier than it ever was. Can you
address a little bit of that and
then Secretary, we could also
talk a little about any plans
that you might have for that
roadway.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, we've had 13
fatalities, um, since 2020.
If you'll look at the chart on
there, you know, we're the 5th
highest county with crashes in
general, uh, throughout the
state.
So I would just say, you know,
to Representative Lada's
comments as well, you know,
everybody has needs. I, I go
throughout the state just like
you guys do. I'm all over the
place and, and you drive
sometimes and you're like, wow,
maybe I should feel lucky that
we're not in the shape that we
are, but I think one thing that
makes us extremely unique is we
are truly a confluence of major
traffic. I mean, we have
180, we have 26, we have New
Mexico 11, the arterial roots,
they're either feeding I-10 or
taking siphoning off of I-10 and
I-10 is one of the busiest
interstates in the country, so
not everybody has that
distinction that, you know, this
is truly a feeder in a drawer
from one of the major
interstates and everybody is
going somewhere and trying to
get there as fast as they can in
the shortest route they can, and
that leads them to these state
roads that we're talking about,
um, and I
think again, that's that has
some importance to it as well.
Not that I have the question
today, but I'd be curious, uh,
about those fatalities or and
and they don't always have to be
fatalities, but any crashes that
would occur day versus night
because in the day, it's a
little dicey
passing when you need to pass
I can only imagine at night
uh, secret, you wanna address
any potential
projects there, McCann, Mr.
Chairman, defer, um, Mr. Aaron
Chavaria is the district
engineer for District one.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
subcommittee
yeah, and I was gonna do it this
afternoon, uh, at my
presentation, but I'll talk
about it now, which is, uh we'll
let you do it twice. Yeah, yeah,
no, it, it's appropriate. It's,
uh, timing is everything, right?
Um, so, uh, New Mexico 26 like
uh county manager, uh, Bryce,
uh, was talking about, um,
since, uh, our crash records
show since 2012 to 23, we had
120 crashes.
Uh, so the number he gave you
is, uh, is up to date, is
current.
um
uh, 7 of those during that time
frame were were fatalities, uh,
so from 23 till now we've had uh
13, like he said.
um, I'm gonna looking at the
crash data, 90% of those
crashes.
are out of town, uh, plates
um, it's just, uh, one of those
highways where, uh, people, uh,
for some reason, uh, they're in
a hurry to pass. Most of them
were due to the passing movement
there were either either head-on
collisions or side swipes.
um,
so, so we're, while we're doing
this, uh, this coming year.
we're gonna be resurfacing the
1st 15 miles because it, it is a
little rough.
uh, should be starting this, uh,
this fall, winter, but we're
also gonna be adding center
center line rumble strips, uh,
from here from Demming all the
way to hatch.
uh, just, uh, right there in
Placitas we'll do center line
rumble strips, um, those are
short term short term fixes, uh,
that can address uh some
inattention uh of drivers.
uh and then uh long term we did
do a, a, a road, uh, safety
audit, uh, we're gonna probably,
we're gonna start a study to and
look at the either widening the
roadway, uh, adding capacity or
just adding some passing lanes,
um, are, are crash map that we
have does show, you know, some,
some heavy heavy locations where
the the crashes are occurring,
um, but we may, uh, adding a
passing lane
I think would help, uh, you
know, it's, uh, like we talked
earlier, the, the agriculture,
you know, I mean between uh here
and the and the Valley of Hatch,
um, it's significant, so we're
adding, you know, out of town
visitors, um, for recreation or
or just visiting, so it, it,
it's a very different, um,
dynamic on that roadway. uh,
I-40 closes, uh, it just, uh,
it's a significant, uh, impact
on that
roadway, uh, so shortcut
um, we're also gonna be, uh, we
have some signs on both, uh,
Interstate 25 and I-10 kind of
indicating that it's a shortcut
we're, we're probably gonna
remove those signs just to
encourage people more, more of
the CMV traffic to stick to the
interstate.
um, so that's, uh, that's what
we have going on for New Mexico
26.
Well, and also the maps will
tell you to go through there,
right?
Um,
thank you,
Mr. Chairman, if I may, the CMB
is commercial
Mr. Cherias, uh, commercial
motor vehicle, uh, semis, yeah,
there's a lot of folks listening
online.
Representative Borero, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and thank you
guys for that. I'd also traveled
that road yesterday, um
was behind uh Amazon truck,
which I pretty much followed the
entire way, but one of the
things that I noticed, um,
uh, well, two things. One, are
the vistas. It's really hard to
see around those big trucks to
see when you can pass, um, and
then the other thing was the
striping. I noticed that there
was a lot of, uh, do not pass
kind of striping and and I know
that that's a really hard thing
to.
ideally, I would love to see a
four-lane highway through there,
um, where trucks could be on one
side and
passenger, you know, vehicles
could be on the other, um, and I
know that's a very expensive,
uh, venture, but I think that we
need to start looking at that as
a four-lane highway because I
mean the, the amount of tra
truck traffic that I saw
yesterday, Mr. Chair, was pretty
significant, um, but I wanted to
mention the vistas because it's
hard to like when you're trying
to pass and you're trying to see
around it and and it just looks
like it goes
off into the sunset, but you
know it it's a really, I don't
know if there are, um
Mr. Chair, if there are any sort
of
um mechanisms that DOT uses for
those vistas to control, you
know, that, that vision, I
guess, around those trucks, so I
just thought it, I would mention
that.
Thank you. Moving on to item 2,
Representative Jones.
I think we need to have Jeff
Gebhardt, Superintendent, Annie
Muss Public school. Gentlemen,
thank you, panelists. We'll see
you in a little bit.
uh
and Russell Johnson.
proceed when you're ready and
gentlemen, if you would please
reintroduce yourselves.
I'm, uh, Jeff Geert Animus
Public Schools, pardon the my,
uh, I lost my voice on our
middle school leadership
retreat. We just got back from
it.
I'll, I'll do the best I can
uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Russell
Johnson. I'm a rancher here
inina County.
Uh, thank you, uh, Chair de la
Cruz, and, uh
I, I think a lot of this is
repetitive, so we probably can
get through it pretty quickly,
but very important. Uh, I
appreciate and after our
conversation, Chair de la Cruz
about safety down here in the
many complaints and concerns I
get from my constituents that
you were willing to uh include
also um
a presentation this afternoon
about Target zero, if I remember
right, and which is something
that you've promoted in the
urban areas, but we desperately
need to address in these uh
rural areas,
so I do have is actually for the
whole state.
Well,
you know, we,
we could use a little more focus
on some of the concerns that I'm
gonna, um, mention to you today
and I have, you know, a
constituents here that will
elaborate on that. So I have a
handout. We did have a
presentation as well, but if I
think you guys
you guys, if you have your hand
out, that'll be, that'll work. I
have the crash data too from,
um.
county manager Bryce's
presentation that might be
helpful, but safety is probably
safety on our roads is probably
the thing I hear most about from
my constituents, um, and so I'm
gonna take you on a little trip
from the east side of my
district down Highway 9 through
Animus and then up on to I-10
and back east on I-10. So I've
got the, uh, I don't think we oh
yes that's slide 2.
slide 2, Highway 9 concerns. You
have a map there
and then the next slide, slide
3, Highway 9, current
conditions. It is a two-lane
border corridor.
with poor payment conditions,
the PCR rating that we talked
about in Senator Teresa last
month in our meeting, um, I
think the rating would be the 0
to 25. We've got potholes,
fractured edges, crumbled
shoulders, limited pull-offs.
and there is a mix of local and
agricultural traffic, school
buses, border patrol, Department
of Defense, and oversize wide
load freight.
Um
and the reason I think this
really deserves attention is
because not so much that on your
crash data map that there's a,
um, it doesn't show that there's
a lot of um
accidents across this road, but
the potential for a catastrophic
tragedy is so great because of
the traffic that we see on this
road, so, um, it's complicated
by the fact that there's limited
cell service. There are many
gaps in, uh, the ability to
contact emergency services
Shoot, now I have to figure out
how to do that
Yeah,
um
and another thing is there are
areas with no center stripe as
far as the conditions of Highway
9,
a concern is unsafe and illegal
practices related to the wide
loads, um, they often, and you
heard this from, um, county
manager Bryce often have no
pilot cars. They're unsafe and
illegal practices, uh,
underreported width and weight
to avoid I-10. I've had truckers
actually a former truckers
actually tell me that, that
sometimes they
will missreport
and I don't know the process
they go through permitting, but
who's checking those, those, um,
statistics about their wide
load, are they overweight? Are
they, are they under height and
overreporting their height so
that they can avoid I-10 and and
the overpasses, um, I'm not sure
how that actually happens, but I
was told by this trucker that
they, they sometimes do over
overreport their height so that
they can avoid the 10 I-10
inadequate escorts and signage
speeds unsafe for pavement
conditions and visibility, long
lines behind wide loads create
no way to pass, um, no safe
pullouts, no way to pull off the
road safely.
So now I'd like for, um
Russell Johnson to speak to
that, um, he, he and his family
live out there and have worked
out there for generations, and
he has a good perspective.
Thank you, Representative Jones,
uh, chaired members of the
committee.
So my family and I have ranched
out in this area for over 100
years, and I lived directly off
of Highway 9 as do the rest of
my family. And in the recent
months, we've experienced that
Highway 9s basically basically
become, uh, just a wide load
corridor and uh just earlier
this week, we experienced a 48
hour period where there was over
40 wide loads that were
traveling
east and west down Highway 9. A
lot of it originates out of, out
of the east, and I think a lot
of it's coming out of the rail
yard in Santa Teresa,
particularly with the uh
windmill blades that are coming
through.
And, uh, like the representative
mentioned, uh, escorts, the lack
of, and then we've also
experienced um instances where
these escorts are actually
pulling into our lane of traffic
and trying to force us off of
the road.
and that creates an unsafe
situation for everybody involved
and, and they've told us that
they have the authority to do
that and we've argued that point
with them to no avail. Um, like,
like the representative
mentioned with the lack of cell
phone communication out there,
you know, we've taken these
concerns to the state police,
and they suggested, you know, as
soon as this happens to call
them to notify them and they'll
try to address the issue, but
with the lack of communication,
you might be
30, 40 minutes before you get
cell phone service to report
this and that load's long gone.
Um.
with this road being a two-lane
road with no shoulder, the
entire length of it and that,
that runs from rodeo all the way
to Santa Teresa, where it
intersects with the Pete
Domenici Highway. There's no
safe place to pull off. And so
when you have these escorts that
are trying to force you off the
road. You have to pick where
you're going to get off of the
road, and they're not affording
you that opportunity.
And let's see here, I'm sorry,
I've got some notes here. Um,
there, there are, they're
operating uh
during school bus curfew hours,
and I don't know if that's still
a thing or not, but they're
operating at the same time, the
school buses are on the road and
last I've heard there was a
curfew and they were supposed to
pull off during these times, and
they're not observing that
anymore.
And I think another reason for
the increase in the presence of
these white loads is the lack of
law enforcement that's in the
area. Our, our local county
sheriff as well as the state
police are manpower is, is, you
know, stretched pretty thin. And
so it's kind of, you know, just
outlaw territory down there.
They're able to run down there
and do whatever they please and,
and basically harass the locals.
Um
as I mentioned, we're ranching
family. Our ranch is bisected by
Highway 9 in some places where
on both the north and south side
of it. In fact, this morning, I
had to, uh
remove a bowl that had blocked
the cattle guard and got onto
the highway, uh, amongst all
this wide blow traffic that was
already running through there.
But uh the, the highway
rightaway fence is in, is in
disrepair in a lot of places. In
fact, yesterday I went through
and in order to try to help DOT
and marked a bunch of places
that were problemed areas.
and there needs to be some
routine maintenance done on
these fences. DOT's very good
about coming out and fixing
problem areas if we report them,
but there needs to be some more
routine maintenance with the
amount of traffic that's on that
road now. Also with the increase
in dust storms that we've had
lately. When I tend to shut
down, particularly between
Lordsburg and Demming.
Highway 9 turns into Interstate
10.
And so it's, it's
it's a pretty, pretty bad deal.
Thank you, Russell. And so next
slide is number 6, so who's at
risk? The school buses
throughout the region, the
student drivers, families in
farm traffic, first responders,
uh, freight and cross
cross-border commerce and the
tourists from out of area
drivers that are they're
unfamiliar with the corridor
risks. I do have a picture of
this is the buses that were
referred to earlier, we have, I
think it is 8 buses that come
every day up Highway 11. They
intersect
with, um, with Highway 9 in
Columbus. You'll see on your
crash data that there are a
number of crashes there at that
intersection. It is, it is busy
um
Columbus and Highway 9 and
Highway 11 intersection. The
problems I just mentioned
multiple school buses, numerous
accidents.
um, possible solutions. I did
include those because I think,
you know, so often we think, OK,
we need to make this a four-lane
road. You know, we, we see this
problem and the solution to the
problem is widening the road.
Well, we know that takes years
sometimes and so I, I included
some possible solutions
throughout this presentation
that we could
we could take, you know,
urgently that might make a
difference and might help. um,
rules and enforcement for wide
loads to avoid school commute
periods, the high visibility
traffic signage, perhaps
lighting or lighting signage
at that intersection of 9 and
11.
Um, I do have a picture of that
I took yesterday morning with a
wide load on Highway 9
approaching the stop sign right
there in Columbus and um there's
a
um
horse trailer and and truck
approaching the intersection as
well.
Um, Animas School District, the
problem, those wide loads and
they are near the school route,
um, no safe pullouts. It just
drop off. I get people calling
me and say I was just run off
the road and nearly rolled my
vehicle because
no shoulders, sometimes the drop
off does this, and it's very
difficult, um, very dangerous
situations
um
increases rollover risk,
possible solutions, time of day
restrictions like we mentioned.
Is there a curfew? I've really
had a hard time trying to find
that information. I know there
are curfews for wide loads in
other areas of the state, the
urban areas, I believe, um, but
I cannot find whether or not
there's a curfew, but I keep
hearing that, you know, you
is it accurate or not? I is
there a curfew? If not, can we
enforce that?
Um
mandatory pilot escorts with
radios, advanced warning signs,
um, constructed sign pullouts
every few miles.
So I have a picture here
um.
yes, there we go, yeah, this was
taken yesterday. Thank you, Mr.
Upshaw, for bringing uh for
sending that to me. You can see
this is Animus High School and
um it's our our rural high
school way down toward the boot
heel Highway 9 is marked
This is where the wide loads
cross right here at the entrance
to the school. So I'd like for,
um, Superintendent Gephart to
share some of his experiences
and concerns about that area.
Mr. Superintendent, thank you
Mr. Vice Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for
having us. It, it, uh, it really
is a safety issue. I'm not just
a superintendent. I actually
drive the bus as well and, and
so I'm speaking from experience
here. Um, in fact, I brought the
kids back last night on these
roads, um, on the bus and so,
uh, it, it's difficult even when
there's just traffic on the
roads when you have the bus on
the road, um, and I won't go
into everything that's
everybody's already signed no
representative Tross has already
talked about
the, the, the, uh, how narrow
the roads are, Mr. Johnson
already talked about the wide
loads and everything, but, uh,
there isn't a shoulder. Um, it's
very steep at times. And if you
ride a bus driving a bus with a
bus full of kids and you get
knocked off the road basically
or forced off the road.
it gets scary and that bust tips
and it it gets really steep at
times, um, it's not when an
accident or if an accident is
going to occur. It's when an
accident is going to occur. It
it and, uh, I'm our bus drivers
are great they do everything
they can to keep our kids safe,
um, but even just slowing down
and pulling off as far as you
can on a road like that, that
creates another dangerous
situation and then you add in
the dust storms in visibility
issues
and then when a Interstate 10
closes down and uh our law
enforcement partners do a great
job limiting traffic,
redirecting through there. But
now we have these narrow roads,
we have dust storms, limited
visibility, people sneak
through, they try to get around
the, the closure of Interstate
10 when the dust storms are
going on and it, it creates a
perfect storm literally and
figuratively, um, there's gonna
be an accident and, and there's
gonna be, uh, um, and I, I hope
to God it's not with the uh with
the school
bu s I hope to God it doesn't
happen, period. Um, but we are,
uh, I spend most of my time
right now in our dust Bowl
conditions monitoring weather
and roads and not worrying so
much about our schools, which is
where our focus really needs to
be, um, because it's, it's
dangerous. I have to get kids
home, um, and safety and
security is that's our, our
number one goal and so um it is
very difficult. I know I don't
have, um
any
real solutions to the problem
because I know there's
everything from funding to as
Representative Jones says, you
know, it's gonna take years to
widen those roads and make them
safe, um, I'm just here to, to,
to share our story. uh, there
was one other, um, mention I
think, uh, Representative Jones
mentioned that, uh,
communication is terrible down
there. I think, uh, Mr. Johnson
mentioned it as well,
self-service is terrible. Our uh
Gillespie Tower is down, so
even the radio communication on
the bus, getting back to the
school is out and so I'm
actually even I now that I'm
back from going on leadership
retreats with kids. I'm gonna be
riding the bus with Mr. Upshaw,
one of our bus drivers who's in
the audience today. I'm gonna,
I'm gonna jive their route and,
uh, uh, early next week and uh
we've been testing radio. I'm
gonna see what they're
experiencing out there, um.
with everything that's going on
with border issues that we have,
um, and everything else I I've
already mentioned this perfect
storm and then not being able to
communicate on top of all of
that, um, just makes for like I
said it's, it's it's there's
gonna be a tragedy if we don't
do something, um, and so I'm
just, I'm here to, to present
our our story even though I
really don't have any answers.
Thank you
Thank you so much, Jeff. So if
we go to slide 11, um, target
zero for rural New Mexico really
appreciate DOT's, um, program
for Target zero, looking, I
think it's important to look at
expanding that to strategies for
Highway 9, we need to look at
those near term tools like I
said, portable message signs,
enhanced striping, speed
management, um, increased law
enforcement.
uh, targeted, you know, targeted
enforcement school bus safety
package, um, again, sign maybe
enforcement blitzes, uh,
sometimes that, that makes
people be aware that they need
to be more careful. Community
reporting channel and license
plate readers. I did speak with
the state police, um.
not too long ago, I think, you
know, license plate readers is
something that we can
we can look at. I, I believe
they um did implement that there
may be two of them down there,
but even that is, it's difficult
with the lack of law enforcement
to follow through, um, a lack of
lack of
um
just to follow through for them
to be everywhere, these rural
areas are just so vast, so, um,
that's something that might be
part of the picture, but it's
certainly not a total solution
in slide 12 visibility threats
from dust storms. I do want to
move on to that. I have
um,
got a couple of other chairs
here. If I could get my, um,
Hidalgo County Sheriff's
department up here, that would
be helpful. So visibility
threats from the dust storms
Lordsburg across I-10. So we're
moving across that map. Um,
we've gone down to Animas, we're
going up north to Lordsburg to
I-10. We've had terrible dust
storms across the district this
year. I don't know what it is
about this year that's
different. They come from every
direction. Oftentimes like this,
this
du s tru m that we had, I'm
sure, um, just about 2 weeks ago
and Lordsburg area, it came out
of nowhere and it was, it was a
I want to back up and say our
law enforcement, the DOT have
been
phenomenal with uh in, in our
local people, uh, Luna County
Road department. I know in
Hidalgo County, they've all
worked together to be proactive
and get people off the road to
close these roads, and I have no
doubt that they have saved lives
because of their planning and
their cooperation, so I truly,
truly appreciate all that have
been involved, but there just
needs to be more done, um, we
have, you know, a serious
problem.
um, visibility threats, uh, loss
of life, um.
I'll back up and say during this
session.
we had a terrible accident in
February, I believe it was.
that it prompted me to have a
meeting after the session was
over, uh, directly after with
DOT BLM, um, state police, uh,
the Hidalgo County sheriffs to
look at dust mitigation, and I
discovered, and I think we all
did, it was great to communicate
because we discovered there,
there's a lot of, um, attempt by
the BLM with our soil and water
conservation districts to
mitigate dust along I-10 along
this whole corridor toward
Arizon
a
And they, they're trying to do,
um, you know, trying to decrease
dust however possible whenever
we disrupt the, the layer on, on
top of our desert. Whenever we
have a, a project that disrupts
that layer, we create dust and
let me move on, make sure I'm
not missing anything. Yeah, I
did express my gratitude, um.
so yeah, more is needed for
decreasing that risk during
dust, dust mitigation and
progress on slide 13, um, the
BLM and soil and Water
Conservation Districts, they
have been addressing windbreaks,
vegetative covers, surface
stabilization along the I-10
corridor
So coordination with NMDOT
maintenance and operations, um,
that has been in progress. They
need to plan or they need to
plan the construction phases.
to minimize disturbed desert
soils and restore cover. I say
this because I want us to be the
future thinking about the
projects that we consider along
I-10.
There are certain things that
come to mind like there's a
wildlife overpass that we have
looked at in the past toward, I
believe it's on the other side
of Lordsburg. It sometimes
wildlife crosses between
Lordsburg and the Arizona line.
They cross I-10 and, and it can
cause a hazard to traffic, and
it can cause fatalities. It
happens from time to time.
So we've looked at that
wildlife, um, overpass as a
possibility, but I, I say we
need the strongly consider how
dangerous that would be if we
disrupt the desert to that
degree to create an overpass. I,
I think that um
you know, this issue is wide
reaching. And so when we look at
at any kind of project that's
going to cause dust along I-10,
we need to say, how's that going
to affect? What's the unintended
consequence of trying to divert
the wildlife over I-10, um,
versus
um
causing more dust, um, so
I just want us to be forward
thinking about that. The next
slide, slide 14.
this is 2 weeks ago in Hidalgo
County.
It, this is what we're dealing
with. I don't know if you guys
do they have that in northern
New Mexico? No, I, I mean it is,
it is astounding how much of
this we've seen and I don't even
think that Representative
Terasas, even though he's 45
minutes or 50 minutes away. I
don't think you experienced this
kind of thing. It has been
devastating and like I said, all
the area, um
folks who've been involved in in
helping people stay safe. I
appreciate very much, but at
this point I don't think the
county manager.
Green could have, could be here,
correct? So you're going to tell
us a little bit about what
happened two weeks ago, um,
during this terrible dust storm
that I have a picture of right
here it is, um, very it was life
threatening. Go ahead, this is,
um, Sheriff Chadorne from
Hidalgo County.
um
during this dust storm, they're,
they're, uh
it, it came upon Lordsburg like
quick. There was no real
warning. There was no time for
us to get everything in place,
uh, uh, I mean it just came in
quick.
and um one of the uh city
officers was out trying to put
up cones to divert traffic into
Lordsburg.
and the, the visibility was less
than from here to you. You
couldn't in some places it was
less than from here to the front
of the table.
I could barely see the front of
my hood in a couple of spots,
um.
but
the, uh, city officer went down
and was positioned his vehicle
and was going to try to start
putting up the cones to divert
the traffic into town
because at the request of state
police, they wanted to shut shut
it down and divert it in
and um
whenever he was doing that, his
vehicle was struck by another
vehicle, and then
his vehicle got spun into him,
which caused him to be injured
also, um
and I mean, we got to report
that there was a, that that had
happened, that he was being
involved in the crash.
and nobody could get to him. All
you could hear on the radio was
that I've got zero visibility. I
can't see to get to him. I was
the closest one there. I had
very limited visibility myself.
Um
rolled down the windows and
hoped when I pulled up onto the
road that
that I wasn't gonna get struck
by a vehicle going by.
did the same thing and went out
of, out of the town into the,
when I got to the interstate, I
did the same thing, rolled down
my windows, listened for semis,
cars, couldn't hear nothing, so
I sped across the one lane of
traffic into the median, did it
again, had my windows down
trying to hear if there's
anybody coming, jumped up on the
road and, and tried to get to
him, um.
right after
I got to him, it kind of started
dissipating a little bit where
you could see a little better,
but it took uh EMS I want to say
10 minutes to actually get to
him.
and it took me probably 5
minutes and after I found him,
it took another 10 minutes for
EMS to get to him.
so
this, the stuff I
I don't know what the answer is.
You can't fight Mother Nature,
but, um
maybe they should do a study or
something to see what is the
right way to, to close roads and
do that kind of stuff because.
right now it's guys out there
trying to throw cones into the
wind and
and uh
it's not safe. It's not safe for
the people, it's not safe for
these guys.
this, uh, Sergeant Flores was
stuck in a zero visibility
incident a month ago.
and
at one point I heard him say
there was a car went through
here at 95 miles an hour. These
are the
people we're dealing with on the
interstate.
He couldn't see to move and his
radar showed him that there was
a vehicle went through at 95
miles an hour.
and uh
so I don't know
it would be really nice if we
just had gates so we could throw
up on each end of the dust and
from cruises and then at the
interstate or the Arizona line
and just say nobody's coming
through here but I don't know
what the answer is, but it, it
would be nice if there was
something that was looked into
to see.
what's better for
to protect the deputies in the
state police and all the first
responders out there trying to
keep these people alive they
don't care about us when they
come through it.
Thank you, Sheriff.
Um
so I don't, I don't think I'm
going to, um, slide 17, I'm just
gonna skip that. I'm going to
I'm going to skip slide 18.
We've talked about potential
solutions.
um
so what can this committee do
endorse the expansion of Target
zero plan for rural New Mexico.
implement curfews, restriction,
curfew restrictions for wide
loads at Columbus and Animus
school zones. Jennifer.
on, on that, uh
curfew that there is a curfew.
It's from 3 in the evening until
6 till 5 in the evening.
And then in the morning it's
from uh 6 till 8.
So there is a 2 hour curfew for
the buses to go get their their
students and get them to the
school. It is on their permit
but the 90% of them don't read
it. When you stop them and tell
them about it, they're, oh,
well, I didn't see that. It's
down at the bottom of the
permit. I don't know who's in
control of it over there. It's
on page 2 at the very bottom and
it needs to be in red and
something needs to be done that
makes them understand that this
is an issue and um.
we get the calls all the time
from, from the animus schools
there's in
there's a wide loads going
through
half the time if it's in the
evening, we're up there battling
in the dust storms and trying to
keep the interstate safe.
And then when we shut down the
interstate, all those people go
down and run on Highway 9.
with the wide loads that are
going through and the bus
traffic.
We try to do our best to make
sure that these guys, the
schools under or know whenever
the dust is coming so that they
can send their kids home and we
don't get the mix of traffic,
but it's, it's sometimes it's
hard to do
Thank you. um,
so yeah, you can see the the
nature of this problem is just
uh potentially tragic. Um, I'm
glad to know, yes, there is a
curfew. Enforcement is huge. I
mean, I don't know the answer
for enforcement, but when we
talk about expanding
law enforcement, more officers,
uh, more state police, you know,
more sheriff, uh, deputies, uh,
it's just a, it's a critical
critical need out here in rural
New Mexico, uh, and across the
state, um, support and improved
NMDOT DPS enforcement and
communication plan for dust
closures on I-10. Request that
the BLM and the soil and Water
Conservation District briefing
and directs state funds to
accelerate dust mitigation
and report back checkpoints at
3080, uh 3090 and 180 days. I
really want to keep this on our
radar, and I, I, I so appreciate
you all being here. I know I've
mentioned to the school buses
running off the road in
committee from time to time and,
and, and unless we really focus
on this problem and try to
figure out what are the
solutions. I just, I just don't
um, we just need to do that. So
why are, OK, I'm going to
change, I, we've gone down
Highway 9
through the west. We've gone up
to Lordsburg. We've looked at
Hidalgo County, uh, dust and
across I-10 and now we've talked
a lot about Highway 26, that
connector road to hatch and how
dangerous it is.
um
this is kind of a different
topic
um, and I don't want, I don't
want to sound critical.
I, I think it's important to, to
admit where our problems lie so
that we as a committee, we as
the legislature can help
whether it be DOT, law
enforcement do their jobs and
protect people, um, so I think
it is
important to ask ourselves why
does it take so long to do
everything.
um
2 years ago, I sent a a request
for a safety study to be done on
Highway 26. It was over 2 years
ago. We just received the
results to that safety study and
in the meantime, between my
request
and the results, which are just
results from a safety study we
haven't, we haven't implemented
any measures, solutions. I think
we've had 7 people, maybe 8
people die.
and um
that's hard, it's hard to, you
know, it's hard to handle
um, so why did that take 2
years? Why, you know, what can
we do to help um
to speed everything up so that
we can keep people safe,
um,
and another thing, these are
this is just a list of things I
feel like we can address, we can
address, so what's the solution
to making things happen faster
to keep citizens safe. There's
another issue along I I tend
between Demming and Lordsburg,
there is a, a rest area that's
been closed for over 2 years.
That's a long stretch of road.
There's, you know, there's, like
we've said, it's a very busy
road. We've got semis that need
a, a safe place to pull over.
Sleepy.
travelers that need a safe place
to pull over.
It, we don't have water there. I
understand that that's our
issue, and that's why it's been
closed all this time, but I
propose, and I've have been
asked by several residents to do
this, people who travel this
road often. please put up a sign
and say there's no water, no
facilities, but open it up
because it is a safe area where
our travelers can pull off um
and even during dust storms,
perhaps, you know, pull off the
road and be safe.
And, uh, and that's, that's rare
along that highway. We don't
want folks on the shoulder
sleeping, you know, if they need
to sleep, we need to have that
rest area open and so whatever
we have to do to get that done
would be helpful
um
that is, that's all I have.
Thank you, thank you so much,
committee, appreciate you if you
have any questions for us.
Thank you. First, we have
Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Sheriff, gentlemen, the um
so just educate me more on the
dust storms, um.
the, uh, kind of weatherman
assume like, say there's like an
awesome weatherman, can a
weatherman predict it or, or say
there's a 37% chance of a dust
storm or
or they just happen like the
sheriffs are just really quick.
Said the other day that the
weather can predict it up almost
to a week out.
if the conditions are right, but
then there's some of these rain,
little bit of rain events that
that just pushed the dust in
front of them. Those can't be
predicted if, if it's just, uh,
watching all of the stars in the
moon and all that kind of stuff,
they can predict some of that.
out to about a week out, but
there are those times when it
just comes up and, and, uh,
there's no warning at all. We do
get regular
uh, updates and, and warnings
sent to us and so those times we
know that we need to be
in the areas watching it along
with state police when they have
them there.
um
we know that we need to be in
those areas to monitor those
those problem areas.
but like the one the other day
there, it, it was the whole
Hidalgo County was hit with that
one. It wasn't, uh
it wasn't something that they,
we had no warning at all that it
was even coming. Oh, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Representative
Jones, and then so, so growing
up as a kid in Albuquerque, we
um
there was a massive, massive PR
campaign to for kids to stay out
of the the ditches in the
arroyos because
uh there's flash floods and when
I was a kid, like every summer,
2 or 3 kids would get swept up
and stuff. Now I think only one
person has passed away in the
last 20 years. Obviously better
infrastructure, but that PR
campaign worked.
to folks who grow up in this
neck of the woods know what to
do when they're driving in a
dust storm like what I heard is
you just pull over
if you could even exit your
vehicle. Does, does folks in
this town know kind of know how
to keep relatively safe.
Yes sir they, there's uh
you know, we go into the schools
and we talk to the kids about
during driving training and
stuff. We talked to him about
what to do in the event of a
dust storm. I know the, the, uh,
principal and those the
teachers, they talked to him
about it too. And, um
the, the adults
they know that there's signs up
that say don't do this and if
you're stuck in this dust storm,
you know, pull as far off the
road as you can.
um, there, there's all that
stuff that the locals know
about.
but it's the ones from
California and Arizona and Texas
and you know, all these other
places that don't
they, they don't experience this
stuff and they just think that
we're just inconveniencing them.
So they just want to get
they don't realize that as soon
as you drive into it, you can't
see anything. You can't see the
end of your hood sometimes.
No, that's an excellent point. I
mean, I-10 is just uh a bunch of
out of state traffic, um.
on 26th because I, I drove in
this morning on 26th and uh.
yeah, man, and it's, it's tough
to gauge how far the traffic is
coming in, you know, if you're
gonna pass a slow car
and I think I don't think I've
jumped into an opposite lane in
years, you know, so it, um,
so it's tough stuff. Is there
any uh
anyway, just wanna make the
point that I mean to to go from
one lane to two is, is.
is gonna take a lot of time, a
lot of money, but to do, um
to do, uh, you know, to carve
out a mile here, a mile there
where you can pass.
you know, we, we definitely need
to do that, uh
in the next in the next year,
the, um.
keep in mind if we go two lanes
and when I say 2 lanes, I mean 2
lanes one way. If we go two
lanes on 26th
it will get even more truck
traffic, but
but probably be safer than it is
now.
um, because it could be like
just a just a huge bypass.
for semi trucks to go from 10 to
25 and vice versa. They don't
have to go through crew. I'm
looking at the map right now,
but um
um.
but anyway, just, just, uh, keep
us posted Representative Jones
and what we can do and uh.
and uh to to make this.
this beautiful part of the state
safer thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Terazas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I saw the
vice chair talking to you. I'm
out of Solvido.
I thought you forgot to call me
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
she says, no, you're fine,
you're good.
Anyway, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, uh, uh,
Representative and, and all of
you, you know, uh, I've got,
I'll start out, Mr. Chair. I'll
just kind of work across the
table here and my first question
would be, Mr. Chair, would Mr.
uh, Superintendent gethart tell
us how long his kids are on the
bus to and from school on a
single day.
So Mr. Chair, members committee,
Representative Tarasas, uh, we
actually, uh, have a bus route
that, uh, those kids for a, uh,
one way, it's, it's over an hour
and a half
and so they're out there and,
and that's one of them that has
the poor radio communication as
well on a really narrow road
with no shoulder with very steep
drop offs.
And, and Mr. Chair, you know, I,
I, you know, we hear, we had a
big
back and forth, uh.
we had a big back and forth, uh,
with executive concerning 40
school weeks and so forth. This
is one of the reasons, I mean,
you can see a kid on the bus for
an hour and a half. That's a lot
of time for a for a kid that's
one way it it is it right one
way or is it, can you imagine 3
hours on a bus when you're a
kid. So Mr. Chair, this is why
we support some of the
initiatives for our rural
schools. It's a lot different
than, uh, your urban areas like,
you know, Santa Fe, uh, Las
Cruces, and
in, in Albuquerque we have
different problems and, and, and
things issues that we we're
trying to address. That being
said, I, I, I know you, we keep
hearing this communications
deal, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, myself,
uh, Representative Jones, uh,
Ramos, Senator Ramos, and
Brantley, um, and a few others.
I wanna even say possibly the
executive helped fund, um,
communications towers that we're
working with Hidalgo and we're
working with uh
tech uh down there and we're
working with Columbus, so we
were able to fund that last last
session, so God willing, I'm,
I'm just texted right now and
asked, you know, if they could
give you an update on where we
are with that so communication
at this point looks like we've,
we're gonna have that solved
soon. Um, and it isn't very,
very important. I, I mean, I've
traveled the road. I know, uh,
representatives said have, I
don't think you've seen that.
No, I was in it once, one time,
and it was horrible and
you know, I, I tell all my and,
and here's the thing, Mr. Chair.
when we have these fertility
fatality crashes out there on
these interstates
Our staff has to go out there in
those same conditions.
to go and make those removals.
and clear and help clear the
scene.
It is very, very, very
dangerous. It's, it's terrible,
scary, as a matter of fact, I
told our, uh, our, our people
here in at my office here in in
Demming that I'm in, and I'm
going to say it out loud. I, I
believe that we should have an
escort to and from those areas
instead of us just kind of right
in there and I, I'm not sure if
they're providing that. Um, I
told editor, uh, and, and the
staff, I think that's very, very
important
because we could and while we're
staff in a crash hurt someone,
hurt ourselves, just, just
responding to the call um
and, and since I'm just moving
along with Dust, Mr. Chair, I,
my question and, and this I'm
just throwing this out there I'm
sure that um cabinet secretary,
uh, and, and, and District one
engineer Aaron, uh, will maybe
address this because they're
gonna talk about it a little
later, but I know that in my in
my district, uh, I, I believe,
and I could be wrong, but I
believe that it it it the mine
they use uh mag magnesium, uh,
uh, chloride.
and, and, and it's, it's spread
on this, on this dust and dirt
to keep to mitigate the dust and
hold it down. um, you know, I,
I'm not a
I'm not a soil expert or
anything but I, I, I remember
them talking about that and you
got to be careful which
magnesium. It's not the
magnesium that is like probably
10 different magnesiums, but
the, the chloride is the one
that holds down the dust. And,
uh, um, and I think that's
something that maybe could be
used by the DOT. I'm just
throwing that out there for now.
um, and I'm, my next question
is, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, with the
flooding and the highway, what
does that do when you, when you,
does that affect the bus route
in any way, uh, or any of the
commerce going through there, I
mean, does it, does it?
over go over the, the, the
highway like it did, like we had
that problem on on Highway 180,
Mr. Chair, just recently we had
a, a flood, uh, that really
uh I mean I've been in one, I
was in it once with my wife. We
were in a, in a sedan, one of
the lim not a limousine but a
Lincoln Town car, which is not
the right car to be in when that
thing's happening, but I got
caught up in it a long, long
time ago. Can you tell me if
there's any of that happening
that is disrupting maybe your
schools or any other things on
on those highways? Yes, um, Mr.
Chair, members of committee,
Representative Tarasas, uh,
unfortunately, Animus hasn't
gotten a lot of rain. We've
gotten dust
um, seems like we're getting
rain all over the state except
in Animas or Hidalgo County
right now, but when we do get
rain, there are times where, um,
our bus drivers have to, to
communicate back to the base.
to to let us know that they
can't get through
and uh and they they have their
instructions and, and we always
as we're watching the weather,
um, and the officer uh Hidalgo
County Emergency Management, um,
does a good job helping us with
this and monitoring the weather,
um, if it's a brownout condition
or if it's rain, we kind of get,
we have it on our radar ahead of
time. We work with the bus
drivers, we uh refresh their
memory on on what the, the
procedures are gonna be and what
to do if they come across a
flooded area. Um, there is one,
one route in particular where
there is a flooding issue on one
of our uh highways and if they
hit that they know they're
supposed to come back and then
we're going to be communicating
with parents and getting the
kids home safely at at the right
time.
and Mr. Chair, you know, one
last thing, we're talking about
fatalities and we're talking, of
course we're here at the
transportation committee, um, I
will also, I'd like to report
just though since you're my
fellow uh colleagues that you
know.
since January
our funeral home has not made a
single I.
a single, um, removal to my
knowledge of any immigrants or
any people coming through
undocumented, whatever you
wanna, you know, however you
wanna, um, identify them.
We were removing and you've
heard me talk about this, uh,
Mr. Chair, where we were
removing sometimes 3 at a time,
young people, uh, trying to get
into our country and stuff and
and dying of exposure, uh, since
January, we haven't had any of
that, and I think that's a
that's a big milestone. I mean,
uh, and I was, you know, I saw
that the rancher, Mr. Johnson
there, and I, I, I thought he
was gonna stay up there, but,
you know, that's a relief
because it, it, it was really,
really, it's heartbreaking. I
mean, you saw the, the, the, the
representative start breaking
down, you know, on some of these
issues because we know these
families we and and I can't
specifically talk about things
because of, of my, you know, um,
I have to reserve that right for
our families, but when you know
these families and you know how
it affects them and, you know,
if it affects the entire
families and so anything that
this committee can do to support
this area, I'm glad that they're
expressing their need for
further, I mean, funding
for more law enforcement funding
for infrastructure, funding for,
um, uh, dust mitigation, um,
there's other things that I see
that are happening, Mr. Chair,
um, and I'd like to sit now so
that I, I, I, I brought it up,
if you remember in, in the
committee that I share with you
as a voting member in mortgage,
I mean, excuse me, uh, and
finance authority, Mexico
Finance where I saw that
guardrails all over are down,
and I know that that's a big
I, I would assume, uh, that it's
affecting the budget and stuff.
I think, I think we're going to
talk about some of that stuff a
little later, but I just wanted
to bring that, uh, um, you know,
up the front, OK, thank you Mr.
Chair. Thank you committee,
thank you very much.
for allowing me to speak. Thank
you, Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
very sobering to hear all these
things. Uh, my first question
is, where are the permits
issued, um, who issues the
where they have at the bottom
the curfew hours.
That's insanity
Oh, the deal.
I think, I don't know if they
can get them online or not, but
they can, uh, they do issue them
out of synethy.
I don't know who it is
You can't read, uh, Captain Trey
Reed with New Mexico State
Police, and it's gonna be uh the
NMDOT oversized permitting, uh.
real.
Sanchez is in charge of that
MDOT.
Jessica Sanchez, he said, is in
charge of that in it's NMDOT.
They cannot get permits from,
they have to order them from
Sanniver self issue. OK. Did you
hear that? OK, they, they
cannot, uh, get permits
self-issued. They have to get
them from Santa Fe or at the
port of entries.
on the roads
So, Mr. Chair, the port of entry
would be sanator Teresa or um
Columbus and, and I'm asking
because in these conversations,
there's a lot of collaboration,
but my question then is, are you
meeting like with Jerry Pacheco
and the border Industrial
Association and the companies
that are actually trucking, for
example, the wind turbine
things. Have there been any
robust conversations so that
there there's
more, I mean, education is a
root thing. Is there
any of that going on?
Mr. Mr. Chair Representative,
um, yes, we do, uh, uh,
especially the wind blades, we,
they do, uh, um, they do come
and get a permit from from
district uh which is separate
from the one issued out of our
general office in Santa Fe and
that's because when they come
out of Santa Teresa, uh, they
have to close, uh, New Mexico
136, so they have a traffic
control permit that uh from us.
and then they, uh, they get a
New Mexico 9
um
and we're we're requesting that
they, they do it early in the
morning because when the port of
entry, uh, Santo Teresa port of
entry opens in the morning we
have a lot of traffic coming
through there, so closing 136,
uh, would be uh.
it would be a lot of congestion
and backup right there.
um, and the, the permit issued
by Santa Fe does, uh, it takes
them to Columbus, where they are
supposed to to pull off the
roadway, um, just like the, the
Hidalgo County sheriff said from
6 to 8 they shouldn't be on the
roadway, and then, uh, 3 to 5,
and that is from Columbus all
the way to New Mexico 80.
Thank you
um, and then my other question
is, um,
with the military zone
and the Plius
uh, is that I think that's
closer to Lordsburg, but, um, on
the cell tower, it
is there a schedule is that
really improving? It just seems
like the, the feds should be
contributing money, uh, with all
the communication they're doing
and not to mention the tanks
that I run into, um, but what,
what is the update on the cell
tower because that that involves
everybody, the military, the
National Guard, the schools do
we have do we have any kind of
schedule uh for improvement of
the cell tower issue.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Garrett, I don't
have any information on that,
but you bring up a very good
point, uh, that the DOD should
be involved in making sure that
we have
cell access and uh so I think
that's something that we should
look into.
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair, I have 2 other people
who've come a long way and, and
they have experiences to share,
um, uh, Sergeant Flores from
Hidalgo County would like to
share an experience and also uh
Lieutenant Perrales from the
state police who are sitting
here if they could have a few
moments. I appreciate that, but
let's try to be brief only
because we're really running
late. OK, thank you. Yes, I
won't take up too much of your
time. Uh, first of all, I
appreciate you all letting us uh
be here and speak with you today
on this.
I just kinda want you guys to
realize the significance of
these dust storms that are
hitting our community.
and you, you actually don't know
the fear that, that it brings
until you've actually
experienced it and, and we've
been stuck in these dust storms,
uh, many, many times. Um, I'll,
I'll give you just a kind of
brief incident that happened
approximately 4 months ago. It
was gonna be a 9-car pileup that
resulted in fatality on I-10,
uh, me and another deputy were
responding to that, and I got
hit in the blink of an eye with
0% visibility.
and I'm stuck in this, uh, 0%
visibility on I-10, uh,
traveling westbound towards
Arizona.
And
once I lost complete visibility,
I utilized the rumble strip on
I-10 to kind of navigate myself
and, and know that I was
actually getting off of I-10.
Um, I could hear vehicles all
around me, behind me, in front
of me that were just colliding.
and
it was, it was a scary situation
to be there because I was for
sure that I wasn't, was gonna
get hit.
So I've been doing law
enforcement for
approximately 17 years.
Um, I've done a lot of my law
enforcement careers as far as
investigations undercover
narcotics. I started out in the
Arizona State Prison system when
I was 21, and I've been in a lot
of high stress situations, but
never a high stress situation
has been in in a dust storm and
knowing that you're gonna get
hit, knowing that a semi is just
gonna come and and barrel right
through you, and it's gonna
result in in a fatality.
uh in this certain situation it
did result in fatalities. I, I
did get about it, I would say a
5 2nd window where there was
approximately 20% visibility
where I had seen a car that was
uh rolled over.
I seen him actually get out of
his vehicle, run down I-10
because he was disoriented and
get taken out by an by an 18
wheeler.
Uh, but these are the kind of
situations that these things
happen in the blink of an eye
you guys asked
I is there any warnings for
this, and, and I can tell you
that I've been sitting on I-10
at the 5 mile marker where,
where these dust storms, uh,
occur and I've seen it develop
from nothing to uh just an
absolute, uh,
just big huge dust storm in less
than 5 minutes. That's not
enough time for the weather
service to to put out warnings,
um, also keep in mind we, we do
have signage that that instructs
the motorist to.
uh, get off the, get off fight 0
pull to the to the right, keep
their feet off the brakes, stay
inside their vehicle, uh, keep
their seat belts on, but when
these things hit,
you can't see 5 ft in front of
you. There's no way they're
gonna be able to see these, the,
the signage that, that we have
out there for them.
um, so
I don't know, I mean it is a,
uh, it's Mother Nature doing
what Mother Nature does
and I, I don't think that
there's anything we can do to
stop it but I, I believe that
they're trying to plant seed out
there right now. This is an area
that is a dry lake bed that is
filled with liche and nothing
grows on there and nothing grows
on there for a reason so going
in there and planting seed I
don't think is gonna work.
Um, so
I mean, plain and simple, we
need more, more deputies to go
out there and shut down I-10
before incidents like this
happen, keep in mind we have 3
exits in in Lordsburg.
Those exits all need to be shut
down when we're shutting down
I-10.
Every exit is gonna take 6
individuals to close one exit.
That's 18 people to close down.
Property shut down, 3 exits in
Lordsburg, plus
we still have to shut down I-10
east and westbound on the
Arizona side and towards the
Grant County side, um, that
takes a lot of planning, and we
have to do it really quick
because the faster we can shut
down I-10 and stop that traffic,
we are going to be saving lives
by doing that, uh, but we just
don't have the staff to properly
shut down I-10.
so I'm not sure there's some
kind of funding that we can get,
but
that I think that's one of our
main concerns right now is just
getting more law enforcement,
getting more deputies, uh, we
are a small county that can't
afford to hire 5 or 6 other
deputies, but there has to be
something out there, and I don't
think we can put a, a price on,
on saving human lives.
Thank you guys
Yes, sir. Uh, my name is Joseph
Flores. I'm a sergeant with
Hidelo County Sheriff's Office.
All good. Hi, good afternoon.
I'm Lieutenant, uh, Arthur. I go
by Jeff, uh, last name Perales.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and the committee, uh, for
granting me a few minutes of
your time. I just wanted to
circle back around to a question
that was asked earlier regarding
weather service. um, the, uh,
county emergency matters
managers including um some of
the uh head law enforcement
personnels are in the
distribution list from the
National Weather Service. Um,
they send those, um, weather
updates to us weekly and uh to
kind of break this down into
two separate, two separate, um,
time frames. We have the spring
dust storm season, those ones to
clarify, we can predict via the
weather service, typically 3
days out, 3 to 4, um, that
allows law enforcement and DOT
to prep, uh, for these shutdown
situations. Now that spring
season runs from
plus or minus in November, a few
days, 2 plus or minus a few
days, uh, in the middle of June,
just basically until the onsoons
come and hit. Once the monsoon
season arrives, the weather
service cannot predict any time
frame for us, um.
best we can guess is afternoon
showers. Uh, what happens is, is
outflow winds develop with uh
these monsoon storms and they
appear out of nowhere. So with
the weather service involved,
um, here in Luna County, our
emergency manager, Mr. Townsend,
if he's still in the back, I saw
him earlier. Uh, he actually
reached out to, uh, the Weather
Service in El Paso and and had a
meteorologist, uh, several times
out here during our spring
season dust storms and so.
a lot of times these storms
develop and it's our people on
our on on the ground it's our
officers or or highway
department personnel who see
these dust storms coming in
themselves while they're out
there in the field, they'll
reach out to the weather's the
weather service, and then
they'll geo fence where we want
them to and then they will send
out the alerts to the cell
phones. The cell phone, uh,
alert system will include, uh,
you know, pull over to the side
of the road, take your foot off
the brake
um, lights on, some of these
questions that you had as far as
what do people uh get for
notices and how they get them.
um
Lastly, the dust storms we've
talked about the schools with
the flooding and the dust
storms, uh, here locally, uh,
we've shut down and I don't have
the numbers, um, maybe checking
the back hasm, but the schools
here in Luna County with the
kids commuting to Columbus, um,
they either had a bunch of late,
late closures or total
cancellations of schools, so we
joke about it sometimes you guys
get the snow days and we get the
dust days so but yeah it it
definitely affects
um
a lot of different levels. Thank
you.
Uh,
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We'll
get back to you.
There's a lot to swallow, guys.
Thank you for your, um
just your candidness and um.
you know, relating to your
stories.
Um, I was gonna start, well, I
have two issues, Mr. Chair, one
is the soil and the second is
the funding, um, I'm gonna start
with the soil because that's
kind of where we
where we are right now and um
I just wanted to mention, I
mean, I hear the fear and
the tragedy and all of those
things, it's just, it's hard to
swallow. It really is, and, and
Representative, thank you for
bringing this up
Um
I, I think of my time as a city
planner and when we uh did du,
you know, uh, soil and dust
mitigation for developments and
it actually caused me to really
think about what you guys were
talking about and what, uh,
representative Maestas brought
up about working with, um, you
know, um, our weather folks, but
it also caught caused me to
think about who, um, and, and
you guys are all working
your doing your best to deal
with these issues. Arizona is
dealing with these issues.
There's other states in the, in
our country that are dealing
with severe dust storms, Texas
and Oklahoma and some of those
areas. And, and it caused me to
start thinking about like what
do they do and, and I think that
we need to start looking and
maybe DOT probably already has
started looking at some of these
dust mitigation, um, efforts
that cau that that can and like
you said, there's no way to
control Mother Nature, but we
can try to work with her a
little bit, and there are, uh,
things that, and I was
researching, uh, Mr. Chair,
while I was sitting here
listening some of the things
that Arizona Arizona does to,
uh, for dust control measures,
and I think that we need to
start engaging also our
environment department, um, to
start
coming to some of these meetings
to listen because it's not, we
don't work in a vacuum. It's not
like traffic and environment and
but sometimes I, I see that at
the state level and it, and it
frustrates me because I think
that we need to start pulling
resources together, um,
representative and Mr. Chair of
how um
I mean, DOT builds the roads,
and we are responsible for our
right of ways as well, and there
are, there are dust mitigation
efforts, um, and, and materials
that are in place, Mr. Chair,
um, uh, there are products out
there that are environmentally
safe, um, and we can control our
right of ways, um, adjacent
because we have a certain area
adjacent to our roads that we
can control
um, when, when big developments
come in and I noticed when I was
driving in, big solar farms and
big, um, uh, windmill farms and,
and all of those require
permitting.
um, and when, when they're uh
going to uh develop their
properties, Mr. Chair. We can
require through permitting that
they use some of those dust
control measures on their
properties before they actually
put those that are safe and that
they can work with whatever that
technology is. And so I just
wanted to mention that because
there are, there's a, and I
looked on in Arizona's dust
control. There's a whole group
of, uh, and I'm not gonna
mention their names because
I don't, I'm not here to
encourage, but I think that we
need to be looking at some of
these, um, uh,
uh, sort of environment nontoxic
environment eco-friendly, uh,
non-harm harmful to humans,
animals, and you know
some of these products that
might be available out there.
And I know that that
you know, you, we can require
when they go pull their permits
that they put these things down
in place to control their and
they're, it's not gonna take
care of the whole area, but it's
going to take care of certain
areas and that could be helpful,
Mr. Chair. So I, I just wanted
to bring that up. Is that the
state can look at some of that
for our right of way, but we can
also encourage our uh neighbors
as they develop these properties
to maybe look at some of those
products as well.
uh, to mitigate that dust.
and that's why I say we can't
control Mother Nature, but we
can certainly work with her and
um so I'm just bringing that we
do that in Albuquerque when
we're developing properties,
especially when we develop large
residential areas and we start
leveling and so on because it
creates a lot of dust and, um,
so I, I wanted to share that,
um representative. The second
piece of it is the funding, um.
you know, there's a lot in here,
and there's a lot of, and I
really appreciate whoever did
this
this report, um, because it, it
really does.
um
tell us what our actions could
be. And when I start thinking
about when I did city planning,
uh, Mr. Chair and a
representative is one of the
things that, because it's a lot
and it's a lot of money and we
don't have, we don't always have
that money available, but when I
start breaking it down, I think
about what's most important to
prioritize the health, safety,
and general welfare of the
public. And when I think about
the funding, I start thinking
about what are the short term
immediate needs? What are the
short term and then what are the
long term and then we
and that's Mr. Chair, one of the
reasons I proposed a planning
department at the state level
because I think that we need to
start
you know, linking all of these
things together because we are
not, um
we're not gonna be able to fund
everything, but I think when we
start breaking it down, um,
you know, over time we can fund
a lot of these things, so I
appreciate that, Mr. Chair and
thank you for, for your
presentation.
Thank you. We don't have any
more questions. Uh, we are going
to take a 3
representative Raas.
Mr. Chair, I know you're real
hungry, but don't, you know, I.
you know, Mr. Chair, I, I was
reading up on magnesium chloride
and and it's
environmentally is not perfect,
but it's safer and for me, I'm
just gonna say because I've been
out here for 37 years working
the, the, the, in the mortuary
business and we just have to
sometimes
find middle ground and I know
that environmentally sometimes
we get kind of over leveraged,
but to save a human life, I
mean, you just heard one of the,
the, the officers express
how dangerous and how scary that
was for him, and I think we
sometimes just have to say, you
know what.
our, uh, lives come first.
I removed children
and you name it
so we have to sometimes just say
there's certain areas that we
just say we're gonna have to,
you know, um, do some of these,
these, uh
these things that we have, you
know, these, these products that
we have that will save lives at
the end of the day. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you and thank you for your
presentation, very enlightening
and a lot of important work
still needs to be done. We are
going to break for 30 minutes
for lunch, members.
