We have feed bounce back,
feedback. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us here this
morning. I'm Toby Velasquez. I'm
the director of the New Mexico
State Parks Division, and I have
Doctor Kramer Winningham with
me, uh, with the Arrowhead
Center from New Mexico State
University. We're gonna, uh,
Doctor, uh, Winningham's gonna
present today on a collaboration
that we started last summer, uh,
regarding an economic impact and
contribution analysis for state
parks across the state of New
Mexico and um I'm gonna fill in
some of the back end after the
presentation and so I'm gonna
turn it over uh to Doctor
Whittingham so we can make
best of the time that you've
allotted for us here this
morning, uh, Doctor
Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thanks
for having us. Um, I'll be
presenting on, uh, the study
that Toby mentioned. The purpose
of the study
is to uh analyze the uh benefits
of New Mexico State parks, uh,
the Associated Visitor spending
and social benefits, um, for
fiscal years 2019 to 2024.
Um, so we looked at two types of
benefits, the economic benefits,
as well as non-market social
benefits.
Um, we use two methodologies for
the economic benefits.
uh, economic impact and economic
contribution analysis. Uh, the
primary economic benefits of New
Mexico State parks that we
analyzed, our visitor spending,
and the effects from their
expenditures.
With economic impact analysis,
uh, we're, we're looking at out
of state sources, um, so this is
gonna be, um, out of state
visitors and uh funding from uh
federal funding that's coming
from out of state.
Um, the second approach we took
was the economic contribution
analysis, and this is
appropriate when you have a
unique asset like the state
parks that will draw people in
from surrounding counties.
And so this consider considers
all spending associated with
activity of the state parks. So
we're looking at all visitors,
um, and, and all expenditures.
Um, and any impact or
contribution analysis, uh, we're
measuring, uh, this impacts in
terms of uh changes to economic
output, value added production,
labor income.
um employment and tax revenue.
Um, you can think of output as
uh revenue to businesses, uh,
value added is most, uh,
correlated with the GDP and then
labor income would be wages. Um,
then we, we have the tax
benefits as well.
Uh, we measured, uh, these
impact and and contributions.
for uh all the counties in New
Mexico where the activity was
occurring and then measured the
spillover effects using
multi-regional input output
analysis. Uh, we presented all
the impact figures for New
Mexico as a whole and then also
at the county level, um, the
county level figures are, are in
the, in the report.
Um, getting into the impacts,
uh, uh, and contributions, uh,
the job contribution from
expenditures. So considering
all, uh, New Mexico State Park
expenditures, um, you can see
this going from 2019 to 2024.
Um, the
the darker area at the bottom is
the direct jobs and then
resulting from that you have
induced jobs, so this is, uh,
purchases from, from other
industries, uh, for supplies and
things like that and then uh the
lighter area at the top is in in
um induced jobs, which is uh
spending from um all the wages
earned, uh, was in the direct
and indirect effects. And so
that adds up to a total effect,
so you see that going from 258
jobs, uh, supported by
New Mexico State Park
expenditures in 2019, rising to
464 jobs in 2024.
Um, the next slide is the same
uh component here looking at the
contribution of New Mexico State
Park expenditures, including all
of them.
and then we have uh
labor income on the bottom, uh,
value added and and total
output. So that's kind of the
format for the rest of these
impacts. We'll, we'll go through
the job impacts and then the uh
the economic uh impacts here.
And so these ones don't
compound, uh, but you will see
that the uh uh total output
would be that top line there
going from 31.5 million in 2019
to 68 million in 2024.
Um, when we look at the job
impacts, so this is where we're
only looking at the out of state
funding sources, um, so this is
driven by the federal funding
that parks receives, mostly from
capital projects, um, that grew
from 7 jobs in 2019.
to 87 jobs in 2024.
And then the uh
the economic impacts, uh,
looking at total output grew
from 1 million to 17 million um
is the park's raised more from
federal funding for capital
projects.
Um, the visitor impacts are, are
probably the most significant,
uh, for the parks.
Um,
you see the top line here is the
number of visitors at the park
starting at 4.7 million, uh, in,
in 2019, there was a, there was
a dip for the COVID year down to
4 million, and then rising in
2024 to 5.2 million visitors at
the parks.
Uh, the lower number, uh, so
111,000 going to 265,000 is the
out of state visitors, um, uh, I
have the asterisk on here
because it's uh it's an
undercount based on the way the
data is collected. Uh, we only
have, um, out of state visitors
that
booked reservations, uh, for,
for camping. So, um, I would say
that that is a conservative
estimate
Um, we also, uh, came up with a
conservative estimate on daily
visitor spending at $60 per day.
Um, we considered studies from
Arizona and Texas, um, and also
the uh New Mexico Tourism's
department's estimate for
visitor spending and uh we
settled on the national park
figure, uh, which, which puts
visitor spending about $60 per
day, um, which I would say is
conservative, but so how we get
from there to visitor spending
is multiplying the number of
visitors
by visitor days
All right, so the job
contribution from visitor
spending considering all of
those visitors, uh, not just,
uh, out of state but instate,
um, that supported uh
4100 jobs in 2019, growing to
4600 jobs in, in 2024. Um, so I,
I, I think this is an
interesting point when you look
at the impact from expenditures,
um.
visitors is, is much higher and
so there's a significant
multiplier on the expenditures,
um, at New Mexico State Parks
because they attract so many
visitors.
And so in the communities then
this supports uh
you know, in 2024, uh, 440
million in uh
in revenue to local businesses,
uh, which is obviously a very,
very significant uh number
there.
Um, the job impact, so this is,
uh, just considering the out of
state visitors uh who booked
online, so that's the one we
have data for, uh, supported 79
jobs in 2019, 191 jobs in 2024.
and the uh revenue to business
supported by out of state
visitors grew from um 8.9
million to 34 million in 2024.
Um,
moving on to the, uh, non-market
and social benefits, um, and
then we'll show the totals of,
of all of these at the end. Um,
I wanna take some time to
explain these. Um, this is kind
of an abstract concept, but, um,
basically when we're looking at
non-market and social benefits,
uh, we're trying to measure, um
conservation values, the values
of, of keeping land held in
conservation the way the parks
are and then the consumer
surplus for recreational use
values.
And so for the conservation
values, uh, basically
maintaining natural lands held
and conservation provides many
benefits, such as supporting
clean water supply, flood
control, wildlife habitat
preservation. Um, these benefits
generally do not have price
tags, however, they do have,
have value.
And so the conservation values
outlined in our report are based
on a study that considered
individual preferences and the
costs of replicating similar
services using conventional
equipment to quantify a value
provided for various land types
so in conservation.
And so the conservation values
represent a dollar value of the
benefits from keeping various
land types in conservation and
natural form, and this method
is, is used in um other studies
state, uh state studies of other
state parks in other states. um
and, uh, and so it's a, it's a
standard methodology here. Uh,
the benefits include clean
water, flood protection, carbon
storage, wildlife habitats, the
cial well-being all provided by
the ecosystem's, uh, wetlands,
forests, shrublands, and other
land types.
The conservation values for New
Mexico State parks are
calculated based on acreage by
land type and the Ingram Foster
2008 study which uh
estimated the economic value of
all these ecosystem services.
Uh, for the recreational use
values, um, the idea behind this
is
public recreation spaces such as
parks and forests provide
significant benefits to
individuals and communities, yet
access is often free or low
cost, uh, making their economic
value difficult to quantify. So
that's some of the reason for
using this approach.
Recreational use values attempt
to quantify the benefits of
enjoying recreational activities
at parks.
recreational use values are
based on a wide variety of
studies that investigated
individuals stated and revealed
preferences.
for many different recreational
activities. typically used to
assess the economic significance
of recreational resources.
and so these represent a dollar
value of the benefits uh people
experience from enjoying outdoor
activities, conserve lands in
their natural form. These
benefits include the excitement,
mental well-being, satisfaction
gained from activities such as
hiking, biking, camping,
fishing, skiing, bird watching,
all enabled by vibrant
ecosystems and forest lakes,
wetlands, and other natural
landscapes.
The recreational use values were
based on 2016 study from Morgan
State, uh, which valued the
weighted average of recreational
activities in New Mexico to be
$76.20 in $2016 and so we put
that in the $2024 so $99.82 per
visit in in $2024.
So putting these together, um,
on the bottom we have the uh
recreational use value estimate.
So based on all the visitors,
uh, the
uh attended New Mexico State
Parks and you see that varies
with that
uh visitation
and then the top line here uh uh
the conservation values, um,
that stays constant per year and
so um
the conservation values are
annual benefits in dollar
values, um, and so you see and
uh
2024, um, 528 million was the
recreational use benefit and
then in each year 188 million
was the conservation value of
having the amount of acreage
that, uh, New Mexico State Parks
has held held in conservation,
um, totaling these up, the, the
total impacts and contributions,
um, so considering all economic
activity.
um, so this would be the
expenditures and uh visitor
spending, um, in 2024 supported
5100 jobs in New Mexico.
and 510 million in economic
output um across the state, uh,
from an impact perspective, uh,
considering only the out of
state funding and out of state
visitors that we can account
for, um, that's supported 278
jobs in 2024.
and uh 60 million in um economic
output.
Uh, for the tax impacts,
uh, from a contribution basis,
so for all the activity that
occurred, um, A New Mexico State
parks, including expenditures
and visitor spending in 2019, we
estimate that to be 68 million
in in tax, total taxes, uh
growing to 79 million in 2024.
and then a job impact
perspective going from 1.3
million to 4.4 million in 2024.
And so in summary, um, in all
your studied economic
contributions.
from New Mexico State parks were
significantly higher than state
park expenditures due to the
follow-on effects resulting from
visitor spending. So I think
that's an important thing to
note is that there's a
significant multiple on the
expenditures, um, because of the
amount of visitors that could be
attracted.
Uh, state parks also delivered
significant non-market benefits
through recreation and
conservation uses, um, that we
highlighted.
And so in summary, in 2024,
economic activity associated
with New Mexico State Parks
supported 5100 total jobs in New
Mexico.
contributed $266 million to
state GDP, $511 million in
revenue to businesses in New
Mexico.
162 million in labor income and
40 million in state and local
taxes to New Mexico.
and I'll, I'll turn it over to
Toby, uh, for the rest of the
presentation.
Thank you, uh, Doctor
Winningham. And so the last
couple of slides are, are slides
that, uh, we want to have as
takeaways for you all, um.
I've always known, I worked with
the State Parks division since I
was a junior in high school,
and, uh, went to college and
then came back and started full
time, and I always knew that
investing in state parks is not
just about natural and cultural
resource preservation.
but also about improving our
quality of life and building
healthier communities and uh
fostering strong, sustainable
economies both in rural and
urban areas across our state.
I just want to do a few more
examples from the tables that
you have in the presentation and
know that I also made the
electronic full length economic
study available to you all for a
takeaway. I didn't want to print
it out because that killed too
many trees, but uh you have it
electronically and Sarah is
making it available for you. On
table 4 of the presentation, you
can see that expenditures were
made in, in all the counties in
the state of New Mexico and
Sierra County alone for that
period of 2019 to 2024, there
was 23 million. Uh, in San Juan
County, 10.7 million. Uh, San
Miguel.
which county in the, in the, in,
in the state park system has the
most state parks in it. San
Miguel County, Villanueva Pecos
conchas and Story Lake. Uh,
there was an investment of over
$7 million at those parks. On
table 7, we can continue to see
that millions of visitors
cherish their state parks over
that period of time, uh, 2019 to
2024, including the pandemic in
Syria County, 7.1 million people
visited Percha, Elphin Butte,
and Kalio.
In San Juan County and Navajo
Lake are 2nd largest lake state
park, 3.7 million. Uh, in Quay
County out in Ute Lake State
Park Country, Logan, 2.5
million, and again in San
Miguel, 2 million. Those are
just a few examples on table 9,
we can see that camping in Daus
as Dr. Winningham, uh,
discussed, is just over $60 per
person per day.
Um, years ago, the, the rule of
thumb was $1 for every $15 for
every dollar spent was, was when
I started, uh, things have
really changed. On table 14, and
I'm going to use Sira County as
an example right now. Uh, for
that period of time,
there was 1,124 jobs, 33.6
million in labor income, 54.9
million in value added output,
and the total output was over
$107.6 million all from this
little system in the state of
New Mexico. I say little because
we are small, we only have 191
employees and we managed to 41
decentralized locations. I
really think I want to emphasize
that on slide 35 and 36 of your
presentation, if we can change
that next one for me there.
Oh, wrong direction. Um, every
dollar you invest in the New
Mexico State park system.
is a dollar that is multiplied
exponentially in value to the
state. This slide, slide 36
shows what the general fund, uh,
investments have been over the
course of years and what the
results of that is in visitor
spending, expenditure
contributions and conservation
value and recreation use value.
Um, the New Mexico State Parks
division is in our 92nd year.
Uh, I've been part of that for
almost 27 years.
Uh, it's something that I take
great pride in
Uh, there's 35 state parks found
in 23 of 33 counties across the
state. So we have a large
footprint across the state of
New Mexico from the north to the
south
from eagleness in the Moreno
Valley to Pancho Villo in in
Columbus.
We have a huge footprint
We have 41 decentralized
locations, 191 FTE. We use about
130 seasonal temps in the
summer, mostly college, high
school, and return to work, uh,
retirees, uh, we have friends
groups and many volunteers.
The division is an enterprise
agency though we're expected to
generate approximately 75% of
our own fund.
our own operating budget, each
and every year.
Uh, we do that through self gene
revenues like camping and day
use, uh, concessions like the
Merinos, uh, directed state
taxes such as GGRT and motorable
fuel tax, and federal grants, US
Coast Guard grants, Bureau of
Reclamation grants, LWCF grants,
land and water conservation
Fund.
The remaining 25% is supported
by general fund, and I'd like to
expand a little bit about that
because you all have your hand
in that piece of the pie.
Over the last 20 years, General
Fund support has averaged just
over 10 million per fiscal year.
and only increased on average
over this period by 2%.
over the last 20 years
The 25% that we get subsidized
in order to do operations have
for the most part stayed flat
for 20 years.
Unfortunately, uh, this year
we're still at 12.9 million for
2026. We actually had more
general fund
in 2008
than we do today
I don't know if that's going in
the right direction. Um, in FYO
9, the support was 13 million
and it was on a rise.
There's 3 years, there's 11
fiscal years where general fund
was less than 10 million and 3
of the fiscal years we were less
than 8. In fact, we almost broke
7
In 2008, we had 4.2 million
visitors in 2024, we had 5.2
million.
That's a 24% increase in
visitation.
We're doing, I, I believe that
New Mexico and and resident uh
residents and non-residents have
found New Mexico State parks,
and they're of value to them.
Since then we've also expanded
the state park system with
several new parks and land
acquisitions.
In 2008, we had 245 FTE in 2024,
we have 190
Again, data going in the wrong
direction from my perspective.
Um
83% of our positions that we do
have are in the field. There's
not some large administrative
presence in Santa Fe.
Uh, there's 27 of us.
The remainder in the field
across 40 decentralized
locations across the, the system
in, in New Mexico.
We currently have an overall
vacancy rate of 27% across the
system and a 38% vacancy rate
across our law enforcement
program.
38% of my law enforcement ranger
positions.
Those people who respond to
everything you can imagine are
vacant.
We've had a chronic vacancy at
San in San Juan County, at
Navajo Lake.
Rural kids aren't coming out for
these jobs anymore.
It's tough to recruit in rural
New Mexico, and I thought I'd
never say that. I was born and
raised in Mora.
We used to make our hay with
ranch and farm kids.
coming in and working for state
parks and gaming fish and
livestock board. That is
changing.
I can't explain it
but it's changing. We need
people, the strength of the New
Mexico State Parks division is
for those people who help
facilitate and maintain these
natural and cultural areas for
all of us to enjoy for
generations to come.
Um,
in recent years, we've provided
outstanding free benefits to
foster children, foster
families, CYFD staff and care of
foster kids by providing free
day use and camping.
January 1st of this year, as
many of you know, we implemented
and adjusted our fee schedule,
which had not changed in 20 to
40 years respectively, depending
on the fee that was being
evaluated, 20 to 40 years as an
enterprise agency. But yet, even
with these increasing fees,
there's still some of the
cheapest across the country.
This year we implemented free
day use to all New Mexico re
residents from October through
April, and many New Mexicans
this spring reconnected with
their state parks cause there
was no fee for them to go out
and enjoy them.
Come October, they're gonna be
able to reconnect in the fall,
and this will be be the first
year that we have a full season
available to New Mexico
residents for free access.
Talk about accessibility and
making the outdoors available to
every person regardless of who
you are, where you're from, or
how you get there.
We implemented House Bill 161.
Let me, let me rephrase that. We
were proud
to implement House Bill 161 to
honor a New Mexico resident
veterans on July 1st.
In just two short months, we
created rulemaking. We worked
with the Department of Veteran
Services in a great partnership.
Secretary Herrero was a great
partner to me and my staff in
order to implement House Bill
161. And since July 1 to
yesterday, 20,550 nights of free
camping have been provided to
New Mexico resident veterans in
our state. And that number is
going to continue to grow. That
also provides free utilities,
water, electricity, and sewer at
no cost.
In addition, our largest
campground, which is Elfin
Butte, the shoreline. I'm sure
received thousands of veterans
who didn't partake in
reservation sites and were first
come, first serve camping that
we don't measure. We don't have
a way to measure that. And they
also had free debuts.
a great benefit in our state
Our capital improvement
performance has been
outstanding, and I really, truly
want to thank you all for the
capital investments that you've
made over the last 3 years,
we've seen more capital
investments in state parks in
any 3-year period, maybe, uh,
combined throughout the, the
history of the state park
system.
But we've done you well with
that. We've expended the 20
million in AARPA funds by June
30, 2025, 6 months before the
deadline.
I'll challenge other agencies to
do the same. I don't know if
they did the same
Um, the funding specifically
renovated and replaced aging
facilities, infrastructure,
vehicles, and equipment at 32 of
35 state parks.
for the FY 25 ICIP funds that
you all supported. We spent 62%
of that 16 million in the first
year.
For our FY 26 ICIP funds of 40
million were already programming
30 million for outdoor restroom
facilities across the state. The
remainder will be used for water
and wastewater systems in places
like Navajo Lake in San Juan
County where we're dealing with
infrastructure from the original
development of the dam.
In closing, I'm, I'm proud to be
part of our state park system.
We're a small agency and I think
we punch up and wait with just
about anybody.
Uh, we have great people working
in the beautiful places that
people love to travel in our
state.
from Clayton in Union County.
to Fen Lake in Sandoval County,
all the way down to Mesila
Valley here in beautiful Donne
Ano.
As we turn towards our
centennial in just a few years,
I respectfully and passionately
ask you to continue to invest,
not only in capital. We love
that
but in general operating fund
we need to improve our salaries.
We need to pay the cost of
inflation in doing business,
dealing with wastewater and
water in the multiple issues
that we have at state parks,
electricity.
utilities, sewer
just to do our business day in
and day out, year in and year
out. In my opinion, a 2%
increase in that period of time
is unacceptable.
I really want
to make sure that you understand
that I'm passionate about the
division and that we will do
more.
when we're supported with more.
And Madam Chair, that's all I
have and we're open for
questions.
Thank you both for your
presentation, and we do have
some questions this morning. So
far I have Representative
McQueen, Representative Montoya.
uh, Senator Steinborn.
Yes, uh, son, uh, Representative
Senator Cortez.
uh, Senator Scott, uh
Representative Kates.
Senator Cervantes,
OK.
Almost everyone.
OK, so let's start with
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Madam Chair, Director of Alaska,
uh, it's nice to see you.
Um
I, I, I think
we all uh of people, so I try to
keep this short, um, I think we
chronically underfund our state
parks. Um, I think we could do
so much more with our state
parks. Uh, I had
one question Is Senator
Steinborne's here. I, I kind of
want to know about Slot Canyon,
uh, if you know anything about
that veto, um, so there was a,
uh, we, we passed a bill for a
new state park. It got pocket
vetoed. Um, you know, I'm a big
believer in the committee knows
I'm a big believer of veto
messages, so hopefully we're
going to change that. Um, I
don't know, I'll leave that to
Senator Seborn. You're, um, do
your rangers do law enforcement
activ
ities and are they armed?
Um
Madam Chair and Vice Chairman
Queen, absolutely. We have 779
law enforcement officers that
are fully certified and
commissioned officers in the
state of New Mexico. They deal
with body recoveries, domestic
violence, shots fired, fights,
anything that any other police
agency deals with in the state
of New Mexico, uh, we deal with
it in state parks and so we do
have 79 of those positions and
uh uh 38% of those positions are
currently vacant. I will just
add, uh, Mr. Vice Chair, that it
is a tough
uh, competition in New Mexico
for law enforcement officers at
this time, uh, New Mexico State
Police is paying outstandingly
for their officers, which is
deserve deservedly so, uh, some
of the large counties like San
Juan and here in Donana, Santa
Fe, uh, Bernal Leo Paying high
dollar for for law enforcement
officers and it's tough uh for
our state agencies in New Mexico
State parks to be able to
compete with them. uh, day to
day and, and year over year. So
our, our recruitment and
retention rates are, are rough
now. The one thing I can tell
you is once we get
someone to pass that 3 years,
they fall in love with our
division and they stay, but we
got to get to that 3-year mark.
And, and that was certainly my
next question, so I take it
there's not pay equity between
different state law enforcement
agencies.
Madam Chair and Vice Chair, uh,
no, uh, it's, uh, it, it's, it's
really, uh, folks, agencies
trying to fund their positions
to the extent that they're able
to budget-wise and, and keep it
high and be very flexible and
keeping that that pay, uh,
rolling for those officers year
after year. It's very
competitive right now. Uh, the
Livestock Board game department,
state parks, uh, RLD, Tax and
revenue, all of those who have
state law enforcement officers
outside of DPS, I think will
tell you the same.
Yeah, and that, that's my man
chair, uh, Mr. Velasquez,
that's, that's my, my worry and
my frustration, um, you know, I,
I, I think, um, we're asking
your officers to do a law
enforcement, um, uh, play a law
enforcement role, and it makes
sense to me that there would be
some parody, uh, between parks
and Department of Game and Fish
and state place. Um
you know, right now, LLC is
meeting at the same time we are,
um
this is probably a conversation
we should have with them, uh,
Chairman Small in particular,
um, but that's, that's an
ongoing concern. And then just
to, to reiterate, um, I, I think
we, we do a poor job of funding
existing agencies and uh we were
constantly
adopting new expensive programs
and neglecting our existing
programs. And I think I, I've
always believed we should do our
existing programs
better first, um.
and that continues to be the
pattern. And I, and I also think
we should grow our, our state
park system. Uh, I think outdoor
recreation and tourism are still
growth industries in New Mexico
and state parks, you know, if we
had, uh, I mean, we should be
known nationally for our state
parks, that should be a reason
for people to to pick New Mexico
to come visit, you know, not
just that they're staying in the
state park when they're driving
through, but that we're the
destination. Um, so I, I thank
you for what you do.
and I'm, I'm always impressed by
your uh history with the agency,
uh, having been there so long
and, and risen so far. Uh, so I
appreciate you very much and uh
I guess I'll leave it at that.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Montoya.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
this is one of those, uh, days
where myself and
uh Representative McQueen are on
the same page again, that, uh,
I, I, I found if you go far
enough east and the other person
goes far enough west, you end up
in the same place.
So, um, I completely agree, uh
the value. I was actually very
interested at the way that uh
that you calculated value. I
was, I was over here talking to
Representative Zamora, and he
was telling me how his wife goes
uh garage selling and how, uh,
she tells him afterwards how
much money she saved him
Uh, I was looking at that when,
when you were talking about the
recreational use value. I don't
know how you actually put a
number on, on that. Uh, it's, I
mean, that's
really taking something and I
don't think it's necessary to do
that. I think this parks are
something that, that we value
and for whatever reason,
every year it just seems to get
left.
to the site, uh, everybody,
nobody that, when you go to the
parks in New Mexico, uh,
doesn't matter what letters
behind your name, you're there
to enjoy New Mexico. And I,
everybody enjoys New Mexico. I,
I, and I
I, I agree. I think we need to
find a way to, to support
the
departments we have
and, and ones that bring value
added
parks are value added. That,
that, uh, is an underutilized
resource for us for tourism.
and, and we can't be
understaffed if we're gonna be
asking more people to come. So,
um, with that, I'd like to ask
Mr. Velasquez, uh.
what are we paying
park rangers
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Montoya. So it
depends on their obviously they
get paid through the state
personnel office, uh, uh,
process of education experiences
the entry wage. So for a
trainee, someone who has to go
through the law enforcement
academy, uh, our starting salary
is right at 2 about 2350, um,
and then after one year they get
a uh promotion that matches
their experience in education.
And I'll, I'll give a little bit
more information there. If you
can't make it through the
academy, we can't maintain you
in employment, and so that
law enforcement academy is
really, uh, one of those things
that, uh, is, is the bar for
them to start their career.
Well, I, I, and I, I, I think uh
entry wages
that's not an awful entry wage,
but obviously once they go
through the academy, they can
apply at any other law
enforcement agency across the
state and um
I was disappointed between the
bidding war that took place
between uh
Albuquerque Police Department.
and
our state police department. It
just last year, it just took us
to where
most communities cannot compete.
with what the state
police are paying, and that
leaves all of our cities
vulnerable. It leaves us, we,
they're, there, there has to be
something that we can do to, to,
as a Representative McQueen, uh,
discussed some level of parity
uh, some level it's the same
work.
everywhere, but um
smaller departments and
like yours and smaller
communities just cannot afford
to keep up with that. So, um, I
think, uh, I think there's
plenty of folks here
um, that could get behind
uh an increase to your
uh department and I, I think you
make the argument
not on the recreational use
value but on
the need for safety, for if
we're going to have people at
our parks, they need to feel
safe. They need to be safe, and
we need to, we need to be
staffed up. So, um, I would be
uh interested.
to see if you don't get
uh better hearing, but you, once
again, you're gonna have to talk
to the folks at LFC that, that
those uh books are being cooked.
right now. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. I think you're
warning about timing is
appropriate. Senator Steinborn
Thank you, Madam Chair, and good
morning, Toby. Good to see you.
And sir, I'm sorry I didn't
catch your name.
Kramer Winningham with their
arrowheads on. Good morning. Um,
so a few things, starting off
with the positive, Toby, thank
you very much for your um
vision's work on the fee, fee
schedule.
You know, I'll just say it
again, New Mexico fees hadn't
been adjusted in 40 years. Toby
was sorely understaffed,
under-resourced. You did this
historic fee study that not only
updated some fees, but also for
the first time made New Mexico
state parks free for New Mexico
residents for much of the year
for day use. That is incredible
and uh something that we had
asked you all to look at years
ago and then I, so long that I'd
forgotten we'd asked, and then
suddenly you were working on it.
Took a while to get through the
pipeline, but think about that,
colleagues, your constituents
and your kids and your schools
can now go to New Mexico State
parks for free. What, Toby, what
are, what's the time frame that
they get free access. Uh, Madam
Chair, Senator Steinborn, it is
from October through April.
October to April
So that's an amazing opportunity
and uh
you know, I really applaud you
for that. That's, that's
definitely part of your legacy
for sure, is having made this
transition and
I also wanna thank you for your
role in the Rio Grande Trail
Commission, which you guys hear
me rape about through the years
because there was no movement.
Finally, we're seeing movement
and uh and it's incredible, and
the commission is meeting, this
is, of course, planning a 500
mile trail across New Mexico.
kind of like the Appalachian
divide, Appalachian or
continental divide, we have
created in New Mexico this thing
called the Rio Grande Trail,
which is gonna go through the
heart of New Mexico and bring
incredible tourism, quality of
life, frontier economic
development, when we do it, and,
uh, state parks involved and now
that's finally moving forward
and in fact, we're just written
up in Backpacker Magazine as,
you know, they were really
celebrating this cool concept
and seems like the
administration is finally gotten
the Rio Grande Trail buzz here,
which is cool
to see here at the end
Um
obviously, as a sponsor of it
and a resident of Donana County,
I'm super
disappointed over the veto of
the Slot Canyon.
um Riverland State Parkville.
That area, and I represent from
radio, I represent that whole
corridor Radium springs up to
hatch.
Tourism from that area, even
though people have to jump a
fence and go there are felt all
the way to hatch and beyond.
People come in daily to go visit
this site. As you know, we
talked a lot about it and
you were, um, you know,
supportive of the concept and,
and did a lot of work on this.
So as far as like a loss of an
economic asset potential to our
region, like it's almost
inexplicable, um, we, as you
know,
Chairman Small put in 40 million
for capital for state parks, a
historic amount of money in part
because we knew we were going to
be building a state park and uh
even the bill, you guys took the
money, but you vetoed the bill
and it was uh not you guys, but
it wasn't your decision. I don't
believe, but.
any rate,
it's still there. State parks
owns 1000 acres of land, but I
do want to ask you this. So it
is still my hope to, to, to move
this forward and be successful,
but
we have a safety issue right now
that I would really love your
help on to address, which is
that people have to park on the
side of the road, they have to
hop a fence on
state land office land, might I
add, have to hop a fence in
order to get to the slot Canyon,
and, uh, and I would love your
help to just mitigate that
safety issue to work with DOT
and to utilize your land so that
we can at least
deal with that safety issue.
um, whether or not we create a
state park in the future.
Is that something that you're
working on or you can.
we can work on
um
Mr. Vice Chair and, and Senator
Steinborn, absolutely. So we're
having meetings, multi agency
meetings, in fact, just a few
weeks ago, the state land
Office, uh, I, I participated,
uh, NMDOT and BLM all
participated in a uh interagency
discussion of what the steps
need to be in order to get um
right of way access over uh over
that DOT piece and have a safe,
uh, access and egress area where
there be
an opportunity for parking, uh,
as well as access to the
trailhead. And so I, I believe
that the state and, and that
could be on state land office
property as well, um, and so I,
I believe that that is
happening. I know it's
happening. I participated and I,
I think that's moving forward to
identify what the next steps are
to uh potentially have that as
an option, uh, in, in the
shorter term. Great, thank you
so much. That is really good to
hear. And if there's anything we
can do locally to help support
that. I hope you'll let us know.
All right? But thank you for
letting me know that. Thanks
again for all your good work.
Thank you,
Ma
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Director of Velasquez and
Dr. Winningham. That was a very
thorough presentation. Um, I
know that you mentioned
recruitment challenges and
working 20 years in the
nonprofit sec, the nonprofit
sector, that was always a
challenge. And now that I'm a
university professor and run a
small business and in working
with my clients, recruitment
remains the challenge and so
we're always looking for
innovative solutions to attract
people
and keep people because that's
really the only way to sustain a
good business model, right? So,
Madam Chair and directors, my
questions are surrounding
recruitment. So have you thought
about or explored partnerships
with universities maybe for
internship programs or work
study opportunities.
Uh, Madam Chair, and
Representative, uh, Senna
Cortez, uh, yes, so we, we have,
uh, a seasonal program that's
kind of an internship program,
uh, that can do either high
school or college kids, but we
also have an internship program
through the state personnel
office. Uh, our biggest
challenge for recruitment right
now in the law enforcement
sector primarily is that cities
have city of Las Cruces, for
example. I was here last weekend
moving my son back in for his
junior year here at New Mexico
State, um,
the incentive they're giving
annual incentive increases.
like 5 1015 20 $25,000. So if
you think about a new recruit,
he or she goes to the
police signs on, goes to the
police academy, and they said,
if you make it within one year
of hire, we're gonna give you
$10,000.
And in your second, you're gonna
give you $20,000.
And all you have to do is stay
here for 3 years.
The state of New Mexico has no
way to compete with that.
and that's happening across the
state.
They're giving cash bonus
stipends.
for these employment, uh,
opportunities for law
enforcement specifically and you
don't have to look far. It's,
it's right here in the city of
Las Cruces, and I applaud them
for doing it because they have
the flexibility within their own
municipal powers to do that
The problem in competing for us
is not that people don't like
the thought of being a park
ranger.
If they're going to go to law
enforcement and get a background
check and do a psych eval and do
physical exams and be subject to
random testing. They're going to
get paid the very best they can
get paid.
and that is really our challenge
is we're having to sell the
lifestyle.
and I grew up in Mora I was, I
was a farm kid, ranching kid. I
love the lifestyle. I was
working in the outdoors and I
was a people person.
But if we can't sell the
lifestyle, we can't compete on
the economic side, and that's
really, so we do all the career
fairs. We come here to NMSU. We
go to UNM. We go to Mesalands.
We're, we're everywhere. We do
social media, indeed, everything
you can think about, um, but it
really at the end of the day we
get the interest, but when we
get into the details of the pay
and the opportunities for
stipends and bonuses.
and overtime
We, we, we fall out of the
conversation.
Madam Chair Director of
Velasquez, I get it, and a lot
of my clients are in the
nonprofit sector and they cannot
compete financially with other
industries and so again we're
always looking for uh innovative
solutions, have you thought
about Madam Chair, Director of
Velasquez, about maybe housing
assistance or partnerships with
local communities for staff
accommodations because if you
can't get them financially, then
maybe a different incentive.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, and
Representative Senna Cortez.
we have 47 state residences as
part of the New Mexico State
Park system.
um, and most of them are empty
even though we have them
available and the, the unique
part is if you're a law
enforcement ranger, the house
becomes, uh, uh, mandatory for
you to live in in the park, and
it's free of rent. All you pay
is your utilities.
and we have empty homes
The pro the and, and really I
have a very good sell and you
probably see this across your
work.
People are migrating away from
rural areas and that's where all
of our state parks are.
and it's sad
uh, that, that, that's happening
because they're not staying in
the Logans, in the Moras, in the
Chama, uh, Los Sohos areas,
they're just not staying there.
La Cueva and Fen Lake, um, we
have housing and we develop
housing, and it's nice state
housing. I don't want to say
it's perfect.
but um it, it is a challenge as
far as other housing
opportunities, you have to
remember that many of these
state parks exist in a resort or
a resort area like the Moreno
Valley.
It's either Airbnb
or high dollar homes. So there's
there's, there's, there's some
limited opportunities, but I'll
tell you, we're shaking every
tree
It sure sounds like it, Madam
Chair and Director of Alasquez,
um, what about opportunities for
remote work with any of the
administrative positions? Do you
even have that available?
Madam Chair, the executive
agencies do not have that as an
option. We won't remote work is
not an option.
And my last question, Madam
Chair Director Velasquez, um,
what about any what about
creating career pathways that
could help seasonal workers
transition into full-time work.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's exactly what the 136 uh
seasonal, uh, positions that we
hire every summer, that's our
targeted group is we, we think
if we can get them in high
school like I did and college
that they spend the summer, we
attach them to a ranger or an
interpretive ranger or a park
manager that they like the
lifestyle. Like, you know, I
really like this lifestyle. If
they like to hunt and fish, they
usually get hunting and fishing
season open because there's not
as busy, right? Um, and so we
use that seasonal program and
the internship program
that is affordable, uh afforded
to us by the state personnel
office exactly for that. That's
our recruitment, that's our
hook, and we hope that we can
keep them, um.
but we're, we're using it to the
extent possible, and we also use
YCC, the Youth Conservation
Corps, Rocky Mountain Youth
Core, and AmeriCorps to try and
get people, uh, from those core
services interested in state
parks.
Madam Chair Director of Alaskaz,
you are shaking down every tree,
and thank you so much for
answering all of my questions.
You guys are doing a great job
and we're here to support you.
So thank you so much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Oh, thank you, Madam Cheriki's
first question be for Doctor
Willingham of Winningham, the
the charts that were presented
have a bit of a hockey stick
effect in the last
couple of years and I was
wondering about
if we go backward to earlier
than 19
uh name was, was this a
consequence of
a COVID-related issues or how
did that
factor into your analysis.
Madam Chair, Senator.
um, I believe you're talking
about the, uh, like economic
impact expenditure chart, um, I
think that was driven by
increased uh federal funding for
capital projects, uh, that they
were able to receive. So, um,
when we're looking at the
economic impact, it's, it's
mostly, uh, it's all federal
funding, and so they received a
lot more federal funding during
that period and that's why that
increased uh the way it did.
Um, the other ones are driven
by, uh, overall expenditures and
uh visitation which grew but
not, not quite at the same rate.
OK. If, uh Medi chair was 2, let
me direct your attention to
chart 13.
is the bottom
graph there
the number of visitors.
page 13? Yes, sir, page 13. OK.
Yes, so this is uh annual,
annual visitors, um, the total
is everybody that went to the
park, and that, that's a method
that the state park has used for
a long time to track visitation.
The lower one is our estimate of
out of state.
and um he's seeing that
asterisk, we only have data on
the ones that booked through the
reservation system and so that I
would say is an undercount
because anybody that came to the
park but didn't book online for
a campsite or something like
that would not be counted in
that total at the bottom, but
that is the number of visitors
per year.
OK, so, Madam Chair, we went in
2021 from one
10
2 in 2022, 265,000 did I read
that correctly? OK, and then it
stayed high
for a number of years after
that, but the expenditures
didn't seem to correlate
with that dramatic increase in
visitation. Can, can you tell me
why?
Um, well, relative to the
overall visitation.
uh, you know, it's a, this is
more people booking online, um,
and so I think that's the main,
main driver at that point.
Um,
but uh
state funding doesn't vary with
visitation, correct.
OK, so the, the top graph on
page 13, you know, is the total
expenditures as a consequence.
Oh, no, the, the top line is
visitors. It's everybody that
went to the park, so you, you
had, uh, in 2024, 5.2 million
people visiting the park. Um,
the number 265, that's just from
out of state.
So these are people that, you
know, have a, um, credit card
address in a different state.
They book online, uh, for a
reservation. And so then we
count them. So, uh, those are,
are growing, um, as you can see.
So, Madam Chair, just winning
him the, the conclusion you
could draw from that is the vast
majority of the visitors to our
state parks or state residents
that
Um, well, if they use the park
for day use or that they, uh,
they can't, but they don't book
online.
then they could be out of state
as well. Um, and so
it's probably true the majority
are um in-state, but I think
there is a higher number of out
of state than what.
that that that line shows.
I think
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I have.
Thank you, Senator. Next is
Representative Kates, then
Senator Cervantes. Uh, thank
you, Chair, and thank you very
much for your presentation and
um
and, and as you can, someone's
echoing
Thanks.
Um.
and thank you. Um
I am, I'm very proud to serve on
this committee, as you can hear,
there's so much support and so
understand that as, as uh our
representative Montoya said,
you'll need to get LFC support,
but, but you sound like you have
a support here. I appreciate it.
Um, I also appreciate um the
path that represented uh Senna
Cortez went down for workforce.
I would like to also the tree I
would like shaken.
is looking at
um
what kind of uh hours. I
understand that you are not
providing remote work. I
understand that you have 136
seasonal workers, but I know a
lot of individuals in trades in
schools and universities and
community colleges that are
looking for jobs that are 10
hours a week, 20 hours a week,
only in the summer, and a lot of
times they do work on federal
parks and federal lands, um, not
because of the highest
paying, but who's gonna hire
them for only 6 weeks, you know,
full-time 6 weeks, or who's
gonna only hire them for 10
hours a week. And so that might
be another way we can look at
our workforce issues, um, in
the, um
$30 million you're going to put
into outdoor restrooms. Any of
them have hydraulic adult
changing tables in them.
Uh, Madam Chair and, and
Representative, thank you for
that question. These are, so
they're, they're not the type of
restroom that fits the
description that uh would
require an adult changing. These
are the vault toilets that are
outdoors, they're vaulted, they
have no water, there's no water
feature at all there it's a pit,
there're, I mean, usually called
pit toilets, I, I like to dress
it up by outdoor restroom
facility, but they're pit
toilets for the most part in
very rural areas where we may be
too close to a natural or
cultural
feature to develop water,
wastewater, etc. Um, so the
typical, uh, pit wia that you
see in a recreation area. No,
thank you. I am familiar and so
thank you. Um, so I would just
like to bring to your attention
that um that uh as you're
increasing and I very much
appreciate the work you put in
showing the economic impact, but
there are 3.3 to 6 million
individuals in the United States
who are full-time
chair users and as many as 30%
in some parts of our state and
as little as 10%.
Chair users usually do not
travel by themselves. They're
usually traveling with others.
and providing them a clean,
safe, dignified place to be able
to provide their loved ones uh
personal care space, and it is
not appropriate in every place.
I absolutely see that, but
finding those opportunities, I
want to bring to your attention
that our uh a Bureau of Tourism
here in New Mexico State is just
it's in its infancy, handing out
grants for hydraulic adult
changing tables for these public
spaces
to eventually be able to map so
that we can tell New Mexicans
and out of staters traveling
here, these are safe, accessible
places to go, and as you know,
you're not just attracting one
person, you're attracting their
family as sex, and this could be
a great economic driver, and I
want to make sure that it is
brought to your attention.
Um
I will also like to know
so I, I, I've, I've carried the
uh public works for NMFA bill
for a couple of years in a row,
and it provides sewage and water
opportunities in the cultural
affairs building.
Do you have a similar bill or
funding mechanism that you can
bring this committee aware of to
make sure, yeah, absolutely, to
increase and maintain.
uh, our, our, our, our tourism
and our economic uh drivers, you
know, being able to have to make
sure that we are uh maintaining
this infrastructure is
essential. So what is your
funding mechanism for this, or
does it come out of your general
operations. Thanks.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you. So both, we deal with
a lot with our general operating
budget, um, however, we use our
ICIP, the capital fund, uh, that
we get funding for and have been
very, very well funded over the
last 3 years. Um, but we use
GGRT as our state match. That's
our, that's our cornerstone. Uh,
DGRT is our state match to the
Bureau of Reclamation, Title 28
funds, which is a 50/50 match.
Um, we use it towards a Coast
Guard grant, which is
a 50/50 match. And then we use
it just as another state fund to
address um infrastructure issues
across the state. It's not that
much money, but it is a
cornerstone of state-directed
funds that we receive for
capital improvements,
maintenance, and, uh, upkeep.
OK, thank you very much and
thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
just want to bring, I, I wanna
say it twice. Uh, this agency,
um, completed their rulemaking
in 2 months. I know we've
already said that, but let's say
it again cause I don't know of
another agency that has been
able to complete their
rulemaking so quickly. So thank
you very much. Thank you.
Thank you, as Senator Cervantes,
and then after Senator Cervantes
we're moving on to the next
item. Thank you. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. Good morning,
gentlemen. So, um, on the 5th
page of your presentation,
you're, you're discussing, uh,
the economic impact analysis and
you're pointing out here that
the considerations in your
analysis here are primarily
federal funding for capital
projects. Um, I'm, I'm guessing
that we're looking at at least
probably 3 years of not very
much
help from the federal government
in, in this regard, but are just
beginning to see some of the
Trump administration clawback on
some of this uh capital funding,
capital projects, and if so,
what will we do in the 3 years
it's gonna take?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Cervantes, the uptick in the
federal funding that period was
the $20 million in ARPA that you
all made available to us for,
for the agency starting in 2021.
That was a huge infusion. We
were, we were, uh, our statewide
and I ICIP prior to that ranged
averaged about 3 million a year.
Uh, so that 20 million
immediately uh made a huge
difference in our, uh, capital
improvements across the system
because of the any of that funny
remaining?
Um, Madam Chair, we expended all
of it by the debt 6 months in
advance of the deadline. So that
20 million is expended. What was
the deadline? June 30th, 2025.
OK, and, and so again back to
present times, you've seen the
last 6 months and what, when you
get when you're saying the
primary source of is is federal
funding for capital projects. Do
you have any projection of what,
what that future looks like for
the next 3 years. Madam Chair
and Senator Cervantes, we have
had no clawbacks of the federal
funds that we're involved with
through the Bureau of
Reclamation, the US Coast
Guard or the land and Water
Conservation Fund. Uh, we have a
high confidence from each one of
those agencies that uh FY 26
Federal federal fiscal clarified
26 is gonna be at or above the,
the numbers that we've had in,
in recent years. So right now,
I, I don't have cause for
concern, uh, for those three
federal funds that we manage
for. Very good, thank you, and
that's good news. And then I see
statistically you're showing
$511 million of revenue, you
know, in New Mexico, uh, and
I believe elsewhere in the
report I read through there
quickly that there, that you do
have that broken down by county.
Is that in this report someplace
or is that information I'd have
to get from you later.
Madam Chair,
Senator, that's in the full
report. OK, and do I have, I
have that in this presentation
here. I believe you have an
electric copy online. All right,
so we'll be able to find that.
Yeah, I'm curious, that's,
that's a, um, I'm surprised
that's a large number, $511
million of revenue impact. Uh,
and I'm, I, you know, as a
longtime resident here, I'm
trying to figure out where that
impact is here in our community,
how much of it's here. I'll talk
to Senator Steinborn later
because I, again, I'm trying to
figure out, do, do you know how
many employees are employed here
in Toanai County?
Uh, I can go off the top of my
head at Mesa Valley, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, and, and Senator
Mescio Valley, we have two. We
used to have 53 of those
positions were cut under our
previous administration. Um
Leesburg, Leesburg Dam, we have
3.
So that's a total of 5
OK, and, and that, and I'm not
being challenging except to say
that when I see large numbers of
huge economic impacts at a
statewide level, I'm curious
because I don't see that here to
be very candid with you. I don't
see 500 $511 million of economic
activity in parks here and
you're kind of verifying that if
we only have 5 employees here
and I'd like to see what the
revenue is here because again
we'd like to be part of the,
part of the uh discussion, of
course, always too uh last
subject, Madam Chair, um, we,
you've talked about the
difficulty you have filling
positions with a chronic vacan
c y and I think he threw out a
number of starting salary of
$2250 that's an hour, is that
right? Uh, Madam Chair and
Senator 2350, 2350. So that's,
that's approaching what, um,
maybe $50,000 a year as a
starting salary, uh, as a
college degree required. Um,
Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
Education Experience combined
will qualify for, uh, no, uh, no
bachelor's a requirement, but
education and experience both
combined for minimum cost. And
when you say education
experience, so, uh, high school
degree you can start somebody at
$50,000 a year
in a position with your agency,
as long as they're 21, uh, Madam
Chair, as long as they're 21
years old, yes. And, and so then
the, the question I've got is,
um, cause you've described the
difficulty you have filling
these positions, uh, you, you
call it a chronic vacancy, uh,
and you also, I think rightfully
probably attribute some of this
to younger people wanting to be
in urban settings and so forth,
the markets may be less
interested in, in more remote or
rural locations are, are, but
other states, or other
southwestern states that we can
compare ourselves to, Utah,
Nevada, Colorado, Arizona
are they experiencing the same
difficulty filling those
positions?
Uh, Madam Chair and, and Senator
Cervantes, I, I, I have compared
to the, the most, uh, like
divisions Utah is the most like
division to New Mexico State
Parks. They're obviously much
larger, but there's, they're
struggling in rural areas as
well.
Um, just because of the quality
of life, the quality of
education, and just
everything that you deal in a
rural uh community, they're,
they're struggling as well. And
I, I hope you'll continue to
look at those trends because, of
course, it would be nice for us
to think, well, we, we're gonna
fund your agency more, you're
gonna provide more in salaries
and we're gonna take care of,
you said 20+% vacancy, but again
if this is a, a condition that
we're gonna see around the
country generationally, uh,
geographically and so forth and
salaries are probably not going
to make the difference, it seems
to me, so I appreciate you're
looking at other states. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
gentlemen, for your presentation
this morning.
As the next presenters are
coming up, uh, for presentation
number 8. I'd like to, uh,
entertain uh emotion on the
minutes from July 1 to 2,
they've been in your packet and
for a voting member.
Move adoption
Is there a second
It's a second, a motion
and by Representative McQueen
and a second by Representative
Zamora. Is there any opposition
to the minutes of July 1 to 2.
Thank you very much. I also
would like to take this
opportunity to once again thank
the sponsors of Last Night, um,
the event at the Rio Grande
Winey for our committee and the
legislative Finance Committee.
We had 23 groups, Alianza
Agutullatuda detaus, American
Adred College of Osteopathic
Medicine, the dairy farmers of
America, the dairy producers of
New Mexico far
m ed a table, elephant Butte
irrigation District, La Samia,
Food Center, Latino farmers and
ranchers International, National
Center for Frontier Communities,
New Mexico Farm and Livestock
Bureau, New Mexico Farmers
Marketing Association, New
Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts, New
Mexico Chile Association, New
Mexico Council of Outfitters and
Guides.
New Mexico cattle Growers
Association, New Mexico Farmers
Marketing Association, New
Mexico Federal Lands Council,
New Mexico Food and Agriculture
Policy Council, New Mexico
woolgrowers Association, Protect
agriculture now, Rocky Mountain
Farmers Union and Santa Fe
Farmers Market Institute. A big
thank you to all of those groups
who help provide blessed
evenings, um, dinner for us. It
was good to uh meet all of you
and many of you have
participated in the uh
sessions for these 3 days. So
right now we're going on to the
Las Cruces electrification Plan
Community solar and Community
energy efficiency development
projects. We'd like to be
updated on what's going on here
in the region. So I have Jenny
Hernandez, Angie Rodriguez, and
Lucas Herndon. So Jenny, are you
starting?
Yes, good morning, Madam Chair.
Pull the mic right in front of
you.
Is that better
Good morning. Um, Madam Chair,
uh, vice chairs representatives,
counselors, um, sorry,
representatives, senators. My
name is Jenny Hernandez. I am
the sustainability officer for
the city of Las Cruces. Uh,
thank you for having us today
and giving the opportunity to
give some updates. So I'm going
to have some friends with me too
who are gonna help add in some
specific areas on some of the
questions that I know, um, you
all wanted more information on
and so I'm going to start very
general, give you a sense of
kind of where this all came from
and then really focus on our
seed program that we were
awarded, which is the flyer that
you see up here and have in
front of you. And then I will
pass it off to, um, Angie from
EPE who's gonna take a deeper
dive on the EV electrification
portion, and then she'll pass it
over to um Lucas, who will
really be able to dive into some
of the
policy parts of the seed and um
the seed program and maybe
community solar, um.
so to start off, I, I don't know
how familiar you all are, but
the city of Las Cruces adopted
its climate action plan in 2020.
And in that climate action plan,
it is essentially a roadmap for
the city of Las Cruces in
strategies that can help us meet
certain goals, um, on cleaner
energy and a myriad of very
different sectors. It's
divided into sectors in our
inventory, we found that um the
biggest sector of greenhouse gas
emissions, which might not be a
surprise, is transportation, and
so that is one of excuse me one
second, um, for those in the
back, uh, the rule yesterday was
that if you're going to have
conversations, please go out to
the patio or to a different
floor because it does disrupt
the audience and the feedback.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chair. Um, and so and
you will take a deep dive on
kind of our collaboration and
how she's helping the city
through some of the programs
that they offer and the programs
that we're working on together
to achieve the reduction, our
reduction goals in the
transportation, um,
electrification sector. The
biggest second sector was, um,
buildings, specifically
residential, and that's where
our seed program really comes
into play. And so for background
context
we are a recipient. We were
awarded one of the seat awards
from from the state from energy,
minerals, natural resources
department, um, and so with that
specific project, we are really
trying to help our load to
moderate income residents have
more safer and resilient homes,
and so that's what our proposal
was on, and this really aligned
with again our climate action
goals under our um residential
goals that we have, and we
started
this effort. We, we call this
program Plugged in for good,
which is what you're looking at.
Um, we started this almost 3
years ago, and it was really in
an effort to understand
kind of what the challenges were
around extreme heat and
specifically for our low income
populations and what it meant in
their homes for them, and so
this is really about helping
them have a safer home and
really helping to help reduce
energy costs in their homes, so
like their utility bills and
through this work we have done
many reports and studies that
helped us to realize that um
those of you familiar with Las
Cruces, we have an area called
the infill area, which is a 5
square mile radius, very close
to the downtown area, some
portions of the downtown area,
and that is actually the hottest
area of our city when it comes
to our urban heat island effect
and so a lot of those houses are
also very old and they were
built with not so efficient
insulation ornologies to heat
and cool their homes, and so
when it is triple degrees
outside for consecutive amount
of times and you have an
evaporative cooler, that's a
really dangerous home to be
staying in, especially if you're
older, um, or have young
children or have health related
problems, and then especially
with, um, you know, if you then,
we, we have a thing called
energy deprivation where you
decide not to use whatever kind
of heating or cooling system you
have in your home because you
simply can't afford it, right?
And so that's really what we
wanted to do
with this plugged in for good
program is make sure that um
some of these residents in this
area could have
safer homes, and so we proposed
in our proposal
to help us fund um
weatherization, so light
weatherization and then um put
in better and more effective
cooling with a heat pump, um,
and then we also through talking
with our residents, um, we've
been talking with them for 3
years now. This was in the
making. Um, we, a lot of them
were concerned about their
indoor air quality and so we
decided to incorporate that into
the program and what we're
finding with some of the
preliminary studies that we've
been doing is that
a lot of the issues are, are
ventilation issues and so we're
proposing, you know, if someone
doesn't have vents in their
bathroom that we can help them
with providing that to provide
better circulation, um, in their
home to help with that. And so
those are kind of the three big,
so to speak, ticket items that
are seed program would help us
fund and pay for, and then, um,
if there is money left over, and
if it is a good fit for the
house
um, a heat pump water heater is
something that we're also
considering, again, depending on
funding and if the the the home
is a good fit, um, and so that's
what the Cd program, that's what
we're using those, those funding
and dollars for we're also using
that to pay for what we are
calling energy navigators. So
what we also found when we were
creating this program is that a
lot of the um other programs
that exist or even rebates and
incentives
were really hard to navigate for
our residents, especially this
specific population when you
have multiple jobs or just
simply don't have the time, um,
or access to be able to dedicate
time to to capturing those
rebates to help you pay for
these things, and so the seed
dollars is also helping us pay
for a specific person to
essentially guide the resident
through this entire process that
we're um going through. And so
as you know, our
State energy office, uh, energy
Mnerd for short, um, also has
their rebates program so you can
get up to $8000 for a heat pump,
and so obviously we want to use
these funds to also leverage
those funds because it'll help
us, uh, triple the amount of
homes, not triple, sorry, I
wish, uh, double the amount of
homes that we can serve and so
we really need to navigator so
that we can make sure that we're
capturing those dollars and
helping the resident
to reduce the, the upfront cost
for some of this stuff, um, so
that's kind of a very
generalized.
uh thing that we're doing with
this specific program to help us
meet our climate goals under um
our residential building. And so
in a more broader sense, our
electrification goals are um we
are hoping
with the previous
administration, there was a lot
of rebates and incentives to
help all income levels
transition towards
electrification, whether that
was in your home or for your
vehicle. And so we were trying
to help that help you capture
that by, um, you know, offering
sort of incentives and rebates
to make it easier to capture
them and so that aligns really
closely with some of the work
that we're doing with El Paso
Electric
in terms of again electric
vehicle, transportation,
transition, and so we have
partnered with them on many
projects to not only help with
accessing the infrastructure
like EV chargers, but we're
really excited because soon,
hopefully in late fall, we're
also have partnered with EPE and
another um entity called Force
that will help with our LMI car
share program and so this is
essentially you can rent an EB
for a very small fee for
an hour and, and run your
errands, which is really
exciting. And so again, that's
really to expose people to those
opportunities that otherwise
might not have. They had the
opportunity to test drive an EV
and then access to make sure
that there's infrastructure for
them to charge their vehicles
and things of that nature. And
so, um
with that, I forgot community
solar. OK, so community solar
plays in because we are, um, the
some of the works that Lucas has
done and and the PRC at the
state level, they have awarded a
community solar award, which
means that you do not have to
have the physical panels on your
home, and you can still benefit
from the savings created from
community solar, and so Las
Cruces was awarded one of those
awards.
and we have an entity, um,
called Affordable Solar, who was
given that award and they will
be building out the community
solar here in Las Cruces. So
we've actually partnered with
them to sign up our folks that
are participating in our plugged
in for good program. So that
way, not only are they getting,
you know, the retrofits done,
but then they're getting a er
saved and secured spot on
community solar to be able to
reduce their utility bills even
further. Um, it'
s a projected 28% um savings
credit. It's kind of difficult
on the exact ways that that
works, but happy to dive into
those details if you have
follow-up questions, um, and
that credit is a credit on their
bill, which then is what reduces
their utility bill, um, and so I
was trying to set that up nicely
for uh to pass it over to um
Angie Rodriguez from EPE because
she's going to talk in more
detail about some of the project
s that we've been working on
together on electrification in
terms of our transportation.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Angelie
Rodriguez, and I'm a manager of
transportation electrification
efforts at El Paso Electric
At El Paso Electric, we have
been supporting electrification
of transportation since early
2022, and since then, the number
of electric vehicle owners in
our service territory has
tripled. We started at about 500
EV owners at the end of 2021,
and now we have over 1500. I
know these are small numbers
when you compare them to
California, but we're seeing
adoption rate continues to grow.
Um, I looked up the numbers for
the entire state of New Mexico
as of today, we have
20,000 customers with
electrified vehicles, and that
includes plug-in hybrids as well
as all electric.
Um, so our vision has been
guided by two things. Of course,
our strategy, uh, we hear what
our customers want, what our
community wants, such as the
city Donana County as well as
legal principles, so I wanted to
thank you all for passing me
this statute back in 2019
because that enabled the
electric companies such as us to
propose what we call
transportation electrification
plants to New Mexico public
regulation Commission that
regulates us, um, so
we already went through the
process of approval twice, uh,
we received an approval of our
first transportation
electrification plan back in
2021, we ran our programs for 2
years. Uh, we started learning
what our customers like, what
they don't like, and uh last
year we received approval of our
second plan.
and um uh just to give you a
little flavor of what this plan
includes. We have a variety of
things in our portfolio. We
offer rebates to residential
customers for, uh, electric
bicycles, home charging
stations, installation of 240
volt outlets in their garage.
Our commercial programs, they
include a variety of things.
We're not only offering uh
businesses rebates when they
want to have a charging station
at their business. We also offer
urkey solutions to businesses,
and that has been a huge
a huge program, um, if you're
wondering which programs are the
most successful, um, as you
know, everybody likes hiking and
being outdoors in New Mexico are
most popular program right now
is Electric bicycle program,
believe it or not. Uh, it's 50%
subscribed. We have a lot of
residential customers that are
looking to buy an electric
bicycle that helps them pedal
less, right, which may not be
really good because they're not
exercising as much, but they can
go and they can go longer
distances and stuff like that.
Uh, as far as
our commercial programs, uh,
they have grown so much and our
most popular program is called
Take Charge New Mexico, where we
offer turnkey solutions to
different businesses, um,
especially apartment complexes,
because as you know, uh, when
you buy an electric vehicle, you
will charge it for the most part
in your home or at work.
uh unless you go out of town, of
course, you'll use public
chargers, but people that live
in apartments may be a
disadvantage, right? So our
program where we do all the work
we fund charging infrastructure
at apartments has been super
successful. I'm very happy to
report that we just finished
installation of charging
stations at our 8th apartment
complex here in Las Cruces, um,
and they're getting very good
utilization rate because of
course we wanna make sure these
assets get utilized.
and all of these efforts would
not be possible without great
partners such as Jenny and C of
Las Cruces, Donana County, New
Mexico, DOT, uh, last year we
have partnered with Donana Coun
in New Mexico DOT on three
sides. Anthony, Hatch, and Las
Cruces, where we helped
energize, uh, DC fast charging
stations, um, that are located
on County's property. Those are
getting good utilization rate,
and as an electric vehicle owner
myself, I love driving my AV
from Las Cruces to Santa Fe.
I've taken
it to Elephant Butte. I've taken
it to TRC. I've had no issues
with charging. Of course, we
still have a lot more work to
do, to be honest with you, uh,
but access at apartment
complexes has improved
tremendously, um, access when
you travel out of town has
improved and also we've invested
a lot in customer education
because a lot of customers may
not wanna buy an EV because um
they don't understand how it
works, they're afraid of the new
technology, they don't believe
they can take it out of town,
and all of these are common
misconceptions. So what we do,
we or
gan ize ride and drive events in
the community where people can
test drive those vehicles and
they can get experience, they
can ask actual owners of EVs,
what their experience has been,
uh, with the city of Las Cruces,
we have an ongoing partnership
right now we're working on 4
different initiatives I'm very
proud of thanks to Jennius's
leadership and the leadership of
the city as she mentioned, uh,
we're starting a car sharing
program, uh, that's gonna launch
this fall where customers will
be able to rent an electric
vehicle just for a few hours. um
or for a day for $5 an hour or
$50 a day, we're gonna have two
electric Chevy bolts available
in the community. I would love
to invite you to our ribbon
cutting ceremony if your
schedule allows. We're planning
to have it in October, uh, we're
also having another partnership
on different grant opportunities
to ensure we bring more funding
here in our communities. We have
recently secured a grant from
New Mexico DOT for DC fast
charging stations at the city
property, and we're helping C
electr
ify their fleet as well.
Uh, overall, we get asked a lot
of questions about what's the
future of electric
transportation. I get that
question a lot. Um, so as of
right now, we're seeing a lot of
interest from the private
industry and the private
industry is starting to invest
more and more in charging
infrastructure. I don't know if
you've seen, I'm sure you've
seen the national news, uh, very
big news for, for our industry.
Walmarts have made an
announcement that they're gonna
build DC fast charging stations
at Walmart superstores, as well
as Sam's Sam's Club.
so a lot of that private
investment is coming here as
well as um to other states
nationwide. There's another
thing going on, uh, a lot of
automakers created a consortium,
uh, which consists of GM, BMW,
Kiass, and others that
consortium was called Iona. Uh,
we just learned about it this
year, and they're putting their
money in EV charging
infrastructure, so a lot of
that, uh, is coming to the state
of New Mexico as well.
Um, I do wanna say thank you
again to all of you for, uh,
passing this statute would now
have transportation
electrification rule that allows
electric companies to support,
um electric vehicle charging
infrastructure, build out, um, I
can tell you that as an electric
company that serves in Texas and
New Mexico, when we talk to
business and entities and
business owners, and we tell
them about our rebates we have
in New Mexico versus Texas, they
really love what we have in New
Mexico and they're more likely
to invest here in Las Cruces and
the area where we serve all the
way through Hatch just because
we have this amazing programs
available, um, so I think we're
gonna have more and more private
capital coming in. Uh, we're
very engaged in the community,
as you can see, and um, we're
very happy to support our
customers in their transition to
electric transportation. Some
may be ready for that, some may
not be ready. We want to make
sure everybody has access to
charging infrastructure, uh,
when they are ready to make that
leap and um I'll pass it back to
Jenny.
Thank you very much. Uh, do you
have something more, Jenny, or
are we going on? OK, Lucas
Herndon, thank you.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
good morning, committee. My name
is Lucas Hernan. I'm the energy
policy director at ProgressNow
New Mexico, um, and thankful to
be here today. Thank you to uh
Jenny for inviting me. Um,
really exciting things happening
here in the city of Las Cruces
when it comes to um our energy
future.
um, and, um, as somebody who's
worked in the energy sector in
New Mexico for a long time and
was part of the um
policy push when it comes to the
ETA at the state level, seeing
similar work happen to have a
roadmap for the city that I've
called home my entire life and
that I've raised my daughter in.
um, is really exciting and I'm
so, so excited to be a part of
the process, uh, both as a
citizen but also somebody again
who works in the sector. Um, so
I did focus a little bit more on
the community solar aspect of
things because yesterday we were
briefed uh through a webinar
about some of the impacts that
could be coming down the pike
um, in New Mexico, and I wanted
to make sure this committee was
aware of some of those things.
So, um, I was up late providing
providing as much up to-date
information as possible, um, but
just to kind of run you through
things, there are currently 6
projects approved in the in the
Donanic EPE service area um that
would qualify for community
solar.
um, each one close to about 5
megawatts, which would provide
close to 30 megawatts total. Um,
just a quick, uh, reminder in
case you're curious sort of how
community solar benefits the
community in a direct sense. Um,
the need for affordable housing
is one of the most dire needs in
our community, um, not only did
we recently approved the
ordinance so that we could
accept the seed funding, but
that same day, the state, the
city of New Mexico approved
uh multiple ordinances and
to allow for over 500 affordable
housing units in the city, which
really still only scratches the
surface. Um, and when we talk
about why people need affordable
housing, um, you know, the, the,
the here in Donana County, we
are the 2nd most populated
county, but unfortunately are
the 22nd uh for per capita
income in the state.
Um, and so,
when we're, you know, when we're
thinking about those realities,
every penny counts. Um, and so I
provided this is actually from
my house. I live down the
street, actually. Um, so I just
ran through the uh the estimator
that the state has, and for my
house, if I were to qualify for
a community solar, um, I would
receive about a 28% uh credit
discount and then if I apply
those credits to my electric
bill, that would save me about
$20 a month. Now I'm in a
position where that wouldn't
necessarily make a
huge impact, but for somebody
that, again, everybody, every
penny counts and they're, you
know, spending more than 50% of
their income just to live in
their house. Um, that $20 a
month is a big deal, right?
That's, that's a meal, that's
some groceries, that's buying
supplies for your kid to go back
to school, um, and it is worth
noting that that actually does
equate to about 1.5% of, of the
per capita income for somebody
in Donana County, um, over the
course of a year, which is more
than 3 times what they would
you know, be able to save if
they were to just put that money
into the bank. And so um that's
a real level of savings for our
community members here in Donana
County. So when you couple it
with things like the seed
program with, with the direct
with the plugin uh presentation
that that Jenny provided. Um, we
are doing our best to create uh
systems for our community here
in Donana County and the city in
particular so that um all of our
community members can not only
live in safe
homes that are energy efficient
and can cool them in the summer
and warm them in the winter.
But save them money in doing so
and not put them further at risk
having to choose between, you
know, paying their rent or
paying their electric bill.
Um
what I did want to focus on
today is sort of what's at
stake, what we have learned just
since last week because of uh
specifically the US Treasury's
interpretation of the investment
tax credit and its guidance on
community solar and how that
will impact potentially the
state.
basically, all of, all of the
state and so specifically these
6 projects here in Donana County
that will do all these wonderful
things that we've just
highlighted. Um, are potentially
at risk as the backend funding
from the federal government is
potentially not there, and
leaves a number of these
projects at risk of being
stranded.
Um
we have some stopgap measures in
the state that could help in the
short term, um, potentially some
funds from the recently passed
Community Benefits fund, uh, New
Mexico Mat Fund and Energy
Conservation Management Division
of MERD, um,
there are additional partnership
potentials through the New
Mexico's climate and Investment
Center, as well as People Solar
Energy Fund.
Um
that could help keep community
solar alive, but uh to you on
the legislature, there is work
to be done, um, if these federal
funds are not
uh forthcoming as
both the utilities and um the
private industry building the
facilities had expected. Um, I
have provided some ideas that
were worked upon by myself as
well as other folks in the state
who know these kinds of things,
um, these all come directly from
the Community Solar Act and um
you know, I won't necessarily go
through them line by line, but
you can see that I have provided
some specific examples that we
think would be helpful should
the legislature look to help
bolster the Community Solar Act
as it currently exists, um, in,
in an effort to make sure that
these programs do continue to
help our communities as
intended.
That's all I have. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, all of you.
So far in the list I have
Representative Sarana.
Anyone else
Senator Cervantes,
Representative Patricia Royal
Caballero.
OK, let's start
Representativearana, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your presentation. Um,
I, um, couple things, so I have
an EV and I have the heat pump
and I have solar panels just
within the last 2 years
and on a teacher's on a teacher
retired math teacher's salary,
it's doable with all the rebates
that are out there. Um, and I
love it like you once you have
one, you just don't go back.
Um,
couple things. It's here in Las
Cruces. So when I go, we go all
over the state for committee
meetings and um there isn't
anywhere I can't charge. Touma,
all these little places,
everyone has it. So I get to Las
Cruces and I'm telling the
senator here,
finding abo all Finding a
high-speed charging charging
station was tough. And then I
found it, but I only found one,
but I, when I looked on the
website, they said there's more,
so the only one I found was on
North Hotel, I think.
or Motel Boulevard
I found two of them. So are
there more that I don't know
about that are accessible to the
public.
So in the city of Las Cruces,
the one that you saw on the
North Motel Boulevard is the one
that we've done together with
the New Mexico DOT and Donana
County. We also have Tesla
superchargers that roasted
rooster, but I'm not sure which
of you you have if you have
access to the Tesla super which
which of you do have if you
don't want, you have a bolt. OK,
so I think, I think the Chargers
are open to GM vehicles, but you
need to have an adapter right
now, unfortunately, which is,
uh, unfortunate, but we just
secured the grant with uh with
uh Jen
ny ' s team, uh, and, uh, New
Mexico DOT is gonna help us uh
with another DC fast charging
station at Animal Services
Center that the city owns. um
right now, El Paso Electric is
not um we don't have anything in
the plans where we can own and
we, we can play stations on
someone's property. Our goal is
more to support, you know,
private industry to do that, but
I can tell you, I can tell you
who these customers are, we are
in conversations with several
private entities that will
provide a superfast GC fast
charging stations that will be
installed here in Las Cruces at
very good locations next to
freeways within a year, um, so
yeah, more coming
soon. Great, great. So I know
there was Ben chair. I know
there was 38 million set aside
from the government and then
they, we, we use 12 million and
then they froze the rest, but
we're getting, I think 16
million back, so we, we
hopefully will have money for
that, um, but, and, and I found
a lot at level 2 charters, so
that, that at least helps at
night, um, and it's great to
hear that Walmart will have them
because they have them in Gallup
and grants at Walmart, so it's,
it's nice as far as the solar
community solar, um, madam
chair, uh, the, it's starting to
come out in Albuquerque and the
biggest
problem that I get from
constituents is that they don't
understand when these people are
trying to explain it, so I think
you might need a a better
marketing. I, I know in
Albuquerque anyway because um
my, my constituents will call
and say these people are here
and they're trying to explain
something, but I don't
understand it, but I could at
least explain it to him that it
was real and, and it would be
good if they can, they can swing
it, but um that would, that
might be something we need
really to get everybody to
understand what exactly we do
and the impact it could have.
and um
I think that that's it. Just,
just the Chargers straight in
and like I said, they're all
over the state. We with our
committees, we go all over the
state and um there hasn't been
anywhere like this place.
I mean,
they're everywhere, so it's
great. And there's electric cars
everywhere. There's, um, there,
anyway, thank you for your
presentation. Um, Madam Chair,
um,
and Representative, I just
wanted to add that, yeah, NG is
absolutely right. We were just
awarded the for the city to put
in a fast charger and so we have
tight deadlines with NMDOT, so
hopefully less than a year, we
will have a city-owned DC fast
charger, and they actually put
out a 2nd round of funding, and
so we are working with Angie and
her team to look at potential
additional sites that um we can
apply to for the future. Um
in terms of the community solar
absolutely it is very tricky
even sometimes for us to really
understand the credit system
cause it's a two bill system as
well. And so we're actually
working with Affordable solar,
and they're going to train us so
that we know and can register
our residents that we work on on
the ground. Um, so we're hoping
that that'll really be kind of
helpful to help us explain that,
but yeah, that is actually
one of our major concerns is us
being able to effectively and
clearly translate to our
residents what this means for
them, um, and how to navigate it
once they get um that credit.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes. I,
I'm so sorry, Madam Chair, would
you be all right if I answer
something about the community,
yes, sorry.
sorry, we need to do brief
responses, um, because we're on
a timeline today for another
trip, but I understand. Go
ahead. Thank you so much. Um,
Madam Chair, Representative
Saranana, um, I just want to say
that I fully agree with you that
it is complicated to explain
community solar and and the
credits versus real costs. Um,
one thing I don't know if you
have uh children that went
through high school, but down
here, one of the things high
schools do is they sell those
community cards where you can
buy the card and then you get to
discount at your local
businesses
You buy one hot dog, get a
second one free, something like
that. Um, that's how I've
explained it to people. I've
explained it that um you can buy
this subscription to the service
that provides you a cheaper
service and then those discounts
are then applied to your regular
electric bill. Um, I've had some
success with that if it's at all
helpful.
Thank you. Senator Cervantes.
I'm looking very closely to my
friend to my right, because she
has been giving me a hard time
since she got here yesterday.
She said, So what's the deal
with you guys in Las Cruces?
There's no charging stations.
And um there's something unique
about Las Cruces. There's no
doubt about it. I hope she's
getting a sense of it. There's
not a lot of us on this
committee here today, but it, it
is an independent community and,
and they, um, the market will
ultimately dictate those kind of
things, I think, in the, in the
market's just not there. But
right now here, um, I wanna
recognize, Madam Chair, that
when we talk about community
solar, first of all, the
chairwoman starts twitching. I
don't know whether you all can
see that or not.
I'm teasing her. We spent years
with a community solar bill in
her committee over and over, and
she was very gracious about
accepting a great deal of work
that I put into that bill and so
I see in the presentation today
efforts to consider reopening
and changing the community solar
bill again. And of course,
that's why I said I think she's,
her blood pressure is going up
quite a bit. Um, when, when was
the committee's solar bill
enacted?
and ultimately
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, 2023.
OK.
And, and, um, I think what's
always important for me is to
recognize that we have El Paso
Electric here and um we have,
you all know Rico. Rico's not
only with El Paso Electric
course, but now he's a regent
here at New Mexico State
University. There ought to be a
real synergy, right between
what's going on at the
university and, and all of these
goals and I see Patricia
Sullivan, who's a board member
of El Paso Electric Company. I
appreciate all of you being here
today. I've always, when, when,
um, when we dealt with these
issue
s Madam Chair, in, in our
committee, the issue for me is
always economics. It goes back
to the same question that
Representative Santayana is
asking, Why don't you have the
charging stations? Well, if
there was an economic demand for
them, they would be here. That's
my experience with the way
economics works and so if there
was a demand for chargers and
electric vehicles, there'd be
more of them. And, and I think
we have to always be cognizant
of the interrelation between
having an, an owner, uh,
invested in utility here today.
El Paso Electric, and they've
got to be in this discussion.
I've got to understand you, I
want to understand how what
they're doing works with what
Community solar goals are about
because I, I don't think either
one of them will ever really
succeed without that kind of in
a relationship with that
synergy, I think. And so that's,
that's where, um, if I look at
these 5 projects, some of this
doesn't, has never made sense to
me and it still doesn't make
sense to me because I've always
got to believe that in, in my
experience with business and
it's a lifetime and, and
generations of doing that. It's,
it's always about scale to some
degree and so I'm trying to
figure out how these
small 6 proposed projects, uh,
generating, uh, what they're
showing here, maybe 5 megawatts
of power each. How, how does El
Paso Electric, uh, deal with,
with that? How do they feel
about that? And, and I'm not
gonna call on them here, Madam
Chair, and open this whole thing
up. But I, but I think, I think
we've got to have that dialogue.
I think we've got to know, how
does that work into El Paso
Electrics, um, um, fact that we
regulate that industry and that
we, they're in front of the PRC
and they get certain concessions
or don't get them because of the
planning. So
I'm, I'm looking at what you all
are proposing to take out of the
community, a solar bill. Uh, I
don't know who's, who's this,
uh, publication here is the, the
Community Solar Donatta County.
I don't know who's this that's,
that's yours, Lucas, yeah, um.
you know, the proposal here is
to strike a lot of language from
the community solar bill that
allows for consideration of
distribution costs, uh, in the
commission's consideration, um,
and, um, that, that what we had
in the existing bill is that the
non-subscribers, um, would not
be required to subsidize a
subscribers, at least that's my
paraphrasing of the laws that
that those of us that are maybe
not on a community solar system
wouldn't have to subsidize those
who are on the community solar
bill to say that there's going
to be the saving
s and so forth and um I, I
imagine that it would be
probably pretty important, I
would guess, to everybody who's
not gonna be on a commuter solar
is to say, hey, do I want to pay
more so that those on community
so can pay less, and I
appreciate, Lucas, that you're,
you're, say, in your case,
you're saying, well, I'd be
saving X number of dollars per
month, $20 a month or whatever
it may be. And, and that's a
good thing, but not if it's
going to cost me some proportion
of your $20 in savings every
month on my bill, and that's
probably, that's, it's a net,
right? It's a, it's a net
of nothing really. Um, and so
I'm, I'm kind of curious about
that, that proposed language and
so forth. I guess, Madam Chair,
we're not going to turn this
into a judiciary committee or,
or uh uh one of your committee
meetings here today, but I, I do
note that, that there's at least
some discussion about reopening
that bill, and I, I hope in my
comments that there's going to
be a dialogue between Patricia
and Rico and everybody here from
El Paso Electric with you all
and say, hey, here, here's the
sweet spot and this is
particularly important to me,
uh, committee members, because
the district I represent
is on the border of Texas
Uh, I'm gonna leave you all a
little early today because we're
out at Santa Teresa and the
border, right? And the, the, uh,
Santa Trace is probably the
biggest economic engine in the
state right now, by far. And,
and, and it's interesting when I
talked to the owners of the
business out there because
they're comparing their rates on
the New Mexico side to the Texas
side trying to decide where to
locate. Do I put my business and
it's across the street. Do I put
my business on the Texas side or
the New Mexico side and I'll,
I'll visit with my El Paso
Electric, uh, uh,
representatives here today to
ask him about that because
that's what I've always
understood is
there's, that's a huge
consideration if your business
is, uh, especially with data
centers and all the new things
we're looking at. Where's the
power going to be cheaper? And
if it's going to be more
expensive in New Mexico, we're
going to go in Texas, uh, quite
simply, and so I, I want to be
cautious about how we do these
things, and I, and I do think
it's important for you all to
know, they're here and you all
to know they're here and I'd
like to always see those kind of
people sitting at the same table
saying, yeah, here's where we're
going to agree. Here's where
we're going to disagree, and,
and here's where the sweet spot
is, so I, I hope that'll
maybe be an opportunity here
today for you all to do a little
bit of that, um, and Madam
Chair, I'm sorry again about
raising your blood pressure. Um,
I do it from time to time, I
know, and I appreciate your
consideration when I do so,
when, when, when bills don't get
referred to judiciary Committee,
I take the opportunity of
turning conservation into
judiciary and most of the time
she doesn't like it. Uh,
sometimes she does, but not
often.
Thank you, Madam Chair
This is a running battle between
us.
OK, I have, uh, Representative
Royval Caballero, Senator Scott,
and Representative Senator
Cortez. Representative Roy
Buckcair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for your
presentation, and I will remind
the chair of um of judiciary as
the house sponsor of community
solar for multiple years, um, I
sat in his committee for over 5
hours defending the community
solar bill.
and um I understand from after
that that that was a record for
any kind of committee, um, uh,
presentation, so I, I am
reminding him that I'm the one
twitching and I'm the one with
high blood pressure right now.
Um, because of the changes, but
I will also say, Madam Chair,
that um it was very helpful
exercise, even though it was
over 5 hours in his committee,
um, because it went from
um, a multi-page community solar
bill to a much reduced, but it
also addressed succinctly um the
legal aspects of what needed to
be in place. So again to Chair
Cervantes, that 5.5 hours uh
resulted in, in um in progress
and, and
after 5 years of being this
house sponsor, and then I think
Senator Stefaniks for joining
and, and, um, and moving forward
with this bill. So, um
what I'd like to do, I had
originally wanted to ask each
one of you specific questions,
but for the sake of time, I'm
going to just ask one and then
I'm gonna pose a couple of
questions to all of you to see
how best we can move forward.
So, um,
because I'm a community um
organizer and community
activists. I'm going to begin
with Lucas and I have a
question, um
that often comes up.
in our work in the community and
that is from a um policy
perspective, Lucas.
what reforms at the state level
would accelerate
electrification, community solar
and efficiency projects, and I
know that you
presented some um
amendments um to the existing
law that could move forward, but
just very briefly, if you can
add to that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative for
the question. Um, I think that
there's been a number of um
proposals that you've seen, um,
already over the last few years.
Um, some have grown legs and
walked, and some have not. Um, I
do believe that um revising
building codes to require new
building in our communities to
be more efficient, uh, solar
ready, EV charging ready, um,
would greatly impact our
communities for the for the net
positive, um.
I do believe that ensuring
existing programs and the
funding for those programs like
SED, like Community Solar, um,
have all of the appropriate
eyeballs on them to make sure
that we can continue to do them,
um, I will address obliquely one
of the senators Cervantes'
concerns about the various
multi-smaller, um,
stations that are being planned,
um, that is because in the, in
the, in the law as it is
written, they are limited to 5
megawatts, and so, um, we agree.
We agree that that limit
shouldn't be there. We should,
we should allow for the
utilities and private industry
and communities to build
potentially larger ones, and
that would require less overall
funding sources um to, to
address those needs. Um, I also
think that we need to continue
with other programs that we've
had in the past.
I put, uh, solar panels on my
house in 2013, um, and was able
to, I, I got a, you know, I got
a loan, I got the solar panels,
and all of a sudden I didn't
have an electric bill. I used
the money that I was paying for
my electric bill to pay my loan,
and then eventually I paid my
loan off and now I don't have
that bill. Um, that would be a
huge benefit for our especially
lower income families. If we
could figure out a way to um
create those situations where
they didn't have an electric
bill. And again, money in their
pocket to pay for, you know,
food
for their family, school
supplies, whatever it is that
they need, um.
so there are existing programs
that I think we're doing well,
that we need to continue to fund
and then I do think there are
programs that we have tried to
get done and haven't quite
gotten over the finish line that
we could continue to work
towards.
Thank you and, and thank you
very much for your explanation
on um uh the door to door
efforts and how best to describe
community solar subscrip from a
subscription perspective because
that is how um it is best
described, and I did have a
representatives from Affordable
Solar come to my home, and they
were, they had a very difficult
time trying to explain that, so
I'm sure this is a in a process
that's improving along the way.
Thank you
So now I'm gonna ask just, just
two more questions, um, to, to
all of you to see um
and, and you can decide whether
to answer each because we're
trying to move swiftly or just
all of you say something about
it, but um I'm always, and I was
a sponsor of the seed as well.
So, um, I'm concerned about
uh, making sure that our
low-income households are
treated fairly across the board
in all of these processes. So,
um
my first question to you all is,
how do you ensure benefits from
electrification and efficiency
projects are distributed fairly
among rural, tribal and urban
communities. Um, whoever feels
more apt to answer that, can
step forward first and, and
thank you.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
I'll take the first, uh, stab at
it. So as far as transportation,
electrification programs go, we
have a set budget specifically
for low income customers and
customers that reside in
undeserved communities. We also
offer greater rebates and
incentives for home charging for
home chargers, for installation.
So basically if you're a low
income customer and you self
certify as such, you can get a
home charger pretty much fully
funded by the utility and the
install
ation of home charger, electric
bicycle, uh, we have low income
customers applying for low uh
for electric bicycle. We cover
70% of costs of that electric
bicycle for deserved
communities, we have a set
budget that we have to install
charging infrastructure and
undisturbed communities and so
far we've supported more
projects in undisterved
communities than in standard
communities, uh, so we're very
focused on that and I think it's
important to mention that
federal tax credit is going away
for EVs at the end of September.
but there is a state tax credit
that gives customers about 3000,
uh, which is great, but as a
utility, we offer low-income
customers, $4000 for purchases
of EVs, and they can combine it
with the state incentive and
right now with federal
incentive, and on top of that,
we're trying to make it as easy
as possible, so we partnered
with the dealership.
so people don't have to wait for
a rebate in the mail. Uh, we
actually offer incentive at the
point of sale. So if a low
income customer goes to a local
casa dealership, they'll be able
to get $4000 of the pre-owned
vehicle as well, not only new
but pre-owned, so we're very
focused on that customer
segment.
Thank you
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I, it's a little difficult for
the seed program at least as we
are awarded because I can only
work within the city limits,
which is unfortunate, but I will
say that when we get residents
who are outside of the city
limits, we still offer to help
them navigate how to capture
similarly what Angie mentioned.
How can they still navigate the
systems to capture the state,
their local, um, re
b ate s and incentives through
EPE and so while I can't use my
funding directly from seed
because I have to stay within
city limits. We still do offer
to help them navigate the other
dollars, um, that they can
potentially capture and so we
still help them do that even
though they can't tap into our
seed dollar specifically. I
don't know if Lucas has or wants
to add anything about
outside of sibling limits since
our application was only for
city limits.
Thank you
Lucasi you wanna answer or? Yes,
very briefly, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I do just
want to say that, um, you know,
as an EPE customer and customer
of the city of Las Cruces who
issue our utility bills. Um, I
find both entities to be um very
good at communicating with us as
customers. I receive, you know,
notifications and pieces of
mail, emails from them, um, so
there's, there's already sort of
a direct access that they have
that potentially the state
doesn't necessarily have access
to, um, so
there are opportunities for, uh,
that sort of direct contact with
all their customer base, um, to
provide further information
about how people can save money,
um, and what sort of, uh, things
they could apply for
potentially. I also want to
mention too because we haven't
really touched on it, but
community solar specifically,
um, is accessible by small
businesses. Um, that is part of
the program and um yesterday I
went and got my haircut before I
came here and I was talking to
my barber who's right here at
university and um outside of
their rent,
their electric bill is there,
there's their number one bill
and um saving.
potentially as much as 28% in in
overall would be something
impactful for all of them
because um as barbers right,
they pay their booth fee and,
and so they're, but they're all
having to contribute to that
overall electric bill.
Um
places like that are community
centers, you know, I've, I've
run into Senator Cervantes at
one of our favorite local
Mexican food places multiple
times in the years that we've
both lived here and we do, oh,
do we? OK, where you go. So the,
the point is that
the point is, is that New Mexico
is
and, and probably always will be
a community-driven state. And,
um, and if you're a barber has
community solar, and they're
going to be excited about it and
they're going to talk about it.
We could do more, I think, as a
state to incentivize the
business aspect from Community
solar and any of these programs,
and get ambassadors in our
communities to talk about these
things because that's where we
hear about things as New
Mexicans.
Thank you and Madam Chair, just
the last question and, and it's
just a single answer from each
one of you if you can, but it
may be a little bit thought
provoking, but what do you see
as the single greatest barrier
to success. Policy, funding,
grid capacity or public trust.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. That's a great
question. Um, I would tie hand
in hand, um, policy and funding
for us, we unfortunately have
lost close to a million dollars
with the new administration to
support our seed program.
Obviously we didn't lose our
seed program, but we lost
additional funding that we were
awarded, um, to support and
extend and scale up that program
and so for us it's definitely
funding and and policy hand in
hand.
I'll pass it over to whoever
wants to go next.
I would echo that. I think that,
um, sorry, Madam Chair,
Representative, uh, uh, funding
is policy, um, and policy
requires funding. So I would say
that those two are one answer.
And for me, I would just say
that it's policy and customer
trust and customer education,
uh, for example, if we could put
charging stations at rest stops,
and you have heard that probably
throughout your career, we
currently cannot do that, and
that would be a great location
to put charging stations,
especially as we're
transitioning to semi trucks
being electric, right? There's
plenty of parking spots, um,
and, um.
taking advantage of rest stops
would be great and as far as
customer trust as well, uh, we
do need to do a better job
educating our customers about
community solar, about EVs, and
a lot of times they don't
participate because they don't
understand the benefits of each.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
it. Thank you, Senator Scott
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
First question would be for Miss
Rodriguez.
And that is most of the
AI representations indicate that
100% EV penetration in the
market.
would require a 30 to 50%
increase in generating capacity
in the Las Cruces area.
that's about 800
megawatts
So what is the prediction
that El Paso is using for the
market penetration of EVs, what
would your corresponding
requirements for additional
generating capacity B and
who's going to pay for that?
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Scott, great question. Um, as an
electric utility, we see
electric vehicles as assets that
can help us improve utilization
of our grid, not strain the
grid, and I'll explain why, why
is that? Because EVs have very
different load profiles than air
conditioning units, and we have
special EV rate options that
incentivize customers to charge
at night when we have plenty of
generating capacity already and
we built a lot of capacity to
serve
summer low during the day during
peak hours to survey sea load.
So right now we have programs
that are very successful where
REV customers are actually
charging their vehicles at night
with generating resources we
already have. We have a managed
charging program that we're
testing as well, uh, where we
ask customers to give us
permission to schedule their
charging during off-peak hours,
so we can levelize EV charging
even during off-peak hours to
ensure that we don't have to uh
make significant upgrades to the
grid
that we ensure that our system
utilization rate increases
because if it's done in a smart
way, EVs can help us improve
utilization, uh, utilization
rate of the grid improved
utilities load factor, which can
create downward pressure on
rates, because if you're using
the same uh number of assets,
but you're selling more
electricity, uh, you know, it
should put pressure, uh,
downward pressure on rates, so
we're very excited about that as
I mentioned right now, we're
testing our rate structures we
have uh a very
special EV rate that doesn't
require separate meter. Customs
simply show us their review
registration and they get
discounts for charging at night,
so we have a lot of customers
that are doing that already. We
have fleet customers such as the
city charging at night, um, so
we're, we're incentivizing
charging to happen at the time
when the grid has capacity.
So Madam Chair, Mr. Rodriguez,
you are representing then that
no additional generating
capacity.
will be required to accommodate
electric vehicles. No, I'm not,
I'm not saying that. I'm just
saying that currently we are
testing different strategies on
how we can manage EV charging in
a smart way. Uh, we have a, we
have several pilot programs,
right? And so, based on the
results of these pilots will be
happy to share the results of
those pilots with all of you, we
have our annual reports that we
file with the commission every
year. You can see how customers
are responding. Sometimes we do
need to upgrade
infrastructure. It depends on
the project, um, depends on the
infrastructure that we currently
have, of course, if it's a DC
fast charger next to freeway,
that's gonna be, I don't know, a
megawatt load. We will need to
upgrade, you know, that area to
ensure we can serve that load,
but as I mentioned earlier, 80%
of EV charging happens at home,
and our goal is to ensure that
people that charge at home do it
at the time when it's good for
the grid and when it's good for
all of our customers.
Thank you
OK. Now,
for Mr. Herndon, with respect
to the 30 megawatts of
projects that are on the board
now.
Is that nameplate capacity.
or
actual projected output.
of
those solar farms
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
um, the in
in regards to their potential
output.
regarding community solar, it is
the nameplate capacity. I, I
cannot answer if the facility
has greater capacity than that
than that amount.
OK. And so, Madam Chair and Mr.
Herndon,
it's generally accepted that
uh solar panels are effective
only about 1/3 of the time.
that is accounting for weather
effects and the fact that the
sun goes down, you can get
approximately 1/3 of the power
out of those units
of the rated nameplate capacity.
Is that your understanding also.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, um
it varies a lot based on the
actual model and orientation,
um, of the panels themselves. I
will tell you that the solar
panels on my house are a 4.1
kilowatt system and I achieve
about anywhere between 75 and
100%. most of the day, um, on
sunny days, obviously you're
correct if it is slightly if
it's cloudy out, it's less, and
if the sun is down, it is less.
Um, I will also say that um the
cost of so of battery storage
has been coming down to parody
and is a part of the process
being considered by most solar
production companies at this
point in time at the utility
scale and so that would, um, to
some degree negate the issue
that you're bringing up as a
concern.
So, Madam Chair, Mr. Herndon,
how many homes
would that, I'm gonna
I'm, I'm gonna stick with the 10
megawatts of actual output for
30 megawatts of installed
capacity. How many homes will
that
will those 5 projects power.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
uh, the estimated, uh, amount
for
the 5, so for one facility at 5
megawatts as projected is about
1000 homes per, um, so
that would be what um
6000 homes based on the 30,000.
So I mean it.
if you're, if you want to use
your math, I believe that would
be then um
you know, a third of that, so
2000 homes.
Madam Chair, looking at the
average consumption per
household in Las Cruces.
The actual number is only about
300
Substantially lower than that.
Now, we heard
yesterday that there were plans
in the Hopper for 4000 new homes
in Las Cruces as a consequence
of
uh, some new road development
that's coming into the city. So,
uh
without the
federal subsidies available, can
you tell me approximately what
the cost of
powering those homes with
community solar would be.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
not off the top of my head. I'm
sorry, I can't.
OK, Madam Chair, that's all I
have.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Senator Cortez
and then Representative Montoya.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Ms. Hernandez, uh, Ms.
Rodriguez, and Mr. Herndon, I
will be brief. I can read body
language and so for the sake of
time, um, I'll go quick. So you
mentioned in your presentation
that transportation accounts for
a significant portion of our
emissions, correct? Madam Chair
presenters.
Madam Chair, um.
Representative Cortez, yes,
that's correct. I specifically
for Las Cruces. Keep in mind our
climate action plan is for the
city of Las Cruces. It
represents 52% of our greenhouse
gas emissions. So with that
being said, Madam Chair, um, Ms.
Hernandez, what's the target
ratio of EVs versus conventional
vehicles that would create the
substantial environmental impact
that you're looking for.
Madam Chair Representative
Cortez, that is a great
question. We don't have the way
that the climate action plan is
set up. Is there a multitude of
several strategies that combined
help us meet our specific
targets and so there's not a
specific one straight goal to
answer that, but I'm happy to
share the breakdown of the
different strategies that'll
give you a sense of how we hope
to achieve the
goals to get as close to 52%,
and I'll note that we have two
kind of timelines. One is 2030
and then the other is 20,150,
and I can show you the breakdown
for each of those.
Uh, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Ms. Hernandez. Yes,
ma'am, I would love to see that.
And, and you feel that your
infrastructure investment
proposal would support that, but
you, you're not sure about
the ratio of EVs versus
conventional.
vehicles. Is that correct? Madam
Chair, Representative Cortez,
that's correct because it is not
only the conventional switch of
current vehicles to EVs. It's a
strategy of other policies that
are included in that to help us
achieve that goal.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and Ms. Hernandez, and uh thank
you so much for, uh, emailing me
that, that would be great.
That concludes my remarks
Thank you. We have
Representative Montoya, then
Representative Henry, and then
we're going on to our next
presentation. Representative
Montoya, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, just a couple of quick
questions. Um, Mr. Herndon, um,
do you have, uh, an, a cost
breakdown of, um, what
potentially it would uh take for
a
home to be made uh solar ready.
uh to be able to accept uh
uh battery and solar. What, what
does that cost?
Um, madam, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I'm sorry, I
don't have that in front of me
right this minute. I
preparing for this, I was
focusing mostly on the community
solar aspect. Um, I'm sure we
could find
uh, that information, um, fairly
quickly and if you'd like, I can
follow up with you on that.
That'd be perfect, yeah, cause
uh
I know we're talking about uh
low income homes,
uh
already, um, the cost to, to a
new home in New Mexico has gone
up dramatically. So I, I'm just
wondering how much that would
add to the cost of a house.
whether or not somebody is even
able to, to
go ahead and, and afford to go
ahead and add the solar later on
if we made that a standard cost
in building and and actually
maybe
maybe uh I think you're up next.
I don't know if you have any
idea, uh, Mr. Henry is a
builder, so, um, I, I
if we're gonna add that cost in,
whether or not
uh, a low-income person is able
to take advantage of
of that
where we're adding that cost in
making the house even a little
more unaffordable on the front
end.
However, I will follow that up
with uh Mr. Rod Rodriguez cause
you had mentioned there are
programs to help.
uh low income, and you said that
the utility that that El Paso
Electric pays for that?
Um, yes, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Montoya, we have
certain programs uh that are
available to low income
customers where utility funds,
home charger, and installation
of uh 240 volt outlet, that's
pretty much what you need,
right, in your garage. Um, so
yes, we do have programs like
that. So does PNM I believe. So
it would be unnecessary if you
were in the
El Paso Electric, uh
provider area for builders to do
that on the front end.
because you could do that on the
back end. Well, it is always
cheaper to do it during new
construction, sir, than uh
trying to retrofit at home and
uh just some rough numbers of
magnitude. I can't speak about
solar, but I can speak about
EVs. We talked to homebuilder,
and they told us that to put an
outlet in a brand new home that
is 240 volt, cost them about
$50.50 dollars to $100. Now, if
we do it after it's a new home,
it's constructed, and right now
we're seeing
quotes that people are getting
from electricians. They're
paying anywhere from $500 and
above for electrician to add
that outlet to their home, so
there's a big cost difference.
So if we wanna, uh, save money
to the state. I think during new
construction would be the best
way, but for existing homes,
yes, we do have programs.
OK, so, um, that's what I would
like to talk to. You said that
the, the utility provides that,
is there some sort of government
program that's out there that is
uh that funds that or is that
being funded by all of the other
ratepayers.
I know that the state of New
Mexico offers an incentives for
home charger, um, I believe it's
$500. Um, so the state also has
an incentive for customers right
now, for EV, uh, for EV
chargers.
Interesting that uh we it costs
about $500 to install and $500
for a home charger more or less.
That's what the smart ones cost
to install, like I said, it
really, it, it depends
If you have a really old home
and you need to upgrade your
panel, it can be very costly,
over $1000 but if you have a
relatively new home with enough
capacity, probably $500 to
install uh to maybe 1000 if it
if it's more expensive than does
the program
go that high or does it? No, we
have limits, sir. Yes, yes, yes.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
to make sure that, um, you know,
electricians are not increasing
their prices because they're
aware of our rebates. We have
certain limits like you can't go
above this amount for
installation of 240 volt outlet.
Is the rebate
the amount that the state is
providing? Is it the same
amount? No, uh, at El Paso
Electric we cover up to $1300
for installation of 240 volt
outlet in someone's garage, plus
an additional $500 for a home
charger.
OK, so to some degree that cost
being passed on to the other
ratepayers. That's correct. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And we'll finish up
with Representative Henry. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'll be very
quick, I promise, I hope, um,
the, the solar community that
y'all are talking about, I'm
very unfamiliar with. So I've,
I've got a few questions to try
to understand that if I have a
neighborhood and y'all are
trying to hook it up to the
solar community. What does that
look like? What, what does the,
cause you said the panels aren't
on their house. So where are
these panels and what does the
hookup look like and what's the
distance you could go
for that said neighborhood
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
that's a great question. And um
and it's, it's part of the
complicated
part of Community Solar that we
have a hard time explaining. Um
the short answer to your
question is, it is not. The
solar panels are off-site
with within the generalized area
of your community, but more
specifically within the unit of
your utility provider.
You, as a community member who
would like to
purchase this, whether it's
because you want to be more
environmentally friendly, or
because you see the cost savings
benefits. You're buying a
subscription to the credits of
those of the energy produced by
those solar panels. So a
community member using again,
using my
address that I put up here, um,
I would, I would, I would
contact Affordable Solar, who is
one of the providers for the
community solar project here in
Las Cruces.
I would say I'm interested. I'd
like to, I'd like to purchase
community solar. Um, I would pay
them my subscription fee
and then they would issue me the
credits that I can then use on
my El Paso electric bill.
The electrons coming into my
house from the wires connected
to my house are not necessarily
from those solar panels. The
credits that I've purchased
though, are based on the energy
that El Paso Electric is getting
to use elsewhere on the grid
from the solar panels.
Does that answer the question,
Madam Chairman, yes, I think it
does. So if everybody in Las
Cruces tomorrow decided to do
this because it basically it
doesn't, it doesn't cost him
anything, am I correct in that?
Uh minus the subscription.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
uh, there are limits based on
overall capacity, and there are
also limits based on um a
certain amount are set aside for
low income individuals versus
the general public as well as
the business community.
So Madam Chairman, I guess
that's where my questions are
gonna end up is if it's, if it's
based on capacity.
if the entire city wanted to do
it and, and based on what you're
recommend, I believe this is you
recommending us to scratch some
of this, which the senator
talked about earlier, if the
capacity isn't there for
everybody to be on it.
Only those that are allowed on
are on
Will the other users then have
an increase in their utility
rates.
Um,
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
no, at least not as far as I
understand. I would love to hear
El Paso Electric potentially
answer the question as well,
but um, no, my understanding is
that is not the case.
Not a subject matter expert on
the community solar, but we can
follow up with you at a later
time.
Madam Chair, then why would we
need to, to scratch this
language if we're not going to
pass a cost on to somebody else?
Why would the language need to
be scratched.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
the, the, the, the
recommendations that I've put
here so far, these have a lot
more to do with the front end uh
building of the facilities
themselves based on the way that
the law was written, which was
written and passed at a time
where at the federal level, we
were, we had expectations based
on um federal rebates and tax
incentives for building solar
out across the country, not just
in New Mexico, um,
and so in order to uh and
continue to ensure that we have
the capacity, whether or not
that is um
facilities that are currently
close to being online, like the
one in Salem or um the ones that
have been slated, uh, but not
started
to be built yet. Um, we are we
are looking for how to solve
the issue of making sure the
companies are incentivized to
build these community solar
projects in our state,
um, to provide that capacity
that you're talking about. So,
Madam Chair, yesterday we heard,
and I think Senator Scott talked
about it, the 4000 homes that
y'all are proposing to build, I
think you said 40% of those were
going to be low income
Do y'all have capacity right now
if those 40% of low income
wanted to come online with this
community solar.
to actually accommodate that.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
no, if, if everything worked out
and we were able to complete
these 6 projects that are
currently being slated. We are
only talking about 30 megawatts
total to supply the whole city.
So that's not nearly enough.
Obviously, um, we would love to
see more, um, and that is part
of why I'm trying to create a
conversation about how we can
make sure that that happens so
that as more people do want to
sign up, they could have that
opportunity, um, and our, and
we're are not, you know, limited
by um an idea that
was good and is no longer good,
and we can't do any more of. So
what is more, Madam Chair? What
is more look like?
Like, like help me understand
how many solar panels, I mean, I
enjoyed the view of the Oregon
Mountains. Does the whole
mountain have to be a solar
panel in order to accommodate
Las Cruces.
um, just, let's just say the low
income housing.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, we're moving a little past
any area of of detail that I
think I could answer, I guess I
would, I would answer that, um,
there are a multitude of ways
that we could achieve 100%
renewable energy for the city of
Las Cruces. Um, we could
incentivize rooftop solar and
turn our neighborhoods into
solar farms that would not
impact anybody's view anywhere.
Uh, we have existing grid
infrastructure. Every house in
town is connected to the grid it
already
putting solar panels on people's
roofs would solve that problem.
Um, if we are concerned about,
you know, the environment, which
I hope we all are, um, we have
do have plenty of space. Um,
there is a really beautiful
solar farm just to the south of
us, two blocks over that way,
um, the high school, my daughter
attends up the street, has a
beautiful solar farm on it. um,
solar farms are not high impact,
high visibility kinds of things.
So if that is an issue, um, we
can work with builders, we can
work with community members to
make sure that those are not
impacted. um, additionally, the
mountains are controlled by the
federal government
under the Oregon Mountains
Desert Peaks National Monument,
so that wouldn't be an issue,
Madam Chair, no, I wouldn't
propose to put him on. I'm just
asking how much land are you
actually going to have to take
to achieve what y'all are trying
to achieve with solar panels.
The last question I have, Madam
Chairman, is back to the
original of low-income uh and
impacting their rates. If, if
they're not able to get onto
this. You also mentioned that
commercial is allowed to partake
in this, and you had set a
barbershop.
What about grocery stores,
convenience stores, restaurants
who, who obviously have a much
bigger take off of the grid of
the load. How are those factored
in? And if, if that is factored
in, how do we pick the winners
and losers as far as who gets to
partake and get a discount and
who does not?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, there is, uh, there's a
formula within the law that um
allows for, um, the utility and
the PRC to set those standards
into what level of business can
apply for those rates. um, and
those rates are applied um based
on the commercial rates of that
utility versus the residential
rates of that utility. So if, if
the question is who sets those
standards? Uh, we do as the
state, um
the PRC and, and you all at the
legislature when you wrote the
bill.
Mr. Chair, last, that was the
last question, but it kind of
struck another cause I don't
quite still understand it.
So if, if you're pulling those
off and, and I heard earlier
that there is a rate increase
for someone else. Somebody else
is gonna pay that. I think we
were talking about EVs at the
time. So if more folks are
taking advantage of this, those
that cannot take advantage of
this. They will not. I, I'd love
a, a clear answer. They will not
see a rate increase, so that's
all the other commercials that
are not able to partake and all
the other households in the area
that are not able to partake
because of capacity, they will
not see a rate increase. Is that
Am I correct in that or am I
incorrect in that?
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Henry, I, I just want to
clarify, what Angie said is
specifically for her program for
electric vehicles, what Lucas is
talking about is specifically
for solar, and so there are two
different things. So Angie, I'll
I'll let Angie respond to that,
but what Angie is discussing is
not going to impact the
community solar, and so those
are kind of two different
programs. No, I understand the
difference. My question is
is with the solar community that
y'all are, y'all are talking
about. For those that are unable
to partake because of capacity.
whether it be low-income homes
or or anybody that owns a home
and or a business, will they see
their rates increase because
they're unable to take um
partake in this because of
capacity. Will they see a rate
increase.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, thank you for clarifying. Um
for the community solar program,
as it's been instituted in the
state of New Mexico.
We are talking about new
capacity.
with dedicated cause. So these
uh solar facilities that do have
this uh 5 megawatt um name plate
sort of limit are at this point,
all new capacity, whether that's
El Paso Electric or P&M, other
providers across the state,
Excel in the Southeast. um
the energy generated from those
solar facilities is
something that the utilities can
now use one, and 2, benefit from
by adding to their renewable
energy portfolio, whether that's
to the state ETA or um other
incentives.
The
the community solar program was
designed so that
community members
in, in any given community.
who may not have the actual
physical ability to add solar to
their house, whether they're
blocked in by trees. They don't
have a good south or west
facing, you know, roof, um,
or even if they, you know, if
they live in a shared uh
multifamily dwelling kind of
situation.
If they want to make the choice
to purchase their energy from a
renewable source
Community solar allows them that
opportunity to do so.
So there is no um
this, it's not an issue of
creating uh a limited resource
in the sense that the overall
capacity um
for everybody is, is now somehow
more in demand. Um, it is, it
is, it is uh an access issue for
people who would otherwise not
have an opportunity, uh, to, to
be able to purchase solar PV for
their house, for instance.
And if I could add real quick,
uh, yes, uh, representative, so
I, we have a program in Texas
and I apologize if I reference
because I'm familiar with the
Texas program. In Texas, our
community solar is set up in a
way that only communities or
subscribers are paying, paying
for it, um, not, not anybody
else. In New Mexico, I would
have to double check for you,
um, because of course we wanna
make sure that non-participating
customers are not paying right
for the solar resources in
Texas, the way we've done it
is that the total cost of the
solar facility, plus the
administrative cost of the
program, uh, was levelized
across the lifetime of the solar
acid, and then basically that's
how we came up with the
subscription fee that
participating customers pay, so
that's how it's set up in Texas.
Again, I would need to double
check for you in New Mexico, as
I'm not familiar how the New
Mexico one is going to be
structured, but in Texas,
nonparticipating customers are
not paying for community solar.
OK, Mr. Chairman, and if you can
research that and just email me
yes
or no
And, and that's all I really
need to know cause I'm curious,
yes or no, so thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative, and
I think we're done, right? So,
and thank you to the panel. I
appreciate it. um, so that,
that's kinda in that
presentation, and we're gonna
roll right into our next
presentation. Lo Rio Grande, uh,
Water Management and
Conservation strategies, if we
could have a changing of the
panelists.
Yeah
So we're running a bit behind
again, uh, if both the panel and
the, the members could be
mindful of the time. I'd
appreciate it. Uh, first up we
have Hannah Risley White.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair and
members of the committee. It's a
pleasure as always to be with
you this morning.
My name is Hannah Risleywhite,
and I'm the director of the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission. um, I'm excited to
present with with my fellow
panelists here on, on water
management strategies in the
lower Rio Grande.
Um, I realized we're behind
time, so I'll move through my
comments relatively quickly. Um,
I also want to start by
acknowledging, um, the elephant
in the room, which is that this
part of the state is in
interstate litigation. Um, there
is a subsequent panel this
morning in which Office of the
State Engineer General Counsel,
Matt Charis will walk you
through what's publicly
available about that settlement
right now. Um, that settlement
is in its final phase of
negotiation. So unfortunately
there's not a lot that we can
share about it.
Um, however, we hope to be back
with you in September, at which
point, uh, if we, if we reach
the ability to finalize those
agreements, they get filed with
the special master on August
29th, in which case we would be
able to share more with you all
in September. At that time I'd
be happy to share in more detail
about any of the, the other
content that I present today,
um, I also want to start by
um, expressing appreciation to
the legislature for your
investments in water in the
lower Rio Grande. As you all
know, water touches everything
that we do in New Mexico. It's
very critical and I think as you
all know, the lower Rio Grande
is facing significant water
resources management challenges.
In a lot of ways, it's the
epicenter of aridification in
New Mexico. I think what we're
employing and working on
together in this part of the
state is something that we're
ultimately going to learn from
and then implement elsewhere
in New Mexico. So as you know,
the legislature appropriated $30
million in the 2023 legislative
session and capital
appropriation and almost $35
million in a special
appropriation and part of what
I'm going to present on today is
related to progress in expanding
those significant investments in
water in the Lower Rio Grande.
Um, essentially there's 4
categories of things to
highlight. Number one, water
conservation as a critical
component of addressing the
challenges that
we're facing. Number 2,
development of additional
supplies that includes
stormwater capture and aquifer
recharge, brackish water
development, water reuse
investigations, etc.
Um, and then third, data
collection, monitoring and
modeling. There's huge
investment has been done in the
lower Rio Grande related to
those items more as needed.
And the last is community
engagement and education, a
critical, critical component
that we're looking to bolster
and enhance, um, in the coming
months and years.
All right, so first on our
groundwater conservation
program. I think you all were
familiar with the legislature
funded beginning in 2020, a
pilot program for the state, uh,
uh, through Interstate Stream
Commission, um, and voluntary
participants in the Low Rio
Grande to to fallow farmland in
exchange for payments. That
program was very successful. We
learned quite a bit from it, um,
and transitioned in 2024 to a
more long-term program. Um,
we're currently imple
ment ing between the 2024 and
2025, uh, program over 120
participants, including 6,191
acres at a total cost to the
state of $6.9 million with water
conservation between 1200 and
16,000 acre feet through the end
of 2025. So significant
conservation through that
program. Um, I'd also like to
highlight, um
our partnerships, and I should
have said this earlier, um, and
back to the previous slide,
maybe.
I really want to emphasize, I do
not think that we will be
successful in managing the
challenges in the lower Rio
Grande or anywhere in New Mexico
without very strong partnerships
and that's part of why I'm
excited to be at the table
with my colleagues from the city
of Las Cruces, um, and elephant
Butte Irrigation District, but
it will take
bringing everyone to the table
to craft solutions to implement
what's needed here, and, and
otherwise.
with regards to our conservation
program, we're proud to, to talk
about our cooperative agreements
with the local soil and water
conservation district, so Dona
Anna and Caballo, um, they have
are helping us to implement a
cover cropping program, so
ensuring that soil stability,
nuisance control, but also soil
health continues through,
through this conservation
program. We've been really
pleased to work with them and
with NMSU and NMDA to research
uh soil health, um,
and covered cropping related to
this program.
Uh, the next, uh, important
piece related to development of
alternative supplies has to do
with stormwater capture and
aquifer recharge. This photo and
this slide is from Hatch area
around 2005, 2006. And as many
of you know, even as recently as
yesterday, there was some
significant storm events in this
area. So, as we face increasing
iddification, it'll be
increasingly important for us to
be very thoughtful and strategic
and how we're managing
stormwater. Um, and this
relates to another of the
cooperative agreements that I'd
like to highlight with Elephant
Butte irrigation District, and I
think Joshu will speak more to
this in his comments, but we
entered into a cooperative
agreement with them specifically
to help improve conveyance and
efficiency in their system, but
also to identify areas for
stormwater capture and recharge
through existing infrastructure.
Uh, that program is already
quite underway, including share
equipment through EBAD and work
on the ground
to both identify a locations for
stormwater capture, um, and
recharge. We're also working on
what's called manage managed
aquifer recharge, so that's
distinct from aquifer recharge
and recovery where someone
injects water in an aquifer to
then retrieve it later. It's
really just looking at where can
we best infiltrate when we have
excess water in into the
aquifer. And so we're doing
feasibility study currently to
identify where in the lower Rio
Grande, uh, is more most
conducive to that kind of
managed
aquifer recharge and then what
strategies, what technologies
are going to be most valuable
and ensuring that that water
gets back into the aquifers
rather than running across our,
our landscape and being lost, so
I wanna highlight that effort.
Um, in addition, we're heavily
pursuing brackish water
development in the Lower Rio
Grande. I know you all are going
on a tour later this afternoon.
Well you're, you'll see where
that's being utilized elsewhere,
which is exciting.
In the last year, Interstate
Stream Commission conducted
airborne electromagnetic survey,
uh, to I by helicopter, um, to
identify subsurface
characteristics of aquifer,
aquifers in the area to inform
potential development of
brackish water. The next phase
in that effort will be actually
drilling some wells, um, and
doing some analysis on what's
what's possible and where. So
we're excited about that. Um,
all of these efforts
involve, uh, data collection and
building on the existing data
models and and tools that we
have to support management
decisions.
Um, and then the last piece that
I would highlight, um, is
community engagement and
outreach. Uh, last summer,
Interstate Stream Commission and
Office of the State Engineer
convened what's called the Low
Rio Grande Water Alliance, um,
our initial focus was to pull
together the major water rights
holders and owners, um, to the
table to start crafting
solutions. This again is the
idea that we can't really solve
problems here without all the
right people at the table.
Um, we now have also engaged in
that effort environmental sector
representatives, um, and
significant work groups, uh,
carrying forward efforts.
There's an organizing committee,
a groundwater conservation
committee, a regulatory
navigation committee, stormwater
and sediment Management
Committee ecosystem restoration,
um, committee and a DA, um, and
water importation subgroup, um,
that effort joined forces with
an effort that uh
US Bureau of Reclamation had in
the lower Rio Grande, the
drought resilience teams this
summer. A number of those work
groups I just mentioned or
committees I just mentioned were
initiated by reclamation but now
have moved under the broader
umbrella of the Lower Rio Grande
Water Alliance we're really
looking forward to that group,
hoping to inform and craft the
solutions ahead and hoping to
inform the state on how to
prioritize expenditure of the
funding significant funding that
I mentioned.
Um, you know, I think it's
important to say the, the
solutions here are going to be
expensive, um, but we're really
working collaboratively and
productively with all of the
partners on what those next
steps look like. All of the
things that we're advancing that
I just highlighted were things
that we knew were going to be
needed regardless of the outcome
of the litigation, so we felt
like we really needed to get a
kickstart on those things and
have done quite a lot of work in
the last, uh, several years to
move those items forward. Again,
um, I could
go into any one of those in much
more detail, but I realize
you're short on time, so I would
welcome any requests from the
committee for additional
information apart from this
particular hearing or any
content that you'd like to hear
more about at subsequent interim
uh meetings this summer and with
that I'll hand over to um the
next panelist who I believe is
Josh Smith from UBID.
Madam Chair, uh, committee
members, thank you for having
me. I'm Josh Smith, the manager
of BBID. I've only been here
about 10 months. Um
Al'll paint a very brief bleak
picture for you. We provide
water to about 90,640 acres of
irrigated acreages in the lower
Rio Grande where the New Mexico
portion of the Rio Grande
project. We have 300 miles of
canals, 350 miles of drain
spanning from
the Cabayo Reservoir and Dam to
the Texas state line.
um Caballo, for those of you
that drove by, has about 4000
acre feet in it currently, and
elephant Butte has less than 4%
of its capacity.
So we are dry
Uh, our standard allotment is
3.024 acre feet per year and
this year we delivered 6 acre
inches to our farmers, so at at
EBID, uh, our, our priorities,
uh, number one, the partnerships
that Ms. Risley White discussed
are the key. There's no simple
solution to this problem, and
we're talking about resource
concerns. It requires not only
our.
public entities but private
partnerships, uh, throughout the
West. This has been the case and
I think the LRG Alliance is a
great start. There are more
people that need to be brought
to the table
um
and it's gonna be a multifaceted
approach. We have to conserve
water, develop new water, um, so
at EBID our current goal is to
improve our system efficiency
all that we can. Of those 300
miles of canals, we have 267
miles that are potentially
uh available to be piped, which
are current.
irrigation efficiency rate is
about 55%, meaning we lose 45%
of the water that we divert to
the system. Uh, we can improve
that to above 80.
and often case above 90% saving
tens of thousands of acre feet
of water, uh, actually allowing
that to be delivered onto
farmers' land rather than lost
to seepage and conveyance
losses, and second is those
additional sources of water. Now
stormwater is not what I would
call an additional source of
water.
if you have crossed the river in
the last day you've had the
benefit of a 12 hour storm event
that occurred in the Rincon
Valley. We are currently
diverting water based on that at
the Massa Dam, uh, some of our
farmers are driving the benefit
of that stormwater. There was a
2300 cubic feet per second.
Peak
in that storm, and we can't
capture that because we don't
have the infrastructure
So our goal is to provide
several different locations
throughout the system at our
different diversion points where
we can capture and hold
stormwater, settle out sediment,
and be able to apply that to the
land.
apply it to farmers' land rather
than allowing it to go down the
river to Texas, uh, or evaporate
in the system.
Um
you know, there's a lot of
federal funding available.
that we are hoping to acquire a
lot of it's on hold. Uh, we're
looking forward to working with
the ISC. We, we do have a
cooperative agreement where
we've expended $2.8 million so
far, with another roughly 11
million to go to improve our
stormwater system to maintain
our dams, to improve our drains,
to improve that efficiency and,
and again put that stormwater
that is a valuable resource to
good use, um.
we are looking forward to those
partnerships, uh, looking
forward to expanding the work of
the LRG Alliance and
looking forward to improving our
efficiency to conserve as much
water as possible as we can in
the irrigation world.
Thank you
Madam Chair, committee members,
thank you very much. My name is
Adrian Whitmer. I'm the
utilities director for the City
of Las Cruces, and we appreciate
this opportunity to have a
discussion with you, much like,
uh, what my
partners are
did say we're trying to work
together for this very
issue.
Uh, just to talk a little bit
about the city of Las Cruces
wanted to highlight, uh, many
things about the city of Las
Cruces. We have over almost
39,000 m, which that means
that's to residents, businesses,
and the industry. So it just
gives you a little bit of idea
about how water is utilized with
the city of Las Cruces.
I've given you a slide that just
talks a little bit about the
history. The city of Las Cruces,
we used to get our water from
the Asea Madre de las Cruces in
the 1840s. We started using
neighborhood wells in the 1880s
and our first municipal well was
in 1905.
As another issue that I thought
would be very interesting is was
in 1926 city decided to borrow
money in order to put in a
disposal plant for the sewer. So
we've been returning water to
the river for a very long time.
We also have our 40 year water
development plan and in this, we
use our planning issues so that
we can decide where we are and
where we're going so that we
always will have water for the
citizens, businesses, and
industries for the city of Las
Cruces.
We have 3 different well fields
that we're showing you here and
just to kind of show you a
little bit whether it's in the
valley, the west or the east
mesa. Our East Mesa well filled
that imports water to the Rio
Grande when it goes through our
wastewater system.
We also have both our active
wills and our inactive wells,
any wells that are inactive, we
utilize that for water level
measurement. And to kind of give
you an idea on our typical water
users, we do have over 83,000
single family residences, over
30,000 multi-family residents in
the population we have
elementary schools, the middle
schools, the high schools.
There's private and charter
schools. You've got
the 3 hospitals. We've got
industrial use that employs
people. We have
parks, trails, sports fields,
and we're actually the emergency
water provider to both the
Tanamisa and Donana mutual
domestic water consumers
Association when their wells or
their system go down.
this just kind of gives you some
top rankings for the city of Las
Cruces that you all might find
interesting.
Our current growth
trends for 2024 both in the
residential and the commercial
permits, both of which were over
$190 million apiece in addition,
we've got Saputo expanding their
string cheese edition and we've
got two cold storage facilities,
breaking ground.
this month
We like to be proactive and in
2011, we started with our water
level monitoring program.
and we keep an eye on that and
every year we put out a report
on what the water levels look
like with the aquifer underneath
the city of Las Cruces.
In there has conceptual projects
that can go forward as we look
at drought situations
continuing.
for groundwater diversions, the
city of Las Cruces right now is
pulling 7.3% of the total water
that's pulled out of the aquifer
annually. In addition to that,
we return nearly half of that
back into the river. We also
comply with all requirements of
our permits, we put together our
gallons per capita per day
calculator or AWWA audit to the
state engineer in addition to a
return flow
plan for the plant
We have two wastewater treatment
facilities. Our largest one is
the Jacob Hands Wastewater
Treatment Facility. It has a
capacity of 13.5 million gallons
a day.
and it's currently running at
about 9.5
million gallons a day on
average.
This returns effluent to the
river.
every day, 24 hours a day.
24/7, 365 days. Our east Mesa
water reclamation facility is a
small plant that's up on the
East mesa. The water that is
used, that goes to that plant
actually comes from the Jorana
del Muerto.
Basin, and with that, we are
providing reclaimed water to
numerous users of the reclaimed
water that can use it, so then
that means we don't have to pump
as much water out of the East
Mesa Basin.
If there's any excess water that
is sent to the Jacob Hand's
plant, it is treated and put
back into the river, which it's
crediting the river.
for water conservation
we do our annual GPCD
calculator, and when, when we
look at that, our 2030 goal in
our 40-year plan is 165 gallons
per capita per day.
and that's for the total system.
And we met that goal back in uh
2022 and it fluctuates up and
down. So we already know that
the city of Las Cruces can
actually meet those goals, even
though our population is rising,
our
residents and our businesses
take conservation seriously, and
they're working towards getting
even better at it. Our single
family residents, our goal of
115 was meant in 2022 and it
fluctuates because as you all
know, in 2023, it was a little
bit warmer than it had been. And
so that's going to fluctuate up
and down depending on what the,
what the weather is like.
We've installed advanced
metering infrastructure where
our meters are actually read
through the cloud and every 3 m
has an extra ert which is what's
gathering the data to actually
let us know if we have leaks in
the system.
That goes into our system. It
says, hey, you may have a leak
here, we have a crew that goes
out, they pinpoint where we
believe that leak is, and they
try to get on it immediately.
And that has saved an enormous
amount of water.
We also have a utility hawk,
which is a program that any of
our customers can sign up to,
they can watch and see how much
water they're using. They can.
put um little ticks on it to get
notifications if, if they think
that they're using too much,
it's, it's a great program that
a lot of our customers really
enjoy.
Uh, we invested with the, the
help of the Bureau of
Reclamation on a no dose
equipment and I'm really, um, I
should have had a picture of
that because it's, it's like a
big huge water vacuum machine
and what that does is you hook
up between two different
hydrants and you turn it on and
what it does is it pulls out all
the iron, manganese, sand that
occurs in groundwater and with
our water quality.
and it re-disinfects it and puts
it in the system so when people
have complaints about water
quality or the water is
discolored.
instead of flushing that water
and wasting it, we can go
through and actually clean the
system
uh
we don't have any water
violations. We haven't had any
water quality violations in
decades.
and I just gave a little bit of
information that the city of Las
Cruces has always been
restricting water one way or
another, whether it's uh the no
street
sprinkling
the immediate leak repair or the
domestic use only dating back
from 1909, even all the way
through 1914 and we continue to
do that.
Also we have a lot of community
education.
We also have a lot of compliance
that we end up needing to do.
And with water violations, we
keep on track with that.
What's interesting is that water
conservation hasn't really had
to do a lot of punitive damage
only because
what they do is they do a lot of
educating and through that
education, uh, people aren't
having to pay fines, so that's
been very, very successful.
Along with conversation here
there's a double-edged sword.
We need to find out what is our
most efficient water
conservation goal.
and that is system and water
quality based. Our water system
is built to provide potable
water, but it also includes fire
protection.
If we do too much conservation,
it causes water complaints. If
we have water complaints, then
we have to go out and flush. If
we're flushing water.
then that means I've got to pump
the water in order to put it
back in the system to have it
available for our users.
So that ends up with water
waste. There's non-revenue. We
have increased disinfection and
electric costs.
If we wanted to try to uh keep
up on that, then we would need
to go ahead and buy additional
Node machines.
and those end up costing well
over $500,000 apiece and then
cut we'd need 3 technicians to
run each of them. So then that
means that we're increasing
rates due to non-revenue and
increased operational costs.
and we don't want to waste
water. In addition to that, just
to talk a little bit about
wastewater is
right now with the conservation,
we're having to look at how to
operate our wastewater plants in
a more efficient and be creative
in dealing with wastewater
because people are conserving,
that means that the wastewater
that's coming down is not as
diluded as it was with
conventional treatment.
So we're looking up new ways in
order to
operate and maintain our
wastewater treatment plants and
keep our sewer system
healthy
And with that, um
just some future considerations
that we're doing, um, EBID was,
uh, it was really great this
last year. We, we had a, had an
agreement
for a passive recharge project
and we're
we're patiently and patiently
waiting for the white paper to
come out to find out how
successful that was our draft
will be sent over to EBID so
that they can review it with any
kind of comments that they have,
uh, but, uh, the city of Las
Cruces uses it surface water
allotment this last year to do
the a passive infiltration
through Burn Lake.
East Mesa, uh.
water that comes down and goes
through Jacob Hands is water
that is outside of the lower Rio
Grande. So that's considered
imported water. Uh, we're
planning another affluent, uh.
plant up on the East Mesa, so
that we can go ahead and try to
do
our passive recharge projects so
that we can try to recharge both
the Jornada del Muerta, which is
a, um, it's like a closed.
basin. Once you pop it out, it's
gone forever, so we wanna try to
conserve that. In addition, if
we can do any other kind of
direct reuse, but we have to
wait for the environment
department to actually adopt
regulations to where we can
utilize that, uh, moving
forward. And with that, thank
you very much. Appreciate it.
Thank you all for the
presentation. So far I have
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Hamlin, welcome Senator
Hamlin.
Anyone else Representative
Kates.
uh Kadena,
anyone else?
Oh, sorry, uh, Royal Caballero,
OK, so, um, members, it is noon
and uh we board the buses at
one. So if you would like to get
your lunch and come back to the
table, please do, but we're
gonna finish the questions on
this, and we have one more short
presentation. So, um, Senator
Steinborg, you're you, Madam
Chair,
and I know we're really short on
time. I'm gonna ask just really
one question, um, thank you for
your presentations, everybody,
and they're really critically
important work you're doing.
Adrian, I was kinda cracking up
a little bit on some of the
awards, the word lists over the
last 20 years, including most
overlooked city, uh, it's a good
one. I uh.
but anyway, I digress. So, but,
uh, anyway, um, so question um
for you, um, apologize, um.
Hannah, Miss White
um
this is a conversation we've had
locally before with our
irrigation district when we go
to the subject of stormwater
capture. There's a belief that
every drop of rain that falls
from the sky really doesn't
belong to us. It doesn't belong
to our community. It doesn't
belong to our environment, it
belongs to irrigators,
basically, and that we can
capture it all and divert it,
and I, I just wanna say I, I, I
know we absolutely need to take
advantage of stormwater, uh, for
groundwater, surface water.
but also for the environment
itself. And that's where I want
to be a voice of the environment
itself that also desperately
is thirsty for that water as
well, that as we divert water
away that we're thinking about
how we're also using water for
the natural environment and the
wildlife, and really, we have a
growing outdoor economy here.
We've had um
since we protected our national
mommy here. We've had over a
tripling of visitation from over
200,000 visitors a year and over
600,000 a year. We have hunting
and wildlife enthusiasts and,
you know, we're important right
parent, you know, bird habitat
and everything else. So I just
want to say that the water is
truly shared, and that as you
look at water usage strategies
and what are captures strategies
of floodwater that we're
thinking about how to invest in
the natural environment as well,
who, who
has a seat at that table, I
would hope.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Steinborn, very, very
astute. I mean, I think that we
are gonna have some critical
decisions ahead for us in terms
of balancing the various
interests in the system given
increasing scarcity. I also
think there's a real opportunity
to the point that you're making
to identify appropriate
locations for mutual benefit.
Um, and one of the partnerships
that I'd like to highlight is
the state working with Elivi
Butte Irrigation District, US
Bureau of Reclamation, and the
National Fish and
Wildlife Foundation to look at,
as I mentioned, areas for
stormwater recharge, um, with
the dual purpose of those areas
also supporting habitat. Um, and
so I think, you know, all of
those interests are often at
odds with each other, but
sometimes there are
opportunities in which you can
address multiple interests at
once, and that's something that
we're very actively looking at
down here and we'll continue to
update you all on thanks so much
for the question. Thank you.
Yeah, it's just a policy that we
have to make a priority
It has to have a seat at the
table, uh, with standing
relative to the others have
standing, so thank you, ma'am
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
committee, for letting me crash
your meeting today. Um, I'm very
excited that you're down here in
our neck of the woods. Um, you
know, it's, it's, uh, uh, I'm
grateful for this panel, uh,
especially just the topic of
today. Um, I use the Las Cruces
Utility Hawk, and I'm very
grateful for that, and I track
my water use. Um, I've
appreciated your crews coming in
and checking on lines recently
and, um, and making sure of
that. Uh, you, you know, many of
you know that we've had just
some really
ho rr ible flooding. Um, I mean,
we've had horrible flooding all
over the state. Uh, Ruidoso
still continues to get beaten
down and down and down. But
recently we had horrible
flooding in the Valdo area. Um,
and, and I know that when we
start talking about these
issues, it's, it's really a
disservice to those of you who
are doing the work to just think
that there's one solution. I
often say that we're looking at
things like the wheel of a
bicycle that the situation is
here in the middle and that
there are spokes. and so I'm
thinking of like, you know,
especially with EBID, um, and
the, the canal
system and making sure that our
farmers get water, with little
water we're able to, you know,
to do, um, but also looking at
how we, and, and this is my
question to you is, do you have
to consider or take into
consideration issues like that,
what we've had in with roads
washed out and homes being
flooded, um, in terms of the
work that you were doing,
because we can't just look at it
with one lens, thinking that
that's gonna solve or work on
the issues with EBID or
residential
water or rural water access. And
so how does like the cat the
catastrophic situation that we
had with Vado
play into what you're doing and
trying to do the work in the
community. And so if each of you
can do like a really brief
answer, that'd be great.
Madam Chair,
thank you, Senator Hamlin.
Yes, the, the, the flooding and
Votto that happened a couple of
weeks ago was, was substantial,
um, so first I'll take off my
EBID hat. I'm the president of
the Donana Soil and Water
Conservation District and the
president of the New Mexico
Association of Conservation
Districts. A lot of the problems
that we're dealing with are
watershed problems. That water's
coming from somewhere. It's
coming very quickly, and our
infrastructure just isn't.
able to deal with that, so you
know the the first step is gonna
be and, and we're working in
partnership with the ISC and
WRRI to deal with a lot of those
issues, but watershed health,
watershed restoration, as far as
our flooding concerns, that's
really priority number one,
because by the time it hits our
drains, it's an afterthought.
Then we're in a disaster, um,
but yes, to, to your concern, um
you know, the, the mesquite
drain, which is the drain
located there in Vado, um,
luckily functioned as it's
supposed to, but it's capacity
is very small. We've looked at,
uh, increasing that capacity,
um, increasing the culverts that
flow under the five roads. It
has to pass through before it
gets to the river, um, you know,
those, those are our concerns
again, we have a partnership
with the ISC that's providing
funding to EBID for a dedicated
dam and drain maintenance
crew, so part of that funding is
going to be used to improve our
drain system, um, and not just
improve the drains, habitat, our
drains provide habitat.
Um, we've expanded over the
years, several of those drains
to to 100 ft wide, planted
cottonwoods and and and you
know, they're providing habitat
and meeting some of that that uh
environmental concerns. So, so,
yes, thank you. And, and we're,
we're working on it.
Madam Chair, Senator Hamblin,
uh, thank you for the question,
and even though I'm not in
charge of stormwater, I know
that the city of Las Cruces is
always looking forward and
putting together new drainage
plans and putting together other
drainage structures to make sure
that the city of Las Cruces
doesn't necessarily get flooded
or not as bad because there's
you know, much like what, what
Josh says. I mean, when it comes
down, sometimes it's so fast
it's gonna move and it's gonna
go where it wants to because
power is quite water is quite
powerful, but the city of Las
Cruces continues to, to look at
those and uh do infrastructure
improvements to do with that.
When we look at, at stormwater,
when I'm looking more on the
utility side, um, there's other
projects we have talked a little
bit with EBID about and probably
will be looking
even closer to is some of the
programs that we looked at
probably well over nearly two
decades ago that may actually be
able to be brought forward and
we'll just continue to work with
the ISC and EBID as a
partnership like we have been,
uh, throughout
all of this. So thank you very
much. And Madam Chair and
Senator Hamblin, I just say very
briefly, I, I really like what
you said about there not being
just one solution that is
absolutely true, and I also
mentioned earlier, I think what
we're doing in partnership here
in the Low Rio Grande is stuff
we'll learn from and implement
elsewhere statewide and one of
the big challenges we're seeing
is less snowpack, uh, and snow
melt run off for water supplies
and larger intensity and harder
to predict storm events.
So thinking strategically about
stormwater management to protect
public safety, health, and
welfare, but also to capture
that water is going to be a
critical component of what's
needed here, but elsewhere in
New Mexico, thank you. Thank
you, and Madam Chair, thank you
very much and, and pointing out
that, you know, often Southern
New Mexico gets ignored.
Anything below Socorro, we kind
of get ignored, so I really like
when uh southern New Mexico is
doing things that the rest of
the state can benefit from. And
so I, I guess the, the, maybe
the, the takeaway from this
just because of, of talking and
going down and touring the area
in Vaddo and talking with the
Donetta County Flood control, is
that we really need to invest
money in our watershed
infrastructure.
because if it in, and I know
that the experts up in Ruidoso,
um, you know, have the, because
each section is unique.
But down here in the lower of
the, in the lower part of the
valley, that's, I could see
exactly where that water ran and
ran over the highway and washed
out the culvert and dug what was
normally a one story arroyo dug
it to two stories. So we do have
to, and I hope that, um, you
know, and understanding the
impact of this committee is, uh,
is that we really need to
dedicate that because just the
residual impacts and costs. We
have people who are not living
in their homes right now
We have people who have lost
their homes, and this is not
just botto, this is Ruido, so
this is Roswell. This is places
all over the state and so it's
something that we really have to
focus on is really dedicating
money to our watershed, uh,
infrastructure so that the rest
of the work that you all do can
be done without having to stomp
out literal fires.
So thank you very much, Madam
Chair, I appreciate that.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Senator Hamlin for
your wise remarks. Um, I have
just a couple of quick
questions. Um, one for Hannah,
uh, you're following program,
uh, you're saying that, are you,
uh, asking irrigators, farmers
to fallow for up to 5 years.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Kates. Yeah, I
went through that very quickly
and I failed to highlight that
we're currently taking
applications for the next
enrollment. Those applications
are due August 29th. Uh, the
current program that's running
was either a two-year program,
people could sign up for 2024
and 2025 or just 2025. Um, we
then did a lot of listening
sessions and engagement,
including with EBID and others
to try to figure out how to make
this program work best for
farmers.
So the in current current
enrollment allows for 3 options
a single year, 2-year, 3-year
enrollment. I'll look at Ryan,
is that correct? Yep. OK. So,
um, up to 3-year potential
enrollment in the applications
we're receiving now through
August twenty-ninth. I thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you.
And in this, and, and I, I so
applaud this. This is essential
as we move.
as we said, there's not one
answer as we have to really work
at the 50 different water
conservation projects right now.
Are you having any issues in any
counties, uh, farmers losing
their agricultural, uh, tax
status, um, by following more
than 1 year out of 3 years.
Madam Chair and Representative
Kates, I'm not aware of that
occurring, do you? No, I'm
looking at Josh.
Do you want to jump in? Not that
I'm aware of at this point,
Representative Kates. OK, thank
you, Hannah. No, Josh is too
smart to get into that
conversation. Thank you, Josh.
Um, and so, uh, and I
appreciate, uh, the then my next
question is for Josh. I do
appreciate you're, you're saying
we need to invest in our
infrastructure. The senator
mentioned that, you know,
infrastructure investment is so
important, um, and, um, I'm glad
you talked about the opportunity
of capturing stormwater as well.
Um, to you or the representative
from Las Cruces knows of any
municipality or small town or
are taking advantage of a newly
passed bill allowing them to
charge a stormwater utility, um,
with their hookups so that they
have a small funding stream to
be able to address these
opportunities uh to either save
property and homes or to capture
a water in place
s that it's not lost
Madam Chair, Representative
Kates, I am not aware of any
communities taking advantage of
that.
Madam Chair, Representative
Gates, um, I'm not aware of that
either, although we heard about
that and we are always looking
into that to see how that can be
utilized, uh, through the city
of Las Cruces to try to assist.
Thank you very much. Let's hope
that this starts a conversation
that does municipalities in
small towns are now able to
capture a storm water uh usage
fee, um, from their hookups that
could help address the
portunities, um, that storm
stormwater stormwaters can be
dangerous and they can be
opportunities and these this is
will be a small funding uh
stream, not enough to address uh
what we need to do, but it is a
good start and I wanna make sure
that those uh communities know
that that's available to them
now. Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Kadena. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, presenters. Um, wow,
what a difference a year makes.
I remember sitting at a water
Natural Resources Committee
meeting in Socorro with a
similar topic and hearing some
different themes coming through.
Uh, I appreciate you all for
being here again. I want to
shout out one of our elephant
Butte, uh, board members, Mr.
Rafael Robirosa, there in the
front row. Maybe there's other
board members I haven't spotted,
but it does mean a lot that we
have um their engagement in this
legislative process
Um,
just so
I'm gonna wrap together some
comments that connect also to
the next presentation so that I
don't have to speak again, but
just a few clarifying points,
um, like Representative Cates
was asking you about the
following program. I understand
that it's implemented
differently in the irrigation
districts like Mid Rio Grande
does a different thing. EBID
does a different thing. Is there
a statewide minimum acreage
that's required to participate
in that program?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Kadena no.
Then, Madam Chair, is it up to
the irrigation district or the
conservancy district to decide
how to set up those minimum
acreage requirements.
Um, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Kadena, I would,
I guess I would say it somewhat
depends on what the funding
source is for those programs,
you know, if it's state funding,
obviously the state is gonna
work with the relevant
irrigation district to figure
out what makes the most sense
and is the most manageable,
particularly in terms of
verification, that people are
upholding their part of the
agreement and and following, um,
if the funding source and
there's a very range of funding
sources that play for these
programs across the state is, as
some other.
funding source it would depend
on that source and then how the,
the irrigation district is
working with the, with the
funding source to implement the
program. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and part of what I raised, um, a
year ago is that in this valley
for better or worse, a lot of
the acreages in pecans, and
that's not something you can
follow one season to the next,
um, afterwards, a general
counsel that's no longer here,
approached me and said, How dare
you say that aloud? Don't you
even know my last name, but I am
going to say it out loud again.
I have
a little bit of acreage and
pecans. My mom has some acreage.
I think myself and Senator
Cervantes are the only two of
the Donana delegation that have
water rights, albeit at a very
different scale, um, but some of
what I asked offered even then,
like what kind of conversations
are we having about long term
water management in this valley,
and in particular, my mom um has
approached with Sochi, the local
OSC office and EBID, they're
quite professional
respectful, um, but she's a flat
rate user and has been told she
doesn't have enough acreage to
do something like a voluntary
fellow, and she, for instance,
is not even in it for the
resource, but knows that she
doesn't want to lose those
rights, but would like them to
have an added benefit that she's
not bringing to life, but at
least for right now, an EBID for
flat rate users, and then I, I
think I've been told that
minimum is, is 10 acres, um,
but, but I hope moving forward
that we can have
different kinds of possibilities
cause she might have a couple of
acres, but if we add those up
and can find ways to make the
procedural pieces of that
possible. I imagine there's
other people that would like to
see that water go to a a
different beneficial use than
where it's at now. Um, but I
also think like for people I
know besides, right, there's,
there's farmers of all sorts of
scales growing pecans, um, that
to, to disinvest from that crop.
cost hundreds of thousands of
dollars, even in the couple of
acres I have. If I wanted to see
a CSA growing food locally that
people in our valley could eat.
How do I get rid of acreage like
there is a couple $1000 to
remove each tree from lands. So
I know it was my perception that
a previous administration of
EBID, which is all changed, you
all are brand new and fresh. Um,
wasn't interested in those
conversations, but I would love
to hear more moving forward and
appreciate already that I've
seen a different engagement, but
just think that our committee
member, committee members should
also hear that some of those are
the the tensions here. Um, and
then finally, um, I did just
have one more clarifying
question for EBID mostly for the
committee's understanding. You
spoke about how this year we had
6 inches, um, off the river.
Will you speak about how like
the combined rights work like so
if we're not getting it off the
river, we're pulling it up from
a well. Can you speak a little
bit to that?
Mr. Vice Chair, Representative
Kadena, absolutely, um, as I
said, the, the full allotment
for an EBID water ride is 3.024
acre feet. And that's a combined
and then supplemental water
right, groundwater right. So in,
in this case this year we
delivered 6 acre inches. That
gives the farmers the ability to
pump 2.6.
acre feet and change.
Yes, madam Chair, so it's, it's
pretty important that.
we're understanding and, and
having an awareness of like
where this is water, water is
coming from and what the future
of those aquifers may be. I
appreciate hearing EBID about
how we need to conserve,
conserve, conserve. But even
that, um, when we hear things
about like, uh, piping ditches,
right? I grew up on the
Messilateral. My girls grew up
on the California lateral. Those
ditches don't run water anymore,
and I'm, and so it makes me
wonder, like, pipe them for what
for the 56 days out of a growing
season that they might be
moving river water down more
often than not.
what's happening is farmers are
pumping wells using the EBID
infrastructure to move water
from one piece of their property
or another, which they like
bulldoze up and and make little
dirt barricades. Again, people
are being creative, people are
being resilient, um, but for me,
like that, that water is not
going to exist into a future
that we know, whether it's the
threesome acre feet or the 6
inches we pull off the water
now, so I look forward to more
to to Boulder and maybe more
honest conversations about how
we manage that water together
moving forward. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Mr.
Chair
Thank you, Representative. Next
up we have Representative Roy
Ball Capio.
Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you all for
uh your presentation. I
had, um, have some questions and
I also want to kind of address
what I think is gonna be the
next presentation also with Ms.
Risley uh White. So I'm gonna
begin with you and um
uh.
because I grew up in this whole
in Las Cruces and El Paso, uh, I
had a lot of exposure um to the,
uh, interstate stream commission
throughout the years, way back
then and coming forward, so I'm
interested in knowing how in
this day is the commission
balancing interstate
obligations.
with the Rio Grande Compact.
with the need to secure water
for New Mexico communities and
agriculture that seems to be the
never ending um challenge and
you don't need to, if you could
just be as you know, we're time
constrained, um.
brief and succinct. I appreciate
it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair and
Representative Royal Caballero,
um, appreciate your question. I
think this came up, uh, also in
Senator Steinborn's question
about as we face increasing
water scarcity, what does that
mean for our communities about
how we choose to prioritize the
more limited sources that we
have. Um, when it comes to the
compact all'll, I'll let um my
colleague Nat Jakers in the next
panel speak on what's what we
can talk to on the current uh
settlement
that's moving in the lower Rio
Grande, but I appreciate your
question because New Mexico will
continue to have a delivery
obligation under the the Rio
Grande Compact, um, to Elephant
Butte Reservoir. And so, it is
critical and we are really
gearing up, uh, significant
efforts in the Middle Valley to
ensure our compliance with that
compact, but also to balance
water uses there as well.
Significant investments,
including funding from the
legislature for river channel
work in the Middle Valley or
underway, including a lot of
funding, federal funding to
support that effort and and
state funding. Um, and then also
working on conservation
programs, uh, there are also
irrigation conservation programs
in the Middle Valley. Um, we
have reps here from the Middle
Rio Grande Conservancy District,
critical partners for us there
as well. Um, so I just wanna
emphasize we are looking at this
river system holistically as
water
doesn't know boundaries
right? Um, and working
extensively to support
additional flows from the middle
valley into Elephant Butte
Reservoir, which obviously
serves, um, meets our compact
obligations, but also serves
this part of the state. So thank
you for your question.
Thank you.
And I'm also interested in, um,
as a planner and having been in
community um development on my
career, this question is for
Joshua, um, I hate to use your
first name, Mr. Smith, Joshua.
Um, I'm always looking at
innovative ways in which we can
improve our processes and
improve our systems so they
remain cost effective,
efficient and accessible when
necessary. So the question
is, um, what innovations in
irrigation management are being
explored to stretch our limited
supplies
while also sustaining
agriculture in our lower lower
Rio Grande because this is a
challenge for all
administrators. We get
oftentimes very busy with the
day to day
and um and with your expertise
and all that has to be in place
for that
sometimes we.
we fall short on looking at
those um creative and innovative
ways, but also keeping in mind
that we're located in a state
that the irrigation systems were
pretty much already in place by
our tribal Native American
communities, as well as our um
um
native, all native communities
in the state of New Mexico, so
we have to have learned from
them, and we should continue to
learn from them on how, what the
best practices are in
irrigation, so if you can,
please.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Royal Caballero,
um
you know, we
I, I have the opportunity with
my.
conservation hat on to work with
a lot of the Asseass throughout
the state. I began my career
working in the Membris with a
lot of the community ditches
there, so I have an appreciation
for for that knowledge and and
where we can learn from them, um
as far as our district goes.
Technology is the key.
Uh, our district is.
267 out of 300 miles earthen
canals and laterals.
Um, the technology in most cases
hasn't really improved in the
last 100 years, so that, that's
really what we're looking at,
um, the level of automation
that's available and and
possible now is amazing, uh, and
that's really what we're looking
at. So there are opportunities
to line our large canals and
pipe our smaller laterals that
will allow us to meter and
monitor and runoff of telemetry.
so that the system basically
speaks to itself, um, that
allows us to.
deal with the stormwater
situations in real time, um,
capture more of that water to be
able to put it to beneficial
use, um
you know, the, the, the, it only
makes sense where it makes
sense, though, you know, there
are portions of the system that
have absolutely no need to be
upgraded or piped, um, so we're
being very particular about
where we get the most bang for
our buck and the most benefit
for those improvements. So we
can do more with what little
water we actually give.
Thank you. It's important to
know this. We know what to
support in the future. Final
question to all of you and
however way you want to answer
this because it's a burning
concern of the day, and that is
how do you see climate change
and our prolonged drought
reshaping water management.
In the next decades, and what is
the single most urgent
adaptation that we need now.
It's a challenge, I know.
but that's why we have excellent
expertise at the table. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I'll take a
quick crack at it, but that's a
big question we could spend all
week talking about it, um, you
know, I think you'll hear more
about the governor's 50-year
water action plan in the panel
tomorrow. Um, as you know, that
plan projects us having 25% less
water by 2070, which is a lot. I
think all of us should think
about what do you, what would
you do if you had 25% less
water. Um, and, and I think
ultimately there isn't one
answer, as Senator Hamlin's uh,
uh, question
raised, I think it is an, it's
gonna be necessarily and all of
the above approach. Um, however,
I do, I do think conservation is
key. Conservation at all levels,
conservation and a concert
municipal conservation. Um, we
need to develop alternative
supplies, and those will be a
critical piece of the, the
puzzle, um, but ultimately there
just will be less water and then
maybe on a, on a lighter note,
the former state geologist, um,
Nea Dunbar, who we worked with
on that 50
year water action plan, she
would sometimes say, you know,
um, it looks really bleak
thinking about the ratification
we're facing in New Mexico, but
if you had a choice between less
water and excess water. Look at
many parts of this country where
there's severe flooding events,
um, you may prefer to have less
because humans are very
resourceful and creative. We can
be much more strategic about how
we use the more limited supply
that we have. Um, that may be
easier to deal with an extensive
flooding. So it just takes us
being very
creative and strategic and and
how we're going to confront
climate change. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and if the
others concur, we can leave it
at that. And it is an ongoing
conversation that we need to
continue to have, and that's why
I raise it because it has to be
at the top. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank our Mr.
Chair. Madam Chair, I would like
to make a comment just as, as in
general, um, I think something
that can be looked at now, and
this is something that I keep
preaching to everyone when we,
when we get together is that as
we're looking for new and
innovative ways to do it. You
have the aqueous storage and
recovery programs. You have
direct reuse programs and when I
talked about in my talk that
talked about getting the
appropriate regulations for
direct reuse, um, that's, that's
very concerning.
When we do aquifer storage and
recovery projects in order for
us to do that, you have to put
it into drinking water standards
before you push it back into the
aquifer. And if you're going to
do that, then why am I not just
putting it directly in the pipe
for direct reuse, but there's no
real regulations to where that
can even occur right now, and
that's where we would really
like to have the Environment
department come up with
regulations that are more
reasonable so that we can move
forward with direct
reuse and other methods of
aquifer storage and recovery.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Sarignon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your
presentations. This is a quick
question for Hannah. Just need a
quick answer. Better.
Um, how does do the, um,
interstate, interstate stream
commission or EIB see their
management plan um impacting the
ecosystem and um the greater
efficiency can result in in um
less seepage, but that is what
maintains trees and and repair
repairing life sometimes, so can
you give me an answer to that
real quick one?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Sarana. I think,
um, again we're gonna have to be
really uh strategic and how we
use every drop and thoughtful,
um, and I think there are
opportunities for projects that
do things like both recharge
aquifers and provide for
habitat. And so I, I think as,
as we face the increasing
scarcity, we're just going to
have to be even more thoughtful
about how we're um creating
communities that support our um
economic vitality and
quality of life for, for the
community. All right, thank you.
OK, thank you all very much.
Appreciate your presentation.
So the next presentation is uh
Nat Shakira and Hannah, and if
you would come forward and then
after this presentation, which
should be very short,
and I'll explain why we have
public comment and I know there
are members of the audience who
want to make public comment.
Uh, committee members, uh, I
think we're getting an update
today but not
very much in depth because
there's some filings coming
forward. We're going to have an
executive session in Taos with
the AG and all the water
agencies, so they're here to
kind of prep us on uh what's
happening. So please take it
away.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, as the
chair stated, yes, this is not
going to be an overview of all
the details of the settlements
in Texas v. New Mexico. Uh, this
is, uh, really designed because
we're here in Las Cruces. We're
talking about water. We wanted
to address that issue and tell
you where we're at and when you
will be able to get, uh, the
full download on it. Uh, what's
being passed out right now to
the committee is an agreed
statement by all the settling
parties in Texas v. New Mexico.
about what we're going to be
settling and, and sort of in
what settlement vehicles. We are
right now doing the final work
on those settlement documents
and routing them for signatures
from the appropriate officials
who have authority to sign the
settlement documents, assuming
that goes according to plan, we
will be filing settlement, uh,
or proposed settlement documents
with the US Supreme Court's
special master on August 29th.
We will be providing an
executive session
detailed briefing.
at that at that time, uh, to the
legislature, and we will also
thereafter be able to provide
the documents then will will no
longer be private. We'll be able
to provide a more detailed, uh,
discussion for the legislature
in in open session as well,
hopefully later in this interim,
um, just briefly, uh, what we
are planning to settle are one,
the Interstate compact dispute
with Texas. So we will be, we
will be entering a consent to
asking for the
entry of a consent decree with
Texas, uh, to resolve our
interstate compact dispute. We
are also, I'm happy to, to
report going to be proposing two
separate settlements with the
United States in the irrigation
districts. Um, slightly
different parties, um, one of
them resolving disputes
regarding Rio Grande project
operations, uh, that one
resolves problems that New
Mexico has raised regarding
project operations.
The other thing that that
settlement will do, will help
facilitate New Mexico's ability
to effectuate compact deliveries
through balanced transfers of
Project Water. The other
documents that are going to
effectuate those balance
transfers are, um, some
agreements under reclamation law
with the Bureau of Reclamation
and EBID that where New Mexico
will, will have several options,
uh, to
essentially purchase water from
uh from EBID in order to make
deliveries if and when we need
to do that for compact purposes.
The uh major thing New Mexico is
going to be doing under these
settlements to ensure compliance
with the Rio Grande Compact, um,
is we're going to reduce New
Mexico's groundwater depletions
to approximately the levels that
we had during the, what's called
the D2 period, which is the
period from 1951 to 1978. That
will entail us reducing
groundwater depletions in the
Loo Grande by 18,000,200 acre
feet. Uh, we
expect that the lion's share of
those depletions will be through
the purchase of, uh, water
rights for that are currently
being used for irrigation. Uh,
the, the settlement doesn't
require that it all come out of
irrigation. We just expect that
that's likely where, where
that's going to be coming. There
are not a lot of other details
in the settlement about how that
works, um, and we are really
looking forward to working with
the water users in the community
and this legislature to
set up that program to make sure
that it, it, you know, we've,
we've we've talked a lot about
um meeting multiple needs,
ensuring that they are not
negative externalities from,
from these large efforts and
that we are looking forward to
working hand in hand with you
all in the water users on
setting up a purchase program
that works. We will have
approximately 10 years in which
to uh purchase those water
rights, but we want to do it
much faster than that. And we're
right now working with an
economist, uh, several
economists
um, on projections for the
costs, and we will be uh coming
up later this fall, uh, able to
talk to you a little bit more
about the costs. I don't want to
say any more about that right
now. Although the cost
projections that we're seeing
right now are not
materially different than what
we've kind of been talking to
the committee in years past, but
we will, we will have more
details, um, to come. And then
the final thing that I just
wanted to touch on was
uh, we are going to be working
with again the water users, uh,
the city of Las Cruces talked
about all of its uh critical
water needs it has, and its
water rights, uh, the New Mexico
State, who I, by the way, meant
to thank for for hosting us, um,
has significant water rights
and, and farmers obviously have
significant water rights. They
all want certainty going forward
about how New Mexico is going to
administer our limited resource
so that they can plan around
that. We're not going to be
shutting down the hospitals that
Ms.
Whitner was talking about. We,
we don't want to have, uh, you
know, abrupt, uh, curtailment
of, of farmers who've just, uh,
you know, planted their, their
crop, for example, we, we want
certainty and we want to be able
to plan and we'll know with this
settlement, I think with much
greater precision how much water
there is to be used, how much
water people are going to be
able to pump a year or two out.
And what we want to do is work
with the water users to come up
with an a plan
to for, for, OK, given this
quantity of water, um, who's
going to be able to use how
much? Um, it's, it's likely
going to be involving fallowing
uh on a, on an ongoing basis,
but there's a lot that we can,
we can work out with the water
users. There's a lot of
questions about how it'll work,
who will pay for it, and, and a
lot of really good ideas are
coming forward. EBID's got some
great ideas. Um, we will be, we
will be engaging
with those users on a, on a
really intensive basis after
these settlement documents get
filed to try to move forward
with that. So those are the, um,
major points. I just wanted to,
to highlight that we will be
talking with you about in, in
much greater detail in the
coming months. And with that,
um, I'll let, uh, my
co-panelist, uh, Director
Eiseley White, just add a few
words.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
again, you know, we'll provide
more detail, um, and answer
questions hopefully next month,
and I think, you know, it's, I'm
very pleased that we've already
been moving significant work
that I just presented on in the
Lower Rio Grande. All of that
will be very important again,
regardless of the outcome of
this litigation. Thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Um, we appreciate you giving us
a summary
of uh what's in the works and as
I said to the committee, we're
going to be having either an
open or a closed session in Taos
to get into the details of the
filings. So if there's any um
lightweight
questions today. Uh, we could
take them, but otherwise, I'm
gonna ask you to wait.
Representative Zamora
lightweight. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Is there any work being
done with the Department of
Agriculture at the federal level
to uh try to balance the water
uses um
here in the
in the lower Rio Grande
Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, and, and
representatives Zamora, thank
you for the question. Um, not at
the federal level, but I'd like
to just highlight the important
partnership we have with New
Mexico Department of Ag, or do
you, does it, yeah, um, they've
been critical both in terms I
mentioned them is this relevant
to tomorrow's discussion at all?
Uh, yeah, some of this will come
up tomorrow in the presentation.
Yep, thank you and happy to talk
more offline.
Thank you very much for coming
today. We're gonna hear a lot
from you tomorrow as well. OK,
how many people in the audience
by show of hands would like to
make a public comment.
OK, so with all three of you
come to the table, please.
OK, I have Jennifer, Dawn, and
Renee. And if there's others,
that's fine too. So, uh, please,
and we have some online as well.
You have a limit of 3 minutes
each.
and who would like to start? You
push the button that has the
person on it and it will show
light.
Good afternoon. My name is
Jennifer Montoya. I'm the
conservation chair for Messa
Valley Audubon Society. Get up
and pull it towards you.
My name is Jennifer Montoya, and
I'm
excuse me, the conservation
chair for Mesa Valley Audubon
Society, um, where I, I
volunteer my time and um I'm a
former game commissioner with
the New Mexico Game and Fish
Commission, and I recently
retired from the Bureau of Land
Management. Pardon me, and I
wanted to um talk today about
birds and the importance of um
the Rio Grande and um
state parks in March this year,
a charming little bird called a
tufted flycatcher landed in
Young Park, and it's a bird
that's never been seen in New
Mexico before. It's quite
abundant in the Sierra Madre of
Mexico, but a local birder
discovered it 11 evening and
within 3 days, over 70 people
came to see that bird. We have
a, a, an app called E-Bird, and
this morning I went to look to
see how many people from out of
town came to see that bird and
was 7
8 and so most of them came from
Los Alamos and Santa Fe sub came
from El Paso, Tucson, but some
came from Florida, New York, and
Los Angeles. So birds are
important to our economy,
they're important to us
spiritually to us as people,
humans have long connection with
birds.
So I say that as a preface to 17
years ago, our organization
volunteered a lot of time
helping establish broad Canyon
State Park. What we thought was
going to be open to us for
access, and we're very
disappointed that here we are 17
years later, the gate is still
locked. I see it, it, it's a
failure of government to give
the people what they've asked
for and I think it's time for
you all to consider the need,
the desire for the
people in our community to visit
that state park more regularly
and not just thought Canyon I'm
talking about the riparian area
that's so important for bird
habitat. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, before
we go to the others, there is
plenty of food, so if people
want to help themselves, please
do, but um
who's next? Don or Renee?
OK.
Thank you. And just introduce
yourself for the record, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Renee Frank. I'm a long-term
resident of Las Cruces, and I
wanted to share my, my
experience and my observations
as a realtor for the last 19
years in Las Cruces.
There have been substantial
improvements in building codes
that have been reflected in the
quality of the homes um built as
well as the benefits to the
homeowners.
So compared to a home of the
same size built in 2005.
um, the new, the new homes built
in 2025 built to the new codes,
consume about 25% less energy.
They use 25% less energy on the
average, some even, um, even
more so, uh, than, than those
older homes in built in 2005. In
addition, these homes are more
comfortable. They cost less to
operate. They have better indoor
air quality. There are many
benefit
s of these, these newer codes.
I can also attest that back in
the early 2000s there were
builders in our area in Las
Cruces who built to standard
substantially higher than the
codes at that time.
Even today, those houses compare
well to the houses that are
built to current codes today.
Some of those builders are still
building homes today.
and they're building homes that,
that currently exceed the codes
of the uh the current uh
building codes.
And they're selling them at
prices that are comparable to
the other homes that are just
built to code.
As people are, uh, people are
buying these homes, but the
better built homes, because, um,
they want the greater comfort
they want the cost savings, and
they want the additional
benefits of, of these homes, the
quality, uh, and, and the
sustainability. The cost to meet
these new codes has been greatly
overstated by some, um, a year
ago, Brian Condent, the
executive director of the New
Mex
ic o Building and Construction
Trades Council wrote that
meeting the new code
requirements for insulation and
ceiling, um, adds a modest cost
to the, to the cost of a new
home, but far, far less than
some people had claimed, and
that the gains in comfort, noise
reduction, reduced utility
bills, and so forth outweigh
those additional costs.
He also debunked the notion that
EV circuits required in the new
code would add substantial
costs. So essentially adding an
EV outlet is, uh, for new
construction is the same as
adding a 20 volt uh circuit for
a, a dryer. Um, and that cost is
somewhere between according to
his estimates, $50 to $300.
much, much less than than some
have claimed from a realtor's
perspective, I can tell you that
homeowners and prospective
homeowners are interested in
comfort. They're interested in
cost savings. They're interested
in a better built home.
That's why so many existing
homeowners are choosing to make
improvements in their, in their
homes, looking for ways to
improve their energy efficiency
and their comfort and, and so
forth.
The trend is to replace out uh
the aged out ACs, um, furnaces,
water heaters, and so forth, and
to replace them with the new
high efficiency heat pumps, and
heat pump water heaters, and
they're adding EV chargers on
their homes at an increasing
pace.
Unfortunately, it costs more for
these existing homeowners to
make those improvements than it
does for the builders to add
them into new construction. It
makes more sense to build those
in during new construction.
The, the current building codes
are actually in from my
perspective, helping to meet
real consumer needs, and they
are improving the quality of
living.
and a final point is that
keeping energy bills low for all
of us is a very important factor
in in housing affordability.
These are things that I would
just hope that you keep in mind
for the future.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
And your name again was Renee
Frank. That's correct. Thank
you.
And now is this Don Kurtz?
Please go ahead.
Hello, my name is Don Kurtz and
I live in Las Cruces, uh, for
millennia, uh, humans have
burned wood to heat, heat, heat
themselves and to cook food and
an animal power to move things
around and then coal came to
power the industrial revolution
and for the last 125 years it's
been oil and gas, which has an
enormous impact economically and
in terms of productivity.
And now it's electricity's turn,
and it's not just because I say
so, it's because the market says
so and will increasingly say so
over the next
coming years. So, uh, and it's
for a simple reason if, if you
want to, like we did last year,
uh, produce, uh
a billion, 80 billion barrels of
oil and uh
38 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas, you have to find
it. You have to extract it. You
have to transport it for oil,
you have to refine it and uh you
can hold it in embargo in front
and in other countries in terms
of war and international
relations, and then you have to
distribute it all over the
world. And that costs a lot of
money.
It's not even clo when you
compare that to electrons that
are produced by the sun, stored
in batteries from an infinite
source that is abundant and
essentially free and is
transported and wires around the
country and is supplemented by a
rapidly improving in uh research
and technology
It's not even close, which is
going to prevail in coming
years.
It's kind of ironic that the
solar panel, which was invented
in the United States and
developed uh
is now here is, is under kind of
a retrenchment and an attack on
it.
And the main beneficiary of
that, of course, is China, which
is stepping into the vacuum to
sell uh batteries and tech and
other technologies, solar to
countries all over the world,
especially the 75% which don't
have natural gas resources.
and so
that it's, that's kind of a
story for another day, but
what's important, I think, for
you as legislators.
is the knowledge that this
important transition is not
going to happen overnight.
And for the next couple of
decades, the oil and gas
industry and investments in the
state can be realized. A
generation of workers will
continue to work and be
employed, and the permanent fund
will continue to grow.
So that's gonna keep happening
even as electricity increasingly
encroaches in a market way.
Nothing is going to change that,
no kind of legislation is gonna
change that. In the meantime
though, I think we need to stop
throwing bombs at these new, new
technologies and embrace our
opportunity to make sure that
all of us can benefit from the
energy transition.
and that includes building out
the grid and other other
infrastructure, increasing
energy efficiency wherever we
can, shoring up the building
code, as Renee pointed out.
These are good things for the
people of our state, and they
can be done while the market
does its work, which it's going
to do no matter what else we do
in this particular area, and
it's going to keep doing and
keep doing for decades here to
come.
Thank you
Thank you. I appreciate you all
coming. Is there anyone else in
the audience who would like to
speak before I go to those
online?
OK, we have 3 people online who
would like to speak.
The first one
uh, let's hear from Glenn.
All right, so my audio is
working. Yes, we can hear you.
Good afternoon, legislators. Um,
maybe I'm going to, uh,
continue a little bit what Dawn
brought up, which is the attack
on solar energy.
um, coming from the federal
government and um there are some
immediate impacts that we should
be concerning, and I think they
were underplayed by Mr. Herndon
in his presentation about
community solar.
So, um, you know, not only have
the federal tax credits, uh, for
solar been discontinued both at
the residential and commercial
level, um, you know, some of
them going on for another 2
years before they phase out. Um,
but also, uh, just in the last
few days, the federal government
agencies have issued their
guidance about uh
stricter requirements for what's
going to qualify for a federal
tax credit. And, and this is all
gonna impact industry in New
Mexico. Um, you know, as we've
seen, you all work very hard to
pass the community solar bill.
And uh this program is up and
running and uh the state took
bids uh for, for these various
community solar farms of which
we saw 6 of them displayed on
one of the slides today, uh, in
the El Paso Elec region. Um, and
these bids, uh, were created
by local businesses, assuming
that the tax credits would be in
place. So their economics are
based upon those tax credits,
which have now been
discontinued. Um, and as, as
such, the
facilities among those 6, and
that's just down in the southern
part of the state, there's
probably another 12 to 25 of
them in the northern part of the
state, um, are at risk if they
have not already broken ground,
and they can't get their project
moving fast enough to meet the
very strict requirements. Uh, a
number of these community solar
projects will not get built, um,
and, uh, we'll, you know, we'll
have to kind of hit the reset
button and start over. Um.
the tax rule changes uh from the
federal government are also
impacting residential solar, um,
and utility scale of solar,
utility scale being uh when EPE
goes out for bids for their own
facilities outside of community
solar. Um, and this is driving
increased costs to the 20-year
power contracts that our
utilities are signing, the costs
will eventually be passed on to
consumers. Also, the costs of uh
residential solar without the
tax rebates will be passed on.
Um, and this will lead to less
projects, job losses in New
Mexico, um, and higher
prices across the economy. Um,
so there's a lot of uncertainty.
These rules were just issued in
the last couple of weeks, the
solar companies are trying to
figure out exactly what they
mean and, and, uh, how it's
going to impact their
businesses. But right now it's
looking like economic decline in
the solar industry.
Um, and, uh, this in turn will
be delaying our transition to
cheaper renewable energy and
more reliable and more resilient
power sources.
So uh I'll just say again, this
is new information in the last
few weeks, and I really
encourage this set of
legislators to take a closer
look at the impacts and talk to
people in the solar industry,
um, and, uh,
get a better picture of uh what
the economic future is, uh, for
them. Um, so, uh, thank you for
your time and uh thank you for
giving us all three minutes
despite that you're under
pressure to get on the buses.
Thank you, Glenn. Uh, next,
we'll have Norm Gum
Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you
hear me?
Yes, we can
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the Water and Natural
Resources Committee.
I'm Norm Gom, president of the
New Mexico Water Advocates and a
former director of the
Interstate Stream Commission.
I'm a retired professional water
resources engineer and manager
I live in rural Sandoval County.
According to the last
presentation this morning
regarding the ongoingl Rio
Grande Interstate water
litigation.
and the requirements of the
pending settlement.
The state of New Mexico is on
the hook.
New Mexico must
purchase and retire the water
rights from over 9000 acres of
irrigated land
decreased depletions by at least
18,200 acre feet per year
and manage water use for
compliance with the, the
forthcoming US Supreme Court
decree annually thereafter.
I have two key points. Number
one, the taxpayer's price tag
will be huge.
2
New Mexico's current Middle Rio
Grande water overuse is greater.
than the water use
in the lower Rio Grande. As of
the end of July, New Mexico's
deliveries of water this year
through the Middle Rio Grande
for Lower Rio Grande uses were
39,000 acre feet short of the
delivery obligation
New Mexico will not violate the
Rio Grande Compact delivery,
deficit delivery cap this year.
because the delivery obligation
is unusually low.
But in the absence of drastic
action, New Mexico will almost
certainly violate that cap in
2026, triggering a brand new and
even more expensive Texas
lawsuit.
The governor requested $500,000
for the state engineer
from the 2025 legislature for
staff.
to work to prevent this imminent
violation.
The legislature said no.
Due to a lack of political will
and leadership.
New Mexico is not proactively
managing its water.
The special districts that New
Mexico has created to manage
water continuously act in their
own best interests
which is often directly opposed
to the public interest and the
interests of the state of New
Mexico.
Regional water security planning
for 6 of 9 regional water
planning areas.
is not slated to begin this
decade.
The costs of delay are
staggering and growing.
What will this committee do?
to ensure that New Mexico meets
its legal obligations
avoids another devastating
lawsuit
and finally begins to manage
water.
for the public good
Thank you
Thank you very much and uh
lastly, we have Blythe Maunders.
Blythe, you're muted.
Go ahead, please. Can you hear
me now? I apologize. Yes, we
can.
awesome. My name is Blythe
Maunders. I'm a concerned
community member.
I live in the South Valley of
Albuquerque, and I have to drive
over the Rio Grande each morning
to get to work.
Seeing the dusty, dry river bed
is heartbreaking.
While walking my dogs in the
bosquey, I've recently seen a
lot of beavers move from the
river to the ditches because the
river is so dry.
This is risky and abnormal
behavior for these creatures.
During my walks, I've noticed
our beautiful cottonwoods
prematurely dropping leaves.
Right now, if you walk in the
bosque of the South Valley, the
ground is full of dead leaves.
This isn't normal for this time
of year. The leaves definitely
shouldn't be falling at this
point. The cottonwoods need
water. Can you imagine what our
bosquey would look like with
hundreds of dead cottonwoods.
I fear that the longer we see a
dry Rio Grande each summer
the more normalized it will be.
I want to emphasize that this is
not normal. The Rio Grande is an
incredibly important feature of
our landscape, not only because
it's beautiful, but because it's
a sustaining life force for so
many plants and animals, and
without it we're going to see
more and more of our plant and
animal diversity disappear.
By passing comprehensive climate
legislation that reduces
pollution. The New Mexico
legislator can protect our
rivers, strengthen our
community, or sorry, our
economy, and safeguard the
health of our people. Bold
action now will ensure clean
water, thriving communities and
lasting prosperity for
generations to come. At a time
when federal policies are moving
backward, it's more important
than ever for our state to lead
on climate action and protect
New Mexico's future.
We need you to vote yes on
comprehensive climate
legislation to address the need
to reduce our emissions. We've
made a good start, but aren't
close enough to meeting the
governor's executive order
targets. There's still time to
make lasting change. Thank you
so much for taking the time to
let me speak. Thank you very
much. So this is one last call.
Is there anybody else online?
Raise your hand. Who wants to
speak or anybody else in the
room.
We appreciate all of the public
participation that we've had.
Committee members, uh, will take
a, uh, quick bathroom break,
then we will meet you
downstairs. Um, you can leave
things in your car, you can
leave papers here, but the room
will be locked when we get back
tonight. So, um, please fill the
first bus up first. The 2nd bus
is only for an overflow. So,
