UNM has other commitments, so
that's why we have a full day
today and tomorrow we have a
hard stop, uh, at noon or
before.
So we'll start with
introductions, and I'd like to
start, start over here with
Senator Gutierrez.
Bobby Gutierrez
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair.
Gonzalez.
I called you by the wrong name.
Sorry, Senator.
That's been happening for a long
time, sometimes.
Uh,
first of all, uh, I'm a senator
Roberto Bobby J Gonzalez,
District 6, which encompasses um
part of Santa Fe, Los Alamos,
Ririba and Taos, and we will be
having some welcomeing remarks
to her area, but you're here at
uh UNM Taos, which is a very
special to the community and uh.
has just done wonders for this
community, you know, in many
ways, and uh I just wanna wish
everyone a welcome and uh thanks
for being here in Taos.
Thank you, Madam Protem
Good morning everyone. I'm state
Senator Mimi Stewart from
District 17, the International
District, and the East Gateway
area of Albuquerque. Thanks for
having us meet up here, just so
beautiful, just so stunning and
rain last night, yeah.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Martha Garcia. I'm from, uh,
the western portion of New
Mexico. I cover District 6,
which is uh part of uh Sila
County and McKinley County and
this is such a wonderful,
beautiful place to be at. So
thank you for selecting the site
just to go around. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee, and, um, all of our
guests, I'm Representative Tara
Lujan. I represent House
District 48 in Santa Fe and this
is about the 6th time I've been
up here in Taos, uh, uh, during
the summer and it's rained every
time
So we have been getting a lot of
moisture this year. It's, it's
just been wonderful and, and
just so beautiful. There's a
beautiful rainbow coming up from
Santa Fe today. So happy to be
here again. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Sarignonna.
Good morning.
Good morning. My name is Debbie
Serana. I represent House
District 21 in Bernalo County.
It's the east central corridor
and the Monzano High School area
of Albuquerque. It's great to be
here again. Thank you.
Thank you, and we'll go over to
Senator O'Malley.
Good morning, everyone. Um, name
is Debbie O'Malley and I
represent a district 13, um,
it's an, it encompasses a
big portion of the North Valley
of Albuquerque, which is
semi-rural, and then some of the
older neighborhoods like
Berellas and Martinezan.
and uh so I'm really, uh, happy
to be here. It's been a while
since I've been this, this far
up north. Don't get very, uh,
far sometimes when, uh, my
family's in Albuquerque and so,
but anyway, it's a real, um,
it's a real honor to be here
this morning. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. uh,
Mr. Vice Chair, members of the
committee to the people in the
audience to our staff members,
uh, those that are paying
attention to us online. It's
great to be here, State Senator
Pete Campos, uh, remember 9/11
and I just want to tie that in
because our messages today are
not only about the environment,
but as we move forward, it's
important for us to know that,
uh, with everything that the
country's going through, uh,
it's going to be incumbent upon
us to continue to help to
service positive examples
to our young people. So again,
state senator Pete Compos
representing all the parts of
seven counties in northeastern
New Mexico.
including Taos, New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Good morning, everyone. Again,
I'm Representative Elaine
Sinna-Cortez. I represent the
beautiful people of District 62
in the southeastern part of the
state. I have loved being in
Taos. I got here yesterday and I
haven't been here since I was a
little girl, maybe 30-something
years ago. You see, the part of
the state I come from is flat,
not many trees. It's extremely
rare. It's one of the few places
that you can stand on a can of
tuna and watch your
dog run away for two days
straight. It's that flat. So
anyway, being here is like
having a vacation. So thank you
so much and I'm excited to learn
and engage in deep meaningful
conversation today.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Representative Cortez Tuna comes
in a little flat packets.
State Senator Larry Scott,
District 42, which is Lee,
Eddie, and Chavez Counties far
southeast corner of the states
and I am impressed
with the Rio Grande coming up on
the drive from uh Santa Fe.
It looks like the rain is doing
that river some good. Pleased to
be here. Thanks for having us.
Thank you, Mr. Beer
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. um, uh, it's a pleasure
to be here. I'm Matthew McQueen.
I represent House District 50,
which is the southern half of
Santa Fe County and a portion of
Sandoval County. Uh, it's a
pleasure to be back in Taos, um,
24 years ago, almost to the day,
uh, I started as the director of
land Conservation at the
Taosland Trust, uh, and I've
been doing lane work, uh, since
before then and ever since, so
it's always a pleasure to be
back up in Taos.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Thank you. I'm going to ask our
staff, uh, Sarah Woodmere, to
please introduce all the rest of
the staff.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning members of the
committee, um, and thank you to
Tas for hosting us. Uh, my name
is Sarah Reedmeyer, Legislative
council Service as well. We have
Angela Dakin, uh, Ian Keller,
um, Gabe Salza, our intern for
this, uh, interim and our
webcast, uh, AV help Bob
Sanchez. Thank you.
Thank you, especially Tai T, uh,
Representative Herrera.
Good morning all. Good to be
with you today. Uh, I represent,
uh, District 41, which is mainly
all of Rio Riba, little bit of
Sandoval, a little bit of Santa
Fe, and I'm gonna do a shout out
to my 4 precincts and towns,
Upper and Lower Arroyahondo.
Tres Pedroojo caliente. Good to
be with everybody today.
Thank you, and I am your chair,
um, Senator Liz Stephanic,
Senate District 39, parts of
four counties, San Miguel, Santa
Fe, Torrent, and Valencia.
If you are able, could we all
stand for a moment of silence
for 9/11.
Thank you very much
I know that the
families and the communities
that were hit we'll never
forget.
what has occurred and for the
rest of us, it was a
pretty horrible nightmare.
So we are moving on to our
opening, and we did move it up a
little bit, uh, so we have Mary
Gutierrez and is Pascual here?
Great, you made it. So please
come on up to the front. Each of
you take one of the microphones.
We really appreciate the
hospitality of Taos, and we
appreciate the hospitality of
being at UNM. So, uh, Madam
Chancellor, why don't you start?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, welcome to TAOS. It
is lovely to hear that you've
had pleasant travels here that
your morning here has, um,
reconnected you with a special
place and the land and the
water, um, that really resonate
the meaning, I think, or part of
the meaning of Taos. On behalf
of University of New Mexico
Taos, um, it's my honor to
welcome you to our campus, uh,
Batan Paul is part of our
campus. Um, thanks to the
generosity of the town
and thank you for your
leadership on issues that
directly affect our community
and our state. At Unim House, we
are committed to preparing the
workforce that protects and
sustains our most vital
resources, particularly our land
and water. And I'd like to talk
with you this morning about some
of the programs that we have
developed that directly do that
work and talk with you about how
you can support the work that
we're doing to develop the
workforce related
to, to land and to water. We
have a natural resource
management degree. It's a
transfer degree that transfers
directly to Highland University.
Students who are at University
of Mexico Taos are in our
climate conservation cops and
have internships working with
various agencies and nonprofits
in our region and then transfer
that hands-on experience with
them, as well as their learning
to highlands, um, where they
complete their degrees and
really immediately
are entering the workforce. We
see 100% placement from these
programs and we're happy that
we're able to provide um fish
and wildlife, beyond them, other
um agencies here that are doing
the work with local graduates,
um, because we know that our
local graduates are bringing a
love for the land in this place
and the knowledge that you don't
naturally have if you're coming
from um other places into these
jobs
Additionally, um, I know that
you're going to be talking, um,
later today about bees and
Joanim Tauss is proud to be a
certified B campus. It reflects
our commitment to pollinator
health and environmental
stewardship. It means that we
manage our lands differently to
ensure that bees have flowers in
the spring and that they have
water and that they have um food
to feed off of and the plants
that we have. Additionally, we
have accessible
trails that are used daily by
the public that were made
possible through Trails Plus New
Mexico grants, and they serve as
a living example of how
education community, health, and
conservation come together on
our campus.
Um, and you may know that UNM
Tao has the Cisneros uh water uh
anise, the Esekia and La Grant
archives on our campus and part
of hosting those archives is
maintaining very healthy
relationships with water
operators, um, in SECia
organizations in our region. As
part of that, we partner with
the rural Community Assistance
Corporation to support the
formation of the greater
Valle de Taos Water and
Wastewater Alliance. Recently,
we have used Grow funds to
support water operator training.
You may know that the growth
funds is a state workforce
initiative that provides free or
low-cost training for
high-demand careers across the
state. This has been supported
by legislative funding that will
need to be renewed this year.
Um, and so I'm asking for your
support for that. We have been
highly effective, um, with the
$200,000
we received to provide training
in areas such as the water
operations. It um covers tuition
and related costs that so New
Mexicans, particularly in rural
areas can access the skills
needed for good jobs. Many of
the people who are coming into
this training are unemployed at
the time that they start the
training in some of the programs
that we offer, I'll talk about,
um, our microfi microfiber
training later, within a week,
someone can be
fully trained and in the
workforce in a uh family
supporting wage job. So thanks
to these funds, we're providing
certified training in all levels
of small water, water 1 through
4, and wastewater 1 through 4.
And we're very proud that this
training will be free to
operators and available locally
meeting the needs of our rural
water systems that keep our
communities running.
Looking ahead to your
conversations later today on
microgrids, wildfire mitigation
and resilience. UNM Tas is
working hand in hand with Kit
Carson to develop curriculum
programs and apprenticeships for
clean energy workforce.
The Growth Fund has already
helped us prepare CDL drivers
and fiber technicians and now
we're expanding into training
for the microgrid workforce,
which is critical to wildfire
protection in New Mexico's
forests.
So these growth funds that are
supported, um, by the, the, by
these New Mexico growth funds,
um, has already enabled
thousands of New Mexicans to
access free or low-cost training
and high demand fields, and
renewal of those growth funds is
essential. Um, I've been told by
the LFC that they're really
looking for support for, um,
renewing those funds. So I'm,
I'm asking for your support and
helping us get those funds
renewed.
They 100% of these funds are
going directly to pay for
tuition so that people who are
training up or who are simply
unemployed and training into
really um to to careers that are
impactful, but also our
supporting families with these,
the wages that they're earning.
It's really essential for our
rural communities across the
state. These initiatives aligned
closely with the important
topics before you on your
agenda, from pollinator protect
ion and land conservation to
Asseia resilience wildfire
mitigation and water security
planning. Um, our programs
reflect our mission as a rural
serving institution to meet
local needs while contributing
to statewide solutions. Thank
you so much for your time, your
advocacy, and your commitment to
sustaining New Mexico's most
precious resources.
Thank you, Mister Mayor. Welcome
Madam Chair
Thank you
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, again, thank you
for being here. It's really
great to have you back in Taos,
and I hope you really enjoyed
the trip. Um, we always hear
that beautiful moment after the
horseshoe and he come up and you
see the beautiful mountain
alongside the gorge and um very
special place for all of us.
I appreciate the opportunity to
update all of you on what's
happening in Taos. Uh, the
implementation of the Abeta
Indian Water Rights Settlement
makes progress, though slowly.
On your drive in, you may have
seen the uh drilling rig off to
your left. Um, that is the one
of the rigs dealing, uh,
drilling the mitigation well for
the Yano Kemado mutual domestic
Water Association. Um, the Rio
Chiquito mitigation well is also
making significant progress on
the construction of the pad is
nearly complete, and they will
begin the process of digging
their well here very soon.
Uh, these projects are a big
step toward the full
implementation of the
settlement. However, the federal
funds that were appropriated
have not been enough. So the
numerous water projects no
longer uh the funding no no
longer covers the numerous water
projects for full construction,
and the five parties, including
the Taos Pueblo, the Taos Valley
Asea Association, the town of
Taos, uh, and the El Prado Water
and Sanitation District are
actively searching for funding
programs that can support the
full
implementation of this
settlement.
Um, although I have learned a
lot about this settlement. I
certainly wouldn't call myself
an expert. Um there are some
that have been working on this
project since before I was born.
So I'd be happy to answer any
questions that you may have. Um,
but I may also have to refer you
to one of the more seasoned
experts.
at the Taos Valley Regional
Wastewater Plant, a facility
that serves the entire Taos
Valley region. Um, we've made
significant progress maintaining
including maintenance upgrades
that extend the life and
efficiency of this facility, and
we're very excited to partner
with Kit Carson Electric
Cooperative for a hydrogen
production facility there at the
wastewater treatment plant.
Um, this was, this facility, the
hydrogen production facility
will use effluent water as a
source of water for hydrolysis,
and there are additional green
energy will go to separate the
hydrogen off of the water.
Um, I know kick Carson Electric
CEO Louis Reis is on the agenda
later, not talking about this
project, um, but I'm sure he'd
be happy to tell you more uh
during the breaks.
Uh, Finally, a regional
collaboration is at an all-time
high in Taos. The town of Taos
and Erala Water and Sanitation
District are very close to
collaboratively extending a
water line that will serve the
airport and additionally serve
residents, uh, the Yano Kimalom
Mutual Water Domestic
Association and the Alvaya de
los Sanchos water and sanitation
District are merging
Um, and the town of Taw and Taos
Pueblo recently renewed a
40-year wastewater agreement
that was set to expire last
year, which is setting the basis
for regional interconnection
agreement renewals and a rate
study that will fairly
distribute the cost of the
system and promote further
regionalization of water and
wastewater into the future. Um,
you also heard about the water
and wastewater Alliance. Um,
thank you to UNM for hosting
that discussion. Um, the
merging of the Yanokimata mutual
domestic and the Elvaya de los
Rancho Sanitation District is a
direct result of that
conversation.
Um
on a side note, uh, I would like
to talk a little bit about the
growth funds as well. Um, my
second job is the executive
director of the New Mexico
Association of Regional
Councils, the councils of
government, um, who are the
fiscal agents for the growth
funds on your behalf. Um, we
found some very successful
projects. Um, this is one of
them as an example, the
certified Water operators
program, um, tell us just like
many communities have very few
water operators
and there aren't many paths for
people to become water
operators. Um, that has
thankfully changed. Um, just a
few years ago, we were talking
about how do all of us share the
same water operators, um, just
because there aren't many out
there.
Um, but there are a number of
other successes all over the
state through the growth funds
and the infrastructure that has
been built in place by the cogs
to issue out the RFPs um
send out the funding to the
nonprofits, to the local
governments, to the special
districts, um, has been put in
place and has become very
efficient. And we'll have a much
larger report for the
legislative Finance Committee
next month in October. Um, but
what also ask for your support
and continuing to grow funding
program.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you again for
choosing to visit Taos, and uh
we hope you have a great stay,
and I stand for any questions.
Thank you. I believe we have
some questions, so I first have
Representative McQueen. Is there
anyone else?
Representative Herrera
OK, Representative McQueen
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Chair, Mr. Mayor, I, I
just, uh, I appreciate you
mentioning, um, the view when
you come around that the
horseshoe. Uh, so the very first
project I worked on, uh, when I
started the Tawland Trust was
what we call the Taus Valley
overlook, which was that view in
the foreground, uh, which was uh
privately owned and it was
purchased, uh, I think by the
BLM as a land and water
conservation fund project. Um,
and I, I know my Republican
colleagues sometimes get a
little uneasy when we talk about
buying land and turn it in it
becoming public land, but I
firmly believe there are, you
know, there are areas like our,
our parks, um, uh, wild areas,
hunting areas, things like that,
uh, that really, you know,
should be publicly owned, and I
think that was an excellent
example of what we can do with
the land and water conservation
fund, and I think it's really
just one of the iconic views,
uh, in Taos, which is itself
a beautiful place, but that,
that one really stands out. So I
just want to thank you for for
bringing that up. It was, uh,
it's one of my
teachers used to say a flood of
pleasant memories, so thank you
very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
good to see you, Mary and um
Mayor, uh, I just wanted to know
what, how much is needed to
complete the uh uh the
settlement, do you know?
Madam Chair
Representative Herrera, that's a
great question and the number
keeps changing every year. Um
I'll have to get back to you
with the, the full number, the 5
parties last year drafted um
some language to submit to our
federal delegation. Um,
unfortunately, the bill did not
make it through Congress, but
they had a specific number on
there. What's been difficult is
the original appropriation, um
did not include any CPI
adjustments. So that number
stayed the same. Of course,
we've seen costs increase and
increase, um, so I believe part
of that number that they were
requesting also included an
adjustment. So that way, as the
project
continued, there would be
sufficient funding over time.
Um,
what I'm thankful for is that
because these two projects,
these two mitigation wells are,
are
beginning, um, and will be
completed soon. Um, there's a
project that the town of Taos is
working on and um needing some
approval from the state
engineer.
But it has always been my
opinion that we should get as
much as we can done with the
money that we have, and then go
back and say, hey, we're broke
now and we need some more money.
Um, as it stands, we have money.
Um there's quite a bit of money
that's left with the town of
Taos. I know El Prado has done a
lot with their funds. But the
more we can do to spend it down
and show that we are
implementing the project and
doing as much as we can, I think
is a better sell to the federal
government that we are making
progress.
Thank you, Mary and thank you
Madam Chair and um Mary, if I
could say how many years what,
what, how many years has Taos
UNM been uh in existence now?
Um,
Madam Chair, and Representative
Herrera recently been looking at
the deeds, the deeds for Clower
Campus were signed in October of
1994, um, and so, you know, I
think that the history is long
because we were the TAUS
Education Center and then um
established as a branch campus
of UNM and we are in our
2-seventh year.
as I recall
Madam Cha, I hate to admit this,
but I was, uh, one of 3 people
who, who, uh, worked, I worked
with Bob Ellis to start the UNM
branch campus, so I, uh, that
was a long time ago and uh, but
I think it was uh that effort
was well worth it, and we knew
it at the time and, and actually
they told me to go out and find
a campus, you know.
in Taos, and uh then I heard
that the US Forest Service was
closing down, and that's when,
uh, we found that campus and I,
I remember walking into the
office and saying, my job's
done. We did it. I found
something, so, uh, it's great,
great to see the growth and, uh,
your leadership and thank you
for that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
with a comment?
question
Yes, Senator Trujillo
And if you'd introduce yourself
too. Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Linda Trujillo, Senate, uh,
District 24, which is in Santa
Fe, um, oh, OK, sorry.
And I will have to agree with
you that that site coming up
around the 2nd horseshoe is what
I told my husband yesterday as
we were coming here, the most
beautiful view in New Mexico,
never ceases to take my breath
away when we come up there and,
and anyway, it's beautiful. Um,
I am wondering about the uh
waste waste or the water
operator training. Is that
remotely or is that only
provided here on UNM campus.
Madam Cha
and, um, Senator Trujillo, that
will be provided on site in um
on our campus.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
will just, um, uh, and you may
already know this, but, uh, RDC
is working on, um, helping to
figure out some job development
and one of those is, uh, water
treatment and wastewater
treatment and so I'm definitely
already texting and trying to
connect you with the people who
are working on that, one of
which is my husband. So thank
you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
uh, Senator Trujillo, thank you
so much for that. I, I'll also
share that
the UNim Tas Hive, which is uh
essentially a small business
incubator is doing some branding
for water operators as water
heroes, um, and really helping
uh younger people understand the
importance and the role of being
a a water operator in our state,
valuing that work.
So, um, for those of you who
have been, uh, coming in and out
of meetings, we are focusing on
workforce that's needed in water
and natural resources at every
meeting and so the water
operators has been brought up,
but we're also gonna be talking
about soil and water
conservation district, the Indus
Oil and gas industry and others.
So we're, we're talking about
workforce needs, uh, throughout
the spectrum, and we appreciate,
uh, your work on this. Any final
comments?
Thank you so much, both of you
for coming this morning and for
your hospitality. Thank you. I
don't see any of the next panel.
So are any of our panelists here
for the next presentation on the
pollinators, please come on up.
There's a couple.
While we're getting our
handouts, this might be a good
moment to take a break for
coffee or whatever, uh, one of
our presenters is 5 minutes away
and we have 2 here out of the 4,
so we'll get started in a
minute.
OK, members, we're gonna go
ahead and get started. Uh, we
have two of our panel members
here. The 3rd 1 is en route very
close, and the fourth one is
gonna be online.
So, uh
Camille or how do you say your
name?
OK
you're gonna turn that uh person
on and you're gonna, it's gonna
have a red light. There you go.
Madam Chair, committee, my name
is Kamali
Kamali.
Can you hear me
Uh, Madam Chair
committee, uh, my name is Kamali
De Long and I'm an A specialist
senior at the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture.
I currently manage our
commercial honeybee registration
program and I am facilitating
meetings for the pollinator
protection plan working group.
Uh, the working group was
convened after the passing of
the 2024 House Memorial 33, and
we have been creating a plan to
address the changes pollinators
face in New Mexico.
So when we talk about
pollinators, a lot of people
think of honey bees first, but
there are actually a lot of
types of pollinators just in New
Mexico we have over 1000 types
of bees over 300 types of
butterflies, about 18 types of
hummingbirds and 2 or 3 types of
flower visiting bats.
uh
because our native pollinators
evolved with the New Mexico
landscape. They have a close
relationship with the plants in
our natural lands, and they are
important for maintaining the
health of our natural lands.
New New Mexico has a lot of
natural lands, and they are very
important for a variety of
reasons, including watershed
health, uh, their value to
indigenous communities, the
wildlife and livestock that rely
on them for habitat and also
just the ability of people to
get out and enjoy nature.
Native pollinators are important
also for primary primary and
supplemental pollination of some
of the crops in New Mexico. A
lot of our major crops do not
require pollinators, but some
crops produce more higher yields
and better quality, uh, product
including cotton. If pollinators
are present and uh a lot of our
fruits, including squash and
tree fruits.
rely on pollinators for, uh,
production.
Interest has been rising in
pollinators in the recent
decades, and with that, a lot
more people have been raising
honey bees on a hobby and small
commercial scale. There aren't
any laws or regulations, either
state or federally, that require
all beekeepers to register, but
the New Mexico B rule defines
commercial apiaries, which are
required to register as
locations with 15 or more
honeybee colo
n ies north of Interstate 40 or
locations with 25 or more
honeybee colonies south of
Interstate 40. Currently, New
Mexico has 9 registered
beekeepers, and that number is
gradually waning as conditions
become more difficult for
keeping bees at large scale.
There are a variety of reasons
that uh
that are making it difficult to
keep bees at large scale in New
Mexico, a big one is that we are
just an arid state.
When, um of course when you get
less rain, there's less water
and honey bees require a very
large amount of water to keep
their hives cool and to feed
their brood or their young.
Uh, they also because they are
living at high densities in, um,
commercial settings. They
require a lot of flowers which
are sparse in an arid
environment.
and
most large scale operations in
New Mexico are clustered around
water sources. You can see in my
map on, oh, I don't remember
which slide it was. It's page 4,
I believe. Uh, most of the
commercial beekeeping operations
that are registered in the state
are clustered around the Rio
Grande and especially in the
Messa Valley.
Uh
the New Mexico B law prohibits
registration of honeybee
locations within 1.5 miles of
existing apiaries which locks a
lot of land up for commercial
beekeepers to be able to
put their bees in a lot of those
prime areas.
and also approximately half of
the state land is owned by the
state or the federal government,
which have policies in place
that may prohibit beekeeping.
so there's not very much land
available, but then even the
land that is available has, uh,
beekeepers have been facing
increasing struggles with
drought, which again, that's the
water concern with honey bees
and
honey prices not rising to
compensate for the rising cost
of maintaining
beehives
So besides the barriers though,
honeybees bring great value to
New Mexico. Many commercial
beekeepers send their bees to
California with stops in Arizona
for paid pollination services.
and
we also in the state have income
from uh
the supplementation of fruit
from, you know, fruit
pollination from our honey bees
and other, other crops including
alfalfa and sea or alfalfa and
onion that are grown for seed.
Honey bees also bring income to
New Mexico from honey, wax,
pollen, and other products.
But around the globe, many
native pollinators have
declining populations, uh,
several types of bees,
butterflies, bats, and
hummingbird pollinators are
recognized as threatened or
endangered, and honeybee colony
losses are increasing in many in
many regions, including New
Mexico, uh, because honeybees
are a globally managed bee.
There are regions where they are
doing well and those regions are
able to maintain region
s where they are struggling, but
the shipment of honeybees in
that way does also bring
concerns for transporting pests
and disease.
On a global level, pollinators
are declining for many reasons,
but those reasons are generally
attributed to habitat loss due
to urbanization and changing
climate conditions, pressures
from pests, parasites, and
diseases. Prolonged expo
exposure to pesticides and
pollution, declining genetic
diversity because of decreased
population numbers, honeybee
management practices mostly in
hobby
ist beekeepers who are not as
educated on beekeeping practices
as a lot of commercial
beekeepers.
and, um, factors that are
causing pollinator declines, of
course, in different regions
have different influence and in
New Mexico, we have limited
information about the factors
that are driving declines, but
the
the main cause, according to a
lot of leading researchers is
drought and habitat loss through
drought.
Uh
another important concern is
pests and disease. We are seeing
a lot of colony losses and honey
bees due to varroa mite. There
are also pests of concern that
are currently being spread
around the world but not in New
Mexico that we're trying to keep
out of New Mexico.
And the, the last main cause
that gets brought up a lot is
pesticide usage, which for bees
in New Mexico, most of the
use pesticide usage that is
affecting bees, we believe is
improper usage, but there is um
there is more work to be done on
on investigating
exactly how much
of an issue that is in New
Mexico since the EPA created
more restrictions to protect
pollinators. However, we have
seen a lot less bee kill due to,
we haven't had any confirmed to
be killed in the last.
decade, I believe, for
honeybees, uh, since the EPA has
put more restrictions
So national pollinator concern
has been addressed in a few
different ways, including a
presidential memorandum in 2014.
which caused the National Task
Force to convene and publish a
national strategy for the
promotion of pollinator health
and One Direction was for states
to create pollinator protection
plans.
I have found over 30 pollinator
protection plans that have been
published by states, most by
state departments of A, at least
in some part, and they vary in
length and complexity. However,
many only address honeybees and
sometimes monarchs
but of course, as I addressed
earlier, there are a lot more
pollinators than just honeybees
and monarchs.
They also, many of the state
plans only address pesticides as
a concern for pollinators, but
there are a lot of other
concerns that we would like to
address in our plan as we work
through it.
Many states are updating their
plans due to changes in
information about pollinators in
the last decade, and some have
already published new plans.
So as far as New Mexico
pollinator legislation and
concern, uh, memorials were
passed in 2016 and 2017, aiming
to increase public awareness.
There was also a bill in 2019 to
create a pollinator protection
license plate with fees,
funding, pollinator protection
activities and in 2024, a
memorial requested NMDA convene
a working group to develop a
state pollinator protection
plan, provide
pollinator protection
recommendations and create
pollinator outreach materials.
So that group was convened last
year in June or July, and we
have written much of the
introduction to pollinators and
their importance and status in
New Mexico as well as some of
the best practices. We're still
working on finishing up some of
those sections and we will be
creating an implementation
section
and in our most recent
discussions, we have talked
about having a protection plan
draft for external review in
late spring of 2026.
So in case anyone is interested
in reading more about some of
the stuff that I talked about
today. I did include a resources
page and there's also contact
information on the last slide
for uh contact information for
myself, my division's director,
and our secretary and deputy
director.
and with that, Madam Chair and
committee, I would like to open
up the floor for questions.
Thank you. Will you hold all the
questions till the end of the
panel, and I know that there are
some people here are very
interested in this topic. Uh, so
next we go to Olivia.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I have handouts. Can
I give those to you really fast?
Thank you
Well, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, thank you so much
for the opportunity to talk to
you about today about the
amazing pollinators that we have
here in the state of New Mexico.
My goal in the next 8 minutes is
to tell you something about who
these pollinators are, why we
should be aware of them and what
we can do to sort of help secure
their health for the next
generation.
Um, so just to make it clear,
when I say the word pollinator,
I'm talking about anything that
moves pollen from one flowering
plant species to the next. In
New Mexico, of course, that can
include wind, as anyone with
allergies in late spring through
late summer can attest to, but
also within that group there are
a lot of insects which will land
on a plant to get nectar or to
have a rest, and in the process
of doing so, get pollen on their
bodies and then move that pollen
from one plant to the next
Um, and if you look at my next
slide, we can talk about this a
little bit. Chief among those
pollinators are our native wild
bees in our domestic honeybees.
We can, uh, attribute it by 80%
of pollination and seed set and
sort of the base of our food
chain, uh, in all natural um
functioning ecosystems around
the world can be attributed to
wild bees. Um.
because they actively gather
pollen to feed their offspring.
Uh, they're more purposeful in
their movements, and they tend
to move more efficiently from
flower to flower, and so they
tend to be among the best
pollinators, uh, of any sort of
insect that's out there doing
this.
Um, it's these wild bees that
I've been studying for the last
30 years. So if we can go
forward one slide. Uh, I feel
silly putting this up here, but
I just want to tell you why I'm
up here talking about these uh
amazing pollinators today. Um,
what's that? No, you won't. It's
OK. It's fine. Um, I'm a
researcher. I'm a teacher at the
Santa Fe Girls' School, and I've
been studying wild bees working
a lot with federal land agencies
for the last 20 or 30 years.
Most of the work that I do
involves trying to
figure out how to monitor and
inventory these bees on our, on
federal lands. Um, also, along
with this work, I've done a lot
of work studying rare plants,
especially in the state of New
Mexico, where oil and gas
development is happening, trying
to figure out what bees are
pollinating these plants and
what their habitat requirements
are. I'm also running the New
Mexico beat Atlas, which is
actually funded by Oregon State
University of all things, um,
training up a crew of really uh
well skilled volunteers that can
go out and
collect bees and document them
in new places where bees have
not ever been sampled in New
Mexico before. I'm an author of
3 books on wild bees, um, and
I'm working with the Xerxes
Society to help them develop a
species assessments and
extinction risk plans for all of
the bees of North America, and
I'm working with the um National
native bee Inventory Network to
try and come up with a
standardized plan for how to
sample bees across western
landscapes in particular.
And most of this work I do with
my, my two girls. They have to
come along no matter what.
Um, based on my work and records
from researchers, uh, kind of
over the past 100 years, we know
that the state of New Mexico has
about 1100 bee species. And I,
of course, am not biased at all,
uh, but I'd like you to notice
on this next slide here that
that's more than any of our
states to the east, west or
north of us. We are one of the
most be rich states in the
entire country.
Uh
we have, um, not only that, we
have the, the biggest V in in
all of North America is found in
our state as well as the
smallest, and you can see it
there next to a quarter for
scale, Pered at a minima only
occurs in the Chihuahuan and
Sonoran Deserts.
Um, two of the three sisters, of
the three sisters are pollinated
by native bees, one of which is
endemic to the Chihuahuan
Desert, and this is just an
aside, but it's really
interesting to know this bee
only used to occur here but
through trade with ancestral
peoples is now found all the way
with the bee and the squash all
the way to Maine and Oregon. And
though green chili and red chili
don't necessarily require bees
for pollination. They certainly
set more seeds when bees are
around. Just saying bees are
important in New Mex
ic o
Uh
I might add two, and this is
really interesting to me that
one of the fathers of wild bee
science in the world. A man
named Theodore Drew Ellison
Cockrell, who lived in Las
Cruces in the early 1900s.
and published over 5000 bee
names of the 20,000 bees in the
world, he named 25% of them. And
he lived here in New Mexico. His
son Martin, who died of
diphtheria at the age of 8, is
buried in Las Vegas, New Mexico.
all of which is to say that
despite the deep and varied
history of bees in New Mexico.
We know so very little about
them.
The full extent of their range,
their habitat and floral
resource preferences, what times
of year they occur in different
parts of the state and how they
may respond to changes on the
landscape when the landscape
changes.
As an example, using the 2
million records from the USDA
ARS pollinating insects Research
Unit, a lab in, uh, Logan, Utah.
You can see on that map there
that most of the counties in the
state of New Mexico remains
severely under sampled. It's not
that there's no bees there, it's
just that we've never taken the
time to document and quantify
them.
Um, and those areas where
research has been attempted are
areas where federal funds have
supported bee research through
the BLM, through National
Wildlife Refuges and through
national parks.
So what can we say, what can we
do to support the pollinators in
the state of New Mexico. There,
of course, has been a lot of
discussions about bees and bee
declines over the last several
years, and it's really hard to
know what of you what that you
hear is fact and what sort of
maybe exaggerated a little bit.
And I would argue that while the
uh the situation certainly
concerning New Mexico's actually
a great place for bees, uh,
habitat fragmentation here,
believe it or not, is less
severe than in states further
east
and pesticide use, while
certainly improvements could be
made, is not as bad as it is in
the Midwest. And from listening
to Miss Gutierrez earlier today,
it sounds like you and M Taus is
an excellent example of how
small spaces can make a big
impact for our wild bees.
However, there are some things
that are concerning and that we
can address right now to help
continue our role as a refuge to
over a quarter of the bee
species found in North America.
First, we know very little about
these 1100 bee species. Uh, more
research is desperately needed
to flesh out distribution maps
so that species assessment
assessments and extinction risks
can be accurately determined.
Each of these bee species has a
unique natural history, a unique
story to tell. And if we want to
figure out which ones we need to
save, we need to know more about
them. Um, what species are most
susceptible to pesticides in
which bee communities are
invasive plants more likely to
change, uh, plant pollinator
networks. Um, and, and if we can
sort of rule out those that are
persisting with no trouble, then
we can focus on the ones that
most need our support.
Second, pollinators in New
Mexico faced the threat of wide
scale habitat change as droughts
in the state continue to persist
over the long term, but what's
interesting is that cities
uh, which are more reliably
watered even in drought years
compared to wild landscapes are
primed to act as refugia, uh,
with appropriate city planning
and community education.
Third, because many of these
bees are so very small and exist
in such minuscule micro
microhabitats, habitat
fragmentation in the form of
development, oil and gas
exploration, recreation, uh,
roads, uh, can cause significant
impacts on their reproductive
success. This is mitigation is
totally feasible here through
education, restoration, and
proper planning is developments
are made.
And finally, opportunities for
outreach and education at every
level from city planners to land
managers to ranchers to
mayordomos to teachers, to
children, and awareness that
there's more than just
bumblebees and honeybees in this
world, uh, creates an eagerness
to consider habitat when making
decisions. Bees, I think, are a
wonderful gateway bug.
Uh, getting folks aware of the
importance of connectedness and
ecosystems and the value of
natural spaces in in
communities. And I was listening
today to you talk about um how
this we're kind of focused on
the idea of workforce. This
seems like a really easy way to
sort of expand our knowledge of
bees through through outreach,
um, through, through adding
people to universities that can
help teach this to broader
audiences. Thank you so much for
your time today.
Thank you. And next we are going
to Melanie.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
the rest of the esteemed
committee, um, Dienvenidos,
teja, um, apologies for being a
little tardy. I was trying to
get kids to school this morning,
uh, in Santa Fe. Um, at any
rate, I wish we could see the
slides, but I, I will have you
know that there's, um, I know
Sarah has a PDF and there's a,
uh, a link for it. So hopefully
that will be shared with
everybody. But I did also have a
handout. It's just a one pager
for you all with some of the key
points.
but I'll kind of go through my
slides anyways, just to sort of
um build out some of the context
that you have. So, excuse me, is
this the slide where we're
looking at? Actually, no, the,
the slides I have, I have
several slides, but this is the,
this is your takeaway, the one
that you have.
Yes, thank you
Um, so I'm, my name's Melanie
Margarita Kirby. I'm a native
New Mexican. I'm from Tortugas,
Pueblo, which is located down in
Donana County, where state
recognized tribal community and
cousins to Taos and Isletas. Um,
I also am the co-owner and
operator of Za Queen Bees, um,
which has been celebrating 20
years now of providing
regionally adaptive queen bees
and bees, honey, pollination
services across the state. Um, I
also work as an
extension educator at the
Institute of American Indian
Arts. I've been there for 5
years, and I also run RBe and
pollinators research and um
education programs and I'm also
the founder of two really cool
organizations that are built in
community. One is called Popovi,
the flower path Collective,
which is a group of indigenous
matriarchs from around northern
New Mexico working on seed
saving and also um pollinator
habitat regeneration, especially
due to the wildfire issues and
also the adaptive breed breeders
Alliance
which is a coast to coast
network. Right now we're at 12
different B producers and 12
different research institutions,
and we worked together on, um,
sharing adaptive ways for, um,
promoting healthy bee
reproduction and also
cryopreservation. So we do um a
lot of genetic work as well.
Um, in addition to that, I've
just served on a numerous boards
from local to regional to
national, um, New Mexico
beekeepers Association, um,
Western agricultural Society of
North America, American
Beekeeping Federation, New
Mexico Food A Policy Council,
and I'm also serving on the
inaugural pollinator
Subcommittee for the USDA
National Ag Research Extension,
Education and Economics Board.
We've been a little bit frozen,
but we are still um, very active
and in communication. Um,
the next slide actually just
sort of adds on to what Kamali
was sharing about the history of
the plan, but I'm gonna give you
more of a New Mexico
perspective. So actually
starting back around 2015 or so,
New Mexico State University had
an urban IPM um extension agent
named Amanda Skidmore, I
believe, and she actually um had
connected with the managed
pollinator protection plan
working group, which is housed
out of Michigan State
University, um, but it'
s a national group of varying
extension agents. There's a
little blurb on the slide that
talks about who participates in
it, but it includes pesticide
applicators, educators,
researchers, um, professors on
down the line. Um, through that
group, she was able to, uh,
connect with New Mexico
Beekeepers Association along
with the pesticide applicators
of New Mexico and other EPA
officials to start the
conversations for pollinator
pesticide, um, or pollinator
protection plan, excuse me.
Um, and that started going for a
couple years, but then she moved
away. She took another position,
so it kind of just was in limbo
for a bit. During lockdown, we
had a president for the
Beekeepers Association named
Bobrune, who's from Santa
Teresa, New Mexico, and he, um,
really wanted to help revive the
effort, so he had one of our
current board members, Amy Owen,
who's also actually Amy Rogers
now, sorry, who's currently on
the working group as well,
helped to spearhead and share
that committee.
And so we've been working
concertedly for basically almost
10 years on trying to develop a
plan, and it really just
promotes best practices. Um, we
know we're dealing with a lot of
different people and a lot of
different industries, but what
we can do is just really sort of
focus on the current research
that exists in order to, to
support that. But for New
Mexico, we're really lacking
more research to make it more
site-specific for us. Um, as
part of my job as an extension
educator and also being
on the board of the Beekeepers
Association at that time. Um, I
had also connected with the
managed pollinator Protection
Group. I'm actually one of their
co-coordinators for that group.
And so we, um, share information
with each other to try and help
each state develop a plan. So
through extension, I was able to
really start to focus more on
learning the policy effort
because a lot of these states,
the only way for them to not
only raise awareness for their,
their specific issues, but also
to raise funding to help support
what's needed in
their state is through a
legislative effort.
So Beekeepers Association had a
plan. It got posted on their
website, but it really just
stayed there. People didn't know
about it. It really needed to
actually come to the awareness
of all of you and to, um, the
residents of New Mexico. That
brings us forward to the first
legislative effort that, um, Amy
Rogers and myself helped to
spearhead, um, with guidance
from the New Mexico Food Agt
Policy Council, which was for
memorial. We had, um, Bobby
Gonzalez, who actually helped to
um uh sponsor that.
He was not able to, uh, be at a
hearing that year, I think fell
ill or had some family issues.
So it didn't actually move
anywhere, but that was SM 43 in
2023. The following year, um, we
actually had Representative
Cristina Ortez, who's from here
in Taos, um, who very graciously
took the, um, took the memorial
uh effort and sponsored it, and
it did pass, and that was HM 33.
That actual memorial called for
the New Mexico Department of Ag
to then
facilitate a working group,
hence Kamali, um, coming into
that role and, and serving in in
that capacity. Um, and that
group has been meeting
regularly. Um, it's, uh, I know
some of us have participated
more than others. I myself had
to, uh, sort of take a step back
a little bit over summer because
I just get slammed with my own
field work and research, um,
that we're doing it IAIA and
then also through my farm. So,
um, I'm reconnecting again, but
my extension role really puts me
into contact with a lot of folk
s and a lot of our native
communities and also
Indo-Hispanic communities who
are also relying a lot on
pollination services for their
varying efforts. Um, mainly now
we're getting to the sheet that
I gave you and literally this
just has um different increasing
challenges and considerations.
Um, we're talking on a social
level, especially when we talk
about managed pollinators and
honey bees more specifically,
there's really not any
regulations for importations.
Um, there's a
few, but there are a lot of
people can slip under the radar.
There's no registration service
for that, um, because of that
and not a lot of localized
production due to our aridity,
but also, um, just the, the
nature of our topography and our
seasonal elevations, we can't
really produce bees early enough
here for all parts of the state.
So a lot of bees are being
brought in from warmer, um, high
production zones. That includes
California, but also the
southern states and it should be
noted that the Southern states
do have a higher prevalence
of Africanized or what we call
apismoliferous scutilata
genetics. They're much more
aggressive. Um, that brings us
to one of the main issues that
we have here, especially with,
um, some of our backyard
beekeeper community who are very
well-intentioned, but do not
have the education at there, um,
at their fingertips to be able
to understand that not all bees
are the same. So there was very
recently a very sincere, um
catastrophe that happened in Rio
Rancho. Dogs died, um, there was
a shelter in place and actually
people are now being sued over
somebody who brought bees in
from Arizona and put them in an
unsuspecting, uh, mentee's yard.
Um, that's a real problem. The
Beekeeper Association has tried
to help mitigate that and to, to
raise awareness, but they are a
nonprofit volunteer
organization, um, with people
who also have other, you know,
responsibilities and limited
capacity. So
on the cultural side of things,
we're looking at stewardship
practices. We're looking at
availability of forage and how
people can access that also when
we're dealing with wildfires and
I'll just share a little clip
here about, you know, 2011, I
used to say was my worst year in
beekeeping where I lost 40% to
bears in August due to the los
Cuenchos fire, but actually just
in 2023 when we had the Caff
Canyon Hermit's Peak was another
very significant year of
devastation due to those fires
and not being able
to put bees, um, in places where
we normally do because we didn't
know where the fire was going to
go. Um, we're not the only ones
affected. Lots of land stewards
are affected, but it does impact
livelihoods. It also impacts
area, local, localized to
regional food production and
security.
Um, and then we have
environmental issues which both
of the um my counterparts here
have also shared information on,
so I won't dwell too much on
that, but loss of habitat, um,
practices in terms of how are we
going to better steward and
manage our spaces so that it's
shared space. We all know that
we all hang out at the same
watering holes because water is
limited. So that's a sincere
concern. Um, recommendations
that came out of the report that
was submitted to you all really
kind of boiled down to three
main points.
and that is, we need more
research, we need more education
and we need more outreach. And
so with that is a little myriad
of different things that can be
impacted by that. We need to
know pollinator diversity and
habitats such as the research
that Olivia is doing. Um,
beekeeper Hive consent or
census. We don't even know how
many hives are in. Right now, it
shows what about 9 commercial
registers, and that's because
that's how the law is written,
but there are literally close to
1
10000 hobbyist beekeepers in our
state that are completely
uncounted, unaccounted for. And
yet you're, they're the ones
whose actions are really
impacting the broader industry,
but also the safety and
well-being of varying
communities if they aren't well
informed and educated about how
to do it properly. Um, we also
need outreach efforts just to
let folks know how, you know,
how important it is to help
support pollinators. If you like
to eat, if you like food, then
you will also like pollinators.
Um, we need more public gardens.
We need public listening
sessions. We need new positions
that are supporting outreach and
research, and we need more
coalitions between growers, pest
control operators, ranchers,
homeowners, agencies,
municipalities, beekeepers,
organizations, stewards,
educators, and researchers. The
list goes on. Everybody is
interconnected, especially here
in New Mexico, Artierra and
Cantada and Querida. This is a
place that many of us have
called home for
many, many generations, and it
really behooves us to be more
forward thinking about the, the
coming generations as well.
And I'll leave it at that. Thank
you so much.
Thank you. We'll now go to
Eduardo online.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you everyone for having me
and for the opportunity. I just
wanna double check, can everyone
hear me OK?
Yes, we can. Can you start by
introducing yourself, please?
Absolutely. My name is Eduardo
Linares. I am a 2nd generation
beekeeper here in New Mexico. I
am considered a commercial
beekeeper, and that's what I do
full time.
And that's what my family has
done full time here in New
Mexico.
for over 30 years and
um
and I run in Chateland honey,
that's my company.
So I want to get started with
sharing my concerns.
from the stand of a commercial
beekeeper.
Uh, one of the biggest concerns
in the state is similar to the
whole country where we are
having a lot of be die-off as
Kamali mentioned, Melanie
mentioned.
um.
specific to New Mexico, we have
certain.
concerns
specifically to southern Mexico
where I'm located.
We have extreme heat in this
area.
We also have
pests, and we also have low
forage availability.
A second concern for me as a, as
a commercial beekeeper is free
migration of bees that come from
other states into our state.
without any protocol or system
to follow.
Uh, there are in New Mexico
registration requirements, which
are law.
Um, but I understand it is
difficult to be able to enforce
them.
um
one of the things that is of my
biggest concern is
having my bees next to another
beekeeper yard that doesn't
follow the protocols.
of registering and taking care
of the bees correctly.
Um, the thing about bees that is
a little different from other
livestock.
is that bees fly and they don't,
we can't contain them in a pen
compared to other livestock. The
big fly and they have a big
radius where they can fly and
diseases can be transferred from
beekeeper to beekeeper.
very fast and, and very easily.
Now without a, without being
able to enforce requirement,
registrations without being able
to enforce
um
proper management, proper best
practices.
That is a, a, that is what's
been so difficult.
to keep bees in this area
Um
one of the things that I
like to see happen is be able to
be clear in the laws that we
have for all beekeepers that
come to the state.
um, that are already in the
states.
um, sharing personal experience
when my father started keeping
bees here. We were unaware of
the laws that were here.
And we also were part of that
where we brought bees from, we
originally bought our first
beehives from Arizona. And we
weren't sure, we bought our bees
and we brought them into the
state without an proper
knowledge of the law's
requirements.
Um, one of the things I think
that
would be really helpful for us
and all beekeepers because
what I see happening is uh being
involved in this industry is a
lot of beekeepers are also
unaware of these requirements.
Um.
and when I one of the things I
like to see is a lot of outreach
to be able to let people know
that they are requirements for
registering or B's and
and, and following the law.
So uh we later on being involved
in industry, found out that we
need to require our beehives and
do we need to register our
beehives and and have a system
to follow um.
so one of the things I would
like, I know it's difficult to
be able to
enforce that because we have, we
don't have a clear number of how
many beehives are in the states.
Um,
and one of the things I would
like to recommend and I would
like to see is being able to
have maybe a position open up,
whether it's through
um the Department of Ag or the
livestock Bureau, someone that
can be able to enforce these
requirements, um
that we have. I, um, comparing
to other livestock I recently.
um, I bought sheep for my small
farm, and before I bought the
sheep.
uh inspector had to go check
those, those sheep and.
and make sure everything, the
paperwork was registered and OK.
Before I was able to pick them
up. Um, and I, it got me
thinking why, why is it that we
don't have anything like that
here in New Mexico.
Um, I understand again that
there is not much, uh, there's,
we're limited in resources, um.
but uh
I would like to see, you know,
some support in that sense. I
also sell bees as part of my
operation,
uh, and I saw most of my bees
here in the states, but I also
sell some parts in in Texas in
El Paso area. And in order for
me to sell bees in El Paso, even
if it's a small amount. I have
to go through inspections and I
have to go through a process.
um that we currently don't have
in the state.
So that is one of my biggest
concerns in this um.
in this, and I think that gives
us
that allows us to be able to,
once we have a system in place.
that allows us to have a
protocol if there was an
outbreak of pest and disease.
Right now there's a lot of talk
about a new mite, a new pest
that is spreading across
the the world, um, it has not
been in this, in our continent
yet, but when we, when I show up
to all the meetings and and and
I learned more about it. They
talk about it not being, it's
just me being a matter of time
that it gets to us.
Now without being, without
having proper and enforcing
proper registration
requirements. We are not gonna
be able to have a system to
defend ourselves if we are when
we spot this when we spot these
situations.
if a new pest arises and we
don't have
registered locations where we
spot this, this, this disease.
we are, if we have a registered
location, we're able to
quarantine certain areas and
survey the registered locations
and, and go from there but if we
don't have a system in place,
it's just gonna spread and it's
gonna be.
very detrimental to our bees. I,
I hope I.
I hope I'm being clear and in
my, in my um.
explanation of, of why I think
require requiring registration
and enforcing for visas.
is very important to me, and
personally, I've been on the
tough on the difficult side of,
of having to register at Bs
because we are also limited
on the amount of bees and the
places that we have.
and I would benefit from not
having in the short run for not
having these registration
requirements because I had to
keep these
on the South Valley in Las
Cruces, all the way up to
Demming and and TRC area which
is our drives for me and I would
benefit from not having these
registration requirements to
keeping all my Bs in one area
close to me.
in the short run, but in the
long run
it's gonna, it would be very
detrimental to not have that.
if that makes any sense
Thank you very much, Eduardo.
Um, I'd like to thank all of you
for your presentation and now
we'll go to questions and
comments. So far I have Senator
Stewart, Representative McQueen,
Senator Gonzalez, Representative
Lujan
OK, let's start. Senator
Stewart.
and Representative Kadena,
sorry.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
wanna thank you for starting us
off today on pollinator issues.
I'm
I'm quite happy to hear
Department of Ag is part of your
work group and and his um
looking at this issue uh some
people might remember my
attempts to, uh, rein in uh near
Nicotinoids, which have been
shown to be a very adverse to uh
bees are impacted by them, so.
uh, it's not like they die from
neonicotinoids. It impacts the
way they do their dance, you
know, be dance, they go back to
the hive and they do a little
dance, telling the other bees
where the pollin pollen is and
uh when you have neonicotnoids
in their environment, they can't
get back to their hive, uh, they
can't do their dance, they can't
explain where the pollen is.
Uh, that's what the scientists
say. I'm not making this up. It
sounds ridiculous, but I was
also given the uh book on the
bee's dance, how bees dance. So
I know all about this, uh, so
really thrilled with your work,
um.
my questions are, you know, we,
we have multiple other states
that in the last 6 years since I
tried it here in New Mexico have
been able to rein in
neonicotinoids, New York State
comes to mind, so I guess I'm,
I'm wondering, are you looking
at what other states have done,
especially recently, uh, New
York's plan, I'm fairly certain
had
nothing at all to do with
agriculture, but really kept
Nick neonicotinoids off of uh
urban environments, parks, golf
courses, Eians, people's front
lawns, uh, it's kind of shocking
to think that we're putting
poisoning on our grass to have
it be nice and green, uh, so,
uh, this is a real issue. We're
not making it up um
so if you could just talk about
are you looking at other states
and what you've discovered from
what they've done the last few
years.
Madam Chair, committee, uh,
Senator Stewart, um, do I?
think
we a little bit of, of
background on exactly what this
plan is to start with. This plan
is, of course, not a plan that
is that is setting restrictions
in place. We won't be
restricting any sort of
pesticides with this plan.
As far as making
recommendations. We are looking
more, we're more interested in
what is a problem in New Mexico
than what is a problem in other
states such as New York, of
course New York is a very
different environment for
pesticide use and beekeeping and
the native bees and, you know,
everything works together in a
very different way in a lot of
different states and, and New
Mexico is
more of our concern, so we are
trying to keep an eye on what is
happening in New Mexico and um
what is affecting bees in New
Mexico.
or and all pollinators in New
Mexico.
Very nice to see you here,
Representative Stewart. um, and
I am appreciative of all the
work that you've done to support
pollinator health. Um, and I,
just to sort of add to what
Kamali had mentioned too. You
know, I think that's part of the
um reason why we really need
more research. New Mexico
doesn't have enough research to
really, um, elucidate better for
us what are the, um, what are
the pesticides that are proving
to be an issue, but you made a
very
very, very important point.
It's, um, you know, a lot of the
big, big box stores, anybody can
walk in and just purchase this
off the shelf. They don't have
an applicator's license, and
they're spraying it left and
right, um, all over. Uh, Taos in
particular has the um invasive
weed working group, which
actually started by a beekeeper
who was having um immune issues,
and she was able to get um a
working group started. I believe
now it's the Tao soil and Water
Conservation District. That
' s running that group that they
meet monthly, um, to really look
not only at invasive weeds,
which I will say one person's
weed is another bee's honey, but
you know, um, we also need more
research on that. But
unfortunately, yeah, but you
know, springing of public
spaces, um, parks, you know, one
of the issues here in Taos was
that they were spraying at um
the park downtown at Red Willow
and um, you know, then it was
the Easter egg hunt the very
next day. That's really
concerning, you know,
our youth are getting exposed
and nobody's being informed. So
I know that that committee had
worked to get at least some
signage up and it really
promoted to the county to
implement what we call IPM or
integrated pest management,
where pesticide application
would be a last resort, um,
because there are other methods
that could potentially be used.
So I'm really glad you brought
that up. But my hope is that,
you know, NMDA will start to
look at this. NMSU will start to
look at this. Other research
institutions or
agencies within our um state
will really start to look at
that because it is concerning
how easy it is for anybody to
come to just have those
chemicals and be able to spray
them.
So
And Cha, I appreciate those
answers. I, I really appreciate
what you're doing. I, I agree
totally with your outlook, um,
certainly education is
important, you know, we have the
wild Friends organization who
have for many years focused on
pollinator health.
Um, they have put together a
little brochure, uh, talking
about pollinators, showing some
plants that are pollinator
friendly, um, asking the asking
for the folks that deal with
uh nurseries, etc. to at least
label plants that this is a
pollinator friendly plant, um,
or at least let people know when
those plants have already been
doused with things like
neonicotinoid, which is a
common, uh, so I think education
is important,
you know, you should rope in the
wild fronts. They've, they've
already done a lot of this work.
I just wanna caution us from
just studying and research
forever
and not listening to what other
states have done, have very
different states, but a bee
dying from neonicotinoid will do
the same thing and both states,
uh, so, um, there've been some
really creative ideas, uh, one,
I think this is Colorado, uh, I
could be wrong about that.
Uh, one state is requiring large
farms to plant an acre of
wildflowers. You're nodding your
head. Is it Colorado? Am I right
about that? I forget where it
is.
I'm not sure where it is, but I
have heard of that. Yeah, and in
and incentivizing for um
homeowners and even renters to
have container gardens. Yeah.
Yeah, I think in incentivizing
people to build pollinator
gardens is important, uh, so,
but you know, we can have these
huge farms of alfalfa that are
corn or whatever and those seeds
already come doused in
neonicotinoid. But if you also
have wildflowers around, you
would have the ability of
pollinators to be uh pollinating
both the corn and the alfalfa,
and the wild flowers, so I, I, I
suggest you try
to think outside the box and not
be bogged down for years in
researching and studying this
issue, uh, just so a little
frustrated that we this is our
default mode and now, now let's
research that.
Let's study that. Let's put a
study group together and then 2
years later, oh yeah, we studied
it till we're blue in the face,
and we don't know what to do
or here's our recommendations
that you're gonna ignore or hear
the recommended no it's just
it's frustrating
Madam Chair, Senator Stewart, I
just want to add on, there's
also the Xerxes Society, which
is doing some great work with,
um, uh, incentivizing some of
those things like you're talking
about when it comes to
pesticides and for the state of
New Mexico, they have plant
lists for, um, the northern half
of the state and the southern
half of the state. So that as
gardeners start to develop a
landscape, they can include very
pollinator-friendly plants that
also um encourage IPM sort of
things to happen too, which is
really neat
Um, and the other thing that
they've been doing is working to
mitigate habitat fragmentation
by, um, giving out, uh, with
education, so you go to a class,
you learn about them, and then
you get an entire box full of
plants ready to go that they've
grown into a nursery that are
all native. And, um, the idea is
to put them in neighborhoods
around Santa Fe in order to, um,
connect habitats and create
habit pollinator corridors
throughout Santa Fe. It's really
ne at And Madam Chair, thank you
for that, and we are doing that
all over the state. I mean, the
beekeepers are just phenomenal,
um, and others in this field,
but
you know, I heard from the
gentleman who was the beekeeper,
you know, his worry is heat and
drought. Heat and drought is
what we're going to have.
What we have now and what we're
looking at in the future. So you
know you can't, you can't fix
that very easily. So anyway,
thank you for your work. I, I, I
look forward to what you come up
with. Hope it's not 5 years from
now.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you, Senator. Uh, we have
Representative McQueen and then
Senator Gonzalez, and then also
on the list is Representative
Lujan, Representative Kadena,
Representative Herrera.
OK, so Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
panel and a couple of questions
on
could, can you just sort of um
expand on the difference between
commercial beekeepers and hobby
beekeepers.
Madam Chair, Representative
McQueen, um, in the state of New
Mexico we have the B rule, uh,
that defines what a commercial
beekeeper is and that is the
definition that we've been
talking about today, of course,
it gets a little complicated
when you're looking at just
whether people are running a
business because there are
people that are running
businesses with
with bees that they're keeping
that are not considered
commercial
by the standards of regulation
in New Mexico.
and Madam Chair, Mr. Long, what,
what is the definition, if you
can summarize that?
Madam Chair, Representative
McQueen in New Mexico, a
commercial beekeeper is anyone
who is keeping more than 15
colonies of
of bees in one location north of
Interstate 40 or more than 25 at
one location south of Interstate
40. It's a, it's a very
confusing definition, uh.
Madam Chairman.
Long, is, is a colony the same
as a hive or is a colony a group
of hives?
And when, when they think of a
hive, they think of one of those
white boxes is that that's one
hive.
Madam Chair Representative, that
is one hive, so a colony will
live in a hive. The hive is the
container that they're living
in.
OK, so it seemed remarkable to
me that we, uh, we were talking
about regis registering
beekeepers, and we only have 9
currently registered beekeepers.
That seems really low
And, and why is it that low
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe that that number is low
for or uh
a number of reasons, including
it's difficult to keep that many
bees in one location in New
Mexico. Also because that, that
number is a very specific number
that you have to keep in order
to be a commercial regis uh
commercially registered
beekeeper. A lot of people may
be keeping just one under that
number and not being considered.
commercial. There's also, you
know, a lot of people that are
just keeping like 5 or 10 hives,
which of course are are not
considered commercial.
OK, thank you for that. I, I, I
have some concerns about being,
uh, overly burdensome on
registration requirements. I
mean, if we currently only have
9 registered commercial
beekeepers, and we
we want to register everyone. I,
I think there's a lot of people
they're gonna stop being
beekeepers, um, uh, you know,
another approach might be to,
um, look at like import
restrictions and things like
that, you know, in terms of
keeping uh diseases out of the
state, um.
you know, but I'm, I'm out of my
area here, um, Mr. Long, one
more question, uh, you said, uh,
there are policies on state and
federal land that may inhibit
uh usage for honey bees. Could
you elaborate on that?
Madam Chair, Representative
McQueen, this may be a little
bit out of my area of expertise,
but I do believe that
to keep honey bees on federal
land at least, you have to
receive a special permit and for
that, a lot of times there has
to be like a habitat assessment
and because honeybees in an area
can be a concern for native
pollinators and, you know,
providing both um
a source of pests and pathogens
and also
needing the same resources as
those native pollinators and and
other wildlife, uh, it can be
difficult to get those special
permits, and I don't know how
difficult it is specifically in
the state of New Mexico, but I
don't maybe someone else on our
panel would have a better
answer.
Um, you know, I've been a
commercial operator now for
almost 28 years. And, um, and
I've kept bees in different
states and different areas, so
each place is distinct, but, you
know, to address a couple of the
points that you were asking
about, you know, the, um, 2,
2006 colony collapse disorder
hit the airwaves. Everybody, um,
got inspired to save the bees.
And so we got a lot of
hobbyists, beekeepers, um, who,
who took to, you know, wanting
to try
that out, what people, I think,
um, might be missing here and
it's hard to stretch your mind
to encompass this, but it really
is a very multifaceted
billion-dollar industry.
Honeybees are livestock. And so
when people have chickens, when
people have, um, goats, they
have to go through certain
aspects of, um, you know,
permitting or even, you know,
inspections, but we don't have
that with bees. So when we talk
about the registrants and it
seems really low
um, that's going to limit the,
the, the sort of
the acknowledgement of the need
for more resources or education
or support for this industry
because there's definitely way
more than 9 commercial
registrants or non-commercial
beekeepers and as Kamali was
saying, you know, some have 1 or
2 less. Um, we have a lot of
folks right now who are what we
call small scale commercial. So
by national standards, they
don't have hundreds of hives or
even thousands of hives, but
they're making a living off of
it, and they're doing
value-added products, and
they're also
having to go through permitting
for all of that. But the, the
livestock that they're keeping
is under the radar. Um, that
being the case, then we end up
with these, you know, increasing
situations, right? So, um, to,
to share about how to get a
permit, I myself looked into
trying to put bees on BLM land
at one point. And, um, they
didn't have a process in place,
but they said, well, the closest
thing we can look at is that
grazing cattle.
right? Like, are they going to
be grazing? How much area are
they gonna need? Well, the
footprint for a hive is just the
box itself, but of course, they
fly, so they can fly up to 5
miles. Um, in that sense,
they're helping to pollinate not
only crops that people are
growing, but also all of these
plants that all of these other
myriad of animals are relying on
for food and sustenance. Um,
there's, there's unfortunately a
potential for pathogen and
pestsillover to other species as
well. So I'll, I'll leave it at
that because I know
this is going off topic, but the
point is, is that it's, it,
there's not, there's not enough
information in general,
especially for our state. So
even trying to get a permit to
put be somewhere is going to be
difficult because there's not a
process in place. We need these
processes
Madam Chair, members of the
panel, thank you for that. Uh,
of course, we're, we have
limited, uh, control or no
control and limited influence
over federal policies, uh,
probably even less so today, uh,
Mr. Long, if you did, uh, were
able to if any state policies
that limited the ability to put
um bees on state land, uh, I'd
be interested in learning more
about that if you want to follow
up, but, um, thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez and
then Representative Lujan.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
uh
uh, seeing the list that we
have, uh, I'll just be very
brief, but, uh, first of all,
thank you to all of you. And uh
if uh if my grandson who's in
2nd grade was here, he would
have loved to have been in your
panel. Uh, I have learned more
from him that uh you know, on
this issue, and he's just
fascinated by it, but as uh, you
know, uh, prote uh Stuart
mentioned, you know, education,
anytime you want to see growth
or you want to see change,
education is the key, especially
if you start from way down at
the level of kindergarten all
the way up, but I have seen Hut
the knowledge that he has
developed and it's just by just
being uh involved and fascinated
with the part but uh what I was
going to ask you is uh on the
presentation, uh, you mentioned
water and so if you have a very
small creek, a medium-sized
creek, or a regular
river in those regions where you
have that, that would mean that
it's pretty safe because the
water is there regardless of
drought.
Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, are you referring to,
uh, what, what do you mean by
safe? Well, you mentioned that
one of the keys was to have
water.
you know, that, that's part of
the cycle
of, you know, having a healthy
bee colonies
and I'm just saying in some
areas you have water all the
time regardless, even if it's uh
a very small trickle.
Well yeah, if we're talking
about managed pollinators, water
is essential, just like it is
for any other type of um uh
livestock. So safe in terms of
at least having moisture and,
and as we're familiar, you know,
it's kind of boom, it's kind of
boom and bust with moisture when
we get a lot of rain, we'll get
a lot of plant growth. Um, and
then when we don't, it's, it's
really slim pickings for
everybody, right? Um, so water
can definitely uh really is
critical. Obviously, they
need to have access to water,
um, but in addition to that,
it's just the, the stewardship
practices around that, but I, I
would agree with you in that I
think it it's safer and that at
least they have a reliable
source of water. They need
pollen for protein, they need
nectar for carbohydrates, water,
of course, helps to grow the
plants that will provide that
nutrition for them. So in that
sense, it is safer. Yes.
Thank you for that, Madam Chero,
the next part in, and I'm only
asking because uh you know, just
trying to know more about it. So
with New Mexico building more
wine vineyards. Does that help
the state?
Madam Chair, Representative
Gonzalez, uh, could you clarify
exactly what I'm just saying
that we're talking about uh
different plants, different
flowers, and with more growth in
our state with having more wine
vineyards.
coming up is that uh something
that does help our state with
more bees or
Madam Chair, Representative
Gonzalez, I would hazard a guess
that that would be beneficial
for beekeepers potentially, uh,
bringing their bees to those
areas as far as native bees go,
a lot of times they're reliant
more on the native vegetation
and a diverse.
set of vegetation and so Olivia,
uh, might be a better person for
that.
Madam chair Senator Gonzalez. I
lived in California for a while
and worked at Pinnacles National
Monument, which is right in,
surrounded by vineyards, and I
ventured over there a couple
times to see if I could find,
uh, bees on the, the grape
flowers, and they don't visit
them. So it doesn't benefit bees
to have veer doesn't benefit our
wild bees. They don't see it as
a source of pollen or nectar
Thank you for that. Um I'am
sure, the last part that I have
is so
and I don't know what the
correct word is, but, um, a
different stores, they sell
these apparatus like to like
glue traps that attract
mosquitoes or any kind, but you
also get bees in there and uh so
I guess uh for now I guess that
is legal and there's nothing
that prevents that, right?
Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, uh, no, definitely not
illegal to do that. I would say
too, and um, you know, we all
talked about the beautiful drive
up here, uh, research is showing
more and more that just the act
of getting in your car and
driving down a road that has
flowers on the side, does more,
uh, in, we're talking in the
millions and billions of bees
per day across the state of,
say, Utah, um, to damage bee
populations, then, then a
mosquito trap
unfortunately.
Very well, thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Next up,
Representative Bluehorn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for this presentation. Um
one of the, the things I do
every day, you know, when, when
I have the chance during the
spring and summer and even into
the fall. I, I watched the bees
in
our gardens and our, and our
property and see the different
types of bees.
And one thing I've noticed is
there aren't as many bees around
right now, um, and I grew up, I
mean, there, there are plentiful
and there are all sorts, all the
different, you know, types, many
of these types. What I'm seeing
right now are a lot of the
bumblebees, the bigger bees.
and that's just one thing I've
observed, just this, these last
two years is the depletion of
those, um, the other species. I
don't know where they are. I
don't know what's going on, but
it's alarming to me.
And
it's, it's, you know, our
insects and especially our bees
are, are those, those creatures
that if we're not paying
attention to, if we're, if it's
not a, we're
they're the markers, right, of,
of what's going on with the rest
of our, um,
biosphere and what and how
healthy our planet is, how
healthy our environment is, and
it's alarming to me right now,
and I even take note and I, I
have a little journal that I
keep and just keep, you know,
and the other, the other animal
I keep no note of is our birds.
Birds are coming back a little
bit more for me here in San, not
here but in Santa Fe, we're in
Taoas now. Um, so I just want to
commend you on all your work and
efforts that you're doing from
the um ecological uh science of,
um, it's a lot and I hear you, I
hear what you're asking us here
today, and I stand with you. I
think that if we are not more
focused on getting this data,
getting this information, we're
going to be more of a world of
hurt. might
my concerns are with the
practice of um the economy of,
of which you've described of of
how easily
we can get a hold of, you know,
Queen bee start a colony and,
and, and all that sort of thing.
Um, and there are no, can you,
um, just clarify, there are no
real regulations federally or
statewide. Is that correct, Mr.
Or those that are, that they're
not very, um, they're not
helping Mr. Chair.
Well, I'll just mention from a
commercial beekeeper standpoint.
I mean, I'd get my bees
inspected every year just
because I want to be able to
tell my customers that, um, but
in terms of what gets imported
in and Kamali can speak to more
specifics of what's in the B Law
and Act, um, but there's
each state has their own rules,
but in terms of mass transit, I
mean, we are a very um
transcontinental agricultural
system in this
country. So bees are moved for
massive pollination events,
Eduardo can speak to this as
well. He moves his bees for
pollination. I move my bees or I
don't, but my farm partner moves
our bees for pollination events,
um, and then they come back and
we have to get inspected when we
get there and we have to, you
know, have, um, you know, no
fire amp, uh, sort of
certification when we go through
different checkpoints, etc. Um,
so for queens in particular, uh,
they can pretty much be shipped
all over. Now, in places like,
and I'll just use this as
a quick example. Florida, for
instance, which has known
aggressive bee genetics. Every
queen producer there has to be
not only inspected annually, but
they have to have so many
numbers of support hives of
known genetic stock. And that
means that they know what kind
of bees they're breeding.
They're still open mating, and
that's what I think people maybe
might not realize this is all
happening overhead and um, you
know, what you can't see, you
can't really control, right? So,
uh, queen bees, for instance,
can fly up to 15
miles away to go mate, but
they're going to be dependent on
whatever the drone or male bee
population is there, and that's
where moving bees in without
regulation, then it changes the
genetics. It changes the pool
with which they're mating, and
that's where we start to have um
different crosses. What people
may not realize is honeybees are
one of the 20,000 different
kinds of global, you know,
species, but there's over 30
different known races of
honeybees. So there're some of
them have um
really gentle genetics. Some are
really aggressive, and that's
just due to where they came
from. Maybe they had big
predators or something that they
had to defend themselves, but
that's, it starts to get into
genetics more um that the
average beekeeper isn't very
familiar with. Thank you. And I
just remember, uh, just Mr.
Chair, a hearing where we, we,
uh, I don't, it wasn't a hearing
to, to the state, but it, uh,
trying to remember where it was,
but this was years ago.
Uh, it was just an, an
I don't know where I heard it,
but what, but it, it was
watching the, it was, um, noting
the migration of the African
bees and what that meant, um,
here in the United States and
how fast and how aggressive and
all the on all the things that
were going on with that. So I
have a concern there. I just
want to say I support you and
see what we can do because if we
don't have our pollinators, we
don't have, you know, um, and we
don't have the account that
you're, you know, that you're
doing and we don't have the
you know, the ecologists and the
science behind it. I, I just, I
feel we are going to really
it's we're we're doing a
disservice and our state having
the diversity, the biodiversity
that you mentioned is quite
exceptional and we need to
celebrate that. We need to do
more to preserve and conserve
what is going on with our bee
population in our state, and I
just wanted to say thank you,
thank you.
Madam Chair
Representative Lujan, I was
wondering if I could add a
little bit.
As far as import requirements
go, there is a requirement for
documentation for import based
on our B law in New Mexico.
but we found it very difficult
to enforce because we don't have
information about most of the
beekeepers in the state and it's
really difficult to enforce a uh
an industry that we have so
little information about. So,
Mr. Chair, there are, so you
don't have to be licensed to be
a beekeeper or you do, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
you do not have to have be
licensed to be a beekeeper. It's
only if you are a commercial
beekeeper that you have to have
registration, but if you're
importing, there are technically
laws in place for documentation
that you're supposed to have.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
therein lies the, the problem
because I mean, I have friends
that that just go online and get
and buy their queen bees and set
up shops, so to speak, thinking
they're doing the right thing,
quite honestly, and the survival
rate, even from those, those,
uh, that's at 0 right now from
what they've tried and they've
tried several times. So Mr.
Chair, I just think we need to
look into that and that, that
enforcement and the laws that we
have and how
you know, um, how we can better
regulate this in the future.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Kadena, then Representative
Herrera, then Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, panel. Um, I just
wanted to quickly share, Madam
Chair, that I appreciate
bringing this conversation
forward, um, all the, although
it's all the way up Pure North
and house, and I especially want
to appreciate that we had uh Mr.
Lin Linares Eduardo joined us
today, um, from South Central
New Mexico from the valley I
represent, uh, for me starting
my legislative career on the
Agin Water Committee and coming
back to the Agenwater Committee
in this last term. I
really appreciate that this is a
conversation that has been going
on for decades. Um, I also like
we've heard said today, we've
done the studies, we've done the
research, we've seen partners,
um, whether it be the applicator
groups or the pollinator working
groups. We've seen them come to
the table to be collaborative
and talk in pragmatic ways about
how we move
together in a way that makes
sense for New Mexico. What I
have to say, and I happen to
represent NMSU's main campus,
but including the Department of
Ag is within the District 33
boundaries in Donana County.
It's the only state agency that
is not headquartered in Santa
Fe, so it's, it's down south in
Donana County that I've been a
bit disappointed that NMDA with
this collaboration from between
partners.
hasn't
moved in thoughtful ways to
bring forward what partners are
ready to see come to life, um,
and specifically over I think it
was just as recent as this last
60 day session Instead, I was
surprised to see and hear.
from
stakeholders that there was was
potential bills that had little
sections here in massive NB NMDA
bills that did pertain to this
issue, but did not reflect the
work that has been happening
over many years now. Um, so I
know we're going into a 30-day
session. I still have remaining
questions about what
authority the agency does have,
like what realmaking authority
and other pieces you could move
independently to at least set up
a pilot or a proposal or
something to have a registry in
our state, um, and if it's not
possible within your authority
as an agency now, then I'd like
to see something in front of us
that we can vet and review and
debate and get into that would
move forward these
conversations.
Um
what I, I
really just wanted to offer that
back and potentially hear from
Eduardo if he's still with us.
The piece that's interesting to
me here and for me seems most
compelling and urgent is this
registry. Like some of my
colleagues here, I don't want
government to be burdensome. I
don't want to create a set of
regulations or requirements that
means we move beekeepers further
underground, but what I hear and
I represent in our district in
South Central New Mexico, uh,
where we grow more pecan
s than any other county in
America, um, where all of our
water users are part of the EBID
irrigation district. Like I
represent AG, and what I hear
people saying, including the
generational families like the
Garcias and Clay Schultz, which
were both on the same ditches as
my family, um, and where I've
had honey since I was a kid and
to date still, these are farmers
who know how critical they are
to our massive ag economy. Like
here it's easy to say I
I imagine there's members here
today listening that still don't
get bees are considered
livestock, but the piece I think
we also lose is that bees are a
critical component to our ag
economy across the board.
Uh, so when I, when I represent
a district like the one I'm
honored to represent.
I really want to see our state
agency
get something down and in front
of us. That doesn't mean it's
gonna be perfect. That doesn't
mean we're scared of amendments
or debate or some tension around
how we figure out what that
looks like, but I do hear
farmers and ag leaders in my
valley saying it's time that we
care for this issue and we
create a registry that works for
farmers, that works for stewards
of the land so that we can
responsibly just like our
neighboring states
know what's happening with bees
in our community. So, um, those
will be my comments, Madam
Chair, but I would like to hear
if Eduardo wants to offer
anything from someone down south
like I am about what it, where
he might see a registry like
that landing and how they would
like to see that come to life if
he might still be with us. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Eduardo, are you still with us?
Oh,
Madam chair, Representative
Parena yes in here.
Thank you for allowing me to
share here. I, I do want to
share
um, I completely agree, um, we
do see
many farmers, um, uh
other than beekeepers as well
that they want to contribute. I
do work, I get the
a chance to work with farmers
from all sizes, from 2-acre
farms to 100 acre farms that we
do pollination for.
And that is one of the biggest
uh sites of my operation is
doing more so than than honey
production. I do more
pollination than than honey
production.
So I get to work with many
farmers from different different
sizes and
no matter their size, they do,
they are concerned and they do
want to know.
uh,
what do we do, where do we go
when it comes to applying
pesticides when it comes to to
what are the best practices that
I can do, um, and I do, we do
have some resources like the BC
uh,
what do we do, where do we go
when it comes to applying
pesticides when it comes to to
what are the best practices that
I can do, um, and I do, we do
have some resources like the
BCheck from, from the Department
of Act.
Um
but it's very difficult when we
don't have
a registration
where RLBs are
Um,
I think one of the biggest
issues is
being able to have other
beekeepers, uh.
wanting to register the visa. I
know, I know a lot of, a lot of
beekeepers, uh, especially those
that come from temporarily from
out of state because we do have
beekeepers that come only for
certain times a year.
and then they leave. They don't
want to deal with registering
their bees.
Um, and unfortunately, we don't
have
the resources to be able to
identify them and, and be able
to talk to them and say this is
what you're required to do. Um,
I think of similar to other
livestock, like I mentioned
earlier, like the livestock
Bureau.
Um, if anyone was wanting to buy
bees or move or or livestock,
other livestock. There is a
system that they have to follow,
um.
and whether it's through a
position that opens up, uh,
through extension in uni in the
universities or um
or NNDA or the Lifestock Bureau
that are more familiar with
doing this type of work. Um, I
would like to see something like
that, uh, you put in place and
I, and I, and I support that. I
um.
because we do have the intent
and also whether a lot of
beekeepers, uh, register or not,
some knowing that they have to
register and they refuse not to,
just putting one less beehive on
their requirement.
or a lot of them also don't know
because I get to work and, and
talk to a lot of beekeepers
uh, and they also are not aware
of these requirements.
and I think I do think we need a
lot more outreach to, to be
clear for everyone that these
requirements are in place that
we have these requirements?
Um
so yes, I, I agree, um, with
Representative Kadena and I
think uh
um I'm here to help with
whatever I can in terms of, of
doing the outreach. I, I, I
reach out to all these
beekeepers that I talked to and
I tell them about this, but I, I
have no power to to be able to
enforce anything and they just
got a lot of people just blow me
off and, and yeah, we don't
register.
and some people do, but, but
yes, we, we have a lack of
contribution from other
beekeepers to, to register the
bees in that sense, but, but I
would like to see us be able to
enforce that better.
Thank you for joining us today,
Eduardo, and thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. OK, so I have
Representative Herrera, Senator
O'Malley, and Representative
Garcia. So you're gonna have to
start shortening up, uh,
Representative Ferrera
uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'd like to thank the panel as
always as a member of the AC
committee, I always enjoy your
presentations, and I always
learn something. Thank you so
much. Uh, I'm just curious, uh
what would it take to do a
pollinator census. I, I mean, I
don't even know if that's the
right word, but how, how do you
do that? What kind of an area do
you look at? Uh, how much does
it cost, uh, can you, anybody
answer that?
Madam Chair Representative
Herrera, I'll try to answer this
question. You guys chime in here
and help me, um, so pollinator
is such a big term. It includes,
you know, in, in New Mexico,
well, the bee's alone are 1100
But, um, a census would be
figuring out how many are in
different areas. So, of course,
first figuring out how you're
going to grid out New Mexico to
figure that out and then, um,
based on my experience doing a
lot of monitoring in different
places. It requires repeated
sampling in the same place over
multiple years because these
have a tendency to come and go
from a place just like birds do.
Sometimes they're in your
backyard, other years they're
not there, um, and so, uh, it's
a, it's a pretty substantial
effort
And so what we usually try to do
is, um, set up representative
plots in different habitats and
use those as sort of, uh,
telling us something about a
larger habitat, so we don't have
to census the whole thing. I'm
speaking only these guys talk
about the livestock. I talk
about the wildlife for the bees.
So just speaking about our wild
bees, I can't speak to how you
do that for honey bees.
Madam Chair Representative, as
far as uh census of beekeepers
keeping honey bees, it becomes a
little bit more difficult
because you're, you're relying
on people's willingness to
participate, but we have
explored ideas for uh a
voluntary registry that might
help at least get a better
picture, but it's, it's
difficult to get a really
a a perfect look because not
everyone is going to participate
in a voluntary registry.
Yeah, we just add to that I
think, you know, NMDA years ago,
um,
had brought up the idea of
possibly getting hobbyists
registered and they received a
little bit of backlash, I think,
from those at that time, but
that was before 2006 when
everybody and their brother
wanted to become a beekeeper,
um, you know, anybody who works
with stinging insects, tends to
be a little bit eccentric and a
little
kind of, you know, quiet and
quirky in their own ways. So,
um, you know, it's not something
that necessarily people want
everybody to know, and partially
that's because, you know,
there's a fear of of
misunderstanding, again, lack of
education, uh, a lot of people
will mistake, um, hornets and
yellow jackets for honeybees,
and then, you know, say I got
stung and it's like a thing. And
so there's been sort of, you
know, even nationally,
beekeepers tend to be quiet
people, but when you start
keeping
these, um, you are now working
with these semi-d domesticated
but still yet wild animals. And
so there, there's
despite what people's individual
feelings are, there's, um,
there's, I think there's a real,
uh
important aspect of public
safety that needs to be
followed. So if you want to keep
bees, then you're gonna need to
register. And I say that as a
commercial person who, you know,
I'm small scale commercial, but
I mean, it's, it's more effort
and, and hassle for me, but I'm
willing to do it. And if I
already have had to be doing it
already now for so many years,
why isn't everybody required to
do it? And I know Eduardo and I
have talked about this often,
like, why are we required to do
all this, but all these other
people are going under the
radar, and yet all those others
are the ones who are actually
posing the most threat because
of their inexperience and um and
ignorance of the fact that
different bees come from
different places. If you do
click and ship, that doesn't
mean you're going to get these
cute little fuzzy things you saw
online. You're going to get
basically a hive unit which in
and in and of itself are these
individual bees, but
collectively they become a
superorganism and that um
requires more knowledge of
management. The issue with, um,
bringing in bees because we
don't have a lot of localized
production becomes a massive
issue. I keep creeping up
farther and farther on the
mountain just to like have
appropriate breeding grounds,
but point being is that it's not
just these potential aggressive
genetics that will be moved in.
It's these pests that move in,
and the pests themselves pose an
issue, but they're actually
vectors. So like mosquitoes,
they start passing viruses, and
those are going to infect so
many others. So in terms of a
census to kind of get back to
your question, um,
yes, we could start with
voluntary, see how that goes. I
even suggested, hey, give
everybody a patch or a sticker
or something just to like, you
know, hey, I've registered my
hive, but I think there's ways
to do it where, um, not so much
anonymity, but privacy can be
maintained. Maybe they don't
have to tell us exactly where
they have them, but they can at
least tell us what zip code or
what county, um, and just how
many they have. And every year
that they have them, you know,
we should know. And the, and one
of the ways that we could also
encourage that is by telling
them
when we know how many we have
then we can really advocate for
more services, right? Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
since we're talking about a
registry, has anybody done an
estimate of the cost of of uh
implementing that in the state
of New Mexico?
Madam Chair Representative, I do
not believe anyone has looked at
the cost of that if we're
talking though about a voluntary
registry
it
if we're, if we're, if we can
make a, like a, uh, an
application or program, it
shouldn't be too high of a cost
for the department, um
but we have not done a cost
analysis.
Uh, thank you. And then just uh
uh close with the bee story, um.
we were running uh in career
science program and of course
little kids love you know bugs
and bees and caterpillars and
butterflies and uh I went out to
visit a little, uh, grade school
and talked to a little first
grader and
uh we're she was a bee, you
know, it was a bee, um, uh,
inquiry project, and I said, I
said to her, how do you know
which one is the queen
And she battered those big brown
eyes at me and she looked at me
and she said she's the one with
the crown.
And I just say it's kind of
disheartening sometimes when you
have to really educate preschool
kids, but it's really, really
fun and um I just wanted to
close with that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, ma'am Chair
Uh, I just wanted to
uh, say that I, uh, this idea of
having a voluntary registry or
for hobbyists and I think that's
a good one right now, what
you're saying is that some
someone who really functions as
a commercial operation could
have several hives throughout an
area as long as they're not in
one location. And I think that's
probably happening a lot all
over the state.
Um,
the idea of, of having a
volunteer register and having
hobbyists register. I mean, it's
really for the health of the
bees more than anything, as long
as it's not too onerous, I would
think that maybe there might be
some interest in doing that
because right now you just have
this one tier which is for
commercial and um and it's not
working obviously because you
can definitely get around it and
uh and I don't know what the
cost of the fees are for
registration, but I think that's
gonna be really important
Another thing, and that was
mentioned, um, by others is the
idea of really promoting, um,
uh, plants, uh, to, to attract,
uh, pollinators and I'll be
honest with you, I had no idea
that there were so many
different ones other than bees,
uh, and in fact, I started to
look up some things I didn't
know if Carpenter bees were
pollinators. I didn't know Mason
bees were wild bees, um, and,
uh, so that of course would go a
long way
And as, as a matter of fact, I
don't know if the city of
Albuquerque was is still
offering this, but one time, um
they were really promoting,
putting, uh, pollinating plants
and medians instead of just a
bunch of rocks and trees and
I'm, and I don't know
I haven't seen too much of that.
Maybe it has to do with
maintenance, uh, but, uh,
whatever we can do to really
encourage that. I think we will
be really important but also
just the the diversity of
insects that do this and also um
that diversity also creates uh
an opportunity for other
insects, right, to, to, you
know, to take advantage of the
bad insects and just that kind
of diversity is just very, very
helpful.
So anyway, I learned a lot this
morning and I want to thank you
for your efforts. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Can I, can I
mention something? I'll be very
brief, very briefly, yes, uh,
Madam Chair, and, um, uh,
Senator O'Malley and the rest of
the committee, um
thank you so much for bringing
that up. I mean that that's our
hope is that people will start
looking things up, you know, and
recognizing to that um how
interconnected it is, you know,
the pollinators are pollinating
these plants. These plants also
feed other insects which feed
the bats, which feed the
bunnies, which feed the coyote
and the bears, and then you get
a nice fat elk steak for dinner,
right? Like it just goes on down
the line. So, um, yeah, I just
really appreciate you bringing
that up. Thank you.
Thank you, and we're gonna
finish with this, uh, session
with Representative Garcia.
Thank you.
OK, thank you very much, um, my
question is a very simple one,
and it's based on experience,
uh, wondering if, uh, they're
transporting bees across into
our state, they're going across
on these major highways, I-40
specifically if they're being
expected to make sure that
they're well protected, that
they're in a safe environment. I
had the experience of traveling
between Gallop and Grants, and,
uh, 3 trucks passed me and
I realized that they're carrying
beehives, and they're pretty
well covered with mesh, netting,
and uh
two of them passed me and that's
when I realized that, oh, these
are hives. Wonder where they're
going. The third one passed me
and uh and it just so happened
that I started following it
uh, it, they were going pretty
fast, and I noticed that the
bees had all uh not all of them,
there was a number of bees that
had come out of the hives and
they were all in kind of pack in
the back. You can see them.
There was a swarm of them, and
then the top of the
the netting itself had come,
there was a small opening. It
was flapping
It was a done tightly, so pretty
soon they start escaping through
Thos, and I was wondering what's
going to happen to them. They're
coming out of a safe place that
you were in and now they're out
and they're open. Where are they
gonna go and what's going to
happen to them and that's, uh,
that's why I'm wondering, is
there
uh uh inspection at the state
line or anywhere that
that they make sure that
anything that's been transported
that could escape
or something would happen, uh,
is there something in place like
that?
Um
Madam Chair and Representative
Garcia, an esteemed committee,
um, Eduardo might have some
thoughts on this to share as
well. But, you know, there's,
um, like I mentioned, it's a
really multifaceted industry.
You have um packers, shippers,
distributors, brokers, all sorts
of folks involved in helping for
these big pollination events.
And yeah, we've got a lot coming
through. I-10, I-25, I-40, um,
and all those three are right in
our state. So we're a major
thoroughfare for this movement.
Um, they also have rules for the
truck drivers who are driving,
they can't drive over, you know,
X amount of hours. That's really
difficult when you have
livestock on board, especially
livestock that's, um,
conditioned to, uh, you know,
navigate with daylight, so they
try to drive through the day and
then only stop at night, but
sometimes, um, there are some
leakers and depending on where
they're going, then, you know,
whatever station they have to go
through, that's where they may
be inspected.
Um, the truckers that I've
talked to in the past usually
have spare nets, um, but it's,
it's a thing when my farm
partner moves bees, he knows
every gas station and every
spigot because he has to
actually stop and hose him down.
They will overheat if they don't
get out to fly, um, and for
these pollination events where
they're going cross country,
like say Maine all the way to
California for almonds. It could
be 5 days on a truck without
going to the bathroom. And so
the, there's a lot of stresses
that are put on them, but, um,
Eduardo,
do you wanna pipe in about
shipping these because I know he
moves them.
Very briefly, Eduardo.
Madamer senator, yes, I
currently just do CDs and we do
put them in nets. Um, they have
to be in nets because they have
to reach. It is very hard to
contain them, even, even make it
as tight as you can. Um, and the
bees will find a way out.
Um, from what I know, there are
currently no
uh inspection sites in the state
for for bees that are being
transferred.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anything else,
Representative Garcia?
Thank you so much and I'd like
to thank this entire panel. It
was very informative and as you
can see there's a lot of
interest. Thank you.
Um, members, I just wanted to
with something we did not talk
about today is that about the
political
um
fatality yesterday
and uh due to that and any uh
potential threats, the state
police
will be making the rounds of
different committees, so they
might visit us uh today, um,
part of it is just to uh
ensure our security
so we're going on to the very
next, uh, presentation, number 3
Community resilience, wildfire
mitigation.
microgrids, energy storage, and
public safety powered shutoffs
if you all would come to the
table. I need a pucktae
Louis, uh, Lee Bowie and West
Gray, please.
And we will start with Puck, so
you might get the microphone
over to you.
Yeah
OK, please go ahead
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Puck Stahr, and I am
the director of the Energy
Conservation Management division
over at MED, and
I'm delighted to be here to
speak about, um, microgrids for
wildfire mitigation and
resilience. I'm going to give a
brief overview of sort of the
state of play with microgrids in
New Mexico and then turn over to
my colleagues here who are much
more boots on the ground. Um,
and I will say we had a little
mix up with drafts, so the paper
version you're holding is
slightly different from the
presented version, but you will
get the email, um, screen
version.
So I wanna, I, I do want to make
a comment.
The reason this particular uh
session came about is because I
get all of the um
house uh alerts and about all
the work that's being done on
about wildfire on uh private as
well as public lands and so I
thought that it would be wise to
hear what the state is doing and
what the other utilities are
doing. So that's how this
presentation came about. Thank
you.
Great, thank you, Chair. Um, so
it following in that, uh, we're
starting off with sort of some
of the problems out there that
microgrids could help contribute
to solving, uh, one problem is
that ford wires can cause fire.
Uh, the current data does show
that that's very, very rare in
New Mexico, however, um, our
latest data says that of all the
wildfires in New Mexico to date,
only 1% of them have been caused
by remote lines that we know of.
Um, another problem that uh
microgrids might help solved is
that remote customers can be
very expensive to serve if you
imagine stringing miles of poles
and and wires out to a far-flung
cabin that could be very
expensive, um, or whether you
have to underground those lines
because of the fire risk in the
area, and that can raise costs
for everyone because in the
utility world, typically, um,
those capital expenditure costs
or capE are averaged across all
customers.
A third problem is that, um, you
know, in New Mexico we now have
PSPSs, public safety power
shutoffs as a last resort that
utilities can use to prevent
triggering a wildfire. However,
when we do those that can leave,
um, remote communities without
power, um, during those
protective times.
Um, so one solution can be
microgrids, um, and I will note
that here's a, a difference, uh,
microgrids, we tend to think of
as, um, a solar panel on a cute
little cabin at the end of at
the end of a roadway, but it can
also be for community centers so
that uh you'll see a second
picture here of a civic center
that also had solar and
batteries. Um, microgrids are,
uh, there's lots of variety with
what a microgrid is, um, and
it's, there's not a clear
definition, but typically
they're small local
energy systems, usually made up
of solar panels and batteries
that can power homes or
buildings or community centers
when main grid goes down. And
they're often placed at the edge
of the larger grid and or in the
center of town to help
communities keep the lights on
during emergencies, um, and they
can also help reduce strain on
the overall system and lower
energy costs by using clean
power and storing it for later
use.
Um, some solutions for
microgrids, so they can ease the
impact of PSPSs, um, as remote
customers or town centers would
retain electricity during PSPSs.
Um, in some cases they can
reduce the cost of grid build
out, thus lowering costs for
everyone. In, in other words, if
you don't have to string those
poles and wires the last 5 miles
that can lower costs for
everyone.
Um, during regular times,
meaning not during wildfire
times, um, you can also use
microgrids. You can repurpose
them for peak shaving, meaning
that during times of peak load
on the grid like a July
afternoon when everyone's air
conditioners are running, um, if
they're set up in a certain way,
a microgrid can kind of
voluntarily take itself off the
grid and power itself, thus sort
of keeping the peak a little bit
lower and easing the strain on
our grid and your utilities.
Um, and also during regular
chis, uh, microgrids can allow
for arbitrage. Um, this means
that you can charge your battery
when rates are low and then
discharge it when rates are
high, and that lowers um costs
for individual customers.
Um, one example of a
um
microgrid in the works right now
in the United States is uh Green
Mountain Power, the utility in
Vermont has done a zero outages
initiative. You see her a
gentleman who's very thrilled
with his Tesla wall, um, and the
green, the zero outages
initiative deploys batteries to
certain locations on the grid as
determined by the utility such
as end of the line, um,
locations or at rest community
members like medic folks who are
medically dependent on
electricity and community
centers, um, the batteries
in Vermont are under the control
of the utility and during
regular times, those batteries
in the solar provide those uh
grid services like arbitage and
peak shaving, and then during
outages, those areas have no
outage.
Um, some of the challenges with
microgrids is there can be a
high upfront costs, um, however,
a good lifetime cost, um, the
utility ownership of solar and
storage can help reduce the
lifetime costs, but the PRC
rules and and regulatory cla
clarity are still evolving here.
Another challenge with microgrid
can be their technology
dependent. Um, they work best
when they're paired with smart
buildings or smart panels or
grid-enabled infrastructure, um,
which is limited in many areas,
especially in our rural
communities here in New Mexico.
Another challenge with
microgrids is vehicle
integration is promising here,
but still very young. You may
hear this referred to as V to G
vehicle to grid or vehicle to
home, VH or V to X when you just
sort of wave your arms and mean
it all. Um, EVs can serve as
quite large batteries, um, but
only select models support this
and we need a lot of standards
and we need a lot of regulations
to clarify how vehicles or EVs
could help power our community
centers, our homes, or even the
grid at large.
Um, and the last challenge with
microgrid is for now they are of
a limited duration because the
batteries are only so big. Um,
so most microgrids can provide
backup for only a few days, um,
which is often sufficient, um,
and if you wanted longer than
that, you can get it, but it
starts to get expensive.
Um,
the next few slides I'm gonna go
quickly through. These are just
various ways to pay for GridEdge
distribution, and I'm gonna go
quickly because you all created
most of these and voted on them.
Um, so we have, uh, a federal
fund the state Energy, energy
efficiency revolving loan fund.
There's the energy efficiency
and conservation block grant,
another federal grant, which we
have in hand here. Um, we have
the federal power grant
preventing outages while
enhancing
Resilience. The state of New
Mexico has received the 1st 3 of
what is a 5-year program. It's
unclear whether we'll receive
years 3 and 4.
Uh, and then the state grid
modernization fund can chip in
with microgrids.
Solar for all, which is a a
federal grant which is uh has
some question marks around it
right now. Um, and then on the
tax credit side for individuals,
we have, of course, our state
solar market development tax
credit, and then the clean car
Income tax credit, which can
help if you're using your car as
your battery.
And then if you wanted to pay
for a community resilience
center, um, you could use pretty
much all of what I just went
through, plus here in my office,
we run an ESCO program, um, ESCO
means, uh, an esco contractor
helps pay for the high upfront
costs of installing a microgrid
and then the community center or
town hall would pay back those
costs over 10 or 20 years, sort
of like a mortgage.
Um, and my office is overseeing
over $770 million of ESCO
projects to date in New Mexico.
Uh, we also now have the
innovation in state government
fund, um, which is new and being
set up, but that could
potentially help pay for some
microgrids for community
centers.
um, and then the local solar
access fund, um, which is also
being set up over at NMFA.
Um, and then we have also
in-house at ECchem, a clean
energy finance partner who is
sort of coming alongside ECAM to
support all kinds of creative
green financing that we need for
the state, like loan loss
reserve programs and interest
rate buydowns, um, etc.
Um, moving on to eCAM support.
So I mentioned we have our, um,
in-house clean energy finance
team. We are, uh, halfway
through building a one-stop shop
website to help folks find and
access and apply for all of
these funds at
cleanEnergy.nm.gov. And starting
last week, we have energy
coaches, which are available for
both residences and also like a
city hall or county who wanted
to install a microgrid, who can
coach through best practices and
also how to fund it.
Um, and with that, I'll just end
on some things for the um
committee to consider, uh, if we
wanted to move ahead with
microgrids in a big way in New
Mexico would be considered
clarifying the statute and or
the PRC regulations around
virtual power plants or VPPs and
behind the meter electricity
generation.
um, consider allowing or, or
encouraging sandboxes for
utilities to test different
microgrid regulations and also
to test the cost structures and
the technologies. Those are 3
different types of sandboxes.
Um, also, we need to consider
how to properly value these
services. Sometimes the cost of
electricity is one thing, but
the cost of being able to, to
keep your insulin cool during a
PSPS has a different value which
we haven't really
discussed or monetized.
Um, and the last thing to think
about is maybe a tax credit or
other incentive for batteries.
Um, and with that, I will end my
time.
Thank you very much and we'll
move on. I think, uh, Luis,
you're next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, my name is
Luis Reyes. I'm the CEO of
Kickarson Electric Cooperative,
uh, located here in Taos.
Uh, Karson is a diversified
cooperative. Uh, we have a core
business to distribution of
electricity. We also own a
broadband company. They also own
a propane company and our
members have uh uh
taken us in the direction of we
become 100% daytime solar in
2022 and have deployed about
16.5 megawatts of battery
storage in our system.
uh
as we move forward to try to
address some of the challenges
that we have here in Northern
Mexico, wildfires is probably
Katey Carson's biggest risk.
Uh, we can see, uh, to the east
of us what happened in the Maura
San Miguel area. That fire we
can see the, the impacts of the
Ruidosa fire, uh, fires don't
stop at a border. They, they are
in indiscriminate and um
pretty devastating
uh, we still have people moving
up to our area and they're
moving into the mountain
communities. And so the
microgrids are a tool, a
strategy to be able to address
the issues that we have. So
first and foremost, we are going
to be addressing wildfire
mitigation. How can you use a
microgrid uh to mitigate
wildfire, make it safe, just not
for the public but also for the
first responders and for the
people that have to address
these issues.
Secondly, for extreme weather
events, uh, here we do have a
lot of snow and wind and ice and
as uh as Puck mentioned, you
know, we too, I think all, all,
all co ops, utilities strive to
have lower outages, but it is
getting tougher and tougher to
operate these, these systems.
Uh, thirdly, we want to address
what we see in rural areas is we
see a lot of major medical
devices being taken home.
and so that's just kind of
what's what's happening is, is,
uh, you know, Holy Cross does a
good job here, but there are
critical care facility, and so
they keep you a couple of days
and then they have to ship you
out to somewhere that hasn't
additional bed and then you come
back, uh, with the device.
most, if not all those devices
require electricity.
and so, uh, I view that we're
really as co-ops aren't looking
at uh
kind of the selling electricity,
but how do we enhance the
quality of life?
for what's happening in, in our,
in our society,
uh
you know, post COVID, we have a
lot of people still working from
home, may have a home office,
uh, more active at home. So if
we have an outage or
interruption, it does impact
their ability to make a living.
And then finally, we're looking
for a solution for power safety
power shutoffs.
We understand the risk, uh, no
co op can withstand. I think, I
don't think any utility could
withstand a major fire as we've
seen in, in, in California,
where you get, you know, tens of
millions of dollars of lawsuits,
uh, all that happens is the
rates go up, and then you have
to rebuild the system
and so I, I think you've heard
this in a part of our commercial
is also to help on, you know,
liability. How do we, how do we
limit our liability
uh, when the co-ops and
utilities, I think, are doing
everything possible to mitigate
these fires. And so, uh, as Puck
mentioned, uh
what could happen, uh, so Kate
Carson's going to build 3
microgrids. Uh, we've been
funded by the DOE and a
competitive award. We have
located, uh, or
there's 3 areas that we've
identified and we've started.
We've worked in conjunction with
both uh the uh Carson National
Forest and also with Taos County
and with the first responders to
determine which, which is the
highest risk areas in our in our
system and then let's start
focusing on microgrids in those
areas.
So a little different uh than,
than was explained, uh, uh, and,
and step back, the three areas
are Towski Valley.
If you've ever been to Towski
Valley, uh, it's a dead end. So
unless you can, you know, uh,
climb a 12,000 ft mountain
during a fire, there's no way to
get out of there.
Uh, the second one is in
Penasco.
So we serve the pinaco area with
one radio line, one transmission
line that goes over US Hill. If
we lose that, then we're
completely out, uh, 4 of the
Forest Service asks us during a
fire to turn it off, we're
completely out. And then we
were, we have a microgrid in El
Rito, New Mexico. That is also
designed to work with northern
College, northern Mexico College
to do some training.
We think we need to get people
trained in, in storage and
batteries, of microgrid
controllers, that kind of
technology so that we, uh, in
essence try to build our own,
you know, kind of grow our own
employees to have them have a
chance to to do this because
they, you can use microgrids
basically in any application as
it was mentioned. Uh, the status
of the microgrids right now is
all the batteries have been uh
been ordered. Uh, so we have,
uh, we're using lithium ion,
iron phos
ph ate batteries
The iron phosphate is designed
for fire retardant. And as I
watch around what's going on,
uh, discussions on batteries.
Uh, we want to make sure that
our public is, that the battery
isn't going to start the fire.
Uh, again, from our perspective,
the co op, we've operated
batteries for 3 years.
and we have, we've had no issues
with the batteries.
at all. In fact, every new uh
solar facility we build is going
to have battery storage, and we
currently have an 8 megawatt
facility at the uh in Amalia,
New Mexico, that's gonna have
about 9 megawatts of battery
storage.
And so, uh, we plan to have
these uh online.
about August of next year.
batteries have been ordered.
They're, they're about a 40-week
lead time. Uh, we have the
contractor, we've already met
with the different communities.
The first people we met with is
the first responders. We want to
make sure that the fire police
understand where the batteries
are going to be, what issues may
come up with the batteries and
then address those issues.
And so we've done a lot of work
with our members to make sure
that they understand the value
that comes to them.
when we do this as a result of
that, we've had other mountain
communities ask for microgrids,
you know, Red River, Angel Fire,
Town of Taos, uh, and so it
really is, uh, we think a good
way to then, as I mentioned
earlier, mitigate uh
uh fires or addresses issues.
I'll give you an example. I
think the other thing, stepping
back again, is there also going
to be AI enabled. So we're
working with New Mexico State
University, uh, on, uh, simple
technology, very high res, very
smart cameras that you kind of
put on the power line, and it's
feeding back data. Basically,
it's called a digital twin. So
it's taking a picture of the
system
and then recreating on computer
and then with the data, we'll be
we we better understand what's
happening with our system
in real time and then coupled
with that is gonna be weather
stations. So then we can start
analyzing when things happen,
what weather conditions occur,
what's gonna happen? And then
try to predict that.
So in predicting if we know that
there's gonna be an extreme
weather events.
Uh, our position is let's turn
off the, you know, shut off the
power lines going to that area,
one of the three areas, the
batteries come on, the batteries
that we are uh purchasing our
six-hour batteries. So as Puck
says, we, we currently do not
have a long duration battery
that works, but that gives first
responders the elected
officials, people who have um
medical devices, a chance to
make some decisions and also for
us to communicate, do we think
this is going to be a long-term
event, gonna be a short-term
event.
but it gives more information
Uh, we're also proposing to
share on these, on these
batteries and and they're the
the AI is pretty, you know, it's
starting to get pretty
sophisticated.
Uh, we have systems that we're
deploying that once that once it
can see smoke, let's say it just
see smoke.
you'll see, it'll tell you how
far the smoke is.
So you get an actual coordinate
and then once the technology you
can actually then deploy a drone
to go see what's going on at
that area. Our goal is to then
have the Carson National Forest
and the first responders have
access to this data. The co op
just wants to be able to support
that for our infrastructure, but
there's no reason that other
first responders, other entities
B BLM, um, Forest Service, uh,
Taos Pueblo, Picqueris Polo,
can't utilize this data.
to better uh uh address these
these issues.
So at Toschiavelli, that's,
that's a scheme, uh, it'll be
charged from the grid
If you've been to Towski Valley
very, very narrow area, uh,
property is very expensive. It's
not conducive to put solar on,
on that type of property. So
we'll just charge that from the
grid.
and that would be in Ready State
and because we have a fiber
optic network, Karson can see
all this in real time.
So we can see the state of
battery, uh, we, we, we have a
lot of data coming in, uh, and
then with weather stations and
all the other technology we
have, uh, we have a pretty good
handle on what's going on in
those areas at any time we want
to know.
Uh, second one in, in, in, uh,
Penasco, uh, that's gonna be
situated at our substation, so
it's gonna feed the batteries,
we'll feed right back into our
grid. Uh, we have two power
supplies that will serve that.
One will be from our system, the
second is we have agreements
with Picqueri Pueblo. They have
22 solar rays that we are
purchasing power. So then
they'll back, they'll be the
power supply for those
batteries.
In addition to what we're doing,
Pierre is also creating a
microgrid uh for their, for
their pueblo and we're working
with them on those
interconnections.
and then in the West El Rito,
um, it's on the college campus,
uh.
property, there's already solar
facility, so we're gonna attach
it to the solar facility. So in
that case, the primary uh feed
will be the, the, the solar
facility to the battery and then
the same type of strategy
depending on the events, uh,
then we will then, uh, deploy
the proper strategies.
Uh, the AI again, the, the
cameras, uh, with weather
stations, we also have uh
software integrated into this so
we can actually model a fire. So
based on data that we gain, data
we can get from the Carson, the
BLM, we can actually model the
fire, the characteristics of the
fire first before we can model,
so we, we better understand what
part of our system we have to
harden and then during a fire,
we can share that information so
at least the fire
or first responders know which
direction this fire may go. and
also so we can notify people so
if they have to evacuate, at
least we have some data.
of where the fire is going. So
then you know in some areas
which way to evacuate. And if
you're in Taos Canyon, do you go
to Angel Fire or do you come
towards Taos, and I think part
of this again as I mentioned,
really goes to the quality of
life and how do we use these
tools to enhance public safety.
And so with that, you know, I
could talk about Mike Riggers
all day, uh, and finally the,
the importance of the propane.
We are looking at machines that
we can attach to our propane
facilities for resiliency
You know, when there's a, when
there's a fire, extreme weather,
uh, no one has ever asked me and
I go, I still go out and outages
with the crews. Where you're
getting your power from? The
question is, how long is it
gonna be out and when is it
gonna come back? And I think the
more that we can get, uh, keep
more people with service during
these uh pretty extreme times,
the better for our our
community.
And so with this mountain chair
I, I'd, uh, pass this over to my
good friend Lee. Thank you.
Thank you. Please go ahead, Lee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Lee Bowie.
I'm with the Tri-State
Generation and Transmission
Association. We are the not for
profit wholesale power supplier
to 40 electric cooperatives
across the West, including 11 in
New Mexico, including one that
serves my family in the East
mountains.
One of the important things to
think about on these issues when
it comes to to tri-state is the
nature of how we operate. We're
a wholesale power provider. In
fact, we have the most high
voltage transmission of any
generation and transmission
cooperative in America, about
6000 miles of the high voltage
transmission lines, uh, we serve
a population of approximately a
million people, which means that
transmission is a significant
part of the work that we do.
Uh,
rural residents, uh, our members
are spread across the west, and
it takes a significant amount of
infrastructure to be able to
serve reliable and responsible
power uh to those co-ops.
so
we take very seriously uh
operating a safe and reliable
system, uh, one that we hope can
continue to deliver power to our
members, no matter what.
Tri-state is a rapidly changing
uh power supplier, um, last year
we were about with our members,
38% renewable at the end of this
year, about half of the power
that our members use will come
from renewable resources and we
forecast in 2070 about 70% of
the power our members use will
come from renewables, so, uh, we
are meeting and exceeding the
requirements of the Energy
Transition Act and, and proud to
be doing that. In fact, our
first solar project was in New
Mexico out near Springer and our
largest project is surrounding
our retired Escalante station
coal plant out near Grant's.
When it comes to microgrids, one
of the most important things
that I can tell you today is
what tri-state is doing is a
wholesale power supplier to
support our members' goals and
to help make distributed
generation or microgrids at the
local level.
work as best as they can and we
call that our cooperative energy
ecosystem.
And what that is is a fancy term
for what is a distributed energy
resource management system that
ties together the operations of
a local energy resource, say at
a hospital or other types of
facilities to the co op that
electrically serves them to
tri-state as the power supplier.
and working together in a system
that can best take advantage of
that distributed resource of
that micro grid. We can help
make that financially viable
around the clock
365 days of a year. Does it
matters how you structure the
economics and the power supply
that may come from a micro grid
with a local co op with a GNT.
And by optimizing that system,
we're working to make that
affordable and practical. So
it's an important part of the
overall energy system. Uh, we
also are supporting our members'
goals by providing uh ample
opportunities for local
distributed generation, uh,
through one of our policies that
our members have put into place.
They can supply up to 20% from
the local co op and in that
community. Uh, another program
adds another 40% to that called
bring your own resource and
developing rural energy
resources and storage. Uh, we've
also been very active and have a
new demand response tariff, uh,
that helps to create more value
for those distributed resources
when we can control loads or
control resources.
and help to make them even more
financially viable. So when it
comes to microgrids and the
wholesale power supply picture,
we're doing the work that needs
to be done to help support our
members and local communities,
do what they need to do, but
making it optimized so that the
financials work, and that's
really important
There's two major aspects to how
we approach wildfire mitigation,
and the first is proactive, and
it's something that we've always
done. We have a greater focus
now than ever, and that's doing
the work that we need to do to
harden our systems, to make them
more resilient, so we can always
deliver the power that our
members of rural communities
need and that involves assessing
the risk, understanding where we
need to put our focus in
wildfire mitigation activities,
uh, conducting ongoing
vegetation management projects
where we have transmission
corridors. In fact, there's a
project ongoing right now in the
Carson Forest from the Black
Lake Tahos line and a you are in
the community or listening to
the radio, you'll see uh
newspaper ads or radio ads
talking about that work that's
ongoing and we'll actually be
flying helicopters to remove
material from that corridor
starting on the 15th of this
month.
But it's really important for us
to be able to understand where
the risks are with our
transmission system and
proactively go out and manage
that risk.
And so we actively do that
across our member service
territory across where we have
transmission facilities, um, we
do recognize that northern New
Mexico, Central New Mexico, uh,
are high risk areas and we're
addressing those as we are right
now in that Black Lake Tahos
line.
The other part of the work that
we do is call it real time. Uh,
we are constantly monitoring
weather conditions, uh, the
conditions of our system and as
uh you get into red flag
conditions as conditions
warrant, we have a number of
steps in our operational
processes that help to mitigate
the risk that comes from
operating uh transmission
system, uh, in forested areas
where there's a higher degree of
risk, and that includes uh
whether we go to what's called
a uh no test or no reclose
position where if we get a fault
and our transmission line, the
system just doesn't
automatically try to put it back
on. It waits until we can
identify what the issue was.
patrol the lines as is needed
before we put transmission back
into service to avoid the
potential uh risk of a wildfire.
Uh, we do have in our plans, uh,
the ability to conduct a public
safety power shutoff. It is
something that we really do not
intend to do if we're being
proactive and doing the work
that we need to do to maintain a
safe transmission system. We
want to minimize the use of the
public safety power shut off.
One of the key issues with
transmission is
our transmission serves fairly
wide areas, and if you turn off
transmission, you can turn off
the power potentially to large
areas served by co-ops and other
utilities. You can also cause
disruptions in the larger
transmission grid. So we work to
make sure that we're operating
the system safely and can do
that and if we do have to
conduct a public safety power
shutoff, um, how to mitigate
those issues, so the implic
ations are as narrow as they can
be.
We're also actively involved
with several efforts, including
the Senate Memorial to Wildfire
Study Group, uh, working with
the PRC, in fact, one of our
staffers just in the last few
weeks, uh, was at the PRC for uh
one of their wildfire
preparedness and mitigation
workshops. Um, we also work very
closely with the state emergency
operations center and your ESF
12, which is the emergency
personnel that are tied to the
electric utilities and making
sure that
our response to uh any kind of
risk or issue is uh managed in a
very coordinated way. And if I
can throw a, uh, uh thanks to,
to Wes. uh, I think you'll find
that the utilities in New Mexico
are very much working together
when it comes to these issues
and communicating potential
issues on the system, both from
an operational standpoint and
from a communication standpoint
because it's critical as we're
talking
to each other about how the
system could be affected by
issues. We're also communicating
that in Tri-State's case with
our members so they can
communicate with the public.
Thank you very much, uh, Wes,
you're next.
and I know Sarah's giving you
guys the time and we already
have people lining up for
questions. Thank you. OK, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, honored
committee, uh, I'm West Gray. I
am P&M's vice president of
operations and Engineering.
Um
from a microgrid perspective,
P&M hasn't done a whole lot. We
did some, uh, pilot projects in
the 2010 timeframe in
partnership with some private
entities and Sandia National
Labs doing microgrids. And just
to kind of prove them, so there
were a combination of uh solar
storage, uh, some generators to
try to put together packages.
and it they were proof of
concept to show that microgrids
could work.
but uh over the last few years
there hasn't been as much
interest in microgrids, uh, P&M
does not own any microgrids
within its system currently. We
only have one that's active on
our system, and it's actually at
Santa Fe Community College. So
the community college has been
looking at ways to leverage
their solar packages, uh, with
battery storage and uh natural
gas-fired generators to have
resiliency on their system so
that if there is an outage, they
can be up and running.
But uh, as my colleague Mr.
Reyes put out there, uh, those
communities that are served with
a single line to feed them
become a problem whether it's
from a resiliency standpoint
looking at outage just normal
outages or
during wildfire conditions that
they just don't have that kind
of resiliency because of the
nature of the construction and
the cost it would take to build
a second line into those uh into
those communities so communities
such as Ruidoso, which has been
impacted by fires in 24, uh,
Tularosa, the town of Clayton in
the northeast part of the state,
uh, even our communities just
east of Albuquerque in the
mountains, uh, Taharras, Sandia
Crest, those areas can be
impacted because they're fed
with a single radial line. So,
uh, PNM is looked at and we're
considering that as an option in
comparing the cost benefits of
building an additional
transmission line or additional
feeds into that area or
installing a microgrid to
provide that level of
resiliency. So it's trying to
beef up those communities and
keep them as viable to protect
those communities because that's
really the bottom line for all
of these activities. It's
supporting those communities and
making sure that they can stay,
uh, viable, resilient, and we
don't have any ancillary
impacts.
From an energy storage
perspective, energy storage is
gonna be key as we move forward
closer in energy transition to
100% renewable. Um, it's tough
from a utility perspective for
us, you know, our peak
conditions are about 2300
megawatts of load and for
batteries to be viable and
provide power 24/7, we look at 4
to 5 times that capacity to
serve customers 2
4 / 7 so it's a big investment
in batteries and other types of
storage technologies
to be able to provide 24/7
power. So it's, it's, it's
tough.
Um, PNM has uh two projects
currently in service. If they're
not very big. They're 6
megawatt. We have a couple more
projects coming on in 25 and 26
to or I'm sorry 26 and 27 to add
another 110 megawatts of
storage, we're solving some of
those problems by contracting
out with third-party providers
under what we call a energy
storage agreement, so they
provide a renewable and storage.
and it's not PNM owned, but
we're contracted to take the
output from those facilities.
So currently we have about 720
megawatts of projects that are
actually in service providing
service to customers now we have
another 100 megawatts of
batteries coming online at the
end of 25, and then another 300
megawatts coming on in 206 and
27, so it's working toward this
goal in 2045 of being 100%
renewable at this point.
OK
wildfire mitigation and public
safety power shutoffs, and one
of the keys that we've
discovered through our journey
with wildfire mitigation is
coordination is the key as uh
colleagues from Tri-State said
the utilities naturally we
communicate with each other
daily.
from an operations level. We're
talking to each other about
conditions that are going on,
but as climate changes and we're
seeing more severe weather and
longer duration storms and
higher wind speeds, it
challenges utilities to have.
resiliency built into it, and,
and it requires a lot more
communications.
so
through that the utilities are
coordinating more with, uh,
emergency managers at a local
level. First responders,
community leaders, tribal
leaders, um.
in trying to coordinate what
goes on.
Uh, public safety power shutoff
can have a negative connotation,
but we're trying to get out
there and figure out what we
don't know.
So meeting with those key
stakeholders has enabled us to
understand
what is the broader community
impact of turning off power.
And the challenge being is from
a utility perspective, if the
system is up and running, we
know if there's a problem out
there because we have a
protective devices that will
trigger triple line off and we
can dispatch a crew. If we
proactively turn off power
we don't know if a tree is blown
into a power line or a power
pole has broken and fallen over.
We won't know that, so we have
to go out and do what we call
100% patrol of every facility.
We have to drive it all out.
And in certain districts it is
problematic because there are
hundreds of miles of line, um,
I'll give an example. Our Silver
City district is one of our
largest districts in PNM. We
have almost 1000 miles of power
line in the Silver City District
and so from a public safety,
public safety power shutoff
perspective. If, if I just took
our local Silver City crews and
patrolled that line.
we'd have people out for a week.
easy
It's a lot of miles and you have
to have a couple of guys in a
truck. There's sections of that
line that have to be walked.
So we have to bring in extra
resources from either our other
operating divisions or we have
to bring in contractors, we have
contracts with helicopter
patrols. We have contracts with
drone operators to be able to to
shorten that outage as much as
we can. So we'd like to keep it
within 24 to 48 hours, but
still, that's a huge impact on
communities, more so.
so, uh, with that we're building
resiliency into the grid. Part
of that is, uh, we've done
extensive aerial patrols with
LIDAR in 2023. Throughout areas
that we deem have a higher
potential of, of wildfire.
We conducted extensive ground
patrols of those areas to
understand the infrastructure
and make sure it was going to be
viable, that it was not at risk
due to extreme winds or extreme
conditions.
And then we're using
satellite technology that pairs
with AI to be able to analyze
vegetation in and around power
lines. So we look at those that
infrastructure and that helps us
prioritize the work we might do
in vegetation management to go
out and do extra clearing.
and then from an electric
perspective, I, I, I never
thought we would have to be
wildfire experts, but we're
modeling wildfire and wildfire
risks every 6 hours.
every day of the year
And it's just the nature of the
climate and the risk that's out
there, so all of us utilities
are looking at wildfire risk.
We're modeling, we're looking at
wildfire spread. We're looking
at things that
in my career, I never thought I
would ever see from an electric
utility perspective, but we have
to, we need, you know, for us,
we have an obligation not only
to serve but to protect our
communities, to provide for
those communities.
So we do all of those things and
then we leverage all of that
data we get back to harden the
system. So in areas that we have
that higher fire risk, we build
now and when we do replacements,
we build it to a higher
construction standard, stouter
poles, fiberglass cross arms.
Uh, we use a
colloquialize it, a buffet of
choices to come up with
mitigation technologies to try
to prevent wildfire because over
the, over the course of my
career, I mean, we've seen some
crazy things blow up into a
power line. I mean,
metal from uh a shed roof.
to an entire trampoline, so
things during extreme wind and
weather conditions can drive
what we do, but we don't want
power lines to be the cause of
the next catastrophic wildfire.
So with that, the, the last
choice is public safety power
shutoff, and again it takes
a tremendous effort of
coordination between utilities,
community leaders, emergency
managers, the state EOC, all of
those folks to try to coordinate
what we do and why we do it to
try to protect those communities
and so we, we're meeting
extensively we're having
wildfire town halls with local
fire, state forestry, other
groups that talk about welfare
mitigation efforts and what
people need to do.
um
we meet extensively with those
community leaders and do that
pre-planning. We conduct table
talk exercises to make sure that
we know what we're gonna do in
case we need to shut off power
for a PSPS or during an extreme
event, but also we bring in
third parties to our tabletops
so that the community leaders
see what we're doing and we can
plan together because it's gonna
be a collaborative effort as we
go forward, but it takes all of
us
risk managers, emergency
managers, tribal leaders, all of
us working together. It is a
huge collaborative effort moving
forward, something that we
really haven't seen as much of,
but we are, we are engaging in
it.
Um, one of the things is about
communication and the biggest
thing we've been talking to, uh,
teams with.
is, is getting the word out so
it's just getting notifications
out, we're moving to a watch
advisory warning similar to the
Weather Service about PSPS and
all of our service territories,
so we'll start putting those
watches out
34 days before an event just so
that community people know
that, hey, something is coming
as we get a day before we'll do
an advisory. Hey, we're gonna,
we, we have a potential of
turning off power tomorrow.
And then the day of, we'll put a
warning out.
So it's just trying to
communicate with them and then
we, we've activated programs
such as our LifeWatch program
normally account holders can
sign up to get those outage
alerts with LifeWatch.
not only does the account holder
but a primary caregiver can also
get the same alerts so that we
don't leave any, um, vulnerable
communities out there that, hey,
not only because
you know, I'm one, I've got a 94
year old mom. She doesn't
necessarily pay attention to her
messages. She doesn't pay
attention to anything.
If I'm getting those same
messages as she's getting, then
I can provide for her to make
sure that she's not left alone
and left vulnerable, so those
are the some of the things that
we're doing.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you. OK, so I'd like to
get a comprehensive list of who
would like to ask questions. I
have Senator Thornton,
Representative McQueen,
Representative Lujan, Senator
Wirth, uh, Representative
Romero.
who else am I missing?
Uh, Senator Scott.
and Senna Cortez.
who else
OK, so, um, because I want to
give you all uh plenty of time.
This will be a working lunch and
um let me go ahead and indicate
all of our sponsors. This
morning's breakfast, um, and
lunch sponsors, well, the
breakfast sponsors were UNM and
Tri-State. Today's lunch sponsor
is UNM and PNM.
and this evening there is a uh
dinner at the sagebrush in at
5:30. It's sponsored by the
Water Foundation with support
from Trout Unlimited, Amigos
Bravos, and Audubon Southwest,
and tomorrow morning breakfast
is UNM and Tala Ski Valley.
So what I'm gonna suggest is
that if you have a special diet.
please go get your lunch first.
because I don't want to hear any
complaints.
We have graciously been given
lunch. There are special diet
lunches over there. So if you
have a special diet, please go
get your lunch and then the next
round and the next round. So
Senator Thornton, you are up
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you all for your
presentations. I appreciate the
uh the feedback you guys have
given us, um, so I live in the
Eastern Mountains. I represent
the East Mountains, uh, just
outside of, uh, Albuquerque and,
uh, and so we've seen a lot of
those public safety power
shutoffs from PNM. Uh, we get
upfront notice, usually they're
pretty good at giving the
advisory, and I, I, I guess I
sort of have my own little micro
micro grid because I have a uh
generator that comes on that's
powered natural gas. As soon as
they turn off the electricity,
mine kicks on within a minute,
and we're up and running and
this, we're good as gold. So,
um, so I, I actually like that
and most of the neighborhood is
dark, and they're looking at my
house like, how come he has
power?
Um
but that's just a Boy Scout in
me and I never was a Boy Scout,
um.
so, but one of the questions I
had for PNM is, uh, well, I have
a couple of questions for all of
you actually, but within the
first question is with regards P
PNum said they did some proof of
concepts back in 2010 with
Sandia National Labs and um.
and yet you have no operational
microgrids today other than in
Santa Fe Community College. And
so my question is why? So was it
not feasible? Was it not uh
where the logies that you tried
not um
something that could be easily
scaled out. Why are there no
microgrids today when you
started working in the study
back in 2010.
Madam Chair,
Senator Thornton
A couple of the partners in that
use some proprietary technology
to develop those grids and
integrate those various, uh,
energy sources.
to provide that micro grid.
and
at that point, the technology
had not advanced
and uh as those companies.
moved out of the space and they
weren't really as active in
managing that microgrid anymore.
Uh
they took the institutional
knowledge of how to operate
those systems or how to upgrade
those systems with them and some
of the technologies and the
controllers themselves, you
know, the technology from from
2010 is not the same as the
technology in 2025.
So at this point.
it it was a proof of concept,
but we just didn't con we just
didn't feel it was important. We
were working on other things at
that time frame.
And now as we see that need of
providing that resiliency in the
grid.
there's more effort to try to
reestablish those microgrids and
look at opportunities so when
the community college approached
PNM about, hey, we want to put
this microgrid together as a
full blown microgrid, it was
attractive, but it's finding
those partners as well because
it, it, it can't just be P&M but
it has to be a partnership
between both parties.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair.
um
so also Peter mentioned that
they would need like 4 to 5
times, I guess you said 2300
megawatt full capacity right now
is what you can handle. Um
but if you're gonna have battery
storage to do 24/7. It would
take
4 to 5 times as much storage
that you currently have on it's
my, so do you, how much would it
cost per megawatt to have that
kind of storage?
Madam Chair, Senator Thornton,
um.
we're working toward that.
That's also part of the reason
why we're we're trying to stay
out of the ownership model for
us. It just doesn't work out
economically to provide it. But
uh yeah, during our peak times,
which are typically July
evenings, uh, during the summer,
we'll peak at about 2300
megawatts of load.
Uh.
The, the challenge with
renewables the way they are
today is.
wind blows sporadically.
Solar is only running during the
day and so to try to get to that
100% renewable category. It's,
it's a little bit of a challenge
to try to spread that out to
cover the 24/7 load demands that
are out there on the grid, so
that's why we would need, you
know, 5 times that capacity to
make sure that we can provide
that 24/7 energy and uh as Mr.
Reyes stated, you know, the, the
technology is getting better on
batteries. Uh, we're now a 6
hour duration cells, uh, some of
these systems when they came
online it
was a 4 hour duration. We're
working toward 8, you know, and,
and technology is going to
continue to advance. It's
advancing, uh, a lot faster than
than some of us are comfortable
with but uh we're we're getting
there and we're, you know, ready
to adopt where the next level
is. As battery technology gets
better, it'll reduce that need
for
as great a capacity on that
battery storage.
because the batteries will last
for longer duration, but it's
just waiting for technology to
catch up with the need.
Uh, thank you for that. I, I, so
you didn't answer my question
with regards to economics, but
you basically said it's, it's
too coffee right now. So, so I
understand that. Thank you. Um,
Madam Chair.
Senator, I think the department
wants to answer your question.
please, please do. Chair,
Senator Thornton, yes, thank
you. I just wanted to, um, add
that there's, uh, another way to
think about it as well, which
is, um, not necessarily having
batteries to power the entire
grid, but identifying those
critical areas of need that need
to stay operational, and that's
something that my department and
actually these gentlemen here
with Senate Memorial 2 are
working on is a potential to
map, say, hospitals, community
resilience centers, um,
individual homes with medically
sensitive individuals and, and
sorting out enough
batteries to keep those critical
uh locations up and running, um,
which would be obviously
significantly cheaper.
Thank you, and that, that makes
total sense. I appreciate that.
Um, so my next question then is,
is if we were to go with gas
generating facility. I, I think
that would be a lot cheaper if,
if, if we have to as a backup,
uh, it seems to me they're
having a gas, uh, natural gas
fired facility to maintain the
network if there was some kind
of a power failure would also
seem to be a much cheaper and
economic, although it's not
necessarily green in the sense
that people are considering, but
natural gas is much greener than
a coal-fire
d plant.
Um
I, my last question, and, and
this is with regards to the
lithium ion phosphate, uh, you
said the lithium iron phosphate
batteries themselves.
uh
yes, I think right now the
technology is about 6 hours, um,
the hope is to get to 8, and,
and I know the higher density,
they're trying to improve that
with research. But my concern
here is that um
there have been significant
battery storage of fires in the
past. I think there was one, I
just looked it up, there's one
in called Moss Landing in
Monterey County at 300 megawatt
storage facility.
was printed jet was burning in
January 2025. Uh, they had to
evacuate 1200 people, uh,
because of overheating. Uh,
there was another one in East
Ota Mesa, San Diego, a 250
megawatt storage facility, had
major evacuations, and they had
containment efforts that were so
severe that the people had to
stay evacuated for 11 days.
And then in back in 2021 in
Morris, Illinois, a 200,000
battery lithium ion fire led to
1000 homes having to be
evacuated. So my, my concern
here is if we start going down
this path of, of battery
storage. Most fire departments
and most first responders are
not trained to put out lithium
ion fires. Uh, they don't have
the resources, nor did they uh
have the respiratory issues, and
then, of course, there's always
the issue of the downwind
effects of what happens when
these two fires. How is it
impacting the, the local
community and what are the after
effects of that. And so, so my
concern is that while you're
trying to solve one problem, you
may be creating others and, and
so what are you doing to to
mitigate that?
or to at least get the, get the
facilities uh and each, each one
of you can answer this. To get
the people who who necessarily
need to be trained, who'd have
to respond to something like
that to be trained properly so
that they themselves are not uh
uh at risk.
So, so if you're each answering,
you have to be brief. OK. So,
so, so, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, so Kit Carson is
already
had batteries for a few years.
So to your point, the first
thing we do is we do annual
training with our first
responders.
and you don't really put out a,
a, a battery fire, you try to
contain around it because the
water's not gonna put it out.
So we've gone from lithium ion
and we've had no issues with our
batteries.
So I, I know there's other
areas, but so far we have had no
issues. Uh, lithium ion, iron
phosphate. So that's the next
generation for us. It, it is
more fire retardant. Uh, we are
looking at now a lithium sulfur
flow battery that both is again
more fire retardant plus a
longer duration. So technology
is going to drive that. We think
though that storage is going to
be key in anything we do on our
system anyway to address some of
these uh localized issues that I
talked about. So our approach
with the first
responders is they're part of
the planning process, and then
there's annual training. We've
done the same thing with
propane.
I think we, uh, change out that,
uh, the battery, the battery in
the mic, um, has to be changed.
Just.
It has to be read. They're all.
It's red. Mine's red
Oh, there's a red
I'm red.
Thank you Test tests.
While he's testing, I need to
ask all the sidebar
um.
conversations representative
Romero, could you take
conversations to the back
please?
all the way to the back
Oh, I got this one works.
So, so, so a lot is, is a
training and, and one final
thing on the, the natural gas,
uh, there's a lot of rural areas
that don't have natural gas.
When you talk about natural gas
generation. So that's one reason
I made comments on propane,
maybe being a backup source, but
kind of align with you when it
comes to some kind of extreme
event that we need to use
whatever resources are available
to, um, you know, maintain or
make sure that we have public
safety.
Madam Chair, Senator, it's, it's
also
working with those providers
since we're utilizing third
party owned facilities, is
working with those providers and
making sure they do that
coordination with the local
emergency management and they
have the, the resources they
need to deal with, uh, a
potential lithium ion, but
that's just it. The technology's
gonna change as Mr. Reyes
stated, there's gonna be new
battery technologies that are
gonna improve the efficiency of
those batteries and the storage
at.
the storage time for them. The
biggest challenge is to get that
contact built between the
providers and the uh local uh
first responders so that they
have the resources they need to
address those issues so that.
those examples of catastrophic
failures and the fires that have
occurred don't occur again and
it's just working towards that.
I thank you for that. I thank
you, Madam Chair. I, I just
wanted to say that, you know,
the, the goal here is to have
full-time access to electricity,
right? I mean, that's what we
all want and, and, and, um
so I'm, I'm, even though I don't
have a oil and gas, uh, group in
my, my district or anything. I
just say that natural gas is
something that this state
produces a large amount of and
we should use the resources that
we have available to us because
our goal is to make sure we have
access to electricity so we can
run our homes and all of our
facilities, uh, so thank you for
that. That's all, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. We have
Representative McQueen and then
Representative Lujan.
Thank you ma'am Chair. um, Madam
Chair, Mr. Gray, I had some
questions and, uh, mister, if
you want to chime in, that's
good too. On the public safety
parachut us.
um, so I, I know, uh, that
Senator Thorton mentioned the
law this has been happening in
the East Mountains. Uh, I've
seen that as well. Um, there was
also a, uh, warning of a
potential power shut off that
affected a substantial portion
of Santa Fe, uh, and it caused
Santa Fe Public Schools to
preemptively close for the day.
Um, the, the power shutoff did
not materialize, which is a good
thing. um, I, I think you've
done an excellent job of getting
the word out, uh, to different
people, so people knew, uh, it
was coming but I, I kind of want
to know more about uh the
decision making process
uh in terms of how
how you, how, how you get to the
point where you actually shut
off the power. And I guess
before that, you know, my, my
belief is it's in a high wind
situation it's not the wind
affecting the power lines. It's
a wind affecting trees which
affect the power lines is, is
that correct?
Madam Chair Representative
McQueen, uh
yes, it's, it
most of our common failure modes
are debris blowing up into the
power lines. We haven't seen
many failures of infrastructure
wires coming down, pulse coming
down. We see a we see a few of
those, but generally it doesn't
contact the ground, so it's not
as big of an issue, but the
biggest issue that we do see is
debris blowing in that wind.
So as we go through the process,
we're monitoring weather
forecasts as the originate 7
days in advance, and they're
refining the models as they go
forward and we're looking at
those forecasts to try to make
operational decisions about
whether or not we turn the power
off or not.
Um,
in the 3 to 4 day, the models
get a whole lot better. We have
a, a much better clarity on what
is going to happen, weather
wise, wind being the primary
cause, but it's wind, it's fuel
moisture, it's relative humidity
that might cause catastrophic
spread of fire.
When we get into that 24 to 48
hours, the models get even
better. So we're, we're running
off forecast models.
in all the cases that we've had
in East Mountain and Santa Fe
and then in, in Las Vegas on the
west side of Las Vegas where we
actually conducted a public
safety power shut off this
spring we actually deployed
field personnel with handheld
anneurometers to actually
measure the wind speeds to make
sure that the forecast
was matching what actual
conditions were happening.
Uh, we will be deploying here in
the 4th quarter of the year, uh,
weather stations similar to what
our, our, our friends at Kit
Carson are gonna be deploying in
strategic locations, so we have
better granularity, so we're not
just relying on the weather
services raw stations for
getting that weather data. We
have chosen some stations we
conducted an extensive study to
pick those.
We're also installing some other
technologies such as, you know,
cameras so we can identify that
thing what what's really
happening out there on the grid,
but all those things help build
that, uh, uh, situational
awareness of what's happening,
so.
you know, on some of these PSPSs
we're, we're making decisions an
hour before we're planning on
shutting off power. We want to
make sure the conditions are bad
in, in Las Vegas we saw winds
7580 miles an hour that we were
clocking, so it was uh uh a
logical decision that we need to
shut the power off. In some of
the other instances you stated
in East Mountain and in Santa
Fe, the wind speeds never
materialized to the forecast,
but right now we're having to do
it manually.
with the deployment of the
weather stations, we'll be doing
that a little more automa
have a little more automated
process which will help us
get those, uh, decisions made a
lot sooner so that we can
provide that feedback to the
community so that they can
prepare.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Gray, tell
me more about the debris that's
blowing. I'm sorry, um
are you talking like leaf litter
or or again are trees and
branches falling on lines.
Madam Chair Representative
McQueen, um
trees and branches blowing into
the power lines are the most
common cause of of outages that
we'll see wind driven
that are out there, but, uh, as
I stated earlier, we've seen,
we've seen
all kinds of debris, metal,
trampolines, I mean, you name
it, if it's uh
can be airborne. I mean, when
these high wind alerts come out
from the weather service, they
talk about securing your patio
furniture and tying things down
and they, they're, they're
legitimate, uh, this past spring
we saw a tarp
a 10 by 20 tarp blow up into a
power line. We've seen those
tarp covers on, uh, billboards
blow up into power lines
So the debris can come from lots
of different sources. We're just
trying to eliminate the, the
cause of that wildfire coming
from the power line.
OK, um
I, I don't have, uh, no, Mister,
do you, do you want to weigh in?
I'm sorry, I sort of
Thank you,
Chair, and, um, Representative
McQueen. So, um, ESF 12 sits in
my office. That is the emergency
service function 12 that
oversees electricity during, um,
emergencies, and we do, of
course, before we do
preparations before emergencies,
during and after. Um, and so we
held a tabletop exercise, um,
deliberately on PSPS's back in
April the first one the state
had had, where we gathered
representatives from all the
IOUs, um, and several co-ops and
emergency
responders into a room to
discuss exactly the question
you're asking, which is, right
now, um, because PS, PSs are new
and there is relatively few
regulations from the PRC yet on
how to do them. Each IOU and co
op is making these decisions
differently. Um, different
criteria for shutting off
different notifications, um, and
so we are working to
try to clarify that and maybe
the PRC should consider
formalizing some of the
regulations. Um, for example, in
California, they have red,
yellow, green status, um,
notification is required a
certain number of hours before,
um, and then during a PSPS, it's
not the state, but the IOUs who
pays for the emergency
operations, the, um, shelters,
the bottled water, that kind of
thing. Um, and then afterwards,
there's, um, definitely need, as
Louis mentioned, or
everyone mentioned, uh, some
clarity on time to restore. So
it takes time to walk the line,
so it's easy to shut off the
power very quick, but it can
take hours and hours, sometimes
days to turn it back on, and
sometimes that's not clear
information, and that's
information that we're trying to
get ahead of time. I will say
the next tabletop exercise, um,
to discuss this together as a
group is scheduled for October
1st in Tukukari.
OK, thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Gray, does, does, uh, PNM have
a, a regular program of
maintaining uh
the trees around their lines
Yes, we have a regular program
of, of
doing that, but we've seen the
need, especially in areas where
they have higher fire risk.
So we have started
with our new software that we've
implemented over the last couple
of years to identify those areas
we can
optimize our crews and hit the
areas of greatest need.
sooner rather than later. Uh, we
have gone through our high fire
risk areas. So so far this year
we've cleared all of our areas
around Clayton and Las Vegas,
and we are in the East Mountain
areas, uh, currently and we'll
be there through the end of the
year clearing lines and, and
protecting that zone.
And then the next areas they'll
be moving into Santa Fe and then
Ruidoso Silver City, so we're
we're moving systematically
through to
provide that cyclical clearing
of lines.
It has been a little bit
different because uh
different philosophies we were
doing a little more, uh, ad hoc
trimming as opposed to clearing
the whole lines because we want
to get value for that dollar
spent in doing that maintenance
work, but in the higher fire
risk areas we are not
comfortable with the risk, and
so we're moving towards cyclical
trimming in those areas. And so
those areas like I said, we're,
we're in that process right now.
OK, um, thank you for all that
information. It's uh these power
shutoffs are
I, you know, it's interesting. I
mean, I get it, um, it's really
disruptive to a lot of people.
Um, I mean, Santa Fe Public
schools are, and I'm sure it's
over 10,000 students, um,
closing for a day is a big deal,
uh, and then it didn't
materialize and like I, I don't
want you to shut off the power,
you know, just for the sake of,
you know,
uh, being right, but um
you know, and I also, every time
there's a, there's a power
outage, uh, and there's a lot,
uh, in my area, like just
power goes out, um, and maybe it
comes back on 5 seconds later,
maybe it's a day or two, it
happens a lot. A lot of people
in my district work at home, and
I hear from them in a hurry. Um,
there's some of my most vocal
constituents in terms of um
they're upset about the lack of
reliability. Um, so it's, uh, I,
I'm glad that you're, you know,
sort of developing a pro
a decision making process, um,
again, I think you've been very
good at the uh public
communication the notice aspect
of it, uh, but I think um
I think there's probably some
more evolution that will need to
happen about when and how we use
this tool.
Thank you, ma'am Chair
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you to all presenters and,
and everybody, you know, all our
utilities and co-ops that are
here. I just wanted, you know,
to say thank you for how hard
you're all working together. I
see that that's happening, Madam
Chair, when I, I hosted an
energy policy symposium in uh
May, you know, we talked about
these things. We didn't really
highlight our focus as much as
we should on the the wild
wildfires, but hearing, I know
that we've had policy, we've had
some proposals, and I expect we
may have some more coming maybe
in a 30
day session or maybe in a 60 day
session. So I just want to say.
hearing from all of you and
knowing that you are working
together, especially on, um,
house uh Senate Memorial too is,
is really important, um, and I'd
like to reflect on the
leadership that's in front of us
today and um Louis, what you,
what you've, Madam Chair, um, at
least the way that you've,
you've mapped things out and you
have a plan, um, one of the
policies I had was to create a
board and energy type board for
planning so that we could really
address all of these issues. Um,
it didn't quite get through this
last session. It's just one of
those things. It's a timing
thing, but really I, what I'm
hearing today is just
and what I'm, you know,
gathering from these years, um,
focusing on, on what's going on
here is we need better planning
and we need to come together a
lot better. And we have a lot of
different boards, you know, I
think there's like, I, I don't
even know how many at emmner,
but there's, there's quite a
lot, and I think maybe looking
to consolidate or working, you
know, uh, through a scope that's
really going to dive into what
energy is for our state and all
these aspects is really
important at this time. So, um
you know, good luck and all
that. What I'm hearing too here
are a a bit of solutions. Um, I
have a couple of questions
related to the AI and the fire
mitigation. Louis, uh, you
mentioned that you were looking,
are you're looking at surveying
things through modeling, through
virtual, um, modeling and such,
uh, around wildfire, um, are you
also looking or using AI and
this is for everybody and the AI
tools for the heat waves,
storms, grid failures, uh,
critical loads and when
when everything turns off and
chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
of so
basically 33 different
platforms. One is really the
cameras and weather stations get
a lot of data with the with the
cameras, you see things in real
time.
So it besides modeling and
getting data, you can see things
in real time. So as, as Wes
mentioned, if you see a tree or
something in that area, you can,
you can isolate
where the outages and, and, uh,
to what we've heard before,
maybe it didn't take as long
after
to patrol all these lines. So
we're, we're, we're doing that.
We're also gonna start putting
those in potential microgrid
areas because I think having a
better visual of our system,
especially how rugged it is, is
always good.
Uh, we're using, uh, Firescape.
We contracted with Firescape to
do the uh uh modeling for
wildfires and alerts.
Uh, so that'll be a, a planning
tool, but it'll also be a
predictive tool and then a
real-time tool.
and again that is, is my hope is
then to share that with the
community so we better
understand what happens when
there's a fire and then how do
we address that in the car is
not the uh first responders, so
you hand that over, but we have
the data. And then I think we're
using probably the same as P&M
when it comes to satellite
imagery where we're kind of
plotting out where we're
trimming and uh and then we can
get in the cycle because then we
have some data of where we have
to go back, how quickly those
trees will work, uh, grow back
into the lines. Uh, we're
working with the Forest Service
on some simple things, just
getting a wider right away.
Most of our outages are trees
online
Uh, most of that is outside of
our ride away. And so a lot of
that is getting the, the, the
Forest Service to allow us to
start cutting the trees at the
utility thinks they need to cut
to mitigate uh uh a hazard, not
the ones they think we need to
cut.
And I think if we can get that,
that kind of support from them
and at least hear what the
Carson we do
uh, then that would at least
eliminate some of the issues
going forward with, with Tres
Online.
Chair Representative Lujan, uh,
yeah, we're using the same tools
to do satellite and AI to
optimize our veg management
program to clear those areas of
greatest impact, uh, PNM had
filed a program with the Public
regulation commission regarding
grid modernization, which
includes tools to be able to do
those type of activities and
incorporate more of that.
higher level intelligence into
decision making and operations
of the system. So as time goes
on, the system's gonna get
better and better as we
incorporate more AI, get it
trained up so that it, it takes
some of the decision space out
and makes things happen a little
quicker in response.
so that's good, um, as we said,
we've been working with the Gila
National Forest and we did much
the same thing. We approached
them at a permit renewal and
asked for a wider right away.
with the decision making of
being able to remove those
hazard trees outside that
corridor and have nothing above
power lines.
for that entire right of way
and it, it, it took a couple of
years of negotiation because
it's a different uh different
model that the Forest Service
hasn't really adopted as much
here in New Mexico.
but uh during the trout fire
earlier this year, the Forest
Service used that newly cleared
right away.
as a basis to start a back burn
into the fire.
from fire mitigation, so they
used our right of way to
backburn back. We de-energized
the line for, uh, firefighter
safety, and then they back
burned off of our line into the
fire to build that containment.
So
with the four supervisor, the
GELA, the 4 supervisor of the
Carson, they have pulled
together with all the forest
supervisors in New Mexico and
they're all in agreement. So
we've, we, we've made contact
with the Santa Fe and the Cibala
as well, and all the forest
supervisors were on the same
page. This is the kind of action
we need to try to provide that
level of safety in the national
forests as far as for fire
mitigation and so.
uh.
as, as the utilities are working
together with those agencies,
we're making, we're making gains
in being able to clear that
right away and get that
vegetation out and removing that
as a cause.
Thank you. I think that's
important for us to hear today
and, and, and knowing that, I
mean, um, so thank you, Madam
Chair. I, I mean, I also heard
of where we are, you know, going
back to the microgrids and you
really those pilot programs we
have.
uh pilot projects with, uh,
block energy tierra queanta and
we mentioned um
here in northern New Mexico, the
Piccari Pueblo and El Rito's
station. There are a lot of
things going on.
but with the within the ETA, we
know that there were some
exemptions made. How are
but the technology and
everything moving as it is, are
is everybody kind of like on the
same page? Are we moving in
alignment, uh, in alignment with
um those policy goals that we
have through the ETA.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, I
think I'm looking at Puck there.
I'm sure,
um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Luhan. I'm not
sure I should speak for
everyone, but I will say that uh
the PRC was midstream on some
workshops and some rules around
microgrids when HB 93 was
passed. So, um, for better or
for worse, there may be a little
bit of a startover, uh, over
there in terms of the
regulations that we need around
the microgrids, the things that
I've, I've pointed on my last
slide.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
And, and one of the solutions
you said is a tax credit, um,
for batteries, and I know we've
had some legislation around that
as well as being, um
getting things passed for
incentives like you said, solar,
uh, renew and other renewables
and storage. Would that policy,
Madam Chair, look like those
other tax credits that we've
already moved forward, or would
they be somehow different?
Madam Chair
Um, chair of Representative
Lujan, it's, again, it's not my
place to tell the legislature
how to legislate, but I will
point out some examples of tax
credits that are working really
well on the ground that are
being administered through my
office. The Clean car tax credit
was is structured very smartly
and it's flowing very well. Um,
so that could be a model that we
look at and as we know, the
latest revisions to the new
solar market development tax
credit are, are also great and
simple and easy to execute and
really being up up
t ook by New Mexicans.
Thank you so much. Thank you for
that and that answer. Anybody
else, Madam Chair.
So the, the cost of our 3
microgrids is uh about $29
million so we applied to DOE, we
got a 70%
grant uh grants 30%.
we had to match, so about 17
million comes from the feds. We,
we, we, uh, kind of backfill the
13, uh, with the ITC
uh, we'll pay 12 million, so the
30 the 9 megawatts of microgrids
will cost our members a million
dollars.
So when you talk about cost
effectiveness.
um, you know, over, over a 10 or
15 years of the life of the
battery.
that's, that's very cheap cost
of power during those, uh those
times to have resiliency.
So I think the existing and
these are, these are tax credits
that, uh, survived the the
latest uh uh build modifications
in Congress, so we were able to,
to do that. I think there's a
lot of tax credits at the
federal level also, and that's
where Kit Carson is focusing on
right now, just because our
facilities are bigger, I think
maybe the tax credits at Puck
had been mentioned are for VPPs,
things that are behind the, the
meter where some individual
could apply for those tax
credits instead of a a kick
arson or a tri-state uh type
model that wants to focus on the
utility scale.
Madam Chair Representative Luan,
a big part of the affordability
of this is, is the work to make
sure that once that that micro
grid is created that it can be
operated in a way that's
optimized and and uh brings
value to the entity that has it,
so in our role as a power
supplier, Tri-State is working
and has received about $26
million in grant funding from
the DOE to develop this
distributed energy resource
management uh system, uh, having
a resource that'
s available in a community, uh,
by a retail user by working with
their co op, by working with
Tri-state, we can optimize that
and, and help integrate that
into the broader markets. Make
that more affordable and it
becomes a value proposition to
the person or the entity that's
operating that system, that
micro grid, so we're very
enthusiastic that with uh the
right systems in place, it can
become uh a positive and revenue
gener type of system. So beyond
the tax credits and other
value that you have with
resiliency to bring that in and
optimized it with electric grid
is a real opportunity.
And Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, uh, PNM's done the same
thing. We've, we've looked at
the various DOE grants that are
available to us, uh, I know we
were working extensively and I,
I don't know the final status,
uh, but to build a virtual power
plant, so do those type of
activities to provide value
added so that there's, there's
higher benefits for the cost
incurred and the, the, the
Public regulation commission has
really been encouraging us to do
more of that
And, and that's the challenge.
Not everything is available for,
for a for-profit utility
company, so it's trying to find
the right avenue and uh to to to
get that to provide that extra
value. Thank you, Masha. I think
the most important thing that
we, we need to discuss is that
cost effectiveness and how, how
we can better manage that. And
so thank you for those answers,
and I would really say the, the
next
thing that I don't have time for
is to really that community
engagement and really, um,
making sure that you're having
that and talking about these
things because that economic
development and that future
vision needs to be driven and
given out to our community.
Thank you, Ms. Madam Chair, for
the time. Thank you. Next, I
have Senator Wirth and
Representative Romero, then
Senator Scott, then
Representative Senator Ortez,
uh, Cortez, um.
Mortez, uh, Senator Wirth, uh,
thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Um, I was able to spend some
time in Utah two weeks ago as
part of something called the
Western Energy Caucus. It's new,
it's legislators from the
western states. There's 4 of us,
Senator Woods, myself,
represents small represent
Dixon, and it was fascinating,
uh, because, as was mentioned,
the utility world
is changed and is changing so
fast, it's unlike anything
anyone's seen, uh, one of the
utility execs stood up and said,
Why can't we just make utilities
boring again?
And
the two reasons are wildfire and
demand. There is going to be a
25% increase in energy demand in
the next 5 years based on AI and
so utilities are just
kind of trying to navigate
through something that's totally
new and obviously the, the
wildfire piece, uh, had a lot of
discussions. Some states have
done some immunity. I know there
was a there was a bill for co op
immunity, and I'm gonna talk
about that in just a a minute
and just a downside to that. So
I just have a a question uh I
wanna understand
does the current regulatory
structure allow you to enter
into relationships with, I mean,
I get building a micro grid
yourself on, on this, on your
side of the meter.
if you wanted to, for example, I
like Senator Thornton, have a
battery system at, at our house.
Uh, we have solar panels. We've
had it forever. I've got a
battery system, electric cars,
all of those things allow me to
keep the house on when everyone
else's lights are off, and I
think more and more folks are
gonna constituents are gonna
need to start doing that,
addressing Representative
McQueen's question, but I'm just
curious, uh, if you were to
reach out and it looks like
something like Vermont has done.
you know, have go directly to
homeowners and say, hey, we want
you to be to partner with us or
we're, we're even willing to
give you, we'll give you a
battery just Louis, as you said,
we've got someone who has health
issues. We're gonna give you the
battery, but here's the deal we
want to be able to use that
battery and work with that
battery if necessary. So I'm
just curious if the regulatory
structure allows that individual
piece to happen.
Oh
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Wirth, so
we,
Mr Vice Chair.
uh, Senator Wirth, uh, so Kit
Carson is actually working on a
VPP pilot.
As you've mentioned, to be able
to, uh, seek out those who are
most vulnerable.
uh, get them a battery and the
kind of concept is when they
need it, they use it when we
need it. We use it.
Uh, we're in discussions with
the PRC because for the co-ops
we're regulated a little bit
different than the investor
utilities, so I think because we
have an elected board
who I deem are regulators, I
think we have more latitude to
be able to do that versus a a
PNM that may have to seek
permission, but we have notified
them that we think that's the
next obvious step to really
build resiliency is, you know,
pick out those uh
predominant first most
vulnerable in our community, if
they have medical devices or
they have require medication
that requires refrigeration.
uh, we've been working with, uh,
with, with Puck's Group to see
how do we fund that? We looked
at online billing so that maybe
you you finances over time.
but I think, uh, so so far the
regulatory environment hasn't
impeded our ability to at least
create a pilot.
We are talking to the regulators
about how do you, how do you
recover the cost associated to
that.
uh, because the other thing
you'll find is a lot of these
homes that are kind of the low
income.
They're, they're electric
service may not be up to code
or, you know, they need some
work on that. So if you're going
to start getting behind the
meter, so to speak.
and utilities historically have
said, we're just going to the
meter and everything behind you.
is your responsibility. Kit
Carson's trying to change that
paradigm and says we can go
behind the meter, but let's make
sure everything else meets COVID
right if we're gonna really
service our members, we can't
make excuses anymore of where
our responsibility ends.
So we're doing that pilot. We
hope to have, uh, we, we, we're
doing a study now we have some
money to do about a dozen
batteries.
and we had hoped to start that
in the springtime.
And then Senator, uh, uh, with
our broadband, then we can
monitor this for them. So it's
another value add so we can
actually text them that your
battery is not being charged.
You know, did someone turn off
the breaker type a deal so that
we get more information on how
to address this when we put a
full, a full blown, uh, uh,
project going forward.
Well, I appreciate that and
certainly Kit Carson has been a
leader in this state in terms of
piloting and doing things
differently and I just think
more and more this is going to
become a reality because it's
the vice chair said all these
shutoffs we're gonna deal with
it. Just one final comment. I
just want to let folks know, we
spent a lot of time last session
talking about the fair plan and
insurance looking over at
Senator Scott, I think he gave
me lots of questions on the
floor about that, um, Bill
didn't pass, but we increased
the limits, but it was
fascinating at this conference
to have a discussion with the
insurance industry and the
utilities, uh, and it invol
ve s a liability waiver just so
folks know the insurance
industry is very concerned about
a liability waiver. They want to
subrogate obviously if there's
an incident and they've got to
pay and it was caused through
negligence by a utility and
there's a tension there, uh,
that I just think we all need to
be aware of because we're gonna
see more and more bills like
this, and I think the insurance
issue is one again, I can tell
you in Santa Fe is more and more
folks are just getting rejected
and we're now down to the
fair plan and those limits
aren't enough, but all these
things kind of come together,
so, uh, I really appreciate the
presentation, Madam Chair. I
think this was spot on and maybe
Ms. Park has something else to
add, but I just think this is
the kind of
innovation and things that
utilities, co ops, but also
homeowners need to start really
thinking about this to the
extent that they're able to do
it and we need to help
incentivize homeowners, so
they're in a position to do it,
uh, because again I just think
more and more when, when the
liability is as high as it is,
the utility is going to shut off
the power and it and it's gonna
mean that school's out. There's
just no way around it. So why
doesn't, what if the school has
a backup that allows it to run
for a couple of days on a
battery system. These are things
that we just need to all kind of
think through. So this Puck
I'm, I'm done
Um, Senators, Senator or chair
and senator, um, just real quick
to answer your first question,
just a scenario. I know you said
you had an EV. Here's the things
that have to be sorted out if
you wanted to be a good citizen
and use your EV to power the
grid in times of need. So number
one, what would be the cost? And
what is the fair value for that
electricity, um, you know, is
it, if it's going over to Mrs.
Johnson next door to help keep
her
you know, again, her insulin
quote. So it may not be the
actual rate of the electrons. So
that has to be sorted out. Um,
number 2, the technology, of
course, if you're gonna loan
your EV, you want to make sure
it doesn't get fried by the grid
and, and also that it doesn't
get drained maybe all the way to
zero and you maybe you get
permission that it can be
drained to 20% or 10%. So that
tech has to be sorted out. And
then the third piece is there's
a safety element as well, as we
mentioned when you re-energize,
you want to re-energize the
line. The linemen are assuming
the lines are dead. If your EV
is accidentally powering a
certain cul-de-sac in a
neighborhood, and those lines
are hot. There's a safety issue.
So there's some actual
technology and hardware that
needs to be installed along the
grid. So all of that has to be
sorted out, and that's just for
one person to contribute their
EV, which we should absolutely
work into, but there's a lot to
think through. Um, and in terms
of thinking through, I'm really
proud to be um part of Senate
Memorial 2 Working Group with
these gentlemen here, and I'll
just to give you a sneak peek,
we're making some really great
headway, um, around some some
recommendations for the
legislature.
Um, and on that issue of
immunity, our number one
recommendation is the best
immunity is to not have a fire
in the first place. So if we can
lean really hard together into
grid-hardening, modernization,
resilience, microgrids, all the
things to prevent it from
happening in the first place,
then the, the immunity and the
liability in the insurance issue
becomes much smaller.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam, I missta,
I apologize.
Fuck first name. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Romero.
Um,
thank you, madam. Mr. Madam, Mr.
Chair, um, both hands, um,
appreciate you all, uh, for
being here. We, uh, have been
having an ongoing discussion as
you can tell about, um, how to
look at the grids of the future.
So I really appreciate the
insight on microgrids. One of my
questions is about, um, the sort
of incentive in a microgrid
system versus a virtual system,
and the idea that, you know, for
me it kind of blurs together
Um, I think all these nuances
should have asterisks next to
them for us to really understand
what we're incentivizing through
this process as we're still, you
know, building the plane while
we're flying it. um
and can you, can you help us
distinguish
I guess it's probably a both
and, but what the better
or model sort of way today is
the virtual versus the microgrid
and how the hybrid may work and
then thinking about the market
that we're trying to create or
develop in New Mexico for these
types of products.
how we might stratify that to
help inform the public what
we're trying to to get after
for, for both end.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
so for Kit Carson's plan, it's
really to, uh, as I mentioned,
look at critical infrastructure
first. The microgrid, like let's
take it in Penasco to make sure
that communications
water, wastewater, uh, 911,
those issues are always covered.
because you're gonna need those.
So that wouldn't be uh prevalent
if you had a bunch of them on
homes, you still need cell
towers, uh, the way we
communicate today
uh, during the U Park fire and
because we had fiber, we could
actually ro uh we put a cow cell
on wheels in the fire connected
the fibers so that the first
responders then communicate
because when you turn off the
power, you turn off the radio
towers also, and, and, you know,
they, they're all supposed to
have backups, but they may not
always work.
So we think we're critical. Then
the second layer is within that
community, then the least
vulnerable. So those people who
live there, uh, so we think
that's a better model start. DPP
will complement that, but ours
is really to, to, to address
wildfire mitigation and extreme
events
You know, if you're trying to
cover
batteries as your backup, then
that's a different strategy you
would probably employ, but ours
is really to safeguard the
community, our assets, and, and
first responders.
Vice Chair Representative Romero
at Tri-State we look at it as a
systems approach integrating our
member cooperatives and those
loads that may have the
technology and I think it's,
it's both, it's both the
distributed resources that are
available that
the owner cooperative tri-state
can help manage together to
optimize and on the virtual
side, demand response and being
able to manage loads and
consider that another resource
that we can utilize it all helps
build value in that chain.
from those that have a resource
or can manage their load to the
cooperative to tri-state where
we can leverage our
participation in the market. Our
members can best utilize that
relationship with the consumer.
We can optimize it and drive
down costs.
and have a more resilient system
so it's both parts of that, both
managing the resource, uh,
that's there in that virtual
demand response resource that's
available and making that all
work together and that's what
we're trying to strive to do
within our cooperative model and
we're in a great place to be
able to do that.
So what I'm hearing, um, Madam
Chair, is that sort of the um
microgrid is the first re
redundancy that we're looking
for for first responders and for
essentials and then the second
tier of that would be like a a
virtual system that helps more
market side and need, but not
necessarily the essentials if
I'm just kind of clarifying for
myself about prioritization for
our sake. um
moving on in that sort of same
conversation, is there, how is
community solar being utilized
within that sort of network of
opportunity, um, by your systems
or how are we sort of leveraging
some of this renewable, you
know,
focus that we've had as a state
in leveraging some of that
within the microgrid or virtual
systems.
Oh
and so, uh, Vice Chair
Representative, so just by the
virtue of how we're sort of set
up. Most of our batteries are
probably charged with solar
facilities anyway, uh, we, we
have a, one of our microrids is
close proximity to Picres
Pueblo, so we use that solar. So
it just depends on, on
what time of year, what the
event is, but at least for Kit
Carson, part of the strategy is
to use solar because we we
already know the fixed cost
that's available, but if it's
not, then we would just charge
off the, uh, off the system.
Vice Chair Representative, um,
for the community solars that we
have in our service area, don't
believe any of them have any
storage capacity, so we would be
using off-site storage and then
it depends on what's going on in
the rest of the network is, but,
but that would be it. We would
have to use some other storage
we have available to charge off
those community solar sites. So
to answer your question, it's
not necessarily part of that
resiliency piece, but it, it, it
can be.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think that's something we should
be thinking through as that
distributed generation is so
critical, how we integrate the
storage piece to that overall
play and
um, so that we can actually
continue to modernize where
while we're still integrating
these systems. I think that's
really critically important, so
I'd love to catch up on that at
some point, um, mostly looking
at puck for that. um.
and so, um, moving on to some of
the shutoff systems, um, and the
coordination, um, thanks so much
for answering so many questions,
um, to my colleagues that I got
a lot of clarity there. Um, but
I guess just thinking long term
about redundancy and some of
these other situations, not just
with planned shutoffs, but also,
you know, just outages as they
are, can that system potentially
be integrated together when
we're thinking about emergency
access to refriger
ation facilities, um, when we're
planning with our, I don't know
how it works with, you know
clinics or hospitals, including
schools, you know, having to
deal with wind outages for, or,
you know, versus snow days, um,
how to, how to sort of cope with
that and I just wonder with
standard outages that do occur,
which we hear with potentially
more frequency, just depending
on where, which service you're
on or where you're located, can
those systems be sort of
integrated together for that
emergency management system,
whether it be through counties
or, or other
systems and how we sort of help
the public prepare or understand
what's available to them when
there is an outage.
Chair and Representative, my
office is working on that in in
two different directions, um,
direction number one is with
the, the, the funds and the
resources that we have, we're
trying to identify those areas
of critical need like a
community resilience center or
school, um, and making sure they
have the ability to keep the
lights on when the power goes
off, and even better if they
have the ability to generate and
store electricity as well. So
we're doing that bit by bit as
we can, and as we go with that,
we're hoping through the my
energy security
team to start mapping across the
state of New Mexico where those
places are and working in in
conversation with the IOUs and
the and the collops because they
frequently also know, you know,
the medically sensitive folks,
but yes, we need as a statewide,
it would be good to be thinking
more about energy security,
cybersecurity, resilience, um,
and all the ways that we can
build kind of a fractal system,
um, that is resilient against
all the different shocks coming
at us.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
just thinking through, you know,
we have all these alerts, um,
weather alerts, sort of separate
from, I think what we have with
Amber or silver or, you know,
that if there is a
you know, just thinking through
how to get the public engaged. I
know Santa Fe County has done a
really good job of having
emergency service alerts, but I
don't know if everybody's using
them as well, so, um, how to
have that sort of universal
option available when things
happen, um, in these events. So,
uh, just so you know where my
thinking is going for that. um
but yeah, I think that's, that's
my questions for today, Madam
Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
before we go to Senator Scott,
uh, I just wanted to announce
for the audience we have lots of
extra food, lunches, sandwiches,
uh, some Danishes, stuff like
that, uh, please feel free to
help yourself.
Senator Scott
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good we get
everybody just
nodding your heads
to agree
to the objective
and the objective would be
available
reliable
affordable and environmentally
sensitive.
electricity
Is that what we're trying to
achieve here?
OK
Then I guess my next question,
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Reyes, you're
Kit Carson has been
more aggressive than about any
other co op in the state with
regard to renewables and battery
storage. Do you have
anywhere in your system a
microgrid
supporting resilience running
off
a battery or other power source
backup.
Uh, Vice Chair Representative,
no, those are the three, the 3
that I talked about we're
building, but we don't have any
operating. They'll be operating
about a year from now
OK, so Mr. Chairman, Mr. Reyes,
all of your
all of your uh
renewable energy, battery
storage efforts to date have
been
with respect to utility scale
efforts, that is your
' re you're trying to get more
environmentally friendly.
not necessarily
more resilient
or more cost-effective
Is that
uh, Mr. Vice Chair
Representative, uh, no, I, I,
it, it's our mission with that
is still, still the same. We
understand that, you know, solar
only works when the sun is
shining and the limitation of
batteries, our concept is to fix
our price.
right? So when you talk about
affordability, all these
batteries and solar facilities
that we have, they're fixed for
25 years.
So then you go back to our main,
our main contract with Guzman.
That's fixed to 2040. So now you
have 22 of 3 of our components
that have a fixed price. So even
if it's a little higher today,
it's gonna be the same cost in
2040. So that's one way to build
in affordability is not at that
point in time, it's over the
long term. So we checked that
box with renewables and with
with batteries because we're
back, we, you know, we have
uh Guzman backing us up, um.
you know, we're, we're looking
at hydrogen. So we're looking at
hydrogen production, long
duration battery, fixed price
over time, uh, so our goal is
the affordability. We're also
looking at any new facility that
we build is microgrid ready. Our
goal is exactly what I heard is
if you're gonna have a school or
a hospital or a clinic, you
almost have to put a resource
there if you want a 100%
uptime
because there's going to be
outages and it could be trees,
it could be a bird, you know,
whatever, there's gonna be
outages and so we have to just
acknowledge that that's going to
happen. And so that's how Kay
Carson is, is addressing it. So
if I, if, if our cost of power
uh, used to be 75% of my my
entire bill now it's about 45%
and I fixed that, at least I
fixed half of my members' bills
or until 2040. They won't see an
increase on that side where
we're going to see increases
when we talk about affordability
is on the distribution site.
costs of polls, cost of
transformers, cost of wire,
those things that I have no
control over where they come
from and, and kind of this
market condition we're in.
So I think in our model, we've
addressed those with renewable
and batteries. I think the one
difference with the with the co
op then let's say an XLL or a
P&M is that our members also
drive that decision through its
board of directors, right? So I
have to, we and we respect that.
So if, if I upfront, they know
it's going to be a little bit
higher and they're OK with that,
then it's affordable.
right? So, so we're not working
kind of in this bubble, we make
sure our members know what's
going on. And so I think that's
the one difference when we talk
about affordability, our members
have decided that they want
renewable energy and, and I
think just like you as
constituents, if I want to keep
my job and the board wants to
keep their job, you do what your
members ask
So, so I think if you look at it
from that perspective, we're
right on track to hit check all
those boxes that you just
articulated.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Reyes, I think
it's important to note
that today's electricity costs
from Kit Carson are about 20%
higher
than the state average. So over
long term,
these policies may have
may have
ultimately some benefit to your
consumers, but today,
they are making our less
affordable. Now, I believe I
heard it represented, Mr.
Chairman, and anyone who would
like to answer that these
systems would provide resiliency
for days.
and it's my understanding that
the best available technology,
uh, with respect to batteries
will only provide hours of
resiliency. Is, is that fair?
Um, Chair, Senator, it depends
on how fast you use it. So if
you want to power everything,
the whole room, everything just
as it is right now during an
outage. Yes, batteries are
limited to hours unless you have
two batteries, which you could,
you can daisy chain them to 4
hours plus 4 hours plus 4 hours
or however many, but that
increases the cost. or you can
kind of go into hunker down mode
during an outage and just power
your fridge or just power your
cell phone, so yes and no. And
then there are longer duration
battery
being tested, um, like an iron
air battery, which, by the way
is
cannot catch on fire, um, on the
Mesa del Sol south of
Albuquerque.
So, Mr. Chairman, I spoke today,
if we want to keep the lights on
in this room, for example.
we would have about
6 hours to work with.
Fair to say, OK.
Uh
I believe I heard, uh, one of
the other gentlemen talking
about how they were trying to
reduce
uh, Mr. Chairman
reduce the cost
of some of these programs by
outsourcing.
and uh
I, I don't understand
how that helps. Could, could
somebody explain
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, the,
the thought process is similar
to what Luis was talking about.
If we can try to fix those costs
under a contract
Uh, there's less variability for
us and so we put it back on a
provider to be in that space to
fix those costs for us over the
longer term. And so that's the
challenge is if we're owning it
and we're having to operate and
maintain and
if we have a failure of a of
battery cell or solar cells or
other components of the system,
then that's just raising our
operating costs and it's, it's
making it less affordable
I mean, it's, it's the
granularity of it, but if it's a
third party and they're
providing a certain amount of
capacity.
at a fixed price, then that
secures us of what that cost is
gonna be and then they're
dealing with it in their margins
to deal with the maintenance
issues, the failures of
equipment, things that just go
on in the normal day to day
operations of the system, and it
takes that burden off of us. So
it's trying to again trying to
build that affordability option
and fix those prices.
But what the representation be
that
those problems that they might
experience.
are not the same problems
that you might experience.
I think the problems are
universal, but it's just trying
to fix the prices for us and
trying to have that stable
platform for energy supply.
to fix those rates as opposed to
because of all of the volatility
in the in the materials markets,
that's what drives some of this
cost that we can't control
because we can't control the
price of steel, aluminum,
copper, wood, the things that go
on. So we're doing everything we
can to try to fix as much of the
power supply costs as we can so
that it, it has less volatility
and less, less pressure on
rates.
But Mr. Chairman and gentlemen,
it appears to me like any
outsourcing would the, the folks
providing those goods and
services would be facing the
same
challenges
that your organization would
face trying to
fix
these costs. So
I'm still quite fuzzy on how
that ultimately helps, but, but
let me move on
uh
with respect, and I believe
Senator Wirth brought this up
with respect.
to insurance.
of what changes
could the legislature make?
or would need to be made to make
electricity more affordable
given the challenges
that you will face
in
a
in a climate change
environment.
Vice Chair Senator Scott
when we look at liability
insurance for Tri-State and
what's available to us to
protect us in situations like a
wildfire.
The insurance that's available
to us is coming in at twice the
cost for half as much coverage.
And one of the compelling issues
for affordability is maintaining
the financial strength and
solvency, particularly if you're
not for profit electorate
cooperatives. It's not in any
consumers or the state's
interest to have electric
cooperatives that may uh be
involved in a wildfire
situation, uh, to faint face
financial uncertainty. We
adopt best practices. We go and
and do all the things in our
industry and beyond to make sure
that we're managing the risk of
wildfires, um
and it would be helpful as the
legislature looks at potential
solutions to help support the
electric cooperatives to look at
where those liabilities are, um,
are there protections that could
be put in place for utilities
that are following best
practices that are doing all of
the things that need to be done
to operate safely in areas that
are challenging to operate in.
And if you're doing all of those
things correct and you're making
the efforts to
protect your systems from uh
being the ignition source of a
wildfire. Are there protections
to be put into place that
ensures that that utility can
continue to operate even in the
worst case scenario.
Mr. Chairman, is, is New Mexico
an outlier
with respect to our surrounding
states.
and.
when with respect to that
liability.
or are we
in the middle of the pack
There are some, uh, Madam
Chairman, Vice Chair, Senator
Scott, there are some states,
Wyoming, Utah, that have put
protections into place to make
sure that if a utility is doing
the right thing and is making
the efforts and is demonstrating
that that there are protections
in place to help ensure that in
the worst case scenario, they
can continue to operate and
serve power so I think as the
legislature convenes as the
uh.
Senate Bill Memorial to, uh,
work group does their work, um,
it would be prudent to look at
those protections to look at the
standards by which utilities
should operate at and how they
operate, and if they're doing
that work and doing it well, um,
that there be some type of uh
protections in there that ensure
that the utilities can continue
to operate.
Um, chair and Senator, yes, in,
in Senate Memorial to working
group. That's exactly what we've
done is a survey of the
neighboring states and some
other far-flung states too, and
you'll be seeing in our report
and analysis of where New
Mexico's current regulations
stand as compared to those along
with some recommendations from
that working group. We're almost
done with the report. We just
have to finish coming to
agreement and
cross the T's
OK, well, last comment, Mr.
Chairman, it would appear to me
that kind of developing a
reasonable liability
environment.
and hardening our existing
utility scale generation and
distribution.
might provide
greater benefits to our
constituents with regard to
those
4 primary objectives.
then
more distributed resources.
that appear today to be largely
untested.
that would provide just a few
hours of resiliency
in the case of some of these
catastrophic events. Uh, thank
you, ladies and gentlemen, for
your answer. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. That's all I had.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and
presenters and thank you for
such a well-crafted
presentation. I will go a little
easier on you than my colleague,
Senator Scott here. Um, my first
question is, what is the
lifespan difference between the
current battery storage and a
micro grid.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
so with Kit Carson, the, the
battery storage is
kind of the heart of the
microgrid.
And so the, the life would be
whatever the life of the battery
is.
So, uh, with, with some of the
work we've done with Tesla, we
basically have 15-year battery
life, but upfront, we've paid a
premium, so then they come in
and we'll get another 10 years
of life. So the batteries are
always at uh maximum output but
it really depends on the
utility, the application, type
of battery for our microgrids,
the battery is kind of the heart
of that, that, uh, system. What
will changes uh technology
advancements. AI gets better
microgrid controls get better,
you know, switches, edge devices
out in the that that'll increase
the cost.
But again, the efficiencies
should, should, uh, or the risks
that you mitigate.
should, should cover those
costs, right? If you, if you're
not paying out a big claim, uh,
type of scenario.
I share representative of what
we're seeing on the systems that
we have deployed, uh, battery
systems again are 15-year life.
Solar panels themselves are in
the 20 year span. Wind turbines
are a little more, uh, it, it's
more dependent on the conditions
that they operate in, uh, the
one thing about wind turbines
that there is wind conditions
that'll be out there that will
not allow them, they won't
exceed, they will not generate
so you'll see winds out there of
50, 60 miles an hour in
the wind turbines aren't turning
and it's like, why
Because it's dangerous to
operate them in those
conditions, so it depends on how
they're operated
as to what the lifespan is but
generally it's 15 for batteries,
20 for solar, wind turbines, uh,
in, in, in past life experience
in the Pacific Northwest
operating wind turbines that we
were replacing wind turbines at
the 10 to 15 year life because
of the, those harsh conditions.
and it's just because they're
subject to a lot different
stresses and strains.
being as elevated as they are,
so it causes different type of
operational
challenges for utilities to be
able to operate those types of
devices.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Um, I do echo some of the same
sentiments as my colleagues
regarding the financial
liabilities and the high upfront
capital costs, and I know it was
already discussed about
regulatory changes and the
shifting utility policies and
how that can affect economies,
and I believe it was already
asked and answered, but just to
confirm, you're saying that if
the microgrids are implemented,
there will be no costs passed on
to the consumer. Is that
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, uh, you know, in
a co op setting, the members
always pay whatever it costs,
whether it's operating cost. In
my example, you know, it's, you
know, 29 million we get, uh, uh,
grants. We cover the rest, and
then we get uh uh tax credit. So
if the total amount was a
million dollars to pay for that,
our members are going to pay the
million dollars. But then you
spread that over 30,000 m for as
long as it takes to recover that
million dollars. I think the
other
issue we're looking at is what,
what are the other benefits that
you get from it. You know, if
you, if you, if you do, do not
cause a fire.
or you do save a life, because
you had a microgrid that uh
served someone that was on a
medical device, right? I'm not
sure how you measure that when
you come to a regulatory
environment. So, so I think
cost is always important for,
for a co op, service is more
important. The, the, having it
always on because affordability
is kind of who, who can afford
it, right? Poor people can't
afford as much as wealthier
people when it comes to
electricity. So there are
safeguards with the PRC of how
we address that.
So I, so I think it's uh the
entire value proposition of a
microgrid and the benefits just
not cost because utilities,
it's, it's capital intensive,
you know, a transformer to give
you an example, post pre-COVID
to serve, let's say your home,
$600.
Now it's $1500. You know, who
should pay for that?
And at the end, it's gonna be
the members. That's just the way
our, our co op system is, is,
uh, is designed.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and
presenters. Did you have
something to add to that?
I did briefly, um, Chair and
Representatives. So just to, to,
for the clarity in the room,
there are as many different
kinds of microgrids as there are
like fans at an isotope game. So
there's everything from Senator
Thornton's, uh, gas turbine all
the way down to microgrids being
built to run, um, oil and gas,
um, pumps in the Permian to data
centers. There's behind the
grids, there's in front of the
grids, there's enormous, there's
teeny tiny. So there's a whole
variety of microgrids and they
all
right now can fall into
different regulatory, um, slots
and also some are totally behind
the meter, some are in front of
the meter, some the utility
owns, some are completely owned
by the consumer. It's all over
the place. So there isn't
unfortunately one answer to your
question.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and
presenters, and I agree, uh,
life is indispensable, and if we
can save a life that that
matters most. Um, I do have a
couple more questions on the
financial liabilities though,
um, what happens if federal
funding is cut, you know, under
the current administration, Mr.
Chair and presenters, that's not
completely out of the question
and so how would that be
compensated and maybe you can
just, just to kinda um make my
questions more condensed
If federal funding is cut, what
are we going to do and what if
the grant goals to compensate
for costs are also not met. What
are we gonna do?
Um, chair and Representative
Federal funding has already been
cut. So in my office, we've
already seen um many grants
either challenged or cut. And so
that meaning immediate loss of,
you know, solar panels to
low-income New Mexicans, for
example, or funding for some of
these emergency planning
tabletop exercises that I'm
mentioning. So what we do about
it is what our office is trying
to determine and hopefully it's
something we can discuss
together with the legislature.
and just to uh reiterate, I mean
further cut because that's
already been cut, but it could
keep happening. We're under the
current administration for 4
years, so, um, just to add to
that and I know that's why we're
here, right? I mean, and the
financing world here it's hard
share and and representative of
the financial world here is
complex. There are some things
that are completely in the
private sector in the I in the
regulated monopoly that are,
there are member owned co-ops.
There are completely uh
ratepayer owned backup systems
that are owned by themselves,
and then you have state tax
credits, federal tax credits,
state grants, federal tents, and
it's all layering and swirling
around this ecosystem. So again,
it's hard to give you one answer
other than less money means less
build out, um, and probably less
resiliency and less energy
security. Mr. Chair and
presenters, my um, my ultimate
heart behind all of these
questions is making life more
affordable for New Mexicans and
in an environment where our
constituents
are already struggling
financially, adding more costs
to families that are already
hurting is, is tough and it's
tough to swallow as their
representative and so that's why
I ask and that's the heart
behind these questions.
Um, Chair and Representative,
I'll be brief. I've been dying
to say this the whole panel, but
there is a tension between
resilience, right, where you
sort of build backup systems
that are redundant, right? And
then efficiency where you just
build the one and the cheapest
thing, and then the growth that
was mentioned earlier, and these
are all pulling in different
directions, and the solution to
all of them is energy
efficiency. The cheapest
electron is the one that you
don't have to buy. The, the
safest electron, the one that's
not going to start a wildfire is
the one that you don't have to
move down the line.
So I am the proud director of
the Energy Conservation and
Management Division, and I think
there's, we should all take a
good look into let's be most
efficient with the electrons
that we have and make sure we're
not paying more to make more
than what we actually need. So
insulation, sealing envelopes,
carpooling, you know, all the
ways that we can be efficient
with the electrons that we do
have helps with the whole um
conversation here. Mr. Chair and
presenters, I'm number one, I'm,
I'm glad you finally got to
say what you wanted to say. I
love your heart and I love your
passion, and again, thank you
for being so thoughtful in your
responses to us. um, Mr. Chair,
this concludes my questions and
remarks. Thank you. Thank you,
uh, Representative Senator
Cortez, and thank you to members
of the panel. It was a great
presentation with robust
discussion, um, thank you.
We, uh, we're writing a little
bit behind schedule, so we're
gonna roll right into our next
panel, which is lane
conservation incentives Act. If
our panelists could come
forward.
uh, I would appreciate it
Is Mr. Shelton around? He was
here earlier.
Ben
person
Yeah, outside, I guess.
OK, so we generally go in the
order, you appear on the agenda,
if you could each, uh, take, you
know, the neighborhood of 7 or 8
minutes for your presentation so
we can leave a little time for
questions. Uh, first up we have
Jonathan Hayden.
Yeah, so you gotta push the
button and you have it right in
front of you as well. There's a
little person.
How's this? Oh, all right.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, appreciate you
having us here today to talk
about one of the kind of unsung
heroes of land conservation in
New Mexico and across the
country. The land conservation
incentives Act, which is funded
in numerous conservation
projects across the state. It's
20 years of existence, um, on
the screen here we have one not
too far away, just up on the way
to Taoski Valley.
Sanri N Nuevo, um, that was
protected about 3 years ago, via
conservation easement that was
funded through the land
conservation incentives Act.
Go to the next slide.
So I'm joined here by Esteban
Moldavin, who's the chair of uh
uh Natural Heritage New Mexico
and a landowner who has
firsthand knowledge of how these
transactions work, Cecilia
Rossecker, who is the executive
director of the Rio Grande
Agricultural Land Trusts, and
then Ben Shelton, who's the um
Deputy cabinet secretary for,
for Emnert.
Talk a little bit about what's
LCIA is, uh, how it's performed
in the past 20 years with some
of the challenges we're facing,
uh, in the conservation
community and how this could be
improved.
Uh, next slide, please.
So I want to take just a quick
step back and talk a little bit
about what land conservation is
in the con in the context of the
land conservation Incentives
Act, um
I think, you know, for all
intents and purposes, protecting
against land use conversion from
natural environments, into
subdivisions, extractive
industry, etc. and ensuring that
ecological systems can survive
and thrive. It's kind of what we
traditionally think about as
conservation. But here in New
Mexico, we have something to, we
kind of refer to as New Mexico's
natural heritage, which Esman
will talk about in a little more
detail, but really, um, ensuring
that we're able to live in
harmony with the land for future
generations to enjoy and, and
make their livelihood off of.
So how do we do this? We
typically employ a legal tool
called the Conservation
easement. Many of you have
probably heard of of
conservation easements before,
may be familiar with the term,
but maybe not exactly what they
are. They're a legal commitment
to protect land in perpetuity.
Um, first and foremost, this is
an agreement where the landowner
will not subdivide or develop
their land in a way that's uh
incompatible with the
surrounding ecology. It also
ties water to the land, which is
a really
critical component here. So we
want to make sure that land is
available for, for future
generations, future owners to,
to uh keep uh farming and to
sustain the, the wildlife
habitat on a given piece of
property.
You can also think of it as, uh,
the, the purchase of development
rights from conservation-minded
landowners.
Conservation uses are are held
in trust by land trusts, which
is where we get our name. Uh, in
addition to us at the New Mexico
Land Conservancy and Argold,
Cecilia's organization. We also
have the, the Taos Land Trust in
New Mexico, the Santa Fe
Conservation Trust, as well as
the Nature Conservancy.
And these are really grassroots
expressions of of people's
commitment to the protection of
land, uh, for the conservation
purposes and for public benefit.
So what are the biggest ways we
fund conservation easements in
this state is through the land
Conservation Incentives Act. Ben
is going to talk a little bit
more about the nitty gritty, um,
components of, of the law, um,
but
big picture view is that
landowners who donate the
development rights for a
conservation easement, can
obtain a a a tax credit that is
transferable, worth up to 50% of
the conservation value of that
land, uh, up to $250,000. Now
those caps have been in place
since 2007. And of course in the
intervening 18 years or so,
we've seen land values
skyrocket. Uh, we've seen
transaction costs go up.
and development pressure in
particular. Um, really take its
toll on some of the most
precious landscapes in the
state.
Even so, um, LTIA is resulted
over 50 projects protecting over
500,000 acres across the state.
And so for a little bit of
context, that's um a little bit
larger than the size of Oregon
Mountains, desert peaks National
Monument, or, uh, almost twice
the size of Rio Grande del Norte
National Monument.
Um,
and just over $39 million worth
of tax credits have been issued
over those 20 years. When you
calculate the the per acre
basis, um, of that conservation
value. Uh, it means that we've
been able to conserve land at
only about $66 an acre, which is
really quite an accomplishment.
And in many cases that um
LCIA funding has been able to
leverage other state and federal
funding sources through natural
resource conservation Service,
Fish Wildlife Service, Forest
Service
obviously natural Resource
Trusee, etc.
Uh, next slide, please
I really want to highlight to
you that, you know, this is more
than just a tax break for for
rich landowners too. Um, a lot
of the, the folks we work with
areseia Parianes, our
agricultural producers are folks
living and, you know, uh, land
that is particularly, you know,
conservation valuable but may
not be monetarily valuable. So,
um, that cap of 50% on, on how
much they can basically get in
in terms of
a tax credit, can be really
restrictive, um, especially for
folks who are kind of on the, on
the line between deciding
whether to to sell their land to
a developer or to keep it in the
family and keep it um in a, in a
state of uh natural beauty.
And like I mentioned, you have
really seen an uptick in the
amount of development across the
state has driven land values
quite a bit higher, especially
in some of these areas that have
the most ecological
significance. So everyone wants
to to build their their house
out in the woods, cabin in the
woods, vacation home, whatever
it may be, um, next to a nice
river with, with great views
that has resulted in a lot of
subdivisions and places that
they frankly probably shouldn't
be. And so we want to continue
to, to allow landowners
who are faced with a choice
between um selling to a
subdivide, you know, a developer
who's going to subdivide the
land and keeping it in the
family in a natural state to to
do so.
That cap is also resulted in a
lot of inefficiencies in terms
of how um this program is
actually implemented. So there
are, you know, of course, ways
around that cap, we just have to
to phase projects, um, so that
landowners are, are maximizing
the amount of money they're
getting in each phase, which has
resulted in some, some pretty
inefficient projects. Um, the
one up here on the screen, Ute
Lake Ranch. We're currently on
the, the 5th phase of that one.
It's
s a beautiful ranch, the
landowners want to protect it in
perpetuity, um, it's adjacent to
Lake State Park has great views
of the lake, has some great
riparian habitat and the
landowners really want to see it
passed down to their children
for continued ranching use as
well. Um, but because of that
cap, we're having to, to do that
in, in multiple phases and
really um that, that just takes
a toll, frankly on our own
capacity as land trusts and just
drives the
costs up when we're having to do
uh various due diligence tasks.
So what are the solutions?
Pretty straightforward. I think
it's, we need to update the caps
to be a little more reflective
of the, the actual conservation
value that a lot of folks are
giving up when they, when they
decide to protect their land
with the conservation easement.
Um,
for context, the state of
Colorado has also had a wildly
successful program and recently
updated their caps to about 80%
of conservation value, which um
here in New Mexico would really
help, uh, especially some of the
smaller landowners we work with,
um, receive closer to, to fair
market value for the the
development rights that they're
giving up when they protect
their land.
So I'm gonna turn over to
Esteban here to talk about uh
his recent experience in
navigating the conservation
easement process and LCIA.
Thank you,
Vice Chair and Representatives
and
um yes, I'm here wearing two
hats, really, but I'm gonna talk
about the main one as a
landowner, but I'm also the
director of Natural Heritage New
Mexico. Let's see, in the Museum
of a division of the Museum of
Southwestern Biology at the
biology department at UNM and so
I've been a conservation
biologist, my entire career and
how that career started, I'm
gonna start the story.
I'm gonna set that aside until
the end about what that means as
a conservation biologist, but
the story for me as a landowner
who actually did do a
conservation easement with NMLC,
How that process happened and
what, what were the challenges
there for us as we approach this
issue of caps and the monies
that you might gain by doing the
conservation ement. And it's
going to start with this bolo.
This bolo, my grandmother bought
me in 1971 on the Plaza in her
seventy-first year, a year
before she died.
But she drove out from New York
City with my father in 1926 and
went and stopped in the bed of
New Mexico and bought a ranch.
And she called us home for the
rest of her life.
and she was in the 60s, the
first woman to serve on the San
Miguel Soil and Water
Conservation District Board, and
she was ardent conservationist.
through those years, and that
spilled over into what I did for
my life.
And a year later, I still think
of her when I think of this
thing, um.
of course, she passed, and then
it passed to my father and his
brother, and they, my uncle
really didn't have an interest
in the ranch. So I ranch is a
small ranch, relatively
speaking, it's when you can't
make a real living on, it's at
this time, we're talking now at
2400 acres.
I just say, as they say, land
rich, but very poor with respect
to how you make a living on
something like that. And when it
passed to my father and his
brother. We had to split up the
values, you know, and he won his
portion out. My uncle wanted.
And so we ended up in the long
run subdividing some 400 to 500
acres off of the ranch, off of
that 2400 to pay off my uncle
and send him on his way.
And we said at that time, my,
including my father, um, and my
mother, we never want to
subdivide again because it was
very painful for us to take the
family homestead after, you
know, we're approaching our
100th year on this place, to
have to cut off pieces to to pay
for things. And now we're still
in the same situation. Once we
paid them off, we had a ranch
and a, and an old hacienda and
being not rich people, how do we
keep this
place up? How do we even pay the
taxes?
So through this process, you
know, my parents went on and
passed on and, and it came into
the hand holdings of my sister
and my brother and I, and how
are we going to maintain this
place thus subdivided some more.
You know, how are we gonna do
this
And so I came with this idea.
Well, I hear you can do
a conservation easement and get
cash credit.
And
then we can use that money and
you can sell that tax credit and
you can use that money to, we
can fix up the place. We can
keep from falling down, we can
actually get the road drivable.
We can do things with that and
it's what we always wanted to do
anyway. We want, we didn't want
to subdivise, didn't want to
subdivise anymore, this
beautiful landscape. There it
is, that's starvation peak out
there.
And um
so I contacted New Mexico Land
Conservancy and started this
whole process. And I thought,
oh, I've got, we, because when
we did the subdivision, we were
making 2 to $300 to $4000 an
acre and said, well, we're
gonna, we're gonna pick this tax
credit really easily.
Well, it's not that easy, is it?
And particularly with this cap
where you get the value assessed
and then you only get 50% of
that value that you can apply
towards your credit. And then I
had to sort of start cajoling my
sister and my brother about,
well, we really have a
conservation ethic here. Isn't
it worth doing? Isn't this worth
doing?
And he said, well, we're giving
up all this value.
for this, right?
What, you know, is it going to
be worth it? I said, well,
I'm willing to put my money
where my mouth is.
And I'm finally cajole them
along and they said, OK.
let's go forth
But it was always a challenge
over a five-year period of how
to convince them that this is
really a worthwhile process
because there were costs
involved in doing the credit
that, you know, the animal LMLC
has to bear, as well as we had
to bear ourselves.
And at the end, it was a border
line decision, whether or not to
go through because of these
restrictions that Jonathan's
talking about, that 50% cap, the
total cap of 250,000. You know
your land's worth a whole lot
more. Why should I do this?
Why would I do it? Even with the
values that our family and my
grandmother instilled in me, why
would we do it? Well, at the end
of the day, those values held
the held held the uh held sway
over everybody, and we went
through with it.
So it's really important to
understand that what he's
talking about, I'm was in a
particular position of having
those values instilled in me
from the day one since I was a
kid. This is what you should do.
This is the right thing to do.
But it was
a borderline decision. What
we're trying to do here is say,
open this up, so more people
don't have to be put in this
situation where the, they're
really going to have to take a
hit. I had also explained to my
kids, oh, by the way, you know,
this is all gonna be held in
common by all of us, and you're
never gonna be able to subdivide
it.
Well, you know, they said, OK,
except for one, and, and so what
I'm trying to get across to you
all is how important it is to
raise these levels so that
others can take advantage and do
the conservation work that we
really want to do. And as a
private landowner, there's so
many landowners who don't want
to subdivide, don't want to be
put in that position. They want
to be able to contribute to what
is a beautiful landscape that is
New Mexico, right? And you know,
put in
it's overall now coming back as
a conservation biologist and a
scientist are saying, well,
this, this whole program is so
important to prevent
you know, ex-urban sprawl and
the cut-up of our landscape. You
can see it right out the window
as you go drive out of Taos or
any, any town or village in New
Mexico, where people don't have
the options, but let's give them
an option, a better option than
we've had before.
I think that's what I have to
say.
Great, thank you very much. Um,
so we're a little out of order,
but that's OK. Uh whoever wants
to go next.
OK. Representatives
representative members of the
committee. I'm Cecilia Rosacker.
Oh, they have Ben's, they have
ben slides show up, so maybe he
should go next.
That's fine
OK, go ahead. OK. My name is
Cecilia Rosacker. I am the
director of the Rio Grande
Agricultural Land Trust. I am
also a farmer in the Middle Rio
Grande. I have a 30 acre organic
farm and I sell to restaurants
and grocery stores in
Albuquerque and Socorro.
I grew up on a farm in near
Espanola and my family farm, um,
was irrigated off the Santa
Cruz.
I want to tell you a little bit
about our organization. We are,
are focus area, our mission is
to protect land and water for
people and wildlife in New
Mexico. Our focus area has been
the Middle Rio Grande, sound of
all Bernal Leo, Valencia, and
Socorro Counties.
I want to tell you a little bit
about our organization and the
challenges we have faced in
serving our communities. Next
slide, please.
Our organization was founded in
1997 when a group of farmers and
conservationists came together
at my kitchen table to discuss
ways to protect farmland.
and to prevent water rights from
being sold off our farms and out
of our communities.
In the 90s, this was a very
unlikely partnership.
But both of these groups of
folks understood that when we
lose our farmland when our water
rights leave our land, that
doesn't just impact that
particular parcel, it impacts
the entire agricultural
landscape. It impacts the Rio
Grande ecosystem. It impacts
wildlife corridors, and it
impacts our rural economies.
Next slide, please. Over the
last 20 years, the United States
has lost
11 million acres of farmland.
to development. We are predicted
to lose another 18 points,
another 18.4 million by 2040.
This is land that will never go
back to farmland.
And I'm
disappointed to say that
American Farmland Trust has
ranked New Mexico as one of the
highest in the nation and
farmland loss.
And one of the lowest in the
nation and policies to protect
our farmland and our natural
habitat.
This is a farm, we own the east,
we have the easement next door,
that development went in in one
year.
To me
during COVID. Next slide,
please.
Our organization has really
focused on ensuring equitable
conservation. So we've really
focused on serving land rich,
cash poor folks who have had
most of them, have had their
land and the family for
generations.
They have a heart connection to
the land. They have a
conservation ethic.
and they want to leave that land
on to future generations. But
serving that community means
that we need conservation
funding.
and that has been limited.
There's only a few federal
conservation programs, and
they've been largely
inaccessible in New Mexico. They
require a non-federal match.
and, and agencies like NRCS,
Agricultural Land easement
Program. They bring 200,000 to
$600,000 a year for the entire
state? You know what lamb prices
are
New Mexico has a handful of
local or state conservation
programs.
Less than a handful
Sometimes they're not funded.
They're underfunded.
and
they take 1 to 3, you can do 1
to 3 projects a year.
We're losing ground
navigating those agent agency
programs is challenging. The
application process can be take
one year, and when we finally
get that funding, it takes 3 to
5 years to implement the
projects.
Next slide please
We're losing ground and time is
of the essence.
Land and water is being
transferred to development.
at a, an industrial uses at a
record pace.
Our farmers are aging out. I
live in Pulvadea, New Mexico. My
neighbors are all in their 90s.
We have in the next 5 years,
this nation is facing one of the
biggest land transfers in our
history.
These land, can you back to the
previous slide.
And Socorro County, we aren't
getting development. We're
getting water rights sold off
our land to development up
north. And this is what we're
left with.
So, conservation easements are
one of the only ways we know to
protect water rights.
Next slide, please
Our landowners want to protect
their land. They want to leave
this legacy behind to future
generations.
And we have a waiting list of
folks who would like to do this
if their funding was there, if
there was an incentive for them
to do this.
Next slide, please.
We have our communities begging
us this sign has been in Tomes
since for 28 years and it wasn't
new then.
Updating this land conservation
incentives Act, which was, has
not been updated since 2008.
Is essential to be able to serve
our communities, and I know all
of you want to serve the your
communities.
We want to be able to protect
land and water for future
generations, and one of this is
one of the most cost and
time-efficient ways to do it.
Land conservation incentive um
Act also has helped us leverage
federal dollars and uh does next
side please with the, with the
donation of 7 of
on 20 conservation easements
protecting 6000 acres, we were
able to work with 50 partners to
secure $31 million
Knocka grants
Through that, it wasn't all we
asked for for those landowners
was a transaction cost, which,
by the way, can be up to
$80,000. So when you think about
what the cap is now.
but we were able to help without
finding.
those, those grants or ranked by
Land protected forever, so we
were a key partner and we were
able to get funding to buy,
purchase via DaO to do
restoration on tribal lands to
do restoration on New Mexico
game and fish department lands
on the federal refuges at Bosque
and why the Orro
and through all of that we
impacted 14,000 acres of
critical migratory bird habitat.
Next slide, please
And that's all I have. The these
birds depend on us.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members Ben Shelton. I'm the
deputy secretary at Energy
Minerals and Natural Resources.
I apologize initially for not
having the state forester here
for you today as we get to the
end of burn season, we
prioritize getting some of our
senior wildfire staff out on
personal leave, so I'm, uh I am
what you get today as deputy
secretary. My job is to have
approximate knowledge in many
things. So I'm gonna, um,
give you my best shot here. So
the first slide that I have is
technically slide 2 in the
packet in front of you is just
sort of a purpose statement for
our for our LCIA tax credit, um,
which is paraphra paraphrase
from uh the purpose statement in
the statute, this tells you how
old this statute is. It's got a
purpose statement on it. My
understanding is you guys don't
allow those anymore.
Um, page 3 kind of gives you the
authority that we build this tax
credit
um, off of, you can see that the
statute is sort of split into
two places. So we have a portion
of this that comes out of the
tax code, which is where our
$250,000 cap lives, and then we
have a, a little higher level um
portion in sort of the
miscellaneous natural resources
part of the code that discusses
some more of the policy thrust.
um, for the tax credit.
Generally speaking, uh, this tax
credit is
again, used to the, to the
purposes that, that you have,
um, that you have heard about.
When these things cross my desk
for signature. I have not signed
one yet, that is not $250,000.
So what you are hearing um about
this requiring an update and
that potentially the values that
we're talking about and, and
these things are outstripping
the availability of the credit.
I can confirm at least as to our
end that we are um
kind of all the way to the max.
This credit is a 20-year long
credit and it is transferable.
Um, it is not refundable. So as
you think about it, you, you may
remember this conversation when
we were talking about the
electric vehicle tax credit,
claimable on the hood. This is
not sort of claimable on the
hood in that way. You do need a
broker to sort of, uh, make the
funds process.
The um moving to slide 4.
This is the, uh, some background
on the natural lands Protection
Committee. This is the committee
that authorizes, um, not just
this tax credit, but a cou a
couple of other things as well.
It is chaired by the state
forester.
And it is sort of our, uh,
vetting committee for, for a lot
of these things. It does have 3
at-large members as well as
representatives from a variety
of state agencies.
And we'll move quickly on here
to slide 5.
This just walks you through
internally our application
process. There are restrictions
on who can apply. There's a
restrictions on what sort of um
nonprofit entities are eligible
to participate in this.
as well and it's limited kind of
to the in, in part the folks at
this table, um, as well as a few
others.
Um, and yes, just a note for any
of you who are looking at this
or if you have constituents who
are looking at this October 31st
is our next, uh, the closure of
our next
window. Uh, slide 6 talks about
the types of elig uh the types
of donations that are eligible.
So it needs to be perpetual
protection. Um, it needs to be
for, uh, conservation purposes,
which is defined a little more
broadly than you might think of
as you think about just what you
may think of as conservation off
the top of your head. It
certainly includes things like
agricultural use and many other,
uh, historic preservation, that
kind of thing.
Um, and just also note this is
only for non-feasible. So less
than fee simple um
transfers which basically just
means you can't transfer title
like ownership title of the land
and and claim the credit.
And then there's some
restrictions on recipients, and
then my last slide is just
progress to date to give you an
idea of some of the dollar
values that we're talking about
over sort of the life of the
program. I'm not sure if it
began in 2004 or if it predated
that, but for the most part, you
can kind of see, we think of
that as the functional life of
the program and then our uh our
program progress to date my only
other note, if you ask me
questions regarding the rule, my
tablet here has not been able to
pull the rule up. So if you're
asking me a question about the
rule and I'm looking at my
phone, I promise I'm not
scrolling. I'm trying to find
the answer.
Uh, I can get it. Thank you.
OK, thank you very much for that
presentation. We're gonna do the
questions from the, the, uh,
committee. First up we have
Senator Wirth
Uh, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for the
presentation. Um, so just a
little bit of history. I was a
sponsor of the bill in 2007, uh,
House Bill 990.
So there's some hope. You can
introduce a bill at the very end
and actually get it through, uh,
this was totally a Peterworth
idea. I had seen what was
happening in Colorado and this
credit was transferable, and I
think the transferability was
such an attractive thing to me
that I went and just had a bill
drafted and dropped it that
raised it from 100 to 250 and
made it transferable to 50% was
in the original bill, which I
think was done by the Nature
Conservancy. Uh, it was 10
000 $0 with a 50% cap.
Uh, I, I do want to give a shout
out to Ethan Epstein, who's a
lawyer who now is involved in
these credits, but he was
Bennett Modri and was very
helpful in getting this through.
And so, again, it's, it's
been a little bit bumpy, but I
certainly appreciate really
hearing from the landowner
perspective and also land trust
perspective, and I do think it
needs to get increased, uh, just
a couple of thoughts and, and
I'll just throw them out and I
did have a good chance to visit
with some of the land trust
folks, uh, this week. Um, I do
think that the 50%
valuation is really challenging
because that does really impact
lower the smaller pieces of
land, and I, I think personally,
the goal, you know, this wasn't
the program to do huge large
ranches. It was really, I think,
designed for smaller parcels and
so I do have changing it from 50
to 80%. I, I kinda like that
whether 80 is the magic number
or not. I do have a little bit
of concern about the $2 million
because remember there's no cap
on this tax credit.
which the minute you open this
up, I'm gonna tell you you're
sitting on a tax committee,
there will be a cap put on this
credit. And so I want you to all
think about that, um, you know,
it's been $2 million a year for
20 years, so $40 million has
gone out, but I guarantee you
don't want a $2 million cap. Uh,
that would defeat, that would
make it actually go the other
direction. So I just think we
need to think about that
threshold number and remember,
again this is the state putting
those dollars up to incentivize
this happening, and we want to
keep the, this is part of a much
bigger discussion. I actually
think there needs to be a
separate bucket of
money to do large
scale protecting lands and, and
the conservation easement is
something that I found
you know, doesn't send the
folks, my friends on the other
side of the aisle off the ledge
because it's a private property
right. It's a landowner making
that decision themselves. It's
not us coming in and buying the
land, it's, it's putting that
easement on it, and I know
Chairman McQueen works in this
area, does it all the time. I've
also, again with my lawyer hat
recently, my mediator had been
involved in a number of
different big parcels that have
had these involved. So it's a
great program.
but I just want you to be aware
that when you open this up, um
you know, it's gonna be, it's
gonna have all those kinds of
pieces that, that, that come
into play and we've got to
figure out how to fix this, fit
it into a tax package. We don't
do standalone tax credits
anymore. So it will be part of
the overall tax, uh, discussion
that we have during the session,
but I'm, I'm certainly, it's
time. I think there's no
question it's time to do it, but
I'm really focused. I, I also
think that, you know, the, the,
the small farms that are all at
the farmers' markets, you know,
why shouldn't you be able to
protect 10 acres, you know,
it's, I know it's a lot of work
to go through the whole
bureaucracy of all of this, but
uh
just some thoughts uh as we move
forward, but again, I think
it's, it's been a, a very
effective
program, but the bureaucracy has
been challenging. It was
challenging under Governor
Richardson, Governor Martinez
tried to eliminate this program,
and there were bills to
eliminate this program, and I
just know that it's this, the
committee and it's the tax
component of it, so it's, it's a
complex process and I'm really
delighted to see ban to see you
here, you know, on behalf of
the, of the departments Mner
championing this, this change
because I do support it and
think we need to do it, but I
think we need to
remember it's gonna have to fit
into the overall package,
assuming we're gonna do a tax
package and I hope that it's
something that uh
you know, also the governor will
really prioritize uh when it
comes time. So just, just some
thoughts I thought would be kind
of helpful given the history of
this, this whole thing, but
thank you very much for the
presentation.
Thank you, Senator Wirth,
Senator Romero.
Representative Romero
I, I really don't need the
promotion. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair it's a promotion. Fair.
That's also fair. Larger swath
of land as apropos for this
group.
Um
so I have a question, more
mostly cause I don't want to see
how this integrates together
with what you were talking
about, Cecilia on um the
understanding of how we're, you
know, looking at preservation of
farmland while we're also
thinking about easements and
when you described some of the
um issues on water rights. I
just wanna go back to that, um,
as we talk about these easements
just so I understand how they
sort of integrate together
because we're hearing about
more and more often the
complexities of land
transference with water rights
and some of those, I mean most,
well, sometimes, and then we've
heard about this in our
district. I know, um, Senator
Wirth and I from constituents
where those things may be
completely removed from one
another when that land
transference happens and so it
causes a lot of um issues and,
and problems with, with the
value of the land is, how to be
able to access anything. Um, so
can you just, just help me des
understand a bit
about how
land conservation and water
conservation, maybe this is to
some, whoever the expert is on
this issue, how that
transference works on an on an
easement when, when we do make
that determination of where,
where that land is and how does
the water apply within that.
Sorry
Representative Romero, so when
we do a conservation easement,
the water rights are tied to the
land. If there are water rights,
whether they are transferable or
not. If there are water rights,
they are tied to the land, and
there is a whole section in the
conservation easement that
addresses water rights. It does
allow water right water to be
leased for conservation purposes
or to another farm, but you
cannot sell those water rights
off of the land.
and so that's, that's how we
address it
um, we know that agriculture is
not viable without the water.
And so one of the things that
happened this year for the first
time that I'm aware of is we
worked at the uh praiser to also
consider that water right value
in the easement and so that
almost doubled the la, the value
of the land, like in Socorro,
um, the water rights are worth
twice as much as the land.
to answer your question? And is
the proposal, uh, Mr. Chair, to
keep that tied together is when
we're looking at the value of
increasing, whether it be the
water right or the land value
that those that that value
increase would be for both.
So the conservation needs my
value is determined by an
appraisal, and that would in, in
that appraisal, they would
consider the land and the water
rights. OK.
um too
OK, so then one of the other
questions in regards to thinking
about um.
our valuing this process and,
you know, I'm, I'm trying to
understand, you know, our needs
with housing and some of the
other development that we are
asking our state to do, um,
while also, you know,
understanding the need for, for
these easements and, and the
conservation piece because I,
what I would like to try to
understand more of is we see
these great um projects where
you're taking a smaller, you
know, area of land, but it's,
you
know, much more um water
efficient. It has, you know,
hydroponics and we're looking at
how to make um, you know,
instead of doing monoculture
across acreage of land, we're
able to create really diverse
smaller spaces. Is that being, I
guess, priced into this process
or understood as how we mitigate
open wild or um farmland with
this sort of ideal of having
more efficient,
smaller spaces
So I can tell you on some of our
conservation he's mints. We are
what we're the ones we do on
agriculture, I'm going to tell
you about half of our easements
are protecting repairing water
rights or riparian habitat.
But we do allow for partial
separation, realizing that we
have to keep the farms viable
and giving people an option.
They're, there's still
significant, um
so we do allow for some of that.
I sold at Farmers' markets for
25 years. I know that the folks
selling at those markets are
farming on 2 to 5 acres. Um, we
also work with, we're partnering
with Berna Leo County to protect
the farmland in Bernal Leo
County. Most of that's 5 acres
or smaller, so
we're, we're, it's not, it's a
lot of different
demographics that that we're
serving and, and, but they're
all connected and we're all
connected by the water and like
I said, when one person sells
the water rights off
That impacts the whole system.
That impacts the ability for the
MRGCD to deliver. It impacts the
river, it impacts groundwater
recharge, so we're looking at a
lot of different
um
demographics and of landowners
and farm and and properties that
were conserving.
I didn't know if anybody else
wanted to answer. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Now, I, I think when
we're trying to, I guess,
improve the, the process of this
law and thinking about the caps.
I wonder if there is a
difference in
you know, when we're talking
about these property values in
different spaces and different
uses if there is a nuance there,
and I don't know, I, I'm just
trying to get a, like a picture
of the value of of both the land
and the water and how that looks
across the state and I don't
know if we have anything like
that, but
um
if they're, you know, how these
work out, but I'm gonna ask
Senator Wirth too to sit in on a
mediation for all the property
works too, cause I'm, I'm trying
to wrap my head around it. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you,
Mr.
Chair.
First of all, thank you, Senator
Wirth for carrying that bill.
Many years ago, um, that was
very
cause that's
you saw the, the future, well,
actually it was actually already
occurring, but it's just
accelerated right now. Uh, it
was my pleasure to work with uh
Cecilia with the Rio Grande
Agricultural Land Trust to
conserve a piece of property
actually in Berlio County and so
I'm glad that uh Burlingham
County continues to have a, a
really good relationship with
the Rio Grande uh agricultural
Land Trust.
I was also able to um go on a
tour, uh, not too long ago, um.
and it's in Sokoto County where
the, the, the trust has uh
conservation easements, um.
over quite a few acres, uh, uh,
to, to conserve uh
farmland, so we have uh farmers
that are, um
you know, using it to, to raise
food and also um because they uh
flood the, the area, uh, that's
a great place for, for birds,
migratory birds, uh, to land and
to get also some food, and this
is um what's really impressed me
was on a if you sort of take
that bird's eye view of this
area. It's a very large swath of
land. It's significant, it's
huge, and it is the migratory
path for birds.
Uh, when we were there, I think
they identified some things, the
person who's there, uh, can
could identify at least 40
species just within the hour.
Um, and, uh, that is huge.
That's hugely important to us
as, as a, as a state just as um
I, I think that's what really um
made me realize just how
important it is to, to, uh
make this land continue to be
available for, for wildlife and
in particular, uh, uh, birds
and, and, uh, so I, uh, you
know, when we talked about this
clearly, and I think this was
something that uh Senator Wirth,
uh, certainly, um
was talking about and uh was
that there needs to be probably
a sustainable fund for this.
in order to, to continue this
work. Uh, we just can't keep
going back every year and, and,
you know, asking again and
asking again because it's, it's
somehow we've got to figure out
how we continue to fund uh this
very important, uh, it's very
important work.
So and I don't understand all
the complexities, not being an
attorney, um, and, uh, but I'm
sure those are things we can
work out at some point, uh,
there is a real urgency to this
issue, though, and the pressures
are there and they're very great
and uh I think we, we really
need to act on that.
So I just want to make that
comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Scott.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Jayden.
I'm going to start by saying
that, uh,
about 42% of the land area in
New Mexico is already owned.
by either the state or the
federal government.
So
what I would like to know
this conservation easement does
not transfer any ownership of
the land.
All it transfers is the ability
to develop
the land. Is that an accurate
statement?
Mr. Chair, Senator Scott, yes.
So landowners continue to own
the land, be simple, right? They
can continue to manage it as
they have for generations, where
that's agricultural use or
managing it for wildlife values,
whatever, what basically we are
acquiring as a land trusts are
those rights to develop the land
to subdivide it, and we hold
them in trust for the public
pursuant to the landowner's
wishes. So we work very closely
with the landowners to develop
the D terms in those
conservation units to ensure
that their vision for the
property, um, and for whoever
inherits it or um is the future
manager of that is just
realized.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Jayden, it's
not really public land, because
I couldn't take a fishing pole
out to this piece of property
with a conservation easement on
it and go fishing in a pond
there.
Prue, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Scott, it depends. Oftentimes
that that's usually true. There
are some situations where
landowners we work with want to
provide public access, um.
in most cases though, they are
wanting to just again prevent
development that's incompatible
with their vision for the
property, with the surrounding
landscape, etc. So, Mr. Chairman
and Mr. Jayden, what would
typically be the percentage.
of financial benefit.
to the owner of that land as a
percentage of fair market.
value
Um
Mr. McQueen, Mr. Scott, uh, so
the
are you asking what
percentage they're getting as
the tax credit?
as the, the
the financial benefit to the
individual or trust that is
offering this conservation
easement.
What percentage of fair market
value with the owners of the
existing owners benefit
in a typical
conservation agreement
arrangement.
Sure, so, Mr. Chair, Mr. uh,
Senator Scott.
when we have um
the conservation easement
appraised, the value is
typically a percentage of the,
the land value because what
you're basically donating or
providing some land trust is the
value of the development rates
of that, landowners get 50% of
fair market value.
Sometimes we supplement that
with other programs, you know,
Cecilia had mentioned NACA
grants, for example, or NRCS is
agricultural easement program,
but um through this program, it
provides 50% of the fair market
value of the conservation
easement, and Mister Chairman,
Mr. Jayden, would that
include the rights to the water?
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Senator Scott,
yes, so the, the, the water
rights being tied to the land,
figures into the appraised value
of the conservation easement.
So
limiting, you know, your ability
to sell the water, transfer the
water, as Cecilia mentioned, um,
basically increases the value of
the conservation easement. That
makes sense.
And Mr. Chairman, Mr. Jayden, so
if, if I'm drilling down to a
bottom line here. That landowner
gets a financial benefit
equivalent to about half the
fair market value of the land
and gets to keep it.
Is that accurate? Mr. Chair, Mr.
Scott, not quite. It's actually
50% of the fair market value of
the conservation easement, the
conservation easement value
depends on the land where it's
located, what kind of the the
development pressure is, but
it's typically 40 to 60% of the
land value.
So you can almost look at it as
landowners are getting roughly
25%.
of the fair market value of the
the land.
through this program
That would be Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Jayden, the land and the water.
OK.
Now, with respect to these water
rights, are they
either utilized on that piece of
property in perpetuity for
agriculture
or
retired
or can they be
ultimately transferred out of
that easement to more beneficial
use.
Uh, Mr. Sheriff Senator Scott,
they are tied to the land and
may not be transferred off the
land, um, with the exception of
some
provisions for leasing, for
conservation or agricultural
uses. So I think that has come
up in some of Cecilia's uh
organization's easements, um,
when it comes to water banks, is
that correct? GC, um, and also
we, I think, uh, some landowners
have leased water to the
strategic water reserve. I'm not
mistaken as well.
And Mr. Chairman, Mr. Jayden,
would it be fair to say that
agriculture accounts for about
85% of the water used in the
state and is one of the most
water intensive operations that
can occur.
on a parcel of land regardless
of what crop you're growing.
Um, Mr. Chairman Sir Scott, yes,
I believe that's true. OK.
so there would be some concern,
Mr. Chairman
Mr. Jayden, as to whether
this water might be
ultimately, somewhere down the
road, more beneficially used.
for people to drink
than it would be
tied to this parcel
in perpetuity
Is that a fair statement
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator Scott,
it's
I think that's a, a value
judgment, right? Um, I think.
obviously we want to see and the
landowners, more importantly
that we work with, want to see
the water tied to that land for
future agricultural and
ecological use.
OK, and the last point I think
I'd like to make is to what
extent, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Jayden, and presenters, does
this put
a private enterprise
in competition
with the state taxpayer.
with regard to these resources.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Sarah Scott.
I, I can't envision a scenario
where they're indirect conflict
with each other.
Well,
on one side of the transaction
you have taxpayer dollars.
On the other side of the
transaction, you've got a
private individual benefiting
from those taxpayer dollars who
wants to hold on to his land,
but might have the option to
sell it outright.
to someone else.
without any tax, New Mexico
taxpayer involvement. It looks
to me like that
has the potential to put
taxpayer dollars on one side in
competition with private
investment on the other side,
and that causes me
louse
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Thank you all for your answers
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Chorley.
Mr. Rosseer, can you turn off
your mic, please?
Thank you, Chair and Vice Chair.
Um.
I am curious about um, how many
ranchers and farms that we've
actually kept operating, putting
them into conservancy. So I'm
looking at this and if it's 220
landowners of those 220, how
many have remained operable?
Uh, Chair, Representative.
Sorry, Senator, um,
at the New Mexico lane cause
you're I don't have data for
Sicily's organization. I'm sure
she can chime in. We have done
now 132 conservation easements.
I would say anecdotally,
probably about 60 to 70% of
those have been agricultural in
nature. Um, primarily ranches,
um, but also irrigated
agriculture, particularly in the
Corrales area, and I believe all
those are still
functioning agricultural
operations. I mean that is one
of the, the biggest, you know,
benefits for landowners is that
um these transferable tax
credits, give them the resources
to keep
managing the land for
agricultural use.
Cecilia, do you want to chime in
and Mr.
Chair,
Senator Charlie, all of our
agricultural land these mentors
are in operation. They they're
viable farms, um, half of our
easements, so not half maybe
2/3 or a third of them are
protecting riparian habitat.
And one of the one of the things
I want to mention is when we do
these easements, we have a
relationship with that landowner
going forward. We, we meet with
them every year and
I will tell you, 95% of our
easements have been had some
sort of agency funding and
almost, I would say 100% of them
have
gone and put other conservation
values on that because when we
meet with them and they have an
issue, a conservation concern,
we help facilitate conservation,
so we keep enhancing these
projects and enhancing those
conservation values that really
benefits the public.
and um
one of the things I wanna
address, um, Senator Scott is
we always hear about agriculture
thank you.
I'm and I'll, if Senator Scott
wants to go a second time, I
will let him, um, I'll let the,
let him go through the chair.
Um, are any of those
agricultural easements for pecan
farming? I'm thinking about
particularly in the Southeast
region of the state.
Mr.
Chair, Senator Charlie, we, we
don't have any easements with um
landowners who have pecan farms.
Wonderful, thank you. And then
of the nearly 600,000 acres that
have been conserved. How many of
those have been in Cibola
McKinley, Valencia, or Socorro
County.
Um, the majority of our
easements are in Socorro County
and Valencia County.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
OK
Thank you very much for your
presentation.
OK.
OK, we're moving on to item
number 5. we thank you very much
to the entire panel for being
here. It sounds like there's
interest in opening this back
up.
So we're on item number 5, the
Rio Grande Trail Progress Update
and uh we are 30 minutes behind,
so we are going to keep brevity
in mind as we keep going. We
have Carl Collonius, Ben Bajima
and Caseyish.
And let's go in that order,
please.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ben Baima. I'm the
policy director for. We wanted
to go in order, so Carl
Collonius is listed first. I
apologize. We're all presenting
on off of one presentation so
would it be OK if we go
together, ma'am, please go
ahead. Thank you so much. Uh,
good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Ben Baima. I'm the
policy director for the Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department, as well as the chair
of the Rio Grande Trail
Committee. I am joined today by
uh Mr. Clonius and Mr. Is who I
would like
to allow them to uh introduce
themselves.
Madam Chair is a member of the
committee, um, my name's Carl
Collonius. I'm the program
manager with the Outdoor
recreation division in the
Economic Development Department.
Happy to be here to talk about
our role in moving the Rio
Grande Trail program forward.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Casey-ish. I'm the
director of lands and
Conservation for the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So today we'd like to provide an
update on where we are with the
Rio Grande Trail project as well
as talk through some proposed
liability legislation that we
think could really accelerate
the continued development of the
Rio Grande Trail. Um, really
high level what the Rio Grande
Trail is, it's a envisioned 500+
mile trail that goes from the
south of New Mexico all the way
to the north, so on the border
of New Mexico and Colorado. It's
designed to be used by hikers,
bikers, and equestrians to show
off New Mexico's beautiful
landscape and, and show off our
rich and diverse history and
culture. Um, in addition, we'd
like to stimulate rural economic
development, um, and all the
great things that go along with
that as well. Uh, for the next
slide, this is slide 4 for those
following along in your packets,
I'd like to pass it off to Carl
Collonius, uh, to deliver this
slide.
Madam Chair, the commission
the uh origination of the Rio
Grande Trail Commission, um, uh,
established in 2015, uh, House
Bill 563, um, that commission
met for several years. One of
their actions was the
contracting for a master plan,
um, alta planning out of
Portland, Oregon was utilized to
develop a master plan for the
Rio Grande Trail. Uh, that took
several years. It was completed
in 2018
Um, as a reminder, the outdoor
recreation division was
established in 2019, so we
weren't at the table until that
next year.
Um, at that point in time, uh,
the Rio Grande Trail commission,
um, uh, um, lost a couple of
members, um, and didn't meet
from June of 22 until just this
last spring, um, so we're
excited, uh, to have the Rio
Grande Trail Commission, uh,
re-established, um, and running
under Mr. Baima's leadership,
um, I'm adding in that, uh, in
2020, the outdoor recreation
division, um, uh, was provided a
reoccurring uh fund from the
state legislature, uh, that we
use to contract for the
refinement of that master plan.
Uh, so ORD's work to help
facilitate community meetings,
um, look at the master plan in
order to confirm specific
alignments, um, uh, identify
where the trail in the master
plan is not feasible, um, and
then
working with communities, uh,
and stakeholder groups to
realign uh that uh that master
plan is the work that we're
doing and now presenting
to the Rio Grande Trail
Commission, uh, for their
approval.
Um, this year we have had 3 Rio
Grande Trail Commission
meetings, um, uh, that, uh, will
be continued at the end of next
week in Taos, uh, so we have
another commission meeting
scheduled for the
19th, um, which is next Friday,
um, and, uh, uh, that is kind of
where we are currently in, in
the status of uh of our work.
So in the last meeting that we
held in June, we officially
created 4 subcommittees, um,
that you will see on slide 5,
the first being the alignment
subcommittee, which identifies
the best routes for the Rio
Grande Trail to go on and makes
recommendations to the full
commission. We have a tribal
engagement subcommittee, which
this year we have met with 4 of
our tribal tribal leaderships,
tribal tribal leadership and
partners San Felipe,
Saneldafonso, Sandia and Santa
Ana Pueblos, um, and we
have some, some updates to share
later on in the presentation
based on those engagements. We
have the nonprofit subcommittee,
which is uh creating the
governance structure for a
potential nonprofit to take over
some of Mner's responsibilities
of the State Trails Act, which
we currently don't have the, the
funding or resources allocated
to, to accomplish that mandate.
And then finally we have the
legislative subcommittee which
is uh why I'm here today in, in
this capacity.
So going to slide 6, as, as Mr.
Clonius mentioned, we've
designated over 120 miles, about
120 miles in the last decade.
And if we do the math, that
comes out to about 12 miles per
year. The trail is over 500
miles long. It would take us at
that pace, about 30 years to
accomplish. And so we've been
doing a lot of thinking about
this timeline, and we have um
some ideas that we would like to
share about how we could
accelerate the development of
the trail. Um
and we would really like to ask
for legislative support to, to
do that.
So on slide 7,
our current challenge is with
special districts, um, and not
challenged with special
districts, but our, our kind of
uh a mismatch of priorities. So
below Albuquerque through the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District and the Elephant Butte
Irrigation District and some
others in there as well. There's
about 300 miles of trail that
was identified, um, but has been
unable to be designated because
of misaligned priorities between
the Rio Grande Trail Commission
and these special districts. As
you may know, special
districts serve very particular
purposes. They are designed to
deliver water. They are designed
to conserve and usually
recreation is not a core part of
their mission. Um, people
already recreate if you live in
the Albuquerque area, the Bosque
area, people are already
recreating a lot on the levee
roads that are owned and
controlled by particularly the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District, and they, when
individuals get hurt, they file
lawsuits, and this has had a
very large uh financial impact
on these
special districts. So
for obvious reasons, special
districts are not super excited
about designating 300 miles of
trail on their land which could
open them up to some pretty
serious liability concerns.
The next slide is slide 8. We, I
wanted to put this in here just
to demonstrate that there is
some existing precedent for
governments working with
special districts to do
recreation activities, so there
is precedent, there is a way
that we can get through this,
uh, Mr. I, I don't know if you
had anything that you wanted to
say on this slide in particular.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, this slide just
shows a letter of support that
MRGCD's CEO Jason Kosuga
submitted to Mnerd, um.
as part of a designation of a
section of trail in Socorro
earlier this year, and the only
thing I really want to highlight
there is that we have an
existing uh procedure for how
MRGCD might partner with
entities that are interested in
maintaining sections of trail,
um, and that's through our
existing license program, um,
but currently, uh, MRGC does not
believe that the, the liability
protections exist to allow for
that same partnership with
Enert.
Thank you, Mr. Is
The next slide, slide 9, just
shows kind of the statute
statutes that we're working
under, so we have the Rio Grande
Trail Commission Act as well as
the state Trail Systems Act, and
this is sort of the enabling
legislation that we're, we're
wanting to use to procure and
manage easements or rights of
way across special district
controlled lands.
And slide 10 really gets into
the, the meaty part of what
we're trying to accomplish here.
So this is a specific, um, part
of the state trail System Act,
and we would like to include and
clarify the special districts,
uh, could be
I guess
eligible to receive these
liability protections, um, under
the State Trail System Act, and
this would, this would really
allow us to, uh, unblock,
unstick more than 300 miles of
potential trail that could be
designated, um, and I wanna, if
we go to slide 11, I just want
to be really clear in my
understanding. I'm not a lawyer,
but in my understanding of this
change is that it doesn't a
couple of things. It protects
special
districts, so it protects them
from bankruptcy, from, from
uh, lawsuits unless for the
willful or wanton misconduct of
those special districts and
Emner takes on the liability of
that right of way through the
state trail System Act and ENARD
is still fully suable under the
Tort Claims Act and claimants
are not, um, are still very
able. There's a clear path to
seek compensation for wrongdoing
or injuries that are incurred on
the trail.
Moving on to slide 12, this is
our last slide in the
presentation and I alluded a
little bit to this when we were
talking about um the nonprofit
or sorry, excuse me, the tribal
engagement subcommittee, um, but
I just wanted to provide an
update here. So we've spoken
with 4 of the, the tribes in the
Middle Rio Grande Corridor, and
it's become very clear to us
that this trail will not go
through any sort of sovereign
land boundaries, and we want to
respect that, um, that being
said, our plan now is to
deviate pretty significantly
from the Rio Grande Trail, from
the Rio Grande corridor in
between Albuquerque and Taos
because of the large tribal and
sovereign land presence in that
area. Um
and one note that I wanted to,
to make about this is that we
there are clearly sovereign land
boundaries, tribal land
boundaries, but there are
historical land boundaries, so
areas where there were
migrations or culturally
significant items or sites
outside of current boundaries
and so as we move to develop new
segments of trail. Uh, we wanna
make sure that we are doing
rigorous NEPAA compliance that
we are doing rigorous
archaeological surveys and that
we're really working hand in
hand with the tribes to make
sure that we are circumventing
any sort of culturally
sensitive sites as we as we move
forward in the trail
development. Thank you for your
time and uh we would like to
take questions now. Thank you.
Thank you.
um
I know there are questions. We
have Senator Steinborn,
Representative McQueen.
Senator Scott.
looking down that way
Gonzalez.
No worth
Romero
OK, let's start. Uh, Senator
Steinborn, Representative
McQueen, Senator Scott, and
Senator Gonzalez. Thank you,
Madam Chair, guys, good to be
with you again and it looks like
we all made it at a gallop and
we all made it here so good to
see everybody and thank you for
putting this on the agenda,
Madam Chair, I know you've
always, it's always been
important to you and you've,
you've kept the through line
going here
and which is important because
this is the real Grand Trail and
I was a sponsor of the
legislation way back when, with
many of
you was designed to be a
long-term endeavor. If you look
at other long distance trails,
the continental Divide,
Appalachian Trail. They take
decades to complete, and we
really needed a mechanism where
we would knowing
knowing the assignment that you
would create an instrument, a
commission that would span
administrations and and also
recognize that there are always
going to be intransigent
partners along the trail
whoever that may be
and that that cannot be a fatal
flaw in the design, that it's an
all or nothing proposition. So
the law, the law for the Rio
Grande Trail, which is a
straight wide recreation trail.
Arizona has one. Arizona Trail,
many states too, um, that are
then get designated national
historic trails. I mean, they
bring a real, but our that our
law says contiguous where
possible.
It's, it's, it's implicit and
it's understood looking at other
long distance trails that you
have pieces that are challenging
and you don't let that stop you.
You work around it, um, and so,
um
it's important for folks to know
that that's just kind of goes
with the territory. Um, I also
wanna say I kinda didn't, I
wanna just for my colleagues
just kind of set the facts
straight a little bit because
the premise in here that we've
done so many per year. Yeah,
that's an average, but with all
due respect, we did 80 miles of
what we've done during the last
administration.
even though we are funding the
commission, we didn't have a
commission meeting for about 6
years. And so it's not the
legislature continued to fund
the commission, so it's not been
because the legislature hasn't
supported it, which is what this
says Without support, we won't
do it.
We have given funding, it's been
leadership that's been needed to
have the commission to do it, to
go out and do the grassroots
work, and I wanna thank you,
Chairman Behema.
for your leadership because when
we got a new secretary in of
energy, and this is this is an
executive level thing. It has
nothing to do with the
legislature. We funded it. It's
under the Energy Department
because the Trails Act is under
the Energy Department. That's
why this commission was put
under the Energy Department. um,
it is led by and appointed by
the secretary.
And under the new secretary and
under your leadership and
frankly Ben Shelton, who I think
is in the room, probably had
something to do with it. You
guys, and of course the outdoor
division which now existed, but
really they're a junior partner
in a way, well, they're not
because we now funded them to
really do the planning work, but
you all really are motivated
now. In the last two years of
this administration, so that's
the good news of the story is
that now the fire is lit. You
guys are moving and all the new
trail designation has happened
just this year. The meetings
have happened just this year,
so,
um,
that's a good thing and now we
see the opportunity by bike, uh,
what was it, Backpacker Magazine
wrote a story about the Rio
Grande Trail and like it's a
great idea that can be huge for
the state and it's glad that
this administration kind of
value is on board with that. um
the legislation that you speak
of is very important for my
colleagues. If you support the
Rio Grande Trail. We need this
legislation to help deal with
this liability issue for the
conservancy districts, and it's
a minor, very narrowly tail
tailored bill that just deals
with it can be as narrow as
saying for long distance trails
going through a conservancy
district that
they will be, uh, you know,
shielded from, from being sued
for someone for, you know,
whatever legal the lawyers need,
but um
and that'll then free up that
the conservancy districts like
the Middle Rio Grande, they're,
they're members really want
trails, but um it's not kind of
part of their charter to do
this, so they need this
liability bill. EBID would like
it, so I hope we can do that and
we can unlock that. And I think
we can get most of this trail
designated under this
administration.
So I'm really excited about that
and I think in terms of funding,
you, as, as Mr. Colonia said, we
give $100,000 a year in
recurring funding to the outdoor
division for for doing this work
and now we've given one time
money to the so I don't honestly
know it says here we need more
money, but I don't know that we
do need more money. I think we
just need your paddle, your foot
to stay depressed to the pedal
and demand real results, and we
need to pass a bill so that we
can get the conservancy district
miles done.
and we can probably get most of
the 400 miles left, um, under
this administration.
so, uh, I don't really have a
question. I just wanted to
editorialize. Thank you for
coming to my TED Talk.
Thank you, madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Steinborn, and I
know that uh you won't let this
go.
OK, so Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so I
had a question on your proposed
legislation. Uh, I have a few
questions on your proposed
legislation because I think
about this stuff, um, first off,
uh, your proposed language is no
landowner or leaseholder, uh,
our leaseholders in a position
to grant a right of way or
easement across lands that they
lease.
Madam Chair and Mister Vice
Chair, um, I think that we put
that language in there be sorry,
I don't think we put that
language in there because, uh,
special districts don't
necessarily own all of their
land. Sometimes they lease land
on segments of
le v y roads that they operate
on.
So we are trying to incorporate
that into the text language
there.
Madam Chair,
uh
OK, fair enough, but
I don't know of any leaseholders
who have the right to grant
property interest in their,
their land.
I, I mean that's not typically
part of the leasehold interest.
Madam Chair and Mr. Vice Chair,
uh, thank you for your question.
We will look into that and uh
would like to come back to you
with an answer soon. Thank you.
OK, thank you for that. um, this
is a, this is a preview of uh
Hauser and Judiciary where you
will get asked these questions.
um, second question, uh, Tort
Claims Act, um, our special
districts subject to the Tort
Claims Act and wouldn't that
provide them some protection?
Um, Madam Chair, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, the
special districts, um, my
understanding are, um, subject
to tort claims, but that
typically only covers your, your
original charter and our charter
does not include recreation. Um,
our charter is irrigation, flood
control, and, and, uh, uh,
drainage.
OK, great. Um, next question,
are, um, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the panel, are you
familiar with 174-7.
Madam Chair, Mr Vice Chair, yes
sir, I believe that is the um
it has to do with outdoor
recreation and um
yes, I, I'm familiar. Yes, sir.
And so the question is, wouldn't
that also already apply.
Madam Chair and Mister Vice
Chair, I believe that that was a
bill that was attempted to run
last year was to add special
districts into 17-4. Um, so this
is special districts are not
explicitly mentioned and
therefore that statute is
unclear in my understanding, and
so we are trying a different
avenue, uh, to include special
districts in those protections.
OK, so 174-7 says any owner.
which seems pretty broad, but,
you know, I just
um, you know, this, it's
already, it's a little
duplicative of 163-9, but it's
on the books, um, so I, I, um,
like the changes they proposed
here, I, I don't have any
heartburn over them. Um, but I
think we often hear
this fear of liability as a
reason not to do things and
rarely is it a particularly good
reason not to do things, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you. Senator Scott
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Presenters.
who will be ultimately
responsible.
for the operation and
maintenance of the trail when
these sections are completed.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, um,
based upon,
uh
patchwork of ownership, various
entities will have management
responsibilities for various
segments of the trail
For instance, um, if the trail
is in Bernna Leo County, like
the Bosquey Trail, the city of
Albuquerque or Bernalillo County
assumes responsibility for the
maintenance of that segment.
As you see the complexity of the
trail from Colorado down to
Texas. Various entities, Federal
land management agencies, local
units of government,
conservation districts all have
certain responsibilities, um,
but it varies broadly.
Yeah
is, is Madam Chair presenters,
is there a concern that
everybody
being responsible ultimately
leaves nobody responsible for
the overall
policing
and maintenance of this, uh,
very substantial facility.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, um
briefly put no. Um, you would
look at the example of the
Bureau of Land Management, Rio
Grande del Norte National
Monument that has several
segments of the Rio Grande Trail
under their management.
Um, for instance, the West Rim
Trail, which goes from the gorge
Bridge down to Taos Junction
Bridge, uh, about 9 miles of
trail.
The BLM is responsible for the
management of that trail, for
the signage of that trail, um,
uh, for both the policing and
maintenance and that's
occurring.
Um, are there situations where
land management entities provide
less attention than they should?
Yes. But you heard us also talk
about the establishment of a
nonprofit, um, very similar to
the continental Divide Trail
Coalition, an entity focused on
the ongoing development and
management of the Rio Grande
Trail is what we are, um,
advocating for, um, and and
actively
working towards. Um, we believe
having a nonprofit partner in
this process, um, we'll only
grease the gears towards that
entity, um, taking uh a larger
responsibility for the entirety
of the project.
And Madam Chair, presenters, is
in other trail circumstances
that is uh
one along the spine of the
Rockies or over on the east
coast.
Are there dedicated officers and
maintenance personnel that are
on the payroll to police and
maintain this.
on an ongoing basis.
Madam Chair Senator Scott, that
varies. Um, you can look at the
example of the Arizona Trail,
um, which has a nonprofit that
manages the entirety of that in
partnership with various land
ownership and management
entities, including the National
Forest, the Bureau of Land
Management, um, even some, uh,
Arizona state lands. So the
Arizona Trail Coalition works to
support that entirety, but
there's also some management and
polic
ing responsibilities based upon
the
segments of that trail moving
from land entity to land entity.
And Madam Chair,
presenters, just one last
comment. I
I've heard the word liability
come up.
in several conversations today
during these various
presentations and I find it
interesting that we're willing
to consider uh
some of these special districts,
uh, limitations of liability
where
with regard to medical doctors,
we've been unable to come up
with any plan to help them.
That's all I have, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Gonzalez.
and then Representative Romero.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
thank you to our presenters and
Carl
nice to see you.
Oh, Madam Chair, members on page
3
on the Rio Grande Trail goals.
um
I really feel that uh especially
where you have um increase on
rural economic development that
uh we should have uh outdoor
education.
and uh we have been uh funding
outdoor education for a few
years and we just really need to
get it stronger and
conversations with the governor
she's on board and uh I think
this would really be great
because also growing our own
into the economic development
and if there's anything that uh
I can assist with, I would be
more than glad to help you with
that, but I really feel that
that's missing.
That's all I have about. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. I have
Representative Romero, then
Senator Nava. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, thank you for the
presentation. I'm, I'm curious
about the 300+ miles on
potential corridors, uh,
potential trail corridor
remaining. Is that, how much of
that is within the tribal
landscape.
Well,
uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Romero, uh,
historically, I guess all of it
is within a tribal landscape,
but in current tribal
boundaries, none of it is in
within a tribal boundary. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So that was my
first question, just seeing the
um
historical oversight of not
having discussed with this with
our sovereign nations. Um, my
question is just thinking
through some of the history of
the railroads and some of the
other priorities that we've seen
as a nation in the past, um, and
then also having hiked trails
through various countries and
other things. More recently is
that, you know, there's a clear
um set of goals that where we
are really motivated to do
something.
We can make things happen
within, you know, weeks and not
years. So I'm just curious if
there are lessons to take from
some of that just an
understanding whether it's
eminent domain or some of the
proposals that we have on the
table about
really getting something like
this done using those tools that
say the railroads were using at
the time to really say like you
have to opt out rather than opt
in, and then we deal with those
sort of nuances as they come.
Um, but is there, I'm, and I'm
just trying to think about
timelines and, and actually
getting this done before the 32
years, um, on the updated
proposal, how, I mean, how
quickly are we really thinking
this through and, and can we
take from some of that note
notebook to, to get this done.
Madam Chair and Representative
Romero, thank you for your
question. Um, I think that so
for those 300 miles in
particular, those are 300 miles
within special districts. So if
we can kind of change this
liability structure, we can
really accelerate the, the
leasing and or the easements and
right of ways and develop a
strong framework for Mnerd and
the special districts to
collaborate on trail
development. Um,
yeah, I, does that answer your
question, my, my question, Madam
Chair, I guess is like the but
for it being a trail, special
districts
you know,
like
can we, is this what this
proposal is saying that you
will, that we can fast track
this in a way, like what are we
expecting, I guess on a as a
timeline if this proposal goes
through.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Romero, I, I can't speak to a
specific timeline, but what I
can tell you is that the um
current board of directors and
staff at the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District, um, as was
shown in our letter of support
for establishing a smaller uh
section in Socorro. There is
broad support for doing this,
um, within our organization, um,
but we do need to have those,
um, those protections in place
first before we can take on uh
such an endeavor. So
I, I
I hesitate to give a, a hard
date, but please know, at least
in the middle Rio Grande where
there's over 147 river miles,
um, and a significant amount of
infrastructure already in place
where there's social trails in
place, um, that there's a, a
desire to, to make this happen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
love a direct answer at some
point so that we know when we're
in our session that this is
gonna be a five-year plan or,
you know, so that way we can
also meet the budgetary demands
as we understand the
developmental demand, and that
if this change is made that we
can expect accelerated success,
because I think the 32 year
timeline scares a ton of us off
that we'll ever see this, you
know, done. So I would love to
have a better
handle on that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Are you gonna become
buddies with Senator Steinborn
on this?
I would love that, Madam Chair.
I think it sounds like fun. We
can start a little biker gang.
OK, there you go, Senator
Steinborn. Uh, now we're to
Senator Nava. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you experts for
being here. Um, I represent
Sandoval and Bernoo Counties and
sit right in between Cin Diaz,
and Felipe, Santa Ana, Zia, um,
in my district, I represent
Sandia, so I am wondering how
and has tribal consultation
taken place?
Madam Chair and Senator Nava,
um, we have sent out letters, so
when we reconstituted the
commission in January, we sent
out letters to all tribes,
nations, and pueblos within, uh,
within New Mexico, and we didn't
receive a ton of responses, so
we followed up with many of
them, and Sandia and Santa Ana
responded and they agreed to
reschedule the meeting. Um, I
believe with Santa Ana, they
came to the Ener office and we
had a meeting there and with
Sandia we had
a virtual meeting um with them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you experts. Um, thank you for
sharing that. In some
conversations that I have had
with the governor of um Sandia.
He has expressed concerns, um,
and I would appreciate if those
concerns could be amplified here
to ensure that we are
representing their voices and
ensure that we accurately have
them at the table if we're going
to undertake this. Is there
anything, uh any other
conversations that have taken
place at all?
Madam Chair and Senator Nava,
um, no, not beyond those four
with tribal leaders, um, and if
I can just add a little context
to our meeting with uh Sandia
leadership, um, they're very not
excited about the trail, um,
they feel like some of the
alignments are too close to the
river boundaries and people are
inappropriately recreating in
the Rio Grande, uh, right across
from their tribal boundaries.
Um, so we have, we've been
working to change that alignment
and to move it farther away from
the
ri ver where it is encroaching
onto their sovereign lands, um,
in addition, they also had some
challenges with the alignment
that went through the Sandia
Mountains, um, getting too close
to culturally sensitive areas
and so we have decided to scrap
that alignment and go around,
uh, Sandia Mountain, uh, on
Highway 14.
Thank you, Madam Cho. Thank you.
Has that been communicated with
them?
Madam Chair, Senator Nava, um,
we have not scheduled a follow
up with them yet, so no.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you experts. I would greatly
appreciate if that communication
was um continued and ensured
that they were aware of all
those changes. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Senator
Steinborn, for the 2nd time, and
then we're moving on. Yeah.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. I think
I will, I'll pass. I appreciate
it. Yeah, on that note, but I,
other than to say I really
appreciate the leadership of
these gentlemen sitting at the
table.
and uh
look forward to continued
progress. Thank you, Madam Cha.
Thank you very much for the
presentation. We bring this up
every year and we wanna see
something happen every year. So
thank you. um
members of the committee, uh,
the, uh, Protem has appointed
Senator Brandt and Senator
Charlie as temporary voting
members of this, uh, committee
for for this meeting, could I
have a motion for approval of
the minutes.
So moved
There's a motion by
Representative McQueen and the
second by Representative
Sarignano.
Is there any opposition or
discussion?
Any opposition or discussion?
OK, it is approved unanimously.
Thank you. We are moving on to
item number 6, and we're only 8
minutes late, so we're catching
up time. It's the land and water
conservation Fund and the land
of enchantment Legacy Fund
updates.
Now since the right order or
not.
I, I
it
they switch it on sometimes
So who is going first? I'm not
even gonna guess.
Good afternoon,
Madam Chair. I'll go first. I'm
just waiting for my hopefully
presentation to go up there.
Hooray, it is
Um, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name's Judy Calman. I'm the New
Mexico policy director for
Audubon Southwest. Um, before I
start, I do just want to note
that a few of you have heard
this presentation before, um, at
LFC in July when Brittany Fallon
gave it, um, she wasn't able to
be here today, so I'm giving it
instead. Um, so sorry, I'm not
her. I will try to do as well as
she did. Um, you'll also not be
surprised that I made New Mexico
shaped cookies to go with this
present
ation and they are over there on
that table if anybody would like
one, so hopefully that makes up
for the fact that I haven't done
this presentation before. Um,
but I have a happy job because,
um, I'm here today just to share
the, the first year report for
the land of enchantment Legacy
Fund, um, and I'm gonna
highlight the funds many
successes and also um discuss
some of the challenges that
we've been having over the last
year.
But overall, it's good news, so
this should be a fun one.
next slide, please. So I just
want to remind you all of the
breast of the coalition that has
supported this fund, um, it was
a pretty amazing effort, over 30
organizations comprised the
coalition to pass this bill. Um,
you can see that it is
bipartisan, comprising
environmental groups,
agriculture, recreation,
sportsmen, land trusts, tribes,
asseass, chambers of commerce,
and more.
And this legacy fund project has
accomplished so much
collaboration and bipartisanship
and mutual respect, not just
among the groups in the
coalition, but I think also
between us and the legislature
and the staff and the agencies
and kind of everybody who's been
involved in the, in the whole
process. So it really is the
kind of coalition that you
always want, and I just wanna
acknowledge that it was great
and continues to be. Next slide,
please.
Before um I dive into the
specifics of what has happened
over the first year of
implementation. I'll do a quick
refresher on the Legacy Fund for
people who are new or may have
forgotten. So this was the
state's first dedicated source
of revenue for land and water
conservation, agriculture, and
outdoor recreation. It was
created in 2023 with SB 9, it
used general funds surplus to
invest conservation dollars long
term by leveraging available
federal funds. So all of
the programs that the fund funds
also have available federal
matching dollars, which I'll get
into a little bit more later.
Um, it did not fund any new
programs that only funded
existing programs at 6 different
state agencies.
and I do want to note before we
get into the details of the
Legacy Fund projects too that
all, I think all maybe not quite
all, but most of the programs
that the legacy fund funds also
get additional funding from
other sources, and so they're
actually accomplishing more than
just what was paid for by the
legacy fund funds, so just keep
that in mind. I'm gonna talk
about the projects that were
funded by the Legacy Fund, but
most of them are doing much more
than that because they get
additional funding from other
places. And the other thing I
want to note is that um
now that there is permanent
stable funding for this fund. We
believe that interest in these
programs will grow.
um, and that's gonna come up
later too in the presentation.
Um, next slide, please.
So, I'm not gonna read all of
these numbers, but you have the
copy of this report and your
materials. The report is
amazing. It was put together by
Jake McCook on behalf of the
coalition with help from the
agencies. You can see that it is
beautiful and incredible. On
this page that's shown up on the
screen, um, you'll see the first
year high-level highlights of
the program. Not going to read
the numbers, but they're
incredibly impressive. The most
important thing to note for
today is that 100% of the first
year's
money for the fund has been
allocated, and there are now
legacy fund projects happening
in all 33 counties in New Mexico
and on 10 tribal communities. So
the fund is working well, it's
working the way it should and
it's creating jobs for New
Mexicans. Next slide, please.
So over the next few slides, I'm
gonna just highlight some of the
work that the fund is
accomplishing on the ground
through the people and the
landscapes, they're impacting.
I'm going to do that by talking
about the couple different
buckets that the fund is working
on. The first is forest and
watershed health. Um, so one of
the main legacy fund programs is
NMED's River stewardship
program, uh, which does, uh,
watershed restoration around the
state. So in the past year, 20
NGOs subcon
tra ctor s and engineers did
restoration work on the ground,
90% of those people were from
New Mexico working. The program
is bringing people together and
building partnerships with
ranchers and grazing permittees
and NGOs to protect critical
watersheds around the state.
Legacy fund dollars also support
MR's forestry division. Um, so
one example there on the right
is Emner doing work in the sandy
in the Santa Fe fire shed with
Tesuque Pueblo to protect the
pueblo's water supply from fire
and flooding.
Next slide, please.
I have to go down too. Um, I do
want to focus for a little while
on the outdoor recreation fund
and the outdoor equity fund. New
Mexico really became a
nationwide leader in outdoor
recreation in 20 2019 when it
created the Outdoor Equity Fund.
This program gives grants to get
kids outside away from their
phones, and encourages a love of
the outdoors from a young age.
The legacy fund supports this
program and the Trails Plus
program at the Outdoor
recreation division, which pays
for trail improvements for
hiking, horseback riding, and
river trails. My organization,
Audubon Southwest received a
trails Plus grant to install
bilingual signs that connect
visitors with our nature
discovery area in Santa Fe,
which if you haven't been there,
you should go and the Santa Fe
National Forest, which is right
up against Audubon's property.
Another great example is the
city of Carlsbad's Trails Plus
work to improve the late
Carlsbad recreation Area and
Pecos Riverfront improvements.
Those were also funded by this
fund. Um, one important last
thing about outdoor recreation
is that this was one of the
programs where demand outpaced
um available funds by quite a
lot, um, so they had like
$400,000 to spend and demand for
this program was like 3 million.
So this is a place where they
could really use additional
funding, which I'll talk about
more later too.
Next slide please
Um,
my coalition partner Jillian
Joyce is here to talk in a
minute more about the
agricultural programs, um,
involved in the legacy fund, but
the highlights here are the
three programs that fall under
NMDA, um, the department has
been incredibly helpful and so
is Debbie Hughes and the soil
and Water Conservation
Districts. They've been
incredibly impressive getting
money on the ground to New
Mexico communities. The noxious
weeds Management Program in
particular had to be completely
built and staffed from the
ground up.
um, and the department did this
incredibly quickly and got more
than a million dollars out the
door to 15 projects in 14
counties over the last year.
Next slide, please
So
wildlife habitat restoration is
another big bucket of the legacy
fund, the New Mexico Department
of Game and Fish, which, as you
know, is soon to be the
Department of Wildlife, receives
legacy fund dollars for both
game and non-game species
conservation, and this year the
department funded 43 projects
supporting 34 wildlife species
with funding from the legacy
fund. We're especially glad to
see work being done to support
the Pinyon Jay, an iconic New
Mexico bird whose habitat is
being threatened by
ongoing fires and floods.
Other projects include
conservation work at the biopark
to support the Rio Grande Cub
and Rio Grande sucker fish
species, and there's an
educational project with high
school students in Dora and
Tatum in eastern New Mexico that
teaches them about lesser
prairie chicken habitat
restoration. And together these
dollars are really working hard
to ensure that um species are
protected well enough at the
state level so that they are not
listed on the Federal Endangered
Species list. You might remember
some of those conversations from
SB 5. That was part
of this issue too. That is why
we're trying to work so hard to
keep New Mexico species
conserved.
Next slide
Last, um, the legacy fund
supports historic preservation
through the cultural properties
division, I mean, cultural
affairs department.
um in the 1990s, that department
set up the cultural Properties
restoration Fund, but it has
really never been funded until
now through the Legacy Fund. So
the department had to
re-establish this program once
the fund was set up and get a
million dollars out the door to
5 projects this year, which they
did, um, which included the
oldest fire station in
Albuquerque, and a National
Guard armory in Deming and 4
Navajo defense structures and
cultural artifacts
in Northwest New Mexico. Next
slide, please.
Um,
so here you can see the 5th
grant through the the
department.
which is helping to restore our
silver City's only surviving
19th century stone building,
which is the waterworks
building. This summer, you can
see in the picture there, we,
well, you can't really see it,
but you can sort of see shadows,
um, the coalition hosted
Governor Michelle Louhan Gresham
and Chairman Small and local
leaders at this building to
celebrate the legacy fund's
first year and all of its
successes. Next slide.
So those are just a few
examples. There are many. There
are actually 185 projects that
have been funded by the Legacy
Fund in the first year. Um,
again, in all 33 counties, there
is a map on enchantmentFund.org
where you can see all 185
projects. That's the Legacy Fund
website. There's also an Excel
spreadsheet on that website
where you can see projects by
legislative district, by county,
by, by agency, by anything
you want, so that you can see
exactly where all those projects
were, and there's actually a dot
on the map for each project, so
you can just click on individual
projects that way too, um, and
the XL file is downloadable so
you can keep that.
So this is just the first year.
It's incredibly impressive. That
was just $12.5 million that was
spent and covered 185 projects
around the state
I
So, you know, again, we just
hope you're all so proud of the
fact that you've created
something so beneficial and
amazing that will last for
generations now that it has
permanent funding.
Next slide please.
So, as I mentioned, 100% of
legacy fund programs are
leveraging federal dollars. Um,
I'm going to talk about that in
a few minutes cause that does uh
involve one of the challenges,
as you've heard from other
presentations today, um, next
slide please we'll just go into
it.
So I'll, I'll just talk briefly
about a couple challenges facing
the legacy fund. Like I said,
mostly it's good news, but
there's a couple little things.
Next slide please, um, the, the
biggest thing is that demand
outpaces available dollars by
quite a lot, which really is a
good thing, like people know
what needs to be done on the
ground, and they're trying to do
it, and that's great. Um, every
single program in the legacy
fund, uh, received way more
applications than funding
available. Sometimes 5 times
and 10 times as much as what was
available. So $50 million was
requested during the first year
of the legacy fund for the $12.5
million that was available. So
there's a lot more that needs to
happen.
Next slide please
So the second challenge, of
course, as has been mentioned
several times today is
uncertainty at the federal
level. I don't really know what
the answer to that is, just like
no one else knows what the
answer to that is, but because
the legacy fund was designed to
leverage federal dollars in
every program. A lot of those
programs are getting cut or
they're on hold or we just don't
know what's gonna happen to
them. And so the impact that
that's going to have on the
legacy fund programs at this
point is just sort of unknown.
Next slide, please.
And the last challenge we're
facing is that some of the
programs have kind of
complicated application
processes and some of them have,
um, like 2-year time limits and
things like that. And so the
soil and water conservation
districts in particular often
just have volunteers, they don't
have staff. And so this can be a
little bit um complicated and
confusing, and so it's
challenging, like the
application process itself for
some of these programs is
challenging, which might be
something we could address in
the future.
Next slide please
So just a quick update on where
we are with the finances, and
here's where I may not know the
answer to every single one of
your questions, but I could try.
Um, so in 2024, the legislature
made a historic, amazing, uh,
appropriation of $350 million
into the legacy fund that
ensures that it can exist in
perpetuity at its current rate,
which is incredible. Um, and it
ensures that it's gaining
interest in weathering economic
un
c er tain ty It's actually doing
better than expected, which you
can see in the numbers there,
the, the actual balance is
exceeding the projected balance,
which is great. Um, it could be
gaining more interest if we
invested it in the same way that
the early childhood education
fund is done, um, and so LFC and
the State Investment council and
some legislators are aware of
this and have recommended a
simple fix for this for next
session, just to set up the
interest rate in the same way.
Um, so you might see that in
January.
Um, and all that would be is
fixing that interest rate so
that more money can come out of
the fund to be leveraged.
Next slide please, and this is
my last one.
So we just want to say thank you
again for all the work that
you've done to support the
legacy fund. It really has been
amazing and a huge success in
its first year. We also want to
thank all the staff at all the
agencies who work to administer
these grants, um, and who helped
put the report together. It was
a really huge effort, and it's
just like incredible again that
in one year we got tens of
millions of dollars on the
ground to all 33 counties, and
this was just the first year of
the fund, so thank you
And Jillian is gonna talk about
some specifics on the ground of
how this program is working.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name's Gillian Joyce, and I'm
government relations advocate
for Rocky Mountain Farmers Union
and executive director for
Alianza Agricultura, a local
agricultural nonprofit serving
Taos County and northern New
Mexico.
I was asked to present today
about the impacts of the legacy
funding going to New Mexico
Department of Ag in Taos County
beyond the numbers. So I'm going
to be focusing today on the
healthy soil program and tell
you about how this program is
being implemented, and the
ripple effects of this funding
and our local community here in
Taos.
New Mexico Department of Ag is a
large recipient of legacy fund
dollars as, uh, you just heard
was 22.5% of total annual
disbursements being distributed
across three New Mexico
Department of Ag programs, the
Healthy soil program, the
noxious weeds Management
Program, which was set up for
the first time thanks to the
Legacy Fund and grants to
individual soil and water
conservation districts.
All three of these programs are
having real and palpable impact
on the ground, and the permanent
funding provided by the legacy
fund is allowing for the level
of programmatic stability and
consistency that is absolutely
necessary to implement projects
that will have generational
impact. Well, I'm going to be
focusing on healthy soil work in
our county. Our soil and water
conservation District is central
to this work, and I would like
to give them a little bit of a
shout out. Um, let's see. OK,
this is the slide that's not
included there.
Our soil and water conservation
district is incredible and a
wonderful example of how
government can operate
effectively and efficiently,
responding quickly to needs on
the ground and delivering
measurable long-term results.
From supporting the Task County
Forest and Watershed Health
Program to investing in assea
infrastructure. From advancing
healthy soil initiatives to
managing invasive pest species,
tassel and water serves as the
foundational entity ensuring
Taos County's working lands and
community are
vital for future generations. My
organization, along with
numerous other organizations and
initiatives working in
agriculture and natural resource
management in our county could
not achieve nearly the impact we
do without talus au soil and
water's ability to efficiently
deliver technical assistance and
funding where it is most needed.
That's the slide. As I
mentioned, while our soil and
water conservation districts
support good stewardship in many
ways. I'm focusing today on just
one legacy fund supported
program, and that is the Healthy
soil program. So why do we care
about healthy soils?
Healthy soils are the foundation
of a resilient agricultural
industry and food system. They
are essential for farm
profitability and productivity,
critical for helping
agricultural operations weather
extreme conditions and vital for
food security and nutritional
qualities in our food. Beyond
these direct benefits, healthy
soils on agricultural land
provide valuable community
benefits, improving water
quality, supporting climate
resilience through water
retention and carbon
sequestration and enhancing
biodiversity.
The bottom photo on the slide
shows a 200 acre parcel outside
Angel Fire. When acquired 10
years ago, so it was mostly bare
dirt that on occasion created
hazardous dust conditions for
drivers on the adjacent highway.
Today it looks like this, a
transformation achieved entirely
through implementation of the
soil health principles and using
the cattle from Los Pacheco's
ranch here in Taos, shown in the
upper photo as management tools.
Next slide.
New Mexico's Healthy soil
program is based on the NRCS
soil health principles, which
you can see on the screen.
These principles guide numerous
NRCS programs and inform the
work of agencies and
organizations nationwide. When
individuals are eligible
entities apply to New Mexico
Department of Ag's Healthy soil
program, their applications must
address one or more of these
principles.
These are the principles as
follows. One, minimize soil
disturbance. This refers to both
chemical and mechanical
disturbance. While tillage and
chemical inputs have their place
in agricultural systems,
overusing either negatively
impacts the crucial
microorganisms in our soils. 2,
maximizing biodiversity.
Biodiversity creates resilience
at every level, diverse soil
microbes, plant species, and
animal life all work together to
build stronger, more adaptable
systems that can weather
challenges and maintain their
health over time
3, maximize soil cover. Keeping
soil covered protects it from
temperature and weather extremes
that damage soil biology while
also preventing erosion, and 4,
maintaining a living root. Plant
roots interact with soil biology
in a symbiotic relationship,
soil microorganisms feed on the
sugars and proteins that roots
release, thereby developing
strong soil health to support
healthy plants. Mechanically,
living roots anchor soil and
protect it from wind and water
erosion.
What's remarkable about these
principles.
is their universal
applicability. They work equally
well in your backyard tomato
patch and across large
landscapes to wardship projects.
It's important to note that
while we talk a lot about the
regenerative ag movement and
soil health movement. None of
this is new. The practice and
principles of soil health have
been around as long as humans
have been domesticating animals
and planting seeds. The only
thing that is new is our ability
to apply 21st century science to
monitoring, refining, and
contextualizing them.
So
getting into what's happening on
the ground in Taos.
We are working as a community of
agencies and organizations to
collaborate, collaborate and
streamline programming around
healthy soil adoption in order
to ensure we are optimally
efficient.
A great example is our towel and
water conservation districts,
fiscal year 26, soil health
grant, which among other
practices is supporting the NRCS
approved practice of bale
grazing.
Our org and our partners
collaborated with the district
to ensure the community was
prepared to succeed at
implementing this practice. With
all the on the ground
information and technical
support the community could
need. This started last October
with an event sponsored by my
organization at Pallet Farm, a
small diversified specialty crop
and small room in an operation.
The workshop was attended by
about 30 producers and
landowners. To support peer to
peer learning in our
agricultural community. The
farmers at Pallet Farm, Elise
Monignon and Eli
Colignon, pictured in the upper
right, took the lead on
presenting. Our Taos County
Extension agent, Will Jeremco
Wright, and our NRCS District
Conservationist Vernon Mirabal,
pictured in the bottom right,
and Tauso and Water Conservation
District's Healthy soils
coordinator, Tyler Zander,
pictured in the top left and
sitting behind us in the
audience, we're on hand to
provide technical expertise and
walk people through the process
and timeline for getting
conservation planning done and
applying to NRCS programs, the
healthy Healthy soils program
and soil and water soil Health
Program. Today, if you take the
back road on your way to dinner
and drive past our swollen water
conservation district. You will
see the few 1000 bales of hay in
our soil and water district
parking lot, ready to get on the
ground through this program this
fall.
That's a great example of how
we're streamlining education and
technical service provision and
program participation to get
practices implemented through
the Healthy soil Program. But
the program's impact extends far
beyond acres directly enrolled.
Taus soil and water, along with
one of our local assekiass has
been incorporating community
soil health education events
into their grant applications
each year. Our organization and
partners have collaborated with
Tao Soil and Water and the
Susica to develop and deliver
much of this education.
Our inaugural soil health event
supported by the Healthy soil
program was a movie screening at
our agricultural Center arena.
On a cold April afternoon during
COVID, 50 producers turned out
with masks on and socially
distanced to watch a soil health
documentary receive free cover
crop samples and soil tests, and
check out our community no till
drill.
Since then, we've partnered on
tours of property properties
implementing soil health
practices, hosted peer to peer
learning workshops where
producers learn directly from
each other. We've brought in
local and regional technical
experts for training sessions
and hosted nationally and
internationally recognized soil
health regenerative grazing
experts, including Ray
Archuleta, pictured here,
Alejandro Carrillo and Fernando
Fallomi. The result of this
educational work is that many
producers in our community are
implementing soil health
practices without
applying directly to the NMTA
Healthy soil Program, or our
stolen water conservation
District soil health program.
Meaning this program is
impacting far more acreage than
our official numbers suggest.
This is a little collage of
events supported by the Healthy
soil program in Taos County
since the first year of the
program. In the top left, you
can see the first event at our
Ag Center arena in 2020. Next,
you can see former So and Water
Conservation District member
David Gilroy, doing a soil
health demonstration at the
community center in Badito. To
the right of that is a team of
soil and water staff and
community members doing a field
tour of a cover cropped field in
Questa. The next two photos are
of two experts in regenerative
grazing from
Chihuahua, Mexico, Alejandro
Carrillo and Fernando Fallomir
on visits to a ranch on the Taos
Plateau and the Baye Vidal
grazing permit, respectively.
In the bottom row you can see
one of our intro to cover crop
and healthy soil program
workshops with about 60 people
in attendance. The next is a
regenerative grazing workshop at
the questa VFW with 50 people in
attendance, and an event for our
full community at our TAS Center
for the Arts, with about 100
people in attendance.
The this final story is one I am
particularly excited about. 4
years ago, a local orchard owner
and a secia Pariante on the San
Cristobal ditch, Tobias Duncan
approached house soil and water
about applying for an individual
soil health grant. Taw soil and
Water suggested he consider
applying through his Esekia
instead, helping producers and
landowners throughout his
community of San Cristobal,
revitalized their agricultural
lands. San Cristobal is a
community like many others in
our region. As new generations
have left agri
cul ture and often left the
community itself irreplaceable
agricultural fields have gone
fallow. Meanwhile, remaining
producers struggle to access
land in a county where an
irrigated acre can sell for
$70,000.
Today, Tobias' thanks to
Tobias's leadership, 34
agricultural properties on the
San Cristobal ditch have been
restored. Fields have been cover
cropped and reseeded with
diverse perennial pasture mixes,
fallow land has been releveled
and brush hogged. Ponds have
been relined and fences
repaired. Younger and smaller
producers are partnering with
their landowning neighbors,
haying and rotationally grazing
fields throughout the community.
Our local nonprofit community is
now working to help othersakia
communities.
adopt their own version of this
approach to both soil and
community revitalization.
In these photos here, you can
see, uh, one of the local
producers in the top left,
Junito Medina, is holding a huge
radish that's being used to
break up compacted soil in their
cover crop mix. Uh, the, the
next photo is the Myerdomo on
the San Cristopal ditch, uh,
using our community, uh, crop
crimper, uh, to crimp and kill a
cover crop, um
plot
In the bottom left is a
community event, um, we invited
all the pariantes on the ditch
to come together and spend a day
imagining what the future of
their agricultural community
could look like around soil
health, access to markets, and
other community needs for a
small rural community. And last
in the bottom right is Tobias
Martinez, uh, the person
responsible for this, uh,
project.
Um, this work is having a real
impact in our agricultural
community. We estimate that
between 50% and 70% of producers
in Taos County have either
participated in soil and waters,
uh, soil health program in the
Healthy soil program or in soil
health education through the
district or through a partner
organization of the district.
There is an enthusiasm in our
agricultural community that I
have not seen in my lifetime in
Taos.
In 2024, we held a total of 59
events on agricultural topics in
Taos County. That's more than
one a week. By tau soil and
water extension, or the
nonprofit community. And the
community keeps showing up to
these events. There is a new and
palpable excitement about
innovation and celebration of
food production happening here.
Our efforts are being noticed by
those outside of agriculture as
public lands agency and
conservation nonprofits such as
those led by my friend here, are
approaching our ag community
about increasing education in
public lands offices and to the
conservation community and
asking us to partner on
implementing soil health
practices and principles in
collaboration with other natural
resource management and
conservation efforts.
Taos was also just selected by
the Ecdysis Foundation, a
national agroecology research
entity out of South Dakota as
one of three communities in the
nation to pilot a study engaging
farmers and ranchers in
ecosystem monitoring to help
producers inform their
management and help contribute
to the scientific literature on
how these practices and
principles can contribute to
more efficient food production
and more resilient ecosystems.
We were chosen in large part
because of the existing broad
adoption of these practices in
our community.
I would like to brag all
afternoon about our producers
and the work being done on the
ground here in Taos, but there
are more great presentations to
come. So thank you so much to
the legislature for providing
permanent funding for the
Healthy soil program. I hope you
see it making a difference. I
look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair
and committee members. Uh, my
name is Robert Stokes. I'm with
New Mexico State Parks. Uh,
thank you for allowing us to
talk about the land and water
conservation fund, uh, this
afternoon, uh, we have some, uh,
updated statistics and other
information for you. Um
uh, slide 2.
Perfect
Uh, the, uh, mission of the
state parks is to protect and
enhance natural and cultural
resources, provide first class
recreational and educational
facilities and opportunities and
promote public safety to benefit
and enrich the lives of
visitors.
Uh, this mission statement
dovetails very nicely with the
land and water conservation
Fund. Uh, they value many of the
same goals and so we are two
organizations that are ideally
matched in many ways to run this
particular program.
Uh, next
Uh, so just a brief LWCF
overview. Uh, this is a federal
granting program. Uh, it is
administered by the National
Park Service.
and at the state level, New
Mexico State parks operates it
here for the state.
Uh, it was established in 1964,
so it's been around for quite a
long time. Uh, it is designed to
support outdoor recreation and
to get the public outdoors, uh,
no matter, uh, what that may
mean. It could be a park, it
could be a restored wetland
area. It could be a bird blind,
uh, you know, whatever it is
that gets people outside.
Uh, the goals of the LWCF
program are to expand parks,
trails, and recreation
facilities. Um, I'll also add
that they have money available
to actually acquire new land for
new parks as well. I protect
natural and cultural landscapes,
promote equitable access to
outdoor spaces, support local
and state and tribal projects
through pass-through grants. Uh,
and that's an important point.
Uh, this is federal money, uh,
state parks just pass
es it through. We, we get the
money from the federal
government. We give it to the
awardees.
Uh, so again, New Mexico State
Parks is the designated state
agency to administer this
program and to work with the
National Park Service.
Uh, next slide
OK, the funding mechanism, uh,
for the LWCF, uh, this is now a
permanently funded federal grant
program. Uh, the money comes
from federal offshore oil and
gas leasing uh revenues.
Uh, so it, it, in essence, no
tax putter, payer money is
involved with this.
Uh, there are many branches of
the LWCF, uh, the stateside
program is just one, and the two
primary programs within the
state side are the formula
grants. Uh, these are the grants
that New Mexico State parks, uh,
solicits solicits every year,
uh, and we encourage New Mexico
communities to apply for this
grant.
Uh, the other is the outdoor
recreation legacy partnership,
uh, uh, also known as OLAP. Uh,
this is actually a nationally
competitive national Park
Service, uh, a form of the land
and Water Conservation Fund. Uh,
they solicit the applications,
state parks, works with the
applications to make sure the
applications are in good shape
and then the National Park
Service selects which ones
they're going to fund each year.
Uh, so State Parks has no role
in that, but we select which
ones of the formula grants are
gonna get selected each year and
funded.
Uh, we also put together the
statewide comprehensive outdoor
recreation plan, also known as
the SCORP. Uh, this is mandated
by the Land and Water
Conservation Fund. Uh, every
state must have one.
So, uh, how do communities
access these LWCF funds, um,
subdivisions of the state are
eligible, uh, municipalities,
tribal governments are also
eligible, uh, in a variety of
state subdivisions just this
past year, we awarded uh a grant
to the Ciudad, uh, soil and
Water Conservation District. Uh,
they are in partnership with the
city of Albuquerque to run an
open space
uh, state parks, we are the ones
responsible for developing the
scorp.
Uh, it's, it's, uh, required
every 5 years to be renewed.
We set up the scoring of the
applications we receive through
an independent scoring
committee, uh, and then we use
those scoring results to
determine which applications are
pretty close to being moved
forward. Uh, but if some score a
little poorly, uh, we're in a
position to work with those
applicants to fix the problems
that the committee recognized
and so it, it's like a second
chance to improve their
application.
Uh, here in New Mexico, the LWCF
team currently consists of the
state liaison officer, which is
Deputy Secretary Ben Shelton of
Emner.
Uh, we have two alternate SLOs,
which would be myself and our
program coordinator Navv Khosa.
Uh, next slide please.
So the scorp, uh, we, we have a
current score, it's uh 22 to 26,
and so, uh, we are nearing the
point where we need to get our
next 5-year scorp, uh, moving
forward. Uh, this is a
comprehensive guide and, and
it's really for the state of New
Mexico. It's a requirement of
LWCF, but we do solicit um other
agencies' perspectives, the
public's perspectives, what do
they need? What would they like
to see, um
in, in as far as outdoor
recreation opportunities, uh,
these are put into the scorp,
and so it is a document that is
available to everyone in the
state. The LWCF applicants do
need to reference it, and the
various scoring, uh, chapters
within it.
Uh, New Mexico State Parks was
just awarded $150,000 from uh uh
the LWCF for uh putting together
our next scorp, which would be
the 2027 to 2032.
Uh, so, so that was great news.
Uh, it is a matching grant as
well, so Ebnerd will, uh, state
parks will come up with the
other 50%.
Uh, the, uh, website link, uh,
is up there and in your
printout, uh, if you would like
to see the scorp, if you haven't
seen it already.
Uh, next, please
All right, here's a lot of data
for you.
Uh, so each year from the
federal government, each state
gets uh an apportionment from
the federal government of how
much money they're going to get
for the state side formula
grants, uh, basically.
uh, it's often determined by the
population of the state.
Uh, the numbers here show you
what we've received for the last
5 years. We just received our
2025 apportionment.
When we get an apportionment, we
have 3 federal fiscal years to
use it.
And so we just got our 2025
federal fiscal year last week.
and we have 2 more weeks to go
before the end of the current
federal fiscal year. Uh, so, so
clearly if we would get this
earlier in the year, uh, it
would help with our planning.
Uh, so, so far of these last 5
years, uh, we've received over
17 million, uh, which is an
average of 3.5 plus, uh, since
2021, we've allocated, um,
almost $6 million of that. Uh,
1.7% went to some state parks
projects, uh, 4.2 went to uh New
Mexico communities.
uh, but we have many
applications from last year, uh,
in the pipeline right now. Uh,
for our review for NPS's review.
So we expect these numbers to
increase dramatically as soon as
the federal government reopens
the application portal in uh
Grant's solutions.
uh, uh, the bottom part of this
data set shows how many
applications we've received. Uh,
so 2021, 2022, we, we received
quite a lot. Uh, we, uh, one
OLAP application was submitted
and the MPS selected it and it
was funded. Uh, that was in
Albuquerque project.
Uh, in 2023, that number dropped
to 5, applications
unfortunately, but we're, we
went back up to 7, last year,
uh, 3 from the town of Tawel,
um, communities are allowed to
uh submit multiple applications
per year as long as they're for
different parks and in this case
that that's what happened.
Uh, we actually had two, New
Mexico communities submit for
Orlap, and one of them was
selected
uh, and again that, that was
Albuquerque.
Uh, and so, um, of many of these
are are still awaiting funding.
The 2025 application period just
opened, uh, we were waiting
until we got our official notice
of our appropriation. We would
have loved to have opened it
earlier in the summer, for
example, um, and, and so it's
open now for January 6th.
uh, next week
Oops
skip that
Uh, this is a map that's showing
uh where uh various uh
applications have been awarded
and those awaiting funding
across the state since 2021. Uh,
next slide please.
All right, so, um, let's see.
Oh, there we go.
So we wanted to highlight a
couple of success stories of
recently completed LWCF projects
from New Mexico communities. Uh,
one is nearby at Mallett Park in
Red River. Uh, they were
improving this existing park,
and this is a nice example of a
small project, uh, their grant
was just a little over 20,000.
Uh, next slide please
Uh, a bigger funded project, uh,
Cedillo Park, uh, in Socorro,
uh, received over $340,000 to
replace the, the uh lights in
the three ball fields and so now
they have energy efficient LED
lighting, and they had a nice
ribbon cutting, uh, just last
month.
Uh, next please
All right, so quickly some
recent updates. Uh, this year we
did get $4.6 million. Uh, it was
about $1.3 million more than we
typically get. And so that was a
nice increase. Uh, we are
working with the uh Senate Bill
169 from the previous year. This
is the LWCF State supplemental
Fund. Uh, we've had many
applicants last year, uh, ask
for this supplemental money, and
we expect many more to do it
this year
as well
Uh, lastly, um, we are, uh,
overseeing this program and we
are pushing uh for people to
apply and ask for the state
supplemental fund as well. Uh,
it is a 50% match coverage and
the last slide, please.
Uh, for more information, I've
included uh NAV Kulsa's
information here. Uh, she is
holding webinars, uh, which, uh,
she's had a pretty good
response. Sign up rates so far
and so we're doing what we can
to promote this program and to
get more New Mexico communities,
large and small, uh, to apply
for this.
and that's my last slide. Thank
you.
Uh, hello, everyone, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Nick Streit. I am the
executive director of Friends of
the Rio Grande del Norte and uh
also fly fishing guide, um.
I wanted to start by just, uh,
Judy, thank you for your work on
um the Legacy Fund, uh, our
nonprofit, and my business has
been a, been able to see the
positive impacts of that money
put on the ground, um, really
impacting a lot of uh local
youth here in Taos, and so many
incredible infrastructure
projects through Trails Plus
grant, um.
I was just at this event and
gallop, this wonderful outdoor
recreation conference and we got
to talk about um
what some of that has looked
like and, and somebody asked the
question of, um, you know, what
are the opportunities now and I
just, I started thinking about
where we're at now, um, versus
where we were at 10 years ago
because of things like the
legacy fund, uh, the Outdoor
equity fund and the trails Plus
grant, um, and it's amazing
what, what we're seeing in terms
of those positive impacts not
only for our community but for
um for the lands that we love.
Speaking of which, this is going
to be quick. I think we have,
and it's going to be hard to
see, um.
so already had a great overview
of the land and water
conservation Fund, so I won't go
into much detail and we'll be
able to get caught up on time
here a little bit. Um, there is
the other side of the LWCF, um,
we talked about the stateside
program. Um, so I just wanna,
uh, highlight a project that
happened here in the Taos area
that's been, um, it was a big
deal, very beneficial, um, the
lower property acquisition. So
you mentioned that the money can
also be used to acquire public
land or or
land for the the uh public and
there was about 3,000+ acres.
You can see it in the map there,
can you? Nobody can really see
that. Um, about 3000 acres that
were privately owned that were
acquired and now in the public
trust under the management of
the BLM, um,
this is relevant. I'll try it
since we can't see the map. For
those of you who are not
familiar with Taos, you probably
all drove here from the south,
so I'm guessing you came up
through what we call the
horseshoe, so you drove up the
Rio Grande Canyon.
and you came over the hill and
you dropped into the valley and
you saw what many of us alsenos
think of as like the moment
where we feel like we're home
and we see the canyon, we see
the mountain, uh, it's a special
place and for visitors I think
it's hopefully equally
inspiring. Um, I always like to
think about what land and water
conservation Fund did in terms
of acquiring that property, put
it in the public trust, ensuring
that it won't be developed. I
always picture now when I drive
over that hill and I see that
view and I picture a big hotel
or condo on my right.
I, and I just thank God that we
have programs like the Land
Water Conservation Fund to make
sure that doesn't happen. Um, so
that also, of course, having
that uh acquisition in that land
now in the public trust, uh,
increases access to our public
lands, of course now we have
more public land and public
land, as we've seen is such a
huge, um,
it's so important to New
Mexicans for so many reasons, of
course, economically in our
robust outdoor recreation
economy but also to New Mexicans
culturally. It's where we
um, it's where we go to kind of
find ourselves. Uh, I was elk
hunting all day and almost was
late because we saw E uh right
before this. Um, so it's, it's,
it's important to us for so many
different ways. Um, so with
that, I just would, you know,
also add that uh
the public land issue.
has, has really kind of come to
a head recently. We've seen
efforts out of um out of
Washington to sell off big
sections of our public lands.
Um, I want to applaud the
efforts of the, uh, Taos County
and the town of Taos for both
passing resolutions to oppose
the transfer of those federal
public lands. They realize how
important it is to tau senos and
to New Mexicans, um, it's also
just a, a call out to say the
public land issue is, is really
a bipar
ti s an issue, um, polls have
showed that almost all New
Mexicans support the idea of
federally managed public lands,
and it's something that we all
use and recreate on. Um, so,
yeah, thank you uh very much.
Thank you. I appreciate all of
your presentations. Before we go
to the list of, uh, questions
for the state parks on page 7.
Why were some of the reasons
that uh
projects were withdrawn.
Uh, thank you for your question,
Madam Chair. Uh, committee, uh,
so we do have a number that were
withdrawn over the years, and
oftentimes that crops up from
both the applicant's side and
from our side as well and from
the scoring committee, uh, so
for example, uh, you know, this
isn't a, this is a federal grant
program uh program, it's, it's
not a quick granting program and
some applicants find that they
have another source of money
that's readily available.
and they'd rather just move
forward, um, other communities,
uh, for example, we had one in,
in Clovis where when we
explained to them that part of
the requirements of getting an
LWCF grant was that the parcel
of the park, the outdoor area is
must remain in that state in
perpetuity, and then they
determined that the park they
were interested in getting money
for, uh, they had other plans
for part of it.
and so that would have been a a
conversion and, and, and we try
to avoid going down that road.
Um, in other cases, we review
applications and we find that
they really weren't scoped well
enough to move forward. The LWCF
grant is sort of a shovel ready
type of grant, and we often find
that, um, we have bare bones
description of what they want to
do and, and so sometimes, you
know, the, the effort is to get
some money first and then we
' ll figure out what we wanna
do. And, and we just can't, uh,
um, do that. Thank you, thank
you. OK, so I, first I have
Senator Wirth, are there other
people who have questions or
comments. Steinborn and Charlie.
Anybody else? Sotan.
anyone else
OK, Senator Wirth, please, thank
you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate the presentation, the
update, and I do want to give a
shout out to Senator Steve
Neville, uh, who was the
Republican primary sponsor on
this. Uh, I also worked on it
with him and it was kind of one
of those narrow little windows
where we had opposition from
both sides and just huge, uh,
shout out to the advocates that
all work together. It's kind of
an example of what you can do.
Uh, two things I, I wanna
follow up on the challenges
sheet, uh, specifically, there's
a reference here to the cultural
properties restoration Fund not
being available to tribes
because of the statute, and I'm
wondering if that's something we
could, I assume we could
statutorily address that issue,
so I don't know if you have a
specific answer on that, but
that jumped out at me because
that seems like something we
need to fix, uh, statutorily and
so if you don't have the
specific answer, that's fine. I
just, it jumped out at me and
when we
should fix that, uh, again, we
didn't change
the beauty of this. We didn't
change the underlying statutes,
and there was pressure to do
that, uh, but because we didn't,
I think we didn't open up all
the cans of worm that happened
with that, but this is one that
I think we should fix that
underlying statute. So and if
you don't have specifics, we can
figure that out. I just want to
flag it. Second thing I want to
flag is the amount of funding
because again there's two
permanent funds. There's the
land of enchantment Legacy Fund,
which is the 12.5 million for
four years. That was the 50
million that was put in there.
and then there's the
conservation legacy Permanent
Fund, which is the big corpus,
which I think has 400 million in
its and as I understand it's,
um, every year the conservation
legacy Permanent Fund is
supposed to spin off any income
and excess of $5 million into
the land of enchantment funds.
So that would go out on top of
the 12.5 for the next couple of
years. I just wanna
validate that I've got that
right and do we have any sense
of, I mean, is there money now
spinning off the conservation
legacy permanent fund. I just
did by my rough calculation, if
it's a 5% total return. I don't
know what the return on that
fund is, that would be $20
million additional dollars going
into the lower fund to get spun
off so I just wanted to flag
that and see if you have any
more information on the funds.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, and I am definitely not
a numbers expert, so I might be
getting this wrong, but I think
that's part of what they want to
fix with that little fix in 2026
is that it would increase the
amount that could actually be
spent every year by having more
go in. Does that make sense? Am
I getting that right? So it's,
there's $383 million in it right
now, so it's not quite 400, um,
but there is some little change
that we can make to the amount
of interest. I mean, to generate
more interest by changing
something that would allow more
of that money to come into the
fund. I think I'm getting that
right, but you are definitely
more of an expert than, than I
am about that. So I should
probably talk to Cha Small and
make sure that I got that right.
No, we just, I just, I want to
flag it because we need to look
at that because I think there
is, I mean, it's a big corpus of
money and
just typically I, I was
interested to go back and see
that it was done based on
interest.
That's kind of a weird way
typically in a in a total return
for an investment portfolio of
any endowments they take a total
return, so over 3 years of time,
you take a 5, the average
return, which is somewhere in
the 5% range, uh, but this is
structured differently, so it's
worth looking at and I also can
visit with Chairman Small,
because I think that can open
up.
there's enough money here to
keep the corpus solid, but also
make sure that enough's coming
off that the programs are
actually working. So again, I
appreciate the presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, Senator
Steinborn. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and good afternoon,
everybody. Good to see you here.
And Toner, that must have been
her, uh, yeah, that must have
been a really tough decision for
you, um
pursuing elk or hanging out with
politicians, but uh
it's good to know you hold us in
high esteem and that's
but anyway, good to see you
guys. I have a few questions,
you know, when this bill passed,
I had heartburn with the
legislation on the game and fish
money because this was the
conservation fund
but the language in that bill
just said for the propagation of
game and fish.
and game is a legal term for
species that are hunted.
fish or fish, but what about
species of greatest conservation
need. It wasn't in the bill and
the bill was locked in and no
one wanted to amend it and um
so I asked on the floor and
the director who's back there
made a commitment that the funds
would only be used for species
of greatest conservation need.
So I see that in the report
here, it speaks to that, so I'm
curious
not so much
are they doing some of that work
because I'm sure they are, but
has this actually increased
that amount of work to the level
that we have given them funding
because that's what I would
expect to see if they were
adding to their total of that
work with these funds. Have we
tracked that?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Steinburn, yes, every single
project has been tracked, and on
the Excel spreadsheet that's
available through
enchantmentFund.org. You can see
every project that Game and Fish
has funded through Legacy Fund
dollars, and I will say to their
credit, it is non-game species,
primarily, so you can go and
look through, they've done like
Hilo monster stuff. They've done
a million bird surveys. They've
worked on a ton of stuff that
has is not game and fish. Um, so
as far as I can tell they are
keeping that
commitment that they make. So,
thank you, Madam Chair. So the
question I, I would like to know
though is have you compared that
number of what's being
appropriated now to what was
being appropriated before we
passed this bill to see if that
total expenditure on SGCNN
speaks to the greatest
conservation need has increased
by the amount that we've given
of new money.
That's really what I'm asking
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
don't think we've done that
exact comparison, but we can.
I would urge, thank you.
I would urge you to, Madam
Chair, um, Ms. Coleman, just
because
the way they fund that
department through um the game
protection fund as it's kind of
a big fungible pot of money.
and they spend a little bit
here, so you give them a little
bit over here and then they say,
great, we'll take that what we
were spending on that, we move
it back over here and they
create a perception that you've
increased funding what you've
done is you've just allowed them
to spend less on that out of
that fund and move it back over
here and have you really done
anything?
Um, so
I mean, even if we had made the
amendment I was referring, we
still could have been at risk of
that, but I also had another
amendment to require reporting
annually so we would actually
have transparency on that, but I
know now in our new law we now
have transparency because we
require that reporting annually,
which is great.
Anyway, I would like you to
check into that because that was
kind of the commitment that
made, I think that's kind of
seeing if that was honored, you
know, that good faith.
thing because it is kind of an
opaque situation tracking
dollars in that particular
department. The other question I
have, um, Madam Chair, which is
kind of the leader worst
question a little bit.
You know, one thing I think that
kind of gets left behind are
contaminated lands in the state,
you know, when we focus on
conservation, we're looking at
the shiny penny and the new
areas to protect, but we've got
a billion dollars, sorry,
billions worth of contaminated
lands in this state over 1000
abandoned uranium mine sites,
and there's no funding stream.
There's no
almost no advocate, no voices
saying what about them, you
know, um, a lot of them
sovereign communities and I just
wonder is assets pot of funds
grow.
is there a seat at the table to
create a funding stream for
those sites so that we can clean
up contaminated sites.
too.
What are your thoughts on that
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I, you
know, as Senator Wirth said,
there was a very concerted
effort to only fund existing
programs when the fund was
created, and I think a lot of
people are still pretty
dedicated to that idea, and that
would require an amendment for a
new thing or a separate thing,
so I mean, the legislature could
do that if the legislature
wanted to, but
this process was supported by
all these organizations who were
committed to funding existing
programs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Well,
perhaps there can be a new
legislative effort to.
to, uh, try to, you know, clean
up these generationally
contaminated sites that we've
left behind. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, uh, I
like that amendment, Senator
Stein Steinburn.
Um,
Judy, I think most of my
questions are for you. Thank you
for bringing us cookies. I'm
excited to get one. I hope
they're not all gone yet.
Um,
I'm wondering, uh, I was looking
at the map and the spreadsheet,
and it looks like we have funded
individuals to do work and I'm
just, I'm curious about what
that vetting process looks like.
Madam Chair and Senator Charlie,
yeah, so these, like I said, all
of the funds from the legacy
fund go to existing programs,
and we didn't change anything
about the grant process for each
of those programs, so they all
had each agency had individual
granting processes in place
because they were existing
programs already and we didn't
change those. So some of them
allow for, you know, private
individuals to get grants
through the agencies, and some
of them don't, and some of them
go to direct programs with the
agency, but we didn't change any
of that. So we just created a
funding stream. So all those
processes stayed the same as
whatever they were before the
fund was passed.
Thank you. Um, and then the 10
tribal entities or projects that
were funded were those tribally
led
are they by tribes directly.
Madam Chair and Senator, I don't
know the answer to that, but I
can find out. Sorry.
Um, thank you, and that would be
great because as I was looking
at the maps, some of these
projects look like they're on
tribal land, but they are not
tribally led, and I think that's
a distinction that we need to
make when we're talking about
tribal um infrastructure, tribal
projects, anything that's coming
out or on behalf of tribes
because it's one thing for a
tribe to initiate and sustain a
program. It's a complete other
for an organization or a company
or something outside of the
tribe to come in and say they're
doing that. And then for us to
claim that is tri tribal work.
Um,
and then I think
I think the last question I
have, I'll, I'll leave the
conservation trusts alone, but I
would like to talk to you about
that after, um, because I'm
looking at Santa Fe Conservation
Trust, and it looks like we paid
about $6000 an acre. So about
595,000 acres for a hun
$595,000 for 100 acres, um, for
some land right between in 22
tribes, Pierre, I mean, um,
Puaki and Santa Clara, and I'm
really curious about what that
looked like.
Um
but
Senate District 30, I went to
the map and there was only 2
projects that were funded in
their Senate District 30 is
about 6000 square miles. It's a
huge piece of New Mexico and
there's a lot of I can think of
5 off the top of my head right
now that need to be funded that
would be tribally led. And so
I'm curious what outreach and
collaboration looked like with
tribes. Um, you know, our tribes
oftentimes lack capacity to
actually apply for these grants
and, and so like how are we
supporting I represent 5
sovereign nations. How are we
supporting them to get to the
table so that we can ensure that
these funds are going to all
areas of New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator Charlie. Um, so the
coalition members have been
doing outreach about available
funds to the legacy fund. I
don't know what the outreach has
looked like on the agency side.
Um, definitely there should be
more, um, like I said, demand
for these funds exceeded
available funds by sometimes 10
times, so I mean that word is
definitely getting out that
these funds are available
because that happened, but I
think we do need to do
additional outreach to certain
communities to make
sure that they're aware, but
and how, however I can help with
that and for Senate District 30,
I'd be a happy partner and ally
in that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, Senator, Senators
Thornton.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Uh, thank you guys for your
presentations. It was actually
very good, um, excellent.
uh, Ms. Calmer, I really like
your presentation with the
summary and everything. You did
a great job there. Uh, I have to
admit that coming driving out
here this morning and it was
very early this morning when I
came around the loop and I saw
the view, it made the whole
drive worthwhile. So I
understand what you're saying
there. It's great. um
just had a couple of questions.
Um, first of all, um, Ms.
Common, with respect to the, you
said the demand is exceeding the
supply of dollars and so I guess
my my first question is going
forward, how will decisions be
made on future projects?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Thornton. Um, so each
agency has their own
prioritization, prior, I can't
say that word ever
prioritization process. God,
it's late in the afternoon. Um,
for how they prioritize projects
that they get applications for.
And so, um, there were a couple
instances where there was no
rulemaking where there needed to
be a rulemaking to set some of
those in place once the legacy
fund, um, was passed and so the
agencies did
that and created their own
prioritization process for each
program. So they're receiving
grant applications and they're
making their own decisions about
which which applications get
funded, so.
Thank you for that. I, I just
want to applaud you on, on the
fact that you were able to get
all the money out very quickly.
And, uh, and that's kind of
rare. So, uh, I really
appreciate the fact that you all
were able to do that.
um
I have a question for
Mr.
Doaks in regards to the scorp
you had mentioned that, um,
you are working on the next
version of it, the 27 through 32
score. What stakeholders are
also included in your, in your
development. In other words, who
are you bringing in to help you
with developing that plan.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, Senator
Thornton, uh, thank you for the
question. Um,
we, so what New Mexico State
Parks itself does not create
that. We hire a firm, um, whose
expertise is, uh, producing
those kinds of documents and
then we work with them and, um,
and come up with goals, uh, so
they've been instructed that,
uh, to reach out to uh the
various state agencies that have
a vested interest in the
outdoors, um, uh, to
attend and host public meetings,
uh, through, um, various all all
corners of the state, uh,
they're going to create a
questionnaire that they'll send
out, uh, and so a big part of
the development of the scorp is
the public outreach and getting
feedback, uh, we'll even, uh,
for example, uh, probably have a
meeting up at Navajo Lake State
Park, and we'll talk to the, uh,
fishing guides and outfitters up
there
as well as to what they think um
about uh what outdoor recreation
opportunities are needed for
that particular area, uh, so, so
our hired consultant will take
the lead on that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So
how long does that process take?
I mean, is it a 3 month process
or a 6 month process before you
have all the input you need to
put the, the plan together.
What, what's the normal timeline
for that?
Uh well, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator Thornton, uh,
we're starting this about a year
and a half ahead of when it's
actually uh needed, so, uh,
we're our goal is to have the
approved final draft of it, uh,
ready by November of 2026.
uh, so it, it's available on day
one of 2027.
and so it does take about that
long, so at least a year, if
not, and we're planning a year
and a half because it does take
a while to to hold all the
public meetings to gather the
data, uh, create the charts of
priorities that we've heard from
the public and other state
agencies, uh, so yeah, it, it,
it is a
time consuming process
Thank you that actually that
completes my question. She would
ask the other question, uh,
Madam Chair, with regards to
oh,
your battery's going OK
Thank you very much, Senator.
Any last questions or comments?
OK, thank you very much to this
panel. We really appreciate your
coming to Tao and sharing that
with us.
and Sarah would like for me to
remind everybody there is plenty
of food.
So, uh, she would like for you
to go over and get a snack, get
a some other food so that we
don't leave anything.
If our next panel could come up.
and it's the Department of Game
and Fish Reform implementation,
which I think is the Department
of Wildlife now.
Well
in a year, it will be.
in
Madam Chair, on the, the topic
of food, uh, they're all, there
are also, uh, New Mexico shaped
cookies over there which I
strongly recommend.
and
excuse me, for individuals who
are leaving the committee early,
please remember that the uh
water consortium and others are
planning a dinner for us at the
Sagebrush Inn in the courtyard
at 5:30 and after. So, uh,
please join us if you can, uh,
thank you. So let's go to this,
oh, after this presentation, we
do have a couple of people who
would like to make public
comment, uh, not many, but just
a few, so some of you
could stick around. So, um
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for
inviting me here today. Um, I'm
here to talk a little bit about
the SB 5 implementation and to
to sort of start off I guess
I'll talk about there are sort
of 3 effective dates, um, that
are important to understand
relative to the legislation.
April 1 of 2026 is the first
date that comes up. It's shed
hunter license, vendor fee
adjustment, license fee
increase, and a 25% discount for
SNAP recipients
all of the uh the shed hunter
license, the vendor fee
adjustment, and the, uh, SNAP
recipients are all in rulemaking
right now, so we'll have those
in place, um, and ready to go
when folks are buying licenses
during the next license year.
Um, July 1 of 2026 is actually
when the name change becomes
effective. We go from the
Department of Game and Fish to
the Department of Wildlife.
um
it also a lot that, that point,
the commission can extend
protections to any species of
wildlife and include
invertebrates in the definition.
It also is when the formal
definition of species of
greatest conservation need comes
into effect, and that will, um,
goes along with the recent
adoption by the State Game
commission of this
State Wildlife Action Plan and
the identification of 505
species of greatest conservation
need.
And then finally on January 1st
of 2027, there's, that is when
the changes to the State Game
commission come into effect. Uh,
there's a process required for
that in terms of creating a
nominating committee, um, and
reviewing applications so that
they meet specific criteria set
forth in statute, um, I would
anticipate that that will happen
very quickly after the
gubernatorial election, but when
they'll finally get seated, it
is hopefully sometime early in
January, but it could be later
in that.
um
2027 year
It also adds uh the
Secretary of Agriculture, the
state land commissioner, the
Secretary of Indian Affairs, and
the Director of Outdoor
recreation division as advisory
members to the State Game
mission. So those are kind of
the, the big highlights and the
dates at which they occur. Um,
the question is, when does,
what's happening now?
So, um, I have one slide
if we can throw that up there
That's not it
There it is
So
the, the logo.
um, when we, when the law was
signed by the governor, we
stopped buying any Department of
Game and Fish branded logo and
we'll be moving forward with,
with this logo. We kept the bare
head because bear is the state,
um, mammal, it's, we've had
long-term involvement with
Smokey the Bear, and it's an
iconic species that represents
the state well, I think, and
it's recognized, um, so that's
the, the logo
we'll be going with. Uh, you'll
start seeing more and more of
that in particular around
January 1st of this year, well,
January 1st of 206. Um, so
we're, we're starting in on that
pretty early.
Um, species of conservation
need, as I mentioned, the swap
was, was adopted by the State
Game Commission with an
additional um
200 species on it this year. Um,
it's at the Fish and Wildlife
Service waiting for approval.
The addition of the Land of
Enchantment and Growth Funds has
allowed us to hire 8 new
biologists who will be working
exclusively on species of
greatest conservation need. Um,
so that, you know, the question
Senator Steinborn asked earlier
about what have we been doing?
We, we've been working on
projects, we've been spending
that money out, but now we're
building more capacity to be
able to do the more and better.
Um, so, you know, as, um, Judy
Kalman mentioned earlier, we're
working on a wide array of
species, spring snails, Rio
Grande chub, and stuck suckers,
leopard frogs, ribbon snakes,
garter snakes, Gila monster,
lesser prairie chicken, pinon
jay, as well as doing habitat
projects on Playa Lakes, um, and
we've created what I think is a
pretty exciting, um, thing, uh,
something called a modus tower
system where we have towers
across the state that will be
able to monitor migratory
songbirds. I mean we can get a
better handle
on what habitats they're using,
where they're feeding, those
sorts of things and, and sort of
target our work.
Uh, the fee increase that, that
takes effect in April of 26th,
um, is expected to generate an
additional $9 to $10 million in
revenue, so we'll, as we work
towards our budget backup having
been impacted by inflation and
then probably in about 2 years,
we'll be able to recognize the
full impact of that and start
doing more capital projects and
more habitat work.
And as I noted, the, the changes
commission is in 2027, and that
will depend on the governor
election and and getting.
the folks in the right room to
appoint the nominating committee
to get the application process
started.
So that's kind of where we are
in a nutshell.
Thank you very much, Director
Sloan. Uh, next up we have, uh,
Mr. Hayes. So pick it up, move
it in front of you like.
you pull the whole thing there
you. How's that? Great. OK
Madam Chair, Vice Chair, uh,
members of the committee. My
name's John Hayes. I'm executive
director for Audubon Southwest,
uh, Judy Coman's colleague back
there that you already heard
from. I'm gonna pick up right
where, uh, Director Sloan was,
was speaking a moment ago about
the New Mexico State Wildlife
Action Plan update. I was here
about a year ago to update you
on the process then. Uh, it's
moved and advanced and uh is
playing a role in La Chapman
Legacy Fund, uh, implementation
going forward now. So I want to
give you a little update on how
it's doing that. Next slide
please.
I'm also gonna show you a bunch
of pretty bird pictures, but
that one's not quite coming
through our, our hana Peplo over
there. Uh, so the state wildlife
Action Plan serves at the
nation's blueprint for
proactively conserving fish and
wildlife to prevent species from
coming, becoming endangered.
This is really the list that
helps keep the other species off
the list, right? That's our goal
is to make sure we don't have to
list these species as
endangered. Uh, for the, the
reason that the state needs a
swap, as we call it, is
is required to be eligible for
state wildlife grants and the,
uh, since 2002, the states
received close to $30 million in
state wildlife grants, uh, in,
in addition to that, uh, the
plan guides, uh, Pittman
Robertson's spending and landing
and Chapman legacy funds
spending voluntarily by the the
agency. Uh, first plans were
created in 2005. Last revision
2016, and acquired by the US
Fish and Wildlife Service to
update them regularly. Uh, this
one is due October 1st, 2025 and
the agency
has already submitted their
revision.
Next slide please
So the, the reasons for the
revision, uh, many of these
species population declines
continue, which is troubling.
Uh, new threats have emerged
around renewable energy,
disease, uh, we're always
keeping an eye on the landscape
to see what's out there. Uh,
addition of pollinating insects,
uh, major, uh, addition a new
area of work that the, the SWAP
will include, uh, new data to
incorporate process being
refined and standardized and
then climate impacts of have
increased over a number of years
too. Next slide please.
So just to drive that last point
home, uh, nearly half, 46% of
bird species in New Mexico are
vulnerable to extinction. By the
end of the century under a 3
degree warming scenario, which
is what we're headed towards.
And so that's pretty scary.
These are, you know, this isn't
that far from now. These are our
grandchildren we're talking
about not being able to enjoy
the same birds we do.
Next slide please
So the revision process, uh, I
was a member of the SWAP core
team along with a number of
other people in this room. Uh,
it was ably led by Assistant
Chief Virginia Seammster, and
I'd take this moment to really
congratulate and commend Jenny
for how hard she worked and how
well she did. Uh, we met for the
first time in January 2024. We
had four subsequent meetings.
There was a lot of comment, a
lot of data going back and
forth. It was all incorporated
quickly and cleanly. Uh, they
really the, the agency staff
that worked on it did an
incredible job. Uh, like
I said, we were here about a
year ago, uh, presenting to you
all, uh, uh, last year, the
progress we had made and since
then SWAP was submitted for
public comment on 5825 and uh
the commission voted to approve
the revision on June 13th. I was
submitted to Fish and Wildlife
in July and we're waiting on
Fish and Wildlife approval as
Director Sloane said. Next
slide, please.
So as mentioned earlier that a
number of species were added.
Here's an idea broken out by uh
type of, of, um, a critter. So,
uh, we see a lot of uh additions
in birds and butterflies and
moths, uh, a lot of that
attributes to the butterflies
and moss in particular, those
pollinating insects that have
now been included.
Next slide please
So just a little bit on
implementation as we've been
talking about today, uh, the,
the swap guides, uh, game and
fish, uh, largely SGCN, uh, to
work largely on SGCN species,
uh, game and fishled leadership
is committed to LOE fund to go
towards SGCN recovery, and so
currently there's 79 different
SGCM focused projects underway
that will benefit hundreds of
SGCN.
or species of greatest
conservation need. Habitat
improvements and research
projects are happening in nearly
every county of the state, as
we've already seen. Next slide,
please. I want to just highlight
just a few of them, uh, uh,
before I end here, uh, some of
my favorite birds are
white-tailed ptarmigan
investigations. We know, uh,
white-tailed ptarmigans high in
the mountains, particularly
vulnerable to a change in
climate and change in snowpack
in any given year. Uh, so we
have bio there are biologists up
there studying nest survinest
success, habitat
selection, and so those are, you
know, happening in Taos more Rio
Rio Ariba counties. Next slide,
please.
Nightjar surveys. So, uh, birds
like uh common nighthawk and uh
Mexican whipper will. Uh, these
are birds that are declining
across the continent, uh, down
in, uh, or actually throughout
New Mexico, Game and fish farm
and wildlife staff are surveying
and collecting data on these
species to help understand
nationwide trends to to try to
figure out how to address them.
Uh, those are impacting Colfax,
Union, McKinley, Donana, Luna
Chavez, Rio Riva, and Sandoval
Counties.
Next slide please
And then here's my last mention,
uh, Grassenberg, modus tagging
and monitoring, uh, Director
Sloan mentioned the MOTUS
network that was being built.
It's a really exciting
advancement in wildlife
conservation. Uh, it's more a
more passive, less uh labor
intensive way to, to collect
data on migratory bird species
and it's really kind of the, the
tip of the spear for how we're
gonna address this work going
forward. Uh, we're, they're
getting out there and getting
tags on grassland birds, some of
our most vulnerable species, and
Chavez Lee
Roosevelt Counties, uh and uh
benefiting birds like birds,
sparrows, sprigs, pipe, and
chestnut colored longspur, which
is one of the fastest declining
species in North America.
So that's it. Thank you very
much, and I'll pass it to
Jessie.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, Vice Chair and committee
members, Jesse Dubell here,
executive director of the New
Mexico Wildlife Federation. I'd
like to start by saying this is
a very exciting time for
wildlife management in New
Mexico. A lot of phenomenal
things are happening. Much of
that due to the work of this New
Mexico state legislature. uh,
Director Sloan
provided an overview of some of
what SB 5 does. I'd like to
start by commending the director
and the department for the hard
work and implementing that bill.
There's a lot of work in that
bill. It was a very big bill,
did a lot of things and the
department's done a fantastic
job of working through that and
also ensuring that the work of
SB 5 is supporting the state
wildlife Action Plan and its
implementation, so that's all
very exciting.
Again, SB 5 provided much needed
funding to the agency. That was
critical. It also clarified the
scope of the agency and their
ability to manage all wildlife
in the state. I think that was
critical. The changes to the New
Mexico State Game Commission are
one of the most important things
that SB 5 did, but I'd like to
remind this committee of the
fact that SB 5 was not signed
exactly as the legislature
passed it. There was a portion
of
the bill that was line item
vetoed and that portion of the
bill was how commissioners.
the removal process for
commissioners after they've been
seated.
So I'd like to remind the
committee you've heard, you, we
heard a lot of this during the
uh legislative session, but for
the last 5 years, we've gone 3
full years without a full
seven-person commission. During
that time, 80% of all New
Mexicans have gone without
representation on our New Mexico
State Game commission.
So it's, it's critical that we
get a removal process put into
place. We've got to get this
done, um, just recently at the
last Game commission meeting,
um, just prior to the game
commission meeting, I should
say, a commissioner was removed
from the commission. So again
today, I sit here before you
with a state game commission
that's not fully seeded. We have
one vacancy on the commission.
Now, when I sat through the
commission meeting in August in
Reserve
New Mexico, I listened to hours
of testimony from public
commenters claiming that the
commissioner who was removed
should not have been removed.
The, the reason stated for the
removal was that that particular
commissioner did not disclose a
conflict of interest. I then
listened to hours of commentary
from members of the public, uh,
constituents of that
commissioner primarily who
claimed that the removal was
unjust, that there actually was
no conflict of interest
at all.
Now, I don't have the authority
to say whether there was or
wasn't a conflict of interest,
but I'm here to say we need a
process in place that ensures
that any removal is fair and
just.
and the removal of a
commissioner should not be left
up to just one single
individual. Prior to this
removal, uh, there had been
other removals of commissioners
and the environmental advocates
really, uh, opposed those
removals. In the most recent
case, it was primarily the
cattle growers who were opposing
the removal. I mentioned that
simply to say that it doesn't
matter what stakeholders we're
talking about when SB 5 was
moving through the legislative
process, we had full bipartisan
support.
for a better removal process.
Again, that was line item vetoed
from the bill, and I think we
need to get a removal process in
place. Now I'm not here with a
specific ask. I don't have a
solution.
I do think it's very possible
that within the next two
legislative sessions we'll see
an effort to get that removal
process reinstated. My purpose
here today is simply to remind
this committee how important it
is that we continue to pursue
that outcome. So thank you all
very much.
Thank you uh for your
presentations, um, let's start a
list. I have Representative
McQueen.
Anybody from this side, uh,
Stein Barnes, Senator Steinborn,
anybody on this side?
OK, Herrera
anybody else
OK. Representative McQueen.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Um,
madam chair, uh, I'd like to
echo what um
Mr. Dubell said about the
removal and add a little bit to
it, um, that was the portion
that was lined I vetoed. I think
that portion had um probably
broader support than some other
parts of the bill, um, and it's
not just removal of individuals.
what
the vetoing of that legislation
will do it, it means that
in the future, when we get a new
governor, we can get a new
commission.
And if you look at the bill, you
know, we have all these
positions in there, I think
they're six-year terms and
they're staggered and they
overlap and we were trying to
provide some continuity over
time, so you didn't have
dramatic changes in the
commission, but because that
language was removed, a new
governor can fire all the
commissioners when they come in
and they would have to replace
them through the nominating
committee process which I am
hopeful will take some of the
politics out of the, the
appointment, but nonetheless,
they
can, you can still have a
wholesale change at the
commission, um, during the,
while we worked on that bill, we
asked the governor's office
repeatedly. They expressed
concern about that language. We
asked them what they wanted to
see, and they never really got
back to us on that, um, after
the veto, the governor's office
committed to working with us on
coming up with acceptable
language, um, I, uh, I hope
they, uh, I hope and expect they
will honor that commitment
um, uh, figuring out what that
uh acceptable language is, uh,
has been challenging, um, but
that does remain sort of an
outstanding issue on this bill
that uh has been a long time
coming.
Um, I would, you know, I was a
sponsor of this bill. I would
like to personally thank um for
so, uh, Senator Campos, who is
our lead sponsor on that bill
and who ushered it through the
Senate. Senator Wirth is here.
Uh, we also had senators, uh,
Senator Brant Lee and
Representative Small, uh, so we
had bipartisan sponsorship.
I'd also like to thank Jesse and
Judy, who are our expert
witnesses and we're at, I think
all the um committee meetings,
uh, and finally, you know, I'd
like to thank Director Sloan,
uh, for implementing the bill. I
appreciate that, uh, the, the
new logo brought a smile to my
face. Uh, I love the bear. I'm
happy it's staying and, uh, you
know, the Mexico wildlife uh
rings true to me. So thank you
very much.
Thank you. uh, Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. um, and
thanks for the update
So
you know, I think the drama with
what we see with the commission
just underscores my belief and,
you know, one of those ones who
spent a lot of time thinking
about how we reform wildlife
policy in the state.
I think there was a lot of
emphasis on the commission.
that the commissions, the great
savior, but in reality
we have felt due respect most of
the commissioners don't know
squat about wildlife.
Uh, many of them
and the notion that we're going
to pass a law to codify a
six-year term
so that a future governor is
going to, and I realize we're
creating nominating commissions
that I'm not a fan of that
provision, you know, that, uh,
Jesse, uh, because uh we lived
through the PTSD of that
commission appointments, and I
like the idea of having the
opportunity to actually get new
commissioners because I think
too often their political
appointees, their political
plum.
or supporters of people who have
no background in wildlife.
and I've come to believe that
the real problem with wildlife
management is that we don't have
statutory wildlife management
policy and law.
and that was the other amendment
that was not lying on a veto by
a governor, but by the
legislature taken out and as the
person who presided over the
process that actually
constructed about half of that
bill, which I'm grateful that
many of those things are in law
now. The most important part was
taken out, and that's the part
I'll remind everyone that
required that management
decisions on wildlife
include science, include climate
change, include things we're
talking about here that are
important.
This bill originally required
that management decisions on
wildlife include analysis of
climate change, habitat loss,
things like that. We took that
out of the bill and so we're
talking about the great work
left to be undone that we need
to codify.
you know, removal processes on
commissioners, but, you know,
even when we
even when we designate that you
have a conservationist, for
example.
You know, that can look like a
lot of different things
depending upon the governor. Do
you really get someone who cares
about conservation or they care
about other things that have
conservation in the title.
and how have you qualitatively
improved a commission. We're
going to find out.
but I fear that without the
science being embedded, it's
great that we have some things
happening now, but are we gonna
have really good strong science
guiding this thing moving
forward.
So I don't know what the
thoughts are about that piece
being unfinished business, but I
would submit to you that some of
the most important unfinished
business in creating a true
wildlife agency, you know, I
just have to say, and I got here
late cause I was out of town,
but I, I kind of when I saw this
flyer, you know, we have added
invertebrates to our law, and,
and I saw, you know
pollinator species and
and I was just kind of sad, you
know, once again that we took
that out of our
science, out of our law, because
if we had science we would
actually be putting in the law a
requirement that we would care
about
loss of habitat. We would, we
would, and we would have a
mechanism legally to
to know that irrespective of
what political hacks are running
the commission, we'd have an
actual environmental management
department.
through administrations who
would have to be caring about
science and make science-based
decisions, and instead we're
putting it all on a commission
of
we'll see, um.
so I, to me that continues to be
a huge priority. I would remind
everyone that it's fascinating
New Mexico ranks in the top 5
most biodiverse states in the
country.
for plants, birds.
many species
but yet we have
we have a really
broad latitude and almost no
guidance on how that's to be
managed, you know.
so
you know, that was the work that
we spent years crafting that
language about actually
modernizing the science guidance
of species management in this
state because, right, the old
law said it would be done with
regards to economic viability of
species, and it was like written
by Daniel, you know, Davy
Crockett, um, back in the fur
trade, like our fur bearing
statutes, right? No fur shall be
wasted. That was literally the
tenor of our wildlife management
laws, and we finally modernized
it, but we took out the
requirement that actually
they shall consider science and
we changed it to May.
So that's where I feel like
we're gonna get real value, um.
out of those two options, but
anyway, I hope as we move
forward that the conservation
community, in addition to its,
focus on game commission.
Take a look at strengthening the
science.
and that's, and, and I think,
you know, a lot of people are
fearful of that word, including
the people that mandated it be
changed because God forbid we
focus on science and then what
happens? Maybe then we actually
take steps to protect species,
and people are worried about how
does that impact them and uh
including the department that
current leadership of the
department, you know, not
wanting to have to do that work,
um, or be held to that standard
because that's what they're
worried about that yeah, it's
going to create more work, but
now we're creating more funding
to do that work, and I realized
through the years as we worked
on this, that was the argument
against that is well you're not
giving us the money
Well now we're giving them the
money
but we just took away that
requirement. So that's my
longing is that we ultimately
put science back into this
modernization, but, you know,
I'm really thrilled about all
the other stuff, you know, it's
exciting.
I think, well, I'll leave that
alone. There are other things
too that, that, that are, are
more cosmetic that also are
about tone that we could work
on, but um.
um thanks for the improvements
that have been made and let's
keep it going.
That's all I have.
Thanks, madam Chair
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Herrera.
uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, panel, for your
presentation. Um, I voted for
this bill, although I want to
state for the public record that
I hope to never serve on the
wildlife commission.
Uh, it is fraught with
difficulties. Uh, I've watched
this over the years, and, you
know, I'm, I guess I have to ask
about a problem that we deal
with all over the state, but
certainly in the north and, and
I've watched director Sloane get
beat up numerous times over
this, so I, you know, and, and
he is publicly come and talk to
people, but the overabundance of
the elk is is just destroying,
uh, our small farms and ranches
in the north, I mean, we have
elk that are, we've got
a herd of 2 down, uh, past Ebudo
that are calving in the river,
and once they calve in the
river, that means they're there.
So I'm just curious if any of
you know of uh that we can't be
the only state that faces this
problem, so I'm just curious if
any of you know of other states
that have really um solve this
problem or have have come up
with a solution, uh, and that's
my question.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I'll, I'll start off with this,
which I, uh, you've probably
heard me say before and, and it
may not be very
helpful, but
to one person's eye, it's too
many elk to another person's
eye, it's not enough. And that
is the social issue that we face
with a lot of game management,
not necessarily wildlife
management, but game our
wildlife, but that's a whole
separate conversation. Anyway,
the, the issue really is a
social one about how many elk
are too many versus how many are
not enough, um, and we see that
across the state. Um, we will be
going into the Elk rule in the
next calendar year for the next
4-year cycle, so that
would be a great time for folks
to come out and express their
views about too many. How can
you in which units where, um, so
that we can try and incorporate
that and see what it is the
public wants because really, you
know, wildlife management is on
a spectrum.
as long as you have enough to
keep a sustainable population,
you can be at the top of the
spectrum or the bottom of the
spectrum. And um
some folks feel like we should
be at the top and others feel
like we should be at the bottom.
I don't know how to solve that
problem. Other than we do have,
you know, some of the areas in
the state are over the counter,
unlimited licenses on private
land. I think the area around
Abudo or Belarde is, is that way
and folks have yet to adjust to
that change, um, we met when we
met in Rio Riba County, um, we
talked to a couple of folks who
once they understood that, they,
well, then I can solve my own
problem. Um, so there are
ways and resources for those
folks to address some of their
concerns, um, but
ultimately it's a, it's a social
decision on how many elk are are
enough.
Um.
Madam Chair, Representative
Director Sloan is, uh, no
stranger to my frustrations with
the way the department manages
elk tag allocations, but what I
will say is, is we are a dry
state and it's critical to
understand that our private
landowners oftentimes are, are
owning the lands that provide
the water and some of the
critical habitat for those
animals. And so wildlife,
landowner, agriculture conflicts
are a real thing and they
certainly do exist all across
the west, um, there are
solutions I think it's, it's
really important that the
hunting community, the landowner
community, the guide in the
outfitter community, the
agricultural producers all find
a way to work together
and start having meaningful
discussions to try to identify
ways that we can implement
solutions that work for
everybody. It's very difficult
to do, and I will say that
director Sloan and our chief
wildlife biologist Stuart Lily,
have hosted meetings including
all of those groups recently,
um, no real solutions have come
out of those meetings, but the
conversations are happening and
the discussions have been fairly
respectful, and I'm hopeful that
we'll be able to identify some
solutions that will work for
everybody.
No more questions. We are where
we are. um
uh, no one seems to be able to
solve this problem and it's a
huge problem, so we'll keep
working at it.
Thank you very much. Any further
comments or questions for this
group?
Thank you very much for coming
today. We appreciate it. Um,
members, we have 6 individuals,
uh, most in person and one
online who would like to make a
public comment.
So
anybody in the room, uh, I have
Kirsten Hansen, Saba
Man up, Mandy.
Kristen, and Jean. Come on up to
the table if you're gonna make a
comment. Uh, let me go over the
thank yous for today, the
breakfast and lunch sponsors,
um, New Mexico Rica, Tri-state,
uh, RICA is a rural Electric
Cooperative Association, UNM and
PNM.
Uh, tonight, the dinner is
sponsored by the Water
Foundation with support from
Trout Unlimited, Amigos Bravos,
and Audubon Southwest.
Tomorrow members.
at 12 o'clock we need to be out
of here
because UNM has a commitment,
and we promised we would be out,
but in the meantime, we have
been invited to have a tour and
lunch provided by the Taoist
Land Trust, New Mexico Land
Conservancy Rio Grande,
Agricultural Land Trust San
Santa Fe Conservation Trust in
Amigos Bravos, and it will be
from 12:15 to 1:30, so it won't
be your entire afternoon. So if
you're around at noon and you
' d like to take a tour and then
have lunch in a park. Please
plan on that tomorrow.
OK, so let's go back to our
list.
OK
Kirsten Hansen, no.
she left early. She left
Saba
OK, please
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name's
Sabajadi. I'm the policy and
engagement manager for Trout
Unlimited based in Albuquerque.
Uh, I just quickly, um, and
thank you so much to the staff
who graciously agreed to hand
out our invitation flyer to you
all. I just wanted to note that,
uh my organization along with
Nester Tierra Laa Mia Project,
Milos Bravos, and Western
resource advocates, invite
everyone on this committee to
join us for some ecoflights this
October. These are going to be
taking place October 7th in Las
Cruces, October
8th in Albuquerque and October
9th in Santa Fe. Uh, a lot of
these issues that we've been
talking about today and seeing
presentations on our best scene
from the air, uh, for a land
landscape view of everything.
Uh, so please join us for that.
I will be at the dinner tonight
along with my other colleagues
if you want to talk more, and
I'll be sure to follow up with
some email invitations as well.
So thank you so much.
Thank you. So you have a flyer
about the ecoflights. I've been
on one of them, uh, it's a great
way to see our watersheds, our
rivers, and our waterways here
in the state. So thank you for
the invitation
OK, next we, uh, why don't we
just go right down the
place, please introduce
yourself.
Thank you very much.
Um, madam, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today. My
name is Jeane Stevens.
I have resided in Taos for over
35 years, and I am a retired
educator of the Tels Municipal
schools and also was a UNM TAS,
um, adjunct professor for 20
years.
who taught primarily survey art
history. I'm also a multimedia
artist, filmmaker, and directed
the Taos Environmental Film
Festival from 2015 to 2022. In
addition, I am a Si Sierra Club
member and also a climate
reality leader.
I was also a delegate to the
United Nations in March 2nd to
the 6th of 2025 for the nuclear
ban US, which has the warheads
to windmills coalition of which
the 2024 book was named Plus the
recently published nuclear
abolition, a scenario by Tim and
Wallace. I would like to take
this opportunity to straddle two
topics relating to a warming
planet and also the huge sums,
billions of dollars, which will
become trillions of dollars at
the expense and damage to
renewable electricity, medical
advances, and research for
hospitals, funding for schools,
um, Medicare, Medicaid, and
solutions for low cost
sustainable housing and
agriculture. Huge sums of money
are currently being taken from
the just mentioned above
programs and instead are going
to unneeded nuclear
modernization for Lane, for
petun
ium plutonium pit, warheads.
Why should you be concerned
The lanno property already has
large amounts of dangerous
legacy waste, which is very
vulnerable to forest fires as
they are sitting under
Tan syndromes on Lano property.
This is a fire prone area which
has already had two major
wildfires which threatened to
overtake the lab in 2000 and
2011. This means Taos being 45
miles downwind from Lano. Our
air is at risk with the added
dangers of planned tridium
release in the near future,
which I have an update on that
In addition, a large forest
fire, um, could overly overtake
the lab and subsequent monsoon
rains could affect the soils and
destroy biodiversity of the Rio
Grande for thousands of years
since the half-life of plutonium
is 25,000 years.
To amplify my concerns, I would
like to read a quote.
um,
and also in regards to the
Tridium release for the next 2
weeks, which will be starting on
September 13th as reported, uh,
by the New Mexican and other um
I on ABC KOAT last night. Excuse
me, you have one minute left.
OK, thank you at the radioactive
hazardous Materials Committee of
the State Legislator on
September 2nd, Secretary James
Kenney of the New Mexico
Environment Department was asked
this question.
Committee of the state
legislatures represented
Santanaia, how's your
relationship with Lanel DOE and
WIP going. Secretary Kenny, one
of the things that caught my eye
over the last 6 to 7 years is
how poorly we've been treated by
the federal government and how
willing we've been to take that
treatment. I want to encourage
you, the state legislature and
executive agencies to fight back
because in all the time working
with federal agencies in
Colorado, Pennsylvania,
Washington, DC, and New Mexico.
I
' ve seen a federal government
treat constituents in the state
that it works so poorly. I'd say
that the DOE Lana whipP are
asking us to OK with incremental
cleanups in Lano and OK with
long waits in line to get our
waste from Los Alamos to whip.
They prioritize other states
over ours, continue to do it on
my watch, and I think we need a
catalyst event to really shake
uplannel and whip so they
understand that we in New Mexico
should be the first in line
every day for cleanup Atlanta on
Whip. We
should not be in a position they
put us, which is at the bottom
of the entire complex. I'm
looking at all my authorities
that you've given me to change a
dynamic and not be satisfied
with poor performance as the
norm. I want exceptional
performances in Norm. I'm very
frustrated with the DOE and
their inability to move waste
from landowned whip. Finally, I
hope that everyone will watch a
House of Dynamite. It will be at
selected theaters on October
10th and on uh be believe
October 24th on Netflix
It received a standing ovation
at the Venice Film Festival on
September 2nd. It was directed
by an Academy Award winning
director Katherine Bigelow and
uh it is uh House of Dynamite
may actually be the scariest
thing you watch all year. Thank
you for your time.
Thank you very much for bringing
that to our attention, yeah.
please.
introduce yourself and then go
on.
And in case you're wondering,
uh, public comment is 3 minutes.
That's why we have a timer on.
Thank you. Thank you.
Hello, Chair and committee
members. My name is Mandy
Sackett. I am the New Mexico
lead campaigner for Earthworks.
Across New Mexico we are living
climate change impacts every
day. This spring, Governor Lujan
Grisham's executive order
described New Mexico as
experiencing some of the worst
drought conditions ever
recorded.
Wild wildfire risk is through
the roof too. State foresters
are saying that over the past
two years we've seen some of the
worst
wildfires in our state's
history.
In 202025 alone, nearly 400 fire
starts have been recorded across
the state, burning about 29,000
acres. The first half of 2025
brought the fifth hottest march
through April April period in
the 131 US record.
The forthcoming Clear Horizons
bill, formerly SB 4 needs to
lock in critical greenhouse gas
reduction goals. It should
require regular public
reporting, Decado planning
reviews, and dedicated funding
to ensure that targets are
enforceable.
As a thermographer at
Earthworks, I go into the oil
and gas fields with specialized
infrared cameras to identify gas
releases, specifically, we're
looking for methane, one of the
most dangerous greenhouse gas,
um, one of the most dangerous
greenhouse gasses. Out there we
see and report venting, flaring
and methane leaks all the time.
And these are not small
incidences. Without enforceable
targets, the industry has little
incentive to make meaningful
methane reductions. The 2021
methane rules may look strong on
paper by banning routine venting
and flaring under many
circumstances, but there's still
enough exceptions that it
happens regularly.
Unfortunately, our field work
continues to document venting
and flaring as commonplace, and,
um, satellite imaging such as
carbon mapper picks up methane
hotspots over New Mexico and
disturbing amounts. That's why
strong methane targets are very
important for the bill. Truly
enforceable targets are needed.
Some argue this bill
could be costly given New
Mexico's reliance on oil and gas
revenue, but the cost of
wildfires, drought, heat
emergencies, and public safety
is already running into the
billions. In 2024 alone, the
wildfire season in our state is
estimated to have cost $1.8
billion. Conservative estimates
put the cost of drought at at
least $2.6 billion over 10
years. In investing in clean
energy, resilience, transition
funds will create jobs. It'll
diversify our economy, protect
communities and make us more
resilient. As we work on the
next version of the bill, we
need to make sure that strong
methods methane targets stay in
their truly enforceable and that
they benefit the benefits flow
to communities hit hardest,
especially rural, tribal, and
low-income households. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kristen
Graziano. I'm a family
physician. I'm a board member of
Healthy Climate New Mexico. I
live up in Arroyo Seco about 20
minutes north
I'm here today to voice my
concerns about the health
impacts of climate change, of
which there are many, and they
are very well documented.
I'll share two examples of how
my patients have been impacted.
Just before Christmas, 2021,
Taos County was hit with a freak
snowsquall. Winds of over 100
MPH ripped through, damaging
structures and leveling trees in
the Carson National Forest.
One of my patients owns a
family-run ski business. The
storm decimated it
It was closed for over a year.
which caused stress and
financial hardship, both of
which affect health.
A few months later, the Hermit's
Peak Caff Canyon wildfire
exploded. We had many days of
horrific air quality from the
smoke.
One of my pediatric patients
with severe asthma could not go
outside, could not go to school.
This affected his learning, his
quality of life, his social
life, and his parents' ability
to go to work.
We know climate disruption and
instability is caused by
greenhouse gasses.
They warm our planet and drive
extreme weather.
So we must decrease greenhouse
gas emissions. We also must
build community resilience to
protect against harms that are
occurring now today. This is not
a problem of the future. This is
happening to patients now.
We know climate change does not
affect everyone equally, and it
is exacerbating health
disparities.
Last year, over 70 medical
organizations declare the
climate crisis a health
emergency and called upon
governments, businesses,
leaders, and citizens to act.
For the health and well-being of
New Mexicans, I urge you to
craft and support comprehensive
strategies that reduce
pollution, reduce emissions, and
use our natural resources to
help address climate change,
because Mother Nature is
brilliant.
This is even more critical now
given the federal government's
repeals of policies that protect
the public's health. This
terrifies me.
Lastly, I just want to thank you
for your time and your
leadership, for coming to Taos,
giving our community an
opportunity to participate in
the political process and have
their voices heard. Uh, this is
democracy at work, and we need
to stand for democracy. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. um, next we
have Carlos
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, thank you for
this opportunity to speak to you
and thank you for all of your
extra service in uh the benefit
of the people of New Mexico. I'd
like to speak to you in
reference to the community
resilience and Wildfire
mitigation, uh, specifically
about microgrids. Um, I am
Carlos Matutis. I am the New
Mexico state director for Green
Latinos. We're a national
organization dedicated to
fighting for environmental
justice for Latina communities
and other
communities of color, and I also
happen to be a constituent of
Senator Thornton.
So, uh, Senator Thornton, I
would like to actually make
mention of a couple of points
that you brought up. Uh, the
Moss Landing gateway fires, um,
that happened in Southern
California, uh, I just wanted to
bring up that those were old
batteries, uh, in the case of
the Moss landing, uh, some of
those batteries were up to 20
years old. Both of those fires
were also, uh, in a very uh
outdated way of putting battery
storage together, which is
inside of a building, uh,
everything else that's been
done in the last 5 years, has
been outside of a building which
increases monitoring and
decreases risk for runaway
fires. Just wanted to bring that
up. The reason that I bring that
up is that we are in a climate
crisis. We need alternative
forms of energy that do not
continue to heat up our planet.
Climate crisis is an
environmental justice issue and
a racial justice issue.
It is, as the previous speaker
said, not an equitable crisis.
Our communities, Latino
communities, are indigenous
relatives of black communities,
Asian-American communities,
Pacific Islander communities are
impacted at a much higher level
than our white brothers and
sisters.
This is a fact
We must address climate change
and microgrids, especially in a
place like New Mexico that has
many rural communities that many
of our indigenous brothers and
sisters live in areas where
there's not transmission lines.
Microgrids are a great way to
get people the power that they
need to live a better life.
However, using natural gas,
using diesel, these are not the
ways forward. We must be
careful. I urge you in the next
session to be very careful in
regards
to microgrids, especially, uh,
grid-connected microgrids, we
cannot move forward with fossil
fuels we can move forward with
microgrids using renewable
energy. Thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you. We have 2 people
online. The first person is Anna
Hansen.
Uh, good afternoon. Can you hear
me?
Hello
Yes, we can hear you. You have 3
minutes.
OK, thank you. Um, my name is
Anna Hansen. I am the, um,
lobbyist for the Puebloauaque
and a former county of Santa Fe
County commissioner. Um, first,
I want to thank you for an
excellent meeting, Madam Chair
and Vice Chair. This was an
excellent meeting and all the
committee members, um, I really
also want to recognize Senator
Stewart for her years of work on
pollinating protection, um, as a
county commissioner. I worked
um, on, uh, protection of
pollinators and was able to add
it to the neo um bylaws. Um, so
I wanna encourage you all to
support her and when she brings
this forward again because
neonicotoids are incredibly
damaging to the pollinator
population. Um, I think that the
microgrids are really necessary,
but they need to be with
renewable energy. I agree with
all of the public
uh speakers that spoke. I also
want to recognize Senator, um,
or, uh, interior secretary
Stuart Udall, who made the land
water conservation fund, and I
would like to work with um
Senator Wirth on where the
tribal exclusions are happening,
so the, the tribes can apply for
the land water conservation fund
and other issues
Um, also, Senator Steinborn,
thank you for bringing up the
contaminated land issue and the
abandoned uranium mine that
affects so many of our tribal
brothers and sisters along with
Senator Charlie, uh, bringing
up, uh, the tribally led uh
projects. They are all really
important and um
I look forward to the renewal
and um
of uh the game of, uh, the
Department of Wildlife. Um, I
think that's incredibly
important and I wanted to thank
uh Senator, I mean,
Representative McQueen for all
that he did on that bill, um,
so, uh, excellent meeting. I've
been watching many of the
legislative meetings, and I am
grateful for all the work that
you're all doing. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next online
we have Laura Lucero.
Thank you. Thank you for this
opportunity.
My name is Laura Lucero from
Albuquerque. I'm a retired city
planner and land use lawyer
I wear many different volunteer
and organizational hats now in
my retirement
but the most important one is my
role as a grandmother and now a
great grandmother.
The long view begins to take on
greater significance, and there
is no more important legacy than
leaving a sustainable world for
future generations.
Thank you for tackling each of
the important issues on your
agenda today and tomorrow.
I appreciate the work you're
doing to protect our precious
land, water, and air.
The New Mexico Green Amendment.
if approved by the voters of New
Mexico.
would be a critical tool to help
protect our land, water, and
air.
For decades we have relied on
federal
and state legislation to fight
for a cleaner environment.
and for decades we've been
fighting a losing battle
The sad truth is that our laws
are designed to accommodate
pollution and legalize
environmental degradation rather
than prevent them.
It's no wonder many New Mexicans
feel powerless when it comes to
preserving the quality of our
water, air, climate, public
parks, and special natural
places.
So I respectfully ask you to do
two things.
First
um, and I, and I see that on the
committee that there are a
number of legislative champions
for the New Mexico Green
amendment. And so I thank you
for your, your efforts and your
um your support, but I'm asking
others on the committee if you
uh want more information about
the proposed New Mexico Green
Amendment.
There's considerable information
on the website nm
Greenamendment.org.
And if your committee would like
a formal presentation on the New
Mexico Green Amendment, please
let me know.
And the second thing I'd like to
ask you
is to support the New Mexico
Green Amendment when it comes up
in January's short session so
that New Mexicans will have the
opportunity to vote on this
proposed amendment to the state
constitution in the general
election in November 2026.
Thank you for this opportunity.
Thank you very much. OK, next we
have um
doctor, and I can't see the
first name.
I'm sorry
the pers
Fion
Doctor Fior then Juan, then
Lonnie. So doctor, go ahead.
Yeah, it's Fiona Sinclair.
Thank you for listening to the
community today. I'll try and be
brief. I just got the email this
morning and I'm rushed over. Um,
just a bit about my background,
I have a PhD in biology and
history. I founded the sustain
just remember you have 3
minutes. Yeah, I found I founded
the sustainability studies
program at UNM, um, and I've
been living in Mora for the last
25 years where I've built a
completely sustainable, uh, CO2
waste-free farm, uh, using
naturally sourced materials, the
whole nine yards. I'm also a
horseback rider, and I ride
approximately 100 miles a week
at this point in the season.
Trout, Carson, Santa Fe National
Forest, and the Pecos
Wilderness. I was also ground
zero for the Hermit's Peak, Calf
Canyon fire that went over my
farm, but actually, due to the
resiliency I've built into it.
Nothing was burnt. I'm still
subject to flooding. When
I set out on this project that
would become my life, I had hope
and optimism. Yet here we are
today, emissions are higher,
political action is pro-fossil
fuel, understanding of the depth
of the climate problem is barely
on anyone's radar. These facts
really hit home after the
Hermit's Peak Caff Canyon fire.
The fire was caused by climate
change. Yes, it was started by
humans, caught in an
institutional matrix that told
them to light a match in the
springtime.
but a fire was driven by climate
change. It came on the heels of
a severe drought and was spread
by unprecedented winds. However,
mentioning climate change in
relationship to the HPCC fire
has been really difficult. There
is no mention. In fact, when I
bought it up at a as a primary
driver during an academic panel,
I was ridiculed. What sort of
dystopian reality are we living
here? I have photographs going
back decades of the high
country. These are
the watersheds that supply both
the Rio Grande and the Canadian
basins. Important watersheds
that not only provide much
needed water for New Mexicans,
but communities beyond. The Mora
River goes all the way to the
Mississippi. 20 years ago,
looking from the skyline line at
Hickorita. There was nothing but
green stretching all the way
from the ecos and then all the
way north. Today, that story is
very different. Much of it is
dead or in the process of
dying. It started in 2012. It
was 75% dead before the fire in
2022. It didn't burn, but what
was left just turned bone dry
Now there's literally hundreds
of square miles of dead trees,
waiting, and I would say now
needing to burn. This is climate
change, and yet people carry on
as though nothing is happening,
as is everything, as if
everything is normal. And now we
have a government that is
actively engaging in an
anti-climate change agenda.
I come before you today to ask
for one thing, and it's really
easy and simple. Education.
A public state campaign to
educate New Mexicans of the
problem at hand and a way
forward.
If you travel, you will find
that most countries in the world
put climate change and
adaptation and adaptation first
and foremost in all public
dialogue and actions, especially
during events like fires and
floods. Climate change programs
are mandatory in school
curriculum. There are
afterschool programs for
climate-related activities.
There are work programs to
retrain for climate adaptation.
There is political action to
address emissions. There's
advertising for climate adapted
appliances.
There's new rules for building
and design to incorporate zero
emissions, and this government
policy to end fossil fuel car
production. I could go on and
on. Yet here in the US I have
neighbors who literally have no
clue. They think I'm crazy,
young and old alike, they have
zero understanding. My point is
that the rest of the world is
moving forward while America's
stagnates and adds to a global
problem. And what this results
in is a society of
anti-science, consumerist
stupidity.
New Mexicans can do better. It
might seem like going backwards,
but we need to make people
understand the severity of the
problem. Every school in the
state should have mandatory
climate change, understanding
and adaptive strategies in their
curriculum.
It is criminal not to prepare
children for their fate.
There should be billboards
everywhere recognizing the
threat posed by climate
inaction. Could you summarize,
please? Right, we need
incentives for climate
adaptation to be legally
enforced. Um, all job training
opportunities should address
climate awareness. We need
fossil fuel mandates that draw
down fossil fuel reliance and
production. Sun and wind are our
primary resources and need to be
utilized to the maximum
possible. Solar and wind EV
charging stations need to be
built throughout r
ural New Mexico with viable
recycling programs. We need
viable local governments
supported by a regional
foodways. The bottom line is
climate change needs to be
visible. I can go on, but as
long as there is no visible
message coming from
policymakers, as long as
understanding of the issues at
hand resides with a select
educated few, there will be no
action. We've already run out of
time, now we have to catch up
Thank you very much
OK, so who is, which one is one?
OK, please go ahead
just, you have 3 minutes. Buenos
vios.
Uh, it's an honor to be in, in
front of you all and thank you
for, for taking the time. Next
to me is Mr. Lanny Royal. He's
from Costilla, right along the
state line where they have water
rights, but no water.
And, and I think the state could
help
uh, in terms of that
Uh, I live in Questa, New
Mexico, and
there next to us is a super fun
site
and currently it's Chevron, uh,
that owns it. Before that, it
was UnicCel. Before that it was
Molior.
And, and, uh, it's been closed
down quite a bit and now with
the federal government backing
off, uh, EPA and everything.
It's incumbent on the state
government, especially uh the
environment department. Let's
put improvement back into the
environmental improvement
department, remember how it used
to be, um, beca because, uh, the
mind is no longer operating, but
the degradation, the pollution,
the contamination from the
tailings from the open pit, from
the tunnels is all polluting
into the Red River and
eventually the Rio Grande.
Chevron has built a filtration
system, and it was strange
because nobody knew why would
they put a filtration system
upstream from the mine and the
tunnels.
and they do that and they pump
up, uh, because the tunnels
flood naturally, and they pump
that water up
hill, uh, upstream to the
filtration, and we never knew
why. And now, uh, and it might
be on hold because of the
federal uncertainty, but there's
a green hydrogen project in the
works and, and if folks do just
cursory research on this. It's
super flammable. It, it's almost
not used anywhere except for
high temperature,
uh, uh, shipbuilding and
airplane building, and Questa
has none of that, let me assure
you. Uh, but it's water
intensive.
OK? It's super water intensive,
and it works on, on electrolysis
and needs superheating of water,
taking the oxygen molecules out
in the hydrogen into a gas form,
releasing a lot of nitrous oxide
and, and don't fit into our gas
pipes.
because the nitrous oxide was
resorted, so there's no use for
green hydrogen anywhere because
once you buy into this white
elephant, it's just gonna grow
and grow and soon, you know,
there was no snowca this year.
And you all drove up along the
Rio Grande and is there a Rio
Grande?
You know, my, my God, and
imagine when that happens and
you've already invested billions
of dollars in and, and at
Chevron's liking into a green
hydrogen plant, and they're
going to soak up the entire
rider River watershed,
uh, and worse. So, so that's a
false solution and what we need
is, is environmental monitoring
by the New Mexicovironment
Department
the mind, uh,
or Chevron, um
has hired contractors and, and
there's jobs, jobs, jobs, you
know, let me set it straight. I
have good information that only
12% of the entire Superfund
cleanup is local.
from the Tao Questa area.
So, so, you know, the jobs
aren't there and in this green
hydrogen plant, so you get rid
of the cleanup people and you
bring in pipefitters and
plumbers, uh
and, and it's still not going to
be people from Questa, you know
what I mean. So Juan, your 3
minutes is up.
Uh, just one second. Yeah, 1
2nd. This production water,
that's also a false solution
because it's brine, it's filled
with toxic poisons, it'll never
be cleaned and you know why?
Because it's a corporations do
not tell us what they're putting
into the ranking elements. How
can you clean up stuff without
it. I, I, I, I thank you
for your time
Thank you very much, Lonnie, did
you have something you were
gonna say? Yes, so I'll be free.
Sure.
Yes, my name's Lonnie Royal, and
I'm from Costilla, New Mexico,
and, uh, the issues that we've
had all that was with water, the
beavers, sluicing of sand and
onto our river which goes into
our ditches. We need to find an
entity in the state that can uh
help us uh restore our river
back to it what what it was
before and see if we can get rid
of the beavers and open the
channels back the way it was
before. Now, like I said, they
slew the sand, there's a dam
above where our diversion dams
are
and these res once in a while
they'll slows all that slis down
the river and it goes down the
river, but it, the beavers hold
that all so our river just keeps
getting wider and wider like
this and then the overgrowth of
the willows are taking over our
river and we need some help from
the state to help us clean this
river up and get some water back
and restored. And whenever we
get water, the beavers are
holding it back, so and is
everybody who's used to plant
gardens in Costilla, everybody,
and now we can't really do
nothing and this year we didn't
have no water in
our dish.
A couple of times probably when
it rained a little bit in the
mountains.
So if I can get somebody that
can guide me somewhere to be
able to find some solutions for
these uh problems.
Thank you.
I will talk to you after this
about some funding for projects
like that.
OK? Thank you. OK, this
concludes the public comment
period. Thank you everyone for
sticking around. Uh, I'd like to
remind you that if you look at
the agenda, it starts early
tomorrow.
So 8:15 because we're done at
noon. OK? Thank you.
