an old project.
Mr. Chair, um, just to kind of
echo and expand a bit on
Stuart's comments, I think.
um
you know, just wanted to
highlight this, this is an
example of how the policy of the
council adopted, not limiting
these changes to newer awards is
essentially rewarding districts
that
have not made progress on old
projects, um, in this case, it's
a pretty substantial award, um,
and to clarify, uh, what is our
understanding of where this
extra square footage is going to
be applied. Is it primarily um
to support a larger gym than.
our standards would otherwise
allow.
Mr. Sharon Caswell on page
112 of your e-book.
We have an itemized program of
spaces, um, and the difficulty
in this situation was, this is
the first time we saw the
program was under this revised
square footage with the new
calculator. In other words, they
did not plan under the old
calculator yet. They did not
program. So we really couldn't
make that comparison. But you
can see what they're doing here
is there are um some spaces, uh
on page one
112. You can see the physical
education. So this they they did
provide a.
court space of 6500 square feet,
which is uh a minimum number for
the gym, for a high school gym.
But where it really is, is that
bleacher space.
Um, they really went over that
amount. It's at 8000 square feet
Um
the minimum adequacy for that
amount, for that enrollment was
1,596.
So they went over that amount
and you can see that's where a
lot of that is. Now it's with
it, it's the bleachers are an
eligible space and it's within
the calculator. So it falls
within our policy. OK, thank
you, um.
You know, I think we're from
LFC's perspective, will not
support this again, um, I just
want to note that the previous
projects also, you know, we're
kind of looking at this as one
project essentially, um, they're
right next door to each other.
Uh, so I, you know, I, I do
recognize the council adopted a
policy and we're following the
policy now, but um just to
explain our vote on these
projects. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
you know, I,
these discussions have been
really, I wouldn't call them
difficult, but they're complex.
There's, there's a lot of moving
pieces and how we're weighing
our duty to be fiscally
responsible at the state level
with local flexibility to meet
the needs of community given the
standards that we've adopted.
And I think it's important for
us to recognize that.
if we as a council have adopted
minimum adequacy standards.
We're telling schools that this
is the minimum, the amount of
space required.
to run their academic program
The fact that we had smaller
adequacy standards previous to
this might mean that we actually
built buildings that were too
small.
And, and, and to Ms. Carswell's
point, the folks who moved on
those projects in a timely
manner might feel like they got,
they got cheated a little bit
because they did what they were
supposed to do, and they have a
smaller building than those
folks that are moving coming
forward now.
We can't go back and do that and
why we had those standards that
might have meant smaller
facilities as a discussion I
wasn't part of.
But I just want to recognize
that the, the new adequacy
standards are what we've set as
what are necessary for
school buildings
and how districts use that
flexibility is up to them.
Now, if we want to set
policies about how districts
should use space. We can have
that discussion, and I think
that's, you know, that's
something that we get to do.
But until we're willing to set
certain policies about how they
use certain kinds of spaces.
or that you have to complete a
project within 3 years of award,
or any of those kinds of
policies that guide how
districts
build those projects or how we
decide to say,
we gave you this money 5 years
ago and you've not moved on it.
We have a policy that says once
you hit this point, we rescind
that award.
We can have those discussions
too. I just think we want to be
careful about
being critical of districts who
are operating within the current
parameters and the current
policies that are set.
because we have certain feelings
about how they're doing things.
If we think there's substantive
problems about how to, how
things are moving.
That's our job
And I just want to be be careful
about, you know, letting our
feelings about certain places or
how people are doing their jobs,
get in the way.
We're lucky to have the the
authority to set some of those
policies, and I think we should,
we should have those discussions
if that's where we, we see some
problems happening.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Thank you for that, uh
those comments, uh
we're ready for the motion
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, yeah,
so I would move that the council
approved the award language
change for Crown Point High
School for, for the increase to
the uh the maximum maximum
allowable gross square footage.
OK. Again, this is a award
subcommittee motion.
Uh, all those in favor of
approving the motion please
indicate by saying I, I,
although supposed.
and uh we'll move on then to the
uh
3 project in Thoro
Yes, so item item 6C chair and
members.
is for Project P 23002 through
high school. Another gal at
McKinley County Schools Award.
uh the potential motion is
council approval to amend the
2022, 2023 standards-based award
language.
Gallup-McKinley County Schools
for Theroux High School.
to include an increase in the
maximum allowable gross square
footage from 71,998 to 80,980.
and 8,991 row square footing.
The district is requesting
utilization of the new
calculator.
No additional funding is needed
at this time.
Uh, in December of 2024, this
council amended the existing
award by reducing the design
design capacity from 477 to 390.
and allowed the GSF and and the
allowed GSF
to be reduced from 84,350 to
71,998.
The 2024, 25 enrollment total
389, consistent with the
projection of 3 new district's
current program statement
totaled 83,629 gross square
feet.
Uh, that program square footage
is 2640 square feet, more than
the requested 80,090 Gallop
McKinley scout McKinley County
Schools staff.
has informed PSFA in writing
that they will fund the 2640
gross square feet above what the
new calculator allows.
There are 4 exhibits attached
for your review.
Uh, and with that I will
questions on
Mr. Chair, um, just one
question. What, uh, remind us
what prompted the change that
the council acted on in 2024 for
the enrollment capacity. Did the
district request that or was
that a staff recommendation due
to um
some change that you had
observed over the
since the project was first
awarded.
she remembers it was based on
the number of students that they
had at the time, so it was
exceeding what the enrollment
projection was. So we evaluated
that, we looked into that. Um,
what happened with the Gallop is
that during COVID, there's,
there's a couple of things that
happened in Gal district.
Uh, during COVID, we had some,
just some of their district
schools actually increased
enrollment.
Um, we had people that were our
students or parents were
attaining their students from
BIE schools to to get the
district schools.
Um, and also that there were
people moving back into
communities from other parts of
the country where they were just
to be your family. Um, also,
what Gallup did was they
enrolled some virtual students.
They had set up in a virtual
academy. Those were not
reflected in this. We, we took
those. So it's basically results
from we started seeing more
growth as a result of that. OK,
right, so they, they saw like an
increase.
an enrollment increase during
COVID due to those factors you
talked about, but then that went
away.
OK. Thanks. Um, you know, John,
you do great work on the
enrollment analysis and just
appreciate your attention to
things like this, uh, we know
the problems we've run into from
overbuilding, um, so it's good
work
' re paying attention to not
doing that even under pretty
unique and dynamic circumstances
like this. So thanks, Mr.
Members, I appreciate that.
It's, it's a challenge.
Enrollment is always, uh, you
know, there's a lot of factors
that go into this. So we try to
stay on top of it, you know,
like I say, we look at the FMP
as a base and then what if the
base, the FMP is, is, is starts
to age, we then get enroll
actual enrollment numbers to
which to compare that enrollment
projection too. And then once
those districts come and, and we
start asking those questions.
Hm.
Um, I just have one quick
question. Um, I think I must
have a misunderstanding cause um
the when when there's a local
match reduction, I thought that
was um a district.
uh uh
where it's
played across a district
whatever, so I'm, I'm
asking on the um
the, let's see on the high
school, they're asking for a
local match reduction.
This one they don't, and I think
they asked for a local mass
reduction and the
middle school. Can you tell me
why, uh, uh, we would have
and, and, and to me it's kind of
concerning when the district
says, we'll pay for this
overage.
in one school, but yet they're
asking for a district match in
another school. I don't, I don't
understand how that's um
consistent
Mr. Chair, members, I, I could
explain it.
in terms that I understand. I'm
grateful to see Mr. Schimmel.
Mr. Chair members, uh, so based
on discussions with field, we
have not had a formal sit-down
with Gallup regarding what
projects they will need a waiver
on. It has been discussed, but
it hasn't been
um
to the point where we've
isolated and picked out the
projects that are going to need
the waivers. So based on my
analysis from subcommittee, uh,
Gallup currently has 10
outstanding uh outyear.
projects coming for future
awards.
We are teacher housing projects,
7 are standards projects. So the
total we're looking at just for
the state match of these
projects is roughly $300 million
in out here.
for future requests
And that's with the changes
presented this meeting in the
orderly.
I, I still don't understand. I,
I, I assumed that a
district had the capacity to ask
for a match or not.
depending on their bonding
capacity. And so it's confusing
to me that we have
individual schools, how that
works. I just need to be
explained.
if I might, uh, a lot of this
would also depend on how much
money they've set aside through
their bond issues for particular
projects.
So they may have more money in
the project.
uh, and are able to cover that
project.
more fully than another project.
So
we, I'm sure that we encourage
them to use their money whenever
possible and uh there'll be
times when they say we'll use
our money.
fully on this project, but we do
need a waiver this project, we
don't have money for that one.
That's one of the, one of the
reasons, you know, Mr. Chair
thinks and, and not to harp on
it too much, but I do think this
is part of that discussion about
how we make decisions,
when projects need to be done,
because how we're evaluating
them now seems to me, and I'm
happy if somebody will clarify
if I'm getting it wrong is
because most of these projects
have actually not come back for
construction funding.
We're evaluating each of them
based on their current capacity
to pay.
any projects
It could be that after they came
back and got 3 projects and that
they could actually afford, they
will no longer have the capacity
to pay for future projects.
And so I think that's another
discussion we'll need to have
about as districts come forward
with multiple projects.
how are we evaluating their
capacity to pay, knowing that
they're, they're telling us we
can afford to pay for some of
them, but not all of them. We're
going to ask for waivers over
here but not over here, and it
does sort of confuse the
conversation a little bit.
um, because we're still using
that single point in time.
evaluation of capacity.
right? The the local capacity.
Anyway
good discussion.
chair and members, I'd, I'd be
grateful to kind of give my
perspective on that same point
where it is difficult for the
districts to to know based on,
especially with
a situation where there are
multiple awards.
until they know which ones are
going to cost how much, so we,
we work with them to try and
make sure that whatever's on the
agenda.
PSFA staff can kind of make, is
that how can they make a
distinction or determination
that they can afford to pay for
above adequacy.
improvements
when they don't know, I mean, I,
I don't see how they can make
that determination either.
So that puts it in a very
awkward place in that we're,
we're saying, well, when we can
pay for these.
at this point, but this other
one we want.
above adequacy will pay for that
one, but we don't want to pay
our fair share of the other one.
So this is confusing to me how
this can actually work.
Well, again
you also need to realize that
local districts
have the ability and the
responsibility.
at the local level
So
they can
assign funds
to projects that are priority at
the local level, which doesn't
automatically translate into the
funding criteria that we have
here.
So again
this happens when there's
multiple projects. We hope that
we don't have that many uh
districts with multiple projects
at one time.
because again, we're tying up
money, but again, we need to
recognize the decision of our
local
school districts and boards to
set priorities as they see fit
in the area of capital.
Um, if I could add one thing,
um, I think you raised good
questions, um, and
uh a couple additional points
that might be good to clarify on
this one, I believe PSFA staff
have been making an attempt to
get districts to indicate
whether they will pursue a
waiver in the future earlier and
alert the council to that, and
that's what we're seeing
reflected on the previous
projects and the council has not
considered nor approved those
waivers yet. Is that correct?
OK. Additionally, my
understanding is that
all that is likely sort of
confirmed at this point is that
the district may be eligible to
be considered for a waiver,
which only means that they've
sort of passed those criteria
that are in statute that even
make them eligible to ask. It
does not mean that either PSFA
nor the council has looked at
their finances and determined
that a waiver is needed.
that they, that they actually
don't have the ability to pay
it. It only means that you know
they're bonded to a certain
certain capacity, um, and they
meet those other kind of like
pretty straightforward
requirements. Um, so that will
be a question that PSFA staff
analysis and the council will
have to take up in the future on
these projects and that I think
is very much like a an open
question that does not have a
conclusion. Um, you know, this
has been another, uh, sort of
issue with Gallop in particular,
just given the volume of
projects that they have in the
pipe
line um, that has come up
another, a number of times.
around their projects in terms
of like, do they have the
capacity to execute, you know, I
think it was like 18 projects or
something, um, just from a
project management perspective
and you know, construction labor
and all that stuff, um, as well
as the question of like, can the
district afford this number of
projects, um, so, you know, just
kind of wanted to flag that that
we haven't determined that
that's allowed, and I think the
questions you're raising, um,
are good ones, uh, and
ones the council should look at
carefully and kind of evaluating
that. Is there actually the
financial need and has has the
district made a good faith
effort to raise, to draw on all
of the local resources available
to it to meet its local share
before a waiver is actually
awarded, um.
given that under our current
system, that decision isn't
actually made until like the
project is ready to go to
construction. I think that's
still a big challenge, both for
the council and the districts,
uh, that lack of certainty, um,
and so maybe that's something
else we kind of need to think
about is trying to make that
evaluation and uh the request
happened earlier in the process,
not, uh, when they've already
gone out to bed. So thank
you.
Thank you
Mr. Chair, I, that's really, I
really appreciate those
comments. I just wanted to add
to that I think that also,
again, not to keep putting more
on us, but it's this
conversation of prioritization.
right? We may end up facing
multiple projects
uh, either because of real need
or perceived need at the
district level for, for waivers.
and how we decide to to use that
authority because Ms. Karza was
right.
The fact that you're eligible
that you're eligible for a
waiver does not guarantee that
you get a waiver.
how we develop a protocol in the
council to decide, you know, one
of these projects, the last one
we're talking about right now,
the rose, ranked number 27 on
the list.
The, I was looking at
Crown point is number 70
and the first project was a
little bit, is ranked a little
bit different. So how we use
those rankings as a way to
prioritize which districts
actually get waivers when they
come to us, because there may be
a district in greater need of a
facility and also greater
financial need of a waiver. So,
again, trying
as much as possible, although,
and I, I know it's not always
completely possible to to
eliminate as much subjectivity I
think would help us to think
through some of that criteria,
so we're not making decisions
based on what we think should
happen, but on some well thought
out, uh,
policies and protocols that we
establish.
will be
Really taking a deep dive into a
dream forward so that it's so
that when you're not putting a.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think,
um,
you know, Iris's comments just
now brought up a topic that we
had discussed, I think, in maybe
a smaller working group, but
about looking at 5 year plans
and looking at how the council
and PSFA can start working with
districts to come up with not
just like, just looking at the
ranking list and oh, you're in
the rankings, but like, do we
have a 5 year plan, not just at
the district level, but at the
state level as well for
facilities that, you know, um,
need improvements or need
replacement. We know that
there's district
s out there that are higher up
in that, you know, top 100 that
aren't coming forward, you know,
is there, I, I feel like this is
some good work that could occur
over the next year, you know, to
be looking at how we can start
um assisting in ensuring that
we're kind of bringing projects
forward and, and it's not to say
that if a district needs 10
facilities or 10 projects or
awards that they can't get it,
but maybe we can be more
involved in timing that out and
planning that out over a period
of time versus
just providing 10 awards right
now and then seeing when they
can get to them, so I think it's
a broader conversation and I
look forward to, you know,
hopefully being able to work
with staff and other council
members to kind of think about
what something like that might
look like.
Let's
see if we can move on on this
one. Good discussion though. I
think it's uh very valuable that
we're uh
um
looking at these things at this
point and uh know that.
um we have the motion, Mr.
Chair, I move that the council
approve the award language
change.
for Thoreau High School
We have a motion subcommittee
motion. All those in favor of
the motion please indicate by
saying I.
All those opposed
OK.
cool
All right. So let's, I'm a
positive note, let's move
forward.
Um.
we have, uh, other business, FY
27 Appropriations request. Oops,
Mr. Skipping red tone, sorry.
I was just teasing you.
All right,
next is raton combined scoop.
Uh.
summary
Uh yes
Mr. Chair, members, item 6D on
the agenda is Ratton High
School, Project number P25 is a
project that, uh, moved forward
from systems project to
consolidation effort, reducing a
large number of square feet into
one school to better serve the
community.
Potential motion is council
approval to amend the current
2024, 2025 standards-based award
language direct home public
schools.
to include an increase in the
maximum allowable gross square
footage from 120,000156 square
feet to 133,401 square feet.
a net increase of 13,245 gross
square feet.
The existing gym and cafeteria
addition facility will no longer
be eligible for PSCSCOC funding.
and staff will remove the
facility from the facility's
assessment database.
This is based on recommendations
due to the age and the FCI score
for that particular gym.
and in discussions with the
district about how
uh the new physical education
facilities
and their need for space for
competitive sports
and community activities would
be
separated
um
in that no future PSCOC funding
for utility improvements shall
be applied to facility.
Uh, the district request
as stated
um
staff recommendation.
uh matches that
key points
are the increase in gross square
footage.
uh for an enrollment of 824
students.
Um, the 824
is slightly lower than the 40
day enrollment for school year
2425.
which was reported at 831
students for grades pre-K.
The consolidation of three
current schools, the elementary
school, the intermediate, and
the high school
uh will result in about a 65,000
square foot reduction in
footprint throughout the
district.
No additional funding is needed
at this time.
Phase 2 construction funding,
the district may request
approval of a full or partial
local match reduction or waiver.
uh, in July of 2024.
uh, the planning and design
phase funding for a combined
replacement fillis facility for
824 students.
was for 120,156 gross to support
the recommendation on the German
and cafeteria building.
uh that FCI was 79.51%
on a facility that on a building
that was built in 19 uh there
are 44 exhibits available for
your review, including the
statement of financial position.
Thank you.
Questions. So at the last uh
subcommittee.
of course, I, I voted against
this. So, uh, my concern is the.
the gym uh where uh PSTOC says
they're going to remove
themselves from this is no
longer, you know, be eligible
for any type of funding.
So as I stated in subcommittee,
you know, this building is still
going to be utilized because
that's what was said that they
could be having some potential
tournaments and, you know,
people would come be coming in
to utilize that, so
uh, so if this building is being
removed.
How is the building going to be
maintained. So it was mentioned
that this is gonna be done by
the community or the building
would be maintained by the
community.
Who's the community and where is
this funding going to be coming
from? Because at the end of the
day, if this building is
removed, it still has to be
maintained, it still has to have
a fire alarm system, it still
has to be tied to device, it
still has to be able to, you
know, dial out, God forbid
there's a fire cuz it is in the
vicinity of this uh school
district. So who's going to
maintain all of this of the HVAC
system goes out, who's going to
maintain that? Who's gonna
replace it? Those are some
questions that
I had, were you able to get any
clarification on that?
Mr. Chair, if I may, we do have
the superintendent of Roone here
with us this morning with a
member also of the city of Raton
to be able to answer those
questions.
Good morning.
Good morning, Ms. Hibbs thought
long and hard about
there still will be the need and
use to need upkeep.
And so our goal would be uh to
use the SB 9 funds for 28.
So with the building of a new
facility.
So with the SB 9 fund, the
school district would make
themselves responsible for
correcting any issues such as
HVAC, fire alarm.
uh all of that
And currently right now, we have
brand new HVAC, and we have in
the soon future, since they're.
I could add to that in, in the
dual hats I wear, ratho in small
town, obviously I'm.
deputy city manager and board
president for about the last
decade.
Unfortunately, signed up
yesterday unopposed to do this
for 4 more years. Um, this, uh,
our request is, is complex, but
please understand, this isn't a
sports request. I mean, 2 years
ago, our girls' basketball team
didn't win a game. We're not
running old powerhouses.
We just exist in the North, at
66,000 or 6600.
elevation where recess in Ratton
in January looks nothing like
anything south of Raton in
January.
You know, as.
born and raised Rotonian. It's a
thirteen-inch TV in the middle
of a gym floor, you know,
for most of, of your winter
recess.
our building has historical
significance to us.
not because the championships
won there, but it has a mural
that was made by a nationally
famous artist that came from
Ratone.
painted it in high school, we
show it to our kids.
you know, it's
the
the age of the building, we
agree, it doesn't meet.
the modern day
institutional standards
But we've had a series of failed
bond issues, part of why I got
on the board 10 years ago was to
try to turn that around because
we.
we had issues of trust with our
community based on
administration and board.
and we worked for six years
before we even went out to ask
for bond. We're at maximum
bonding capacity right now.
We're proud of that.
In a depressed town to ask
people to take all of what they
have out of their pocket and and
trust you with it was a big hit
and and Miss Medina and I pretty
much put our livelihoods and our
lives on the line to get a part
of that is our community before
we got there.
wanted to do something for
ourselves. Now, don't get me
wrong, we waiver community. I
hate that that's where we exist.
The Ratton and I grew up in had
800 coal mine jobs, 2000 more
people, and we really didn't
even search for grants cause we
were self-sufficient.
But we're trying to get off the
mat here and part of this
request is
you know, we've spent
a couple million dollars in
COVID money and SB money and,
and awards to get this gym to
have HVAC systems right now to
put new bleachers that are
I mean, we're less than 24
months old, you know, our, our
entire chair back section is
paid for by the community with.
names dedicated to deceased
family members that sit in them,
you know, and.
all we're asking is, is to be
allowed to keep our space and,
and our greater request that,
that it looks like it's not
recommended was just simply to
take a building that was slaved
to a high school cause they were
constructed in unison and
doesn't have a stand-alone
electrical service.
and just be able to pivot our
already brand new fire alarm
with the panel in a building
that we're gonna construct that
has a panel anyway.
to shift an electrical line, not
to upgrade the electrical, not
to do anything improvement wise,
but I mean, we've been living in
buildings that are built in here
we're a 5-school
school district as recently as
10 years ago, we're going from 5
to now 3 to then 1.
with losing space and actual
beneficial WPA era architectural
at every step.
This is our last kind of
surviving relic of of what was a
once proud.
town.
and we're just trying to keep a
little something, but it's not
the, the powerhouse request, you
know, if, if we say let's not
take this building off book.
and we do what everybody else
would have done.
Your demolition costs far exceed
en route tone, what we are
asking for to just simply
reconnect the utility to this
building or allow us
to be there
You know, if you can imagine the
stress on SBI and moneys.
in buildings that are 90 years
old.
I mean, we, we get a bit of a
reset with the new construction.
We're, we're believing our 1st 3
to 5 years, we should experience
little to know maintenance needs
that kind of give us a chance to
to do minor things. We're, I
mean, we're talking patch in the
roof to get us 15 years down the
road. Our, our board is pretty
fiscally conservative, but from
a city standpoint, we've got
better support here from our
mayor and city manager to say,
hey, if you let Ratone keep
this.
we'll work with them to try to
get through these issues. They
may exist.
but you know, I've already
talked to Senator Campos. I
mean, we, we seek capital outlay
funding at the city of Ratone
for recreation and quality of
life.
aspects all the time
And, and my elected officials
have assured us that they would
join us in this effort, you
know, we're, we're a small town,
there's, you know, some
symbiotic relationships that
exist here. The city just
spent $92,000 to to build
pickleball courts
on a school complex. So, I mean,
the partnership isn't just
simply a letter, it's kind of a
way of life for us that exists
in the world of 6000 people.
And you know, our, our request
is, I believe the largest
combined school.
that's gonna come before you
and we're, we're just trying to
do the best we can for our
community, but we're, you know,
we're definitely not trying to
be disrespectful of taxpayers.
We know beggars can't be
choosers. I hate that I'm a
beggar, but, you know, if I have
to sacrifice my pride a year to
beg for my community.
You know, I'll, I'll get on the
knee anytime.
But I do, my background is the
last 30 years of my life as
managing construction. Oh,
before I became deputy city
manager. I've been in public
works for over the last 3
decades.
It's
disrespectful, in my opinion,
more to a taxpayer, to demo out
a 2 year old
HVAC system, tear down things
that somebody just invested
money in and built, because we
were finally successful enough
to, and all we're just asking
for is, is continued support,
but we know it's not a, a cocky
ass they're, there's no chest
out in this, you know, we know
we're hat in hand and we're just
trying to, to kind of keep a
community benefit alive because
on our infrastructure capital
outlay plan.
for the city of Ratone are
things like community centers
and recreational facilities that
we really don't have the GRT
base.
drive, but we do still have
hope, you know, we're on the
map, but the reality is that I
think we've kind of bottomed out
as a community, the city of
Rathones hired multiple economic
development directors, and for
those that don't know
Ratt tone will within a number
of years be only the 3rd
community in all of New Mexico
to have two interstates
intersecting inside there.
They'll be the big guy in
Albuquerque, the big eye.
in Las Cruces, and the
conjunction of I-27.
which is newly constructing from
Laredo, Texas, a dead end in
right tone, and I-25, but we
don't feel like our cards are
out. I mean, the economic impact
of the I-27 construction, and
the job created and the
potential impact to our
population may get us back
to 100 person graduation rates
at some point.
Christy and I, when we
graduated, we were 100, 105
students.
My daughter that graduated a
year and a half ago, graduated
at 48, but
you know, part of this
discussion is stability and, and
skin in the game and
you know, we, we fought long and
hard I think, I think we
understand, we understand why no
one filed against you either,
and that you've been president
for several years because you
represent your district very
well. I appreciate that uh.
uh, you know, um, I think that
uh you've you've made the case.
I think that any, any district
can keep their building if they
so choose who will not force you
uh to demolish it or anything
unless the ID requires it, but
I'm sure after listening to you,
uh, CID will not, uh, take a
close look at it, make a quick
comment. So.
uh, and thank you for making the
trip down to Sanofi to, you
know, kind of clarify this and
explaining that's some of the
clarification that I was looking
for, you know, you've been able
to provide that. So thank you
for making the trip down to
Santa Fe to kind of clear this
up. So, uh, I think this is
something, you know, with the
clarification that I could get
behind if SB 9, you guys will
make yourself the school
district, make yourself
responsible for, you know, the
upkeep of this building and
making sure that it's
operational and, you know,
there's no issues and uh I did
talk
to the state fire marshal's
office as well, and they said
they is if it's maintained and.
up kept at something they could
get behind it also, so I think,
I think we're good and I think I
could get behind this, but I
will, I will mention that I do
remember back in the day playing
basketball in that gym because I
went to walk it. I won't mention
that as closing, but thank you
for making the trip down to
Santa Fe. Thank you. Thank you
so much, Mr. Chair.
and Council members was
the ability to
And uh if the staff could
address that, there's probably a
a staff recommendation. There
are members
the efforts of PSFA was to
ensure that the new construction
would not be connected to the
new gym in a way that would
require
utilities that are connected
primarily to the new school.
to
be required that that there
would be a dependence
on the new facility
for the utility PSFA does not
oppose the the separation of
utility.
Our position was to not make it
such that if there was a problem
with the gym, it would impact
the new school.
There will be separation of
space.
that will allow this to be a
standalone facility.
but the gym at this point
the way the utilities are run.
until the, until the separation
of utilities can be made that
gymnasium would not be
standalone. The 300,000 to
400,000, possibly 500 by the
time we get to construction
is a small cost
to give them the autonomy of
being able to take care of that
facility.
If we don't address that during
construction, then yes, they
have, they have an issue with
sewer electricity.
So we were not opposed to
debate in the separation of
utilities, we needed to make
sure that it was not going to
make that gym reliant on the
utilities for the new school,
which would then
encumber the state
correct anything that might be
wrong at the gym. Does that make
sense? And, and is that
acceptable?
It, it is agreement and just
make sure and we proceeds and
we'll go from there.
Um, just a couple clarifying
questions, Mr. Chair. Um, was
there consideration of trying to
just make the old gym that you
wanna to keep part of the new
school.
And why was that not possible or
desirable. Our rating of this
gem based on age alone before
any of the blemishes were pretty
much automatically kind of
kicked it to that.
couldn't stay in, in the system
mode for lack of counsel, it is
a little bit of a complicated
situation in that the way the
gym was designed. We have 8000
square feet of gymnasium space.
There are locker rooms,
competitive locker rooms, weight
room.
um.
a large amount of bleacher space
that cannot be justified by the
student community events that
they want to hold.
They'll bring people in that
will fill that facility.
But we would be talking about a
32,000 gross square foot overall
impact to incorporate that
building into the school.
where we cannot make that other
24,000 square feet, part of the
educational space. So that was
the primary challenge in
figuring out what to do with
this gym building, existing
cafeteria, which was pretty much
a central kitchen for the for
the for the district is in
there.
It'll now be part of the
concession area for this
community supported and, and
like I said, there's, there's
uh ancillary uses for that
structure that could not be
incorporated efficiently. Mr.
Chair, that helps and given its
FCI, it would have needed to be
improved.
They continue to be useful
Yes. OK. German and and members,
the cost to renovate then
prohibitive to the budget for
the overall project. OK, um, and
then my question on maintenance
and um
your SP 99 funds, you know, is
using those to maintain this old
facility going to negatively
impact your ability to.
put sufficient maintenance into
the new facility.
My, my best guess would in years
1 through 5, we will, will have
an abundance, but what our
design team FPT has identified
as long-term needs for this
building to to fit the use that
we have, not necessarily
educational adequacy are
relatively minor.
but we do intend
to try to minimize that impact
at all by partnering with the
city and the state to try to
create more of an outdoor
recreation space, community use
building and uh visiting with
Senator Cavos, he seems to be
supportive of that in his
district. I believe he also has
some abandoned schools and, and,
and a quite similar to Rat tone.
So we think that we can do it.
Uh, we also do have a a booster
club and kind of community
foundation fundraisers that have
indicated, you know, if we have
to
host golf tournaments or
something to try to keep this
historical building alive that
the community would rally around
it, and then I believe that they
will.
OK, that's good to hear. Um, and
yeah, I would definitely
encourage you to look at other
ways of financing whatever
improvements are needed so that
burden doesn't fall fully on the
district and certainly like my
main concern would be that it
would get in the way of really
what those funds are intended to
be used for, which is for, you
know, your current educational
facilities, um, and you know, I,
I think the idea of trying to
move towards some sort of
combined community
space and combined
responsibility for that is a
good one. and it could also
potentially, you know, if the
city could take more
responsibility for it, could
make you eligible for other
sources of state support, um,
for that facility. Um, so, uh,
yeah, I appreciate that. I
think, um.
you know, LFC has been playing a
little bit of musical chairs on
the committee recently because
of uh conflicts with LFC
meetings and um Mr. Liu wasn't
able to be here today because of
family conflicts. Um, I
understand he voted against this
in awards, I think, due to the
same kind of concerns Mr. Romero
had.
Oh, he voted for it. OK. Well,
never mind. Um, I, I also like
Mr. Romero. Appreciate the
clarification. Um, it seems like
you guys have put a lot of
thought into this, uh, and
again, so long as you can assure
us it won't hamper your ability
to maintain the district
facilities going forward. I
think that's OK. Um, my one
other question, so this, uh this
increase that we're considering
is also just to align with the
new calculator, is that correct?
Um,
OK. Uh, and just note so it's
clear why I'm voting the way I
am, um.
you know, our position is kind
of always been that we would
support that for the newer
awards, but had reticence about
doing so for the older awards
that haven't made progress, um,
so thank you, Mr. Chair.
Take place in the gym. We don't
need to also indicate that
less than this. So, uh, again,
Um, Mr. Chair, sorry, I had one
more question unrelated to the
gym.
Um, thank you for that
clarification, Iris, and um, I
agree. I think it would have
been difficult to justify
renovating this, um.
for the reasons, Mr. Gherkin
mentioned, as well as what you
said. Um
our, so our materials indicate
that the district isn't
eligible, doesn't meet the
statutory criteria for a waiver
currently.
Is that correct
I guess my question is, are you
all going to seek a waiver or
are you able to afford your
share of the project. No uh uh.
Oh, you do? OK.
Oh, does, I'm sorry, I just, I
just read does that does not, so
that's my bad. Art skipped a
second there I thought,
um,
you are, you are going to
request a waiver. OK, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair members regarding the
district's maintenance program.
They do have a currently uh an
outstanding rating preventive
maintenance plan.
You are using all three of the
state-provided facility
information, but a very decent
level, their last FMAR indicates
that they're maintaining their
investments to a 76% performance
rating, but they are maintaining
their investments to rate at
what the current statewide
average is.
is
All right. Thank you
One more
more
Um,
OK, I, I think I'm just, I might
be just confused, but it seems
like you're your request at the
end about the utility reconnect.
um, is conflicting with the
emotion that we got here.
And, and so I, I really want to
understand what.
what you're asking for, and if
that.
if we are in
support of that, and I, I'm, I'm
just confused right now. So,
it sounds like, uh, first off, I
want to state, I, I love this
idea personally. I'm very
conservative with facilities. I
think that older facilities
don't necessarily need to be
demoed. I think it will be a
lovely idea to have your
community owned this facility.
So one of the questions was, is
it gonna have separate metering
to that to that facility, so
that that can be separated, so
that
in the end, I think you guys
should be moving toward uh a
different ownership of that
facility, then the school, and
it kind of troubles me a little
bit about using SB 9 money to
deal with that, but, um, the
what I'm really trying to get to
is
what is your request that we um
consider funding
as far as
the utility reconnect
um
Chair, council members, Mr.
Ingham.
The request is no future PSCOC
funding for utility improvement
shall be as new utilities will
be required for the new school,
the new facility.
those existing utilities are
going to be done away with.
And so the gym would be left
standalone. There are some
requirements to get the sewer
and the water lines run extended
from where they are currently at
the old.
through the old boot campus.
get them to the gymnasium, so
that they can have them
separately metered.
Water.
electricity, natural gas.
stand alone
so that there is no, there is no
path of, of utilities running
through the new facility to get
to the gym, just to get that
gym.
on its own utilities, metered
separately, sewer system that
can be dealt with on its own.
uh, very similar to what they
described for what they do with
their football facility or what
a lot of districts do with
ancillary space that is not
related to education, but it is
district property.
So I hope that clip.
Can I just ask, I just want to
ask maybe a
so those you, so the processes
that will that will set up the
old gym to be metered, all of
the things that you just
described, Mister Girkin, that's
going to be paid for as part of
this project or the or the the
district will be responsible for
that on its own.
That's, I guess, even I'm a
little bit confused about the
motion now too because when we
talk about future funding, are
we talking about the, the
funding to construct this
project? Or are we talking after
the project is completed.
Obviously PACOC won't have
anything to do with that.
Mr. Chan council members, if I
may add and and clarify.
would be that we do receive
funding for that, I understand
your request. I want to make
sure. I think we want to be
clear on what we're voting on.
which is not what that says up
there, right? That is our
And it was my understanding, my,
my apologies.
Council Chair and members.
the, the $300,000 that they are
talking about.
appeared to be a just exclude
the gym from the building of
educational facilities.
in order to allow them to keep
it in
Um,
if,
if I may, I, I, I would say
there are requests would be to
modify the motion to include the
severability of utilities and
standalone as part of the
construction project, and I
would add it, we're building on
the same side as this and trying
to keep these schools and
facilities running and the
Siamese twin relationship
between our gym and high school.
might kind of take that that
either way, I mean, it once the
high school is gone.
if, if we're not fully
constructed here, we have a
problem with using these
facilities, but ultimately our,
our request would be a motion
that's slightly modified to
include the cost of severing and
restoring utilities in the
construction of
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I think
staff is, is clarifying here
what, what this, what they were
recommending in the motion and
what we passed in subcommittee.
I just want to clarify that. Go
ahead.
Yes, um
my mistake for not making this
clear during subcommittee and
making sure that the that the
motion was clear.
and we would like to amend
the motion
suggested
to include funding to separate
the utilities.
to allow the gym to be a
standalone facilendant on the
utilities that will be.
Thank you Chair. I think that's
what the district was asking
for. That's what you intended,
but the, the, the, the piece
about no future funding is
down the line, not part of this
discussion, right, that once
this project is done, the PSC
would not, PSCOC would not exist
in gym.
and the review of that portion
of this book is on me. Thank,
thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
think, I think we're ready for
action. That's right. So, Mr.
Chair, I'll, I'll go ahead and
move that the, the council
approved the award language
change. I'm gonna go through
each of these bullets separately
so we understand them, uh, to
increase the maximum allowable
square footage.
that the existing gym and
cafeteria would no longer be
eligible for PSCOC funding and
that it would be removed from
the facilities assessment
database.
that no future funding would be
used for future utility
improvement, but that we would
fund the severability of the
utilities for this space from
the rest of the project. Is that
clear to everyone?
Yeah
Great.
And that's the motion and uh
just to be safe, let's, let's
take a second on that since it
is a change from the
committee. I would second that
and uh.
so
all those in favor of approving
the amended motion, please
indicate by saying I, I, all
those opposed.
motion passes, and uh we've been
with you for about 10 years on
this project. Remember when you
all first came in, consolidating
your schools, making sure that
you were living within your
student uh population and uh I'm
glad that we're getting closer.
Thank you for being here today.
Thank you. Thank you for your
hard work. Thank you so much.
All right. Moving on then
this time to the FY 27
Appropriations request.
Mr. Chair members, hello again.
If you'll join me on page 148, I
will, uh, as concisely as
possible, go over the FY 27
appropriation request, uh,
exhibit B is also a handout, so
I'll have ID, um, provide. It's
a two-sided handout, um, and
I'll, once I go through the
executive summary, I'll, I'll
take you to that point and then
explain uh the need for the
handout.
The potential motion we bring to
you today is council approval of
the PSFA FY 27 operating budget
request in the amount of
$9,69,208.15 for our fund
94,300. This is our operating
budget, uh, you'll recall our
capital budget actually comes
out of 94,700. So that's
separate from that.
Going through the executive
summary now with the key points.
94,300 operating budget table.
This is a summary of
Fiscal year 25 that just ended
June 30. The amounts uh for
actuals that were spent, what
our operating budget requested
that we're currently using this
year is, and then what our FY 27
request is also denoting the
comparison of what the overall
increase is that we're
presenting. So the net increase
from our previous operating
budget to this year's is
$1,175,0808.15.
1st, I'll take you through all
of the changes and
where we're uh looking to
increase these budgets and the
reason why, uh, but first, I
wanted to know in the table to
see a subnote about the item 2,
or the 200s that's our personnel
services and employee benefits.
Uh, we did have an increase to
our employee liability insurance
from uh the risk management
division division at General
Services Department. Uh, last
year it was $101,300. It's uh
increased from, from the 101 to
240. Uh, also, we've included a
3%
compensation increase for staff
But first, I wanted to, to go
more in depth about the 200s,
uh, starting with the personnel,
uh, services and employee
benefits. So PSFA is currently
requesting 4 additional FTEs at
this time, the agency is
approved for 56 FTEs. This would
bring our total count to 60, uh,
our, our current vacancy rate
right now is we are 91% staff,
so we're 51 to 56, uh, and so
we're looking to, and we have
interviews currently going on at
the agency for some of the other
physicians as well as
the executive director position.
So those are pieces that will be
moving forward. So once the
hearings come, we'll, we'll
ensure that we have our FTE
count as high as possible or to
have all of our staff. So the
four positions were're
requesting at this time the
first is a fiscal analyst. Uh,
this is a position that would
support me in finance, uh, with
some of the higher level
functions we currently have 4
specialists, 3 that do capital,
1 that does operations, and the
one financial coordinator. Uh,
so this would be an additional
piece to help uh offset some of
the duties while also providing
um uh additional support at a
higher level between the, the
specialists and then myself just
to do analysis and work with
other agencies.
Uh, next, the other, uh, second
position we're requesting is an
energy management specialist.
This would work in our
maintenance group, uh, with all
of the new, uh, initiatives and
exciting phase 2 for measurement
and verification. We want to
have someone in staff on the
maintenance team that can
support the M&V and other
initiatives regarding energy
management, uh, providing
support to the district, help,
so, uh, we did request this last
year. It was cut, so we are
requesting it again, because we
do see the benefit in the agency
of having that position.
Finally, the last two positions
included our regional project
managers. They would work under
field, um,
last I checked and uh Mr.
Tulison, if you can double check
for me, I believe we're staffed
to 14 regional parks, 12 or 14
regional project managers at
this time. Uh, so this would
just be additional support for
the districts to offset the, the
workload of new awards and
existing awards. So, uh, we can
have better management of the,
the projects.
So, Mr. Chair remembers now, if
you'll join me on page 150
before going to the next. I
wanted to talk about our
operating budget and the statute
surrounding that.
So what you'll see on page 150,
1st statute as written, written
in, in chapter 22, Article 24,
Section 4G.
Our budget, uh, as a reminder
does not come out of the general
fund. We are completely out of
our bond sale, so the
supplemental Sandberg's tax
funds. So we go through the
normal budget approval process,
but the funding is then sold on
our June bond sale and then uh
made available in July. So
statutorily, uh, what, what, uh,
drives our agency and our budget
request is a total annual
expenditures from the fund for
core administrative functions
pursuant to the subsection shall
not exceed 5% of the average
annual
grant assistance authorized from
the fund from the previous 5
fiscal years. Uh, recently, this
language was changed from 3
previous fiscal years to 5, at
session, just to allow more um a
more streamlined budget so we're
not going from the ebbs and
flows of, of low award years,
high award years, and we can't
have that consistency in our
capacity. So the 5 years has
helped that. So what this
demonstrates on 150 is the
breakdown of our grant
assistance by type, whether it's
new awards
in the year, whether it was an
out of cycle construction award,
uh, counting how all of those
pieces come out of the fund.
This is also similar to the
financial plans layout with the
sources and uses detail.
Coming to our final capacity. So
as you'll see on the very uh
farthest right-hand side in the
red border. I do that for all of
these, uh, you'll see the
capacity that we could request
at this point based on the 5
years the highlighted on line
46, we could request up to $18.6
million based on the the way the
statute is is written in the
spreadsheet is set up.
That is our, our hard cap, the
soft cap comes with the core and
non-core or it's also has been
recognized as field in the past.
Uh, for those functions, but as
we've determined at this point
that then other ceiling for core
would be 14.69 million. So at
this time, and at the very
bottom, it's kind of hard to see
just because of the um the
footer, so I apologize, but you
can see historically the agency
has really only requested
5 to 7 million, where we've had
the opportunity to request more.
So with this request, we're
hoping to, again, we need to
justify the need. I've been
working with the managers
in-house to develop 5-year plans
for our operating budget,
working with each manager and
individually as well as looking
at our strategic plan and the
alignment of the overall
direction of the agency to make
sure every department has a plan
for how many positions do you
need in year 13, and 5? When do
you need those positions? When
do you have certain initiatives,
um,
For example, a facility, uh, the
FA, the database, we're looking
to do a second iteration of
that. We currently do not have
the capacity on staff for our
developer to do that, so we
would look to contract that out
or potentially look for another
FTE, but these are things in the
future we would like to provide
with our request to give a
five-year window of what the
next 5 years of our budget
requests are going to look like
based on uh anticipated uh
projections and capacity. So
with that, now, I'd like to take
you to uh the
handout. Uh, it, it's a
two-sided handout, page one,
exhibit B FY 2627 overview
category 300 detail. So what I
wanted to provide with this
handout, this was a conversation
that came up in our, our AMS
meeting and I thought it would
actually be really beneficial to
provide this to give
clarification on the increases
for the 200s and 300s where
those are coming from.
First, as you'll see on the top,
this is our FY 26 current and
recurring items.
These are items out of the 300s,
which is considered a
contractual service. Uh,
historically, we've requested
about $200,000 of the top table
shows a breakdown of roughly
what those services are in the
budgets that we have established
within this category, uh,
including support service for,
for annual report, uh,
administrative support services
for templates, uh, PowerPoint
presentations, audit consultant,
uh, which assists with our uh
audit prep, uh, financial
analysis or auditor,
CPA which we're required to do
every year. Paper file
destruction, which is just
on-site destruction of old
historical files that that need
to be shredded. They can't be
thrown in the trash.
On-call legal services, IT
consulting services, and then
finally there's roughly about
60,000 left over each year after
these are, are done to allow us
to do other things like the
strategic plan, state local
match studies, any other studies
that potentially would require
an RFP or it would be within
$60,000 of moving forward for
this year, we're looking to
request an increase to this, uh,
including 10,000 for document
digitization. We currently have
uh records, excuse me, we, we
currently have paper records
stored off-site at a facility
and so we are transitioning all
of those back on site going
through them and then making
sure that we dispose of them
properly. So we're reducing our
footprint and reducing that
cost. And so part of that would
be to digitize a lot of the
documents we have, uh, to go on
the server and then be
accessible with all the other
initiatives that IT is doing,
where they're migrating uh
services on site to the cloud.
We're moving to centralize to
the Microsoft Teams and 365
platforms, so we
' ll be moving away from
GoToMeetings, Zoom, and we'll be
trying to centralize all of our
operations into singular
software, uh, suites or
packages.
So the digitization would help
us hire uh through maybe state
use a or another group, uh,
individuals to come in and help
to scan those documents so, so
staff can focus on other items.
We're also asking for 80,000 for
other this is enrollment
projections, adequacy standards,
and uh APG support services or
otherwise.
So with these funds and because
of the size of our agency, we
really want to look into tapping
into a contractual services or
or hiring firms to help come do
analysis, create reports, create
policies, procedures, uh,
providing that assistance to us
so we can focus on our core
mission and the things that
we're doing, but uh ensuring
that these move through the
process because staff has
limited capacity. We want to
make sure that nothing's getting
left behind and so we can
continue to focus on, on what's
currently going on and then also
these other
initiatives that need to be
finalized and maybe brought
forth with new dashboards,
softwares, other ideas, maybe
reports to help them make better
decisions with the agency and
then a council level.
And they're finally just uh this
is uh S3 GIS trainings for staff
just certified trainings for the
team to expand our estuary
services. This is a, a mapping,
uh, you may have heard of RGIS
or ACMA that, that is something
that we utilize in the agency
and so we would look to
potentially expand that in the
future after staff is trained.
Now, Mr. Chair members, if
you'll move to the, the bottom
or the, the second half for the
other half of that page. This is
our 400 detail. This is other
services that we have, uh, and
this, I wanted to keep it as
high level as possible. So I
just focused on the account
name, uh, per share, this is
what we request in our, in our
BFM request, the budget
formulation management system
request with state budget
division. So the breakdown
you'll see is FY 26. This is
what we were requested and
approved for. The FO 27 blue
column and then final column
indicate
what the increases we're looking
in each account as well as with
the final amount would be uh
equaling the 1.7 million
request.
The, the biggest increases
you'll see as items potentially
in the orange column do not
include an amount, but do
included amounts in FY 27. Those
are us just cleaning up actual
expenses recognized in FY 25 to
make sure that although we have
flexibility within the accounts
that there can be overs and
unders. We always want to make
sure that the category itself
never goes negative, but part of
that is realigning to ensure
that if there is expenses
captured on those accounts that
it is being budgeted correctly
and appropriately.
The two biggest items that
you'll see requesting increases
are in our IT hardware software
agreements. Uh, we have an
increase that we're requesting
of 350,000, bringing that line
to 850,000.
If you'll recall, in August last
year, our staff attorney uh
provided an opinion that our
Sims and FIMs, so Sims is our
e-Builder tremble software, so
our construction management
software and FIMS is for
facilities for maintenance. It's
uh the vendors brightly, we
provide this to the districts to
manage their assets and track
maintenance.
Those previously were included
in bond sales, however, our
staff attorney's opinion is that
it
made sense that it needed to be
in our operating budget. The
cost of the time, uh, the
opinion came out August 29th.
Unfortunately, our budget for
this fiscal year, FY 26 was due
September 1st, so we did not
have the time to modify our
requests, which is why the
amount still is the 1.2 million,
however, uh, the cost for those
at the time being moved into the
uh FY 26 FY 25 budget and now
into our FY 26 budget, there
were initiatives moving forward
with those items, so the cost
is substantially increased. In
FA 25, when we did the
adjustment, the cost was 523,000
coming out of the 1.2 million.
because of new initiatives going
on with eBuilder and Sims,
including
uh the the uh active management,
active manage services for
eBuilder helping with reports
with PSR as well as the contract
for that being based on actual
projects or uh currently active
projects. So there's a variable
with the agreement and the cost.
What we're looking at now, the,
the increase we've seen to our
fund is 770,000, so it's a
$250,000 increase from last year
just to this year with the
increases with SIMs as well as
the new in
it i ative s and modules that
are being added with Brightly.
These are all already wheels
that were in motion and
unfortunately the current budget
wasn't able to adjust and
accommodate for that at that
time. So what we're trying to do
at this point as we're in this
fiscal year, we will be
requesting a bar in the next few
meetings. So I will provide a
full analysis of that of how we
can supplement the cost
increases for Sims and FIMs
going forward, looking at FY 27,
we'd like to increase a request
there to about 850,000 to give
us the capacity to, to still
providesIMs and FI
s out of our operating budget
but still allow the flexibility
if we have future initiatives
potentially, I'm working on a,
a, a bond dashboard, uh, that
will, we're hopefully gonna be
moving into phase two, but there
may be costs after the software
and everything is developed that
we may have to pay year over
year, uh, maintenance.
So just making sure that we
account for those within the
fund. And then the final one is
rents of land buildings, uh,
we're increasing this by $3600
to uh the line being 275,000.
Uh, we're currently in the
middle of our lease. We lease
our uh facility from UNM. We pay
about 224,000 every single year,
240,000 every single year, to,
to them it's about 17,000,
18,000 monthly, um, coming
towards the end of the lease, we
want to have
the ability to look outside the
agency and see if there's other
uh state buildings or leases
that we could pursue, uh, the
building itself, um, hasn't
allowed the flexibility that
we've liked with staff returning
to work and really having all of
our FTEs on site in Albuquerque
for the most part. So we want to
make sure that we can find a
facility that supports future
growth for the agency, but also
provides more opportunities for
potentially training centers,
meeting rooms, things like that,
so we can, uh, again,
centralize everything back to
the Albuquerque office and then
just increase our uh ultimate uh
what we're providing to agencies
and districts.
And Mr. Chair remembers.
going back
I believe those are the high
points and I'll, I'll stand for
questions if you have any.
We can
subcommittee motion on this and
I'm, I'm not uh
finding that number
in the documents that we have.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, so I think,
um, the motion is for, um, or
AMS subcommittee recommendation
for council approval of the PSFA
FY 27 operating budget request
in the amount of 9 million69,208
dollars 15 cents. Um, and, uh,
so yes, that's the motion. I
think that Matthew covered uh it
quite well and in quite detail.
So happy to answer any questions
from the questions.
Um, Mr. Chair, just to
uh want a quick note, I'm gonna
abstain from voting on this
given that um I'm responsible
for
uh making PSA's budget
recommendation through LFC, um,
so, Matthew, you and I can
discuss all the details further,
um.
So I just wanna ask kind of a
big picture question, um, what,
on your FY 25 actuals, um, what
was your operating budget for FY
25 and what did you all revert,
Mr. Chair, members, Ms.
Carswell. So our operating
budget for FY 25.
if you'll give me
a moment, was approved at 7
a moment, was approved at
7,410,000. The, the biggest
return of that was vacancy
savings. OK, so that was the
most substantial. So, uh, as far
as returning from the 300s and
uh that's an additional point.
I'll, I'll just briefly say the
300s is hard to spend because
in the sense of awarding a
vendor and keeping it
consolidated if this service has
to go year over year. We can't
carry those funds over year over
year, so we have to close the
POs, reopen with new money, so,
uh, we're trying to align the
300s to make sure that all of
that work is done within the
fiscal year and we don't have an
unexpected cost going into the
other year and then eat into
other initiatives.
OK, thank you. Um, just to note,
it's generally hard for us to
recommend budget increases to
our committee, um, when the
current operating budget is not
fully spent, um, just want to
know with PSFA in particular,
um, you guys also have the
ability, um, to.
have your budget
uh, adjusted outside of the
appropriation cycle if you are
able to fully spend it. Um, so
we can discuss that more. Um,
and then I just wanted to note,
uh, you know, we make budget
recommendations consistent with
budget guidelines that our
committee gives us, which for uh
all agency recurring budgets,
including ours, um, and the
other executive agencies, uh,
the recommendation is gonna be
generally to keep recurring
budgets pretty flat, if not flat
al
to ge ther um, with some
exceptions for uh considering
like risk premium increases that
agency budgets can't bear
otherwise. So just to kind of
let you know that those are like
the general guidelines. I'll be
operating under and then look
forward to working with you on
this more this fall. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Not a, not
a question. Um, I did ask, I
think during award subcommittee
about workload, especially for
your project managers and, and I
heard a little bit about sort
of, you know, some of your
project managers managing 15
projects were sort of industry
best practice would be much less
than that, 3 to 5, and, and,
and, and appreciate the comments
about vacancy savings too, um,
this is, this shouldn't be seen
as sort of a get out of jail
free card, but I do think
sometimes because we're asking
a limited staff to do so much
work, we're actually
creating the problem that we're
trying to solve, if people feel
overworked and overburdened.
They don't want to stay in those
jobs or you're having trouble
finding those people to do those
jobs, so just keeping that into
consideration, although
completely understand the, the
state fiscal uh picture and and
LFC's responsibility to manage
all budgets across the state.
The fact that this money comes
out of a different pot of
different pot of funds is also
something to consider, I think,
but um just appreciate the staff
and the detail, Matthew, and,
and understand why you, why
there may be a
a need for additional staff
Thank you.
Additional comments Mr. Chair,
um, similarly, not really
question but comment. Um, we
discussed an AMS, I think to a
fair degree, to a fair degree,
um, you know what I think is uh
shown on page 150, which is the
increase in funding and the
increase of awards that we've
seen uh come PSFA and PSCOC's
way, and I think it's really
important. I think a lot of
state agencies and local
entities are, are strained to a
certain degree to handle the
influx of funding and and
capital projects.
so I think it's, I was, I really
welcomed personally seeing, um,
the request for financial
analyst and additional regional
managers in particular, given
that, and so I really want to
echo those comments. One thing
I, I would like to note, um, in
looking at the 300s is seeing
kind of the audit consultant and
the on call legal services in,
you know, in a, in a best case
scenario, those wouldn't be
contract labor, right? They
would be included in the 200s of
staff members. And I think given
some of the turnover that we've
seen lately, that, that's a
necessity, but hopefully moving
forward we can get those
positions filled and with the
fiscal, if, you know, if we can
secure the uh funding for the
fiscal analyst, then that audit
consultant would theoretically
go away and everything would be
coming in houses as it is in
many other agencies. So I think
that even though this request
me, you know, look a little bit
larger, and I do think it's
gonna, I've heard the same thing
as Miss Carswell mentioned, you
know, flat budget
recommendations and that kind of
thing, um, I think if we
can get to that point where we
have those positions filled,
then we would, we would
theoretically see a reduction,
um, maybe in the, in the, in the
300s. I also would like to note
that um Board of Finance has
seen a sneak peek of the
dashboard that um Matthew and
the team has been working on
with RTS Solutions on the bonds.
It is
severely needed and long
overdue, and it's going to be
hugely helpful for PSFA and
PSDOC and the school districts
to be tracking projects,
tracking funding, tracking, um,
when projects come back for, for
cost increases. I mean, it's
going to be something that
council members could access at
any time and research. So I
think it's gonna be um very,
very uh impactful, and I, I
think these types of systems are
only gonna give us the tools
that we need to make more
informed decisions moving
forward and, and look forward to
that continued effort.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, if not, then let's.
all in favor of approving the
subcommittee recommendation to
approve the budget request,
please indicate my stay on it.
I will post
and
let's move on
the agenda
Well, as you all know, we're
going through a PSFA director
search at this time. And uh, you
know, with the announced
resignation of Iris and uh
uh the uh process that we've
adopted is to uh.
appoint a
subcommittee
uh at last meeting, I appointed
a subcommittee to help with the
preliminary
uh process, uh, Charles, Ashley,
and Secretary Pavia are serving
with me on that.
and uh
uh of course, Nick Lorenko, the
uh
personnel
uh director at PSFA has been
helping as well.
So, uh, this uh the committee
was appointed in uh our last
meeting July 16th.
The original
uh
draft timeline was reviewed and
and the job was posted
and it closed
officially uh uh initially on
Thursday, July 31st.
So on Monday, August 5th
uh, the subcomed and I met along
with uh Mr. Lorenko.
and uh he gave us a summary
indicating that 14 applications
had been received by that time.
and that uh
two meta requirements and 2 of
those met, uh, middle movie that
those requirements. So after a
long discussion, we decided that
uh we should probably open up
the, the advertising a little
longer so that we would have a
better uh choice of better,
better options and uh
so uh
we went ahead and opened that uh
for additional 3 weeks, which
closed yesterday, August
twenty-sixth.
I haven't spoken with Mister
Lorenko today, but, uh, he had
indicated during the process
that there had been a few more
applications received.
Uh, so
um
we're
uh, we put together this uh
meeting, uh this uh timeline. I
send it out to the subcommittee
to see if the dates, the revised
dates work.
uh for them. I haven't heard
back from the committee, so this
is still a sort of a draft.
uh, the, uh,
the uh timeline calls for us to
meet next Tuesday, September 2nd
to see what we received in terms
of applications and see where we
wanna go and start uh looking at
uh interviews and those kinds of
things.
So, uh,
uh that's where we're at. It's
taking a little longer than we
had originally planned, and you
can see with the timeline, uh,
that uh Nick provided of uh
uh hiring a
uh a new director and
uh a proposed start date of
October 14th, so we're a little
ways down the line.
uh
so that is
the status at this point
Um, with the extension.
uh, and maybe I can move on to
the next item on the agenda as
well. Um
uh.
Mr. Romero will be having her
last day is uh this in the
offices this week.
And she is taking one week on
leave and uh so, uh, that leaves
us without a director, and I
would like to at this time
recommend that we
we, uh, hire
uh Larry Tillerson, the current
deputy director as a
uh.
interim director until such time
as the position is filled.
uh, as you know, uh, Larry has
been with the organization for
about 14 years.
Yes, sir, and has served in
various capacities,
administrative and most recently
has been the lead while Iris has
been out
and
I'm very comfortable in in
recommending that to you.
uh and looking at the
uh previous practices that we
had.
in terms of appointing an
interim director, uh.
with uh
Martika, uh, in particular, we
did grant a 15% increase during
that period before the interim
director. So I would recommend
that as well. So I'd be happy to
take any questions, uh, before,
uh, this is an action item, uh,
the uhpointment of an interim
director, but if you have any
questions on the timeline or the
selection, please, uh.
All right.
So
well let's uh
if there are no questions then,
I would, uh,
entertain emotion to approve uh
Larry
Tillotson as the interim
director of the Public goods
sector, I would make that
motion. Thank you. Effective.
uh, first
the first motion, we have a
second?
Any discussion
Not all those in favor, please
indicate by saying I. although a
post.
ocean passes and
congratulations to you, Larry,
and
we look forward to working with
you. I we we'll be a smooth
transition. You've already been
doing a little bit of that, but
again, thank you for uh
stepping up and uh taking uh
uh this opportunity and uh
helping out.
the agency and the council, Mr.
Chair, members, thank you very
much for this. Hopefully, ever
so brief opportunity so that we
can find a good qualified
executive director to fill these
tough shoes.
Um, I think I've been with PSFA
now through 4 administrations
from Mr. Burrell and Mr.
Chamblin, Miss Cassius, and Miss
Iris Romero. I've seen the good,
and I've seen the really good.
and I'm very comfortable with
moving things forward and
keeping the ship moving uh down
a good path uh through strategic
planning.
One thing I do want to add is,
as I progress into this
position, I am creating a formal
training manual.
for the new executive director
is they
step into this position
to give them a formal training
protocol to better understand
and better integrate quicker.
Thank you.
Thank you
Thank you, and I
and
also take this opportunity to
thank
Iris for all of her service. I
think we've spoken about that
previously, but uh this being
your official last meeting,
thank you so much look forward
to uh
hearing from you
as you take on your uh
additional respo I've not known
a person to become a grandmother
twice.
in less than a month, so
not at the same time with twins.
So.
Thank you. Thank you.
Congratulations
Pa.
All right. uh, moving along.
Martinia took my agenda again,
didn't you? No,
no
All right, so we're on uh
informational items and uh
if you could make these short,
we would appreciate it. uh
uh, because we, you're scheduled
to go on to absolutely, Mr.
Chair, members, the next item in
your books is on page 152. It's
the update to the uh PSFA's.
project status report
uh, and just really ever so
brief, item 8A in your books.
Um.
recognizes that this update was
provided to both the AMS on
August 18th and the awards
subcommittee on August 20th. We
do recognize that this is still
a work in progress. It has been
a challenging to get this thing
moving, many different opinions
and, and, but very much
appreciated on the same, the
same level, um, those documents
are really important to the
PSFA. It is written in statute,
and we are uh dedicated to
progressing this
again through our strategic
planning efforts. It is rated as
one of the number one items to
move forward and to continue to
bring to council so that you
understand what our project
workloads are and how we're
managing those projects across
the state of New Mexico.
Just some quick key points. Of
course, the PSFR PSR is a
high-level customized report
that we use to report funded
project statuses to the council
routinely so that you can make
better informed decisions.
Um.
for both projects across the
state and the PSFA.
Uh, really quick, the as of
August 1st this year, the PSFA
staff is currently managing 153
active construction projects
across the state of New Mexico,
66 of those are standards-based
projects, 73 are systems, 103K
and 4 teacher housing projects.
We do also manage uh just as an
informational, all M&V projects
measurement verification, and
all facility master planning
projects in the Sims eBuilder
program as well.
Uh, in your e-books are several
exhibits to include
um how to read the PSR.
an overview of how to read the
PSR, um, the PSR definitions
page and the actual PSR itself,
the project status report, we've
separated it out into three
primary categories, the PSDOC
funded projects that are behind
schedule or not making progress,
which is a total of today 21
projects.
ESOC funded projects that are in
construction closeout stages,
which are 10, and they are
making progress. We have a
dedicated, uh, human being, an
SME assigned to just doing close
out, which is extremely
beneficial. And then last but
not least, projects that have
been identified with risk and
issues that have been escalated
due to delays beyond the control
of routine management processes,
our regional project managers,
if you will.
With that, I will turn it over
to Mister Jason Gowna if he
wants to provide any input, uh,
Jason, um, and I also have the
field staff here to answer
questions relating to each one
of the projects on the PSR.
Good morning, counsel
Um, I just want to let you know
that we are in the process of
doing uh data remediation.
There's some obvious uh issues
where
the project status doesn't match
with the
project manager has reported,
but we're working with all our
RMs to get those updated.
Basically, the project will be
turned over to the field group,
where they will take it over
completely. Sims will just be in
case there's any issues, and
I'll let Matt uh
chair and council members, the
uh transition that Jason spoke
about
uh, the tremendous effort that
that Jason and his, his people
put into assembling this.
uh with the interaction of the
regional managers is now
transitioning to the
contractors.
to make sure that we update
these things on a regular basis.
The managers report that uh
reflects a brief statement to
show
why the project is where it is,
if there's any uh for all of the
red that you see on there now.
we will make sure that we have a
brief but concise statement.
uh to help you guys understand.
where the project, what is being
done to try and correct the
schedules or encourage the
design professionals
districting.
to uh improve. Um, this has been
an important thing for me for
quite some time.
um, to ensure that
at each stage of the project,
we're able to how we got
from point A to point
to incorporate uh lessons
learned practices as projects
move through completion.
to uh gather data that will help
not only the the management
centers in the districts to
understand how we can become
more efficient moving forward.
Uh, that's the questions from
the council. I have.
Mr. Chair, um, thank you for
your continued work on, um,
making this again and improving
it. Um, I am just gonna, I'm
gonna limit myself to a couple
of questions. So the 21 that are
identified as behind schedule
are not making progress.
Did that list results from a
comprehensive review of both the
standards and systems-based
projects that you highlight in
the first part of this update.
Yes, uh, we initially was
programs, uh, excuse me,
Standards projects that were
included, the, the systems
projects were all brought in
since that first iteration of
the report, standards and
systems.
OK. Um, all right, so basically
it's, it's like 21, I guess I
should have included the pre-K
and teacher housing in that
question.
So it's 21 of the 153 that are
active.
OK.
I would have to ask you looked
at all this. I apologize. I, I
the pre-K and the
I wanted to make sure we whether
we had that um
but I believe, yes, when we're
looking at K24, um,
as, as was discussed earlier,
the
uh systems project selected as,
as late
and
Um, and then the, the Mesa View
Elementary and um.
France
Cibola County that you
highlighted at the end, um.
Could you expand it all on the
design related issues.
that are potentially escalating
to litigation, maybe? What are,
what are those issues?
as well,
yes, we have had some debate
about response tolation.
issues.
opinions are, are no longer any
uh yes, uh.
legal has been brought in to
review the facts and determine
how best to grant Seble County
schools.
to ensure that we're that both
entities are on the same page.
Is it like an errors in
emissions type of issue or
something else?
A statement I would make on that
would be speculation based on
my.
of understanding at this point,
OK.
I would, I would say that there
are some design issues whether
they would legally be termed
errors in. OK. All right. Thank
you.
So first, I think you guys have
done an excellent job on this I
like what you've done, really
sheds a lot of.
light, so, but
the Espanola Public schools, we
have two categories, Varde and
Abeu.
So
uh
the one that really stands out
is
is Abby Q, so.
is, you know, this goes back all
the way to 2016, 2017, and then
you get to manage your report.
I reinstating on 1211 and 23.
Obviously, we're not there yet.
It hasn't started yet. So, but
the question I have is on
Berard.
This is supposed to be restarted
in 2023, but we've committed
$158,000 that's tied up for this
project and hasn't even started.
Chairman, council members,
Director Romero, um, the
complicated path that we've
followed to get to this point.
Uh, there was, there were design
funds encumbered to move the
project forward based on the
original intent of the district.
um.
due to
issues that the school board has
had in interacting with the
local communities.
for whom these individual small
schools are extremely important
Uh, the reorganization that has
gone on, the interaction with a
design consultant and master
planner validation, and how the
school board and communities
would work together to reduce
footprint and better serve
uh.
student bases that are as small
as 40 till the, that's that's a
delicate balance for
the, the community of Espinola
and, and so I believe we are
nearing a point as we're, we're
getting ready to have some more
meetings in-house.
to review what the path forward
will be formalized.
to be at that point, we should
be able to
redefine the project
um, what I'm understanding is
that the option to turn Abike
Elementary into centralized
school that would bring
uh
Hernandez and and other students
from that northern portion of
Espinola schools.
to Abiquiu is an option.
uh, what to do with Velarde when
we're talking about what was
done for Alcalde in the last 10
years, is very difficult for us
to, to speculate on how they're
going to go, but
the indications are that they
are going to consolidate, they
are going to make a decision on
how that
best fits
which small communities and, and
we do anticipate moving forward
with design of the, the whatever
those decisions would render
very soon, but I believe we have
a meeting scheduled within the
next couple weeks. It would
include their consultants
uh, the master planner, I
believe it was determine what
the consolidation efforts and
without getting into any more of
the purely speculative, I, I
think.
that's, that's where we stand is
that the community has reached
some decision quickly, but we do
have $158 committed or tied up.
We do have 158, uh, uh.
$1000 tied up to this project or
commit.
I believe that that expenditure
was for the reports and the
studies that led to what the
recommendations for
consolidation would.
I could, I, I'll, I will verify.
Yes, that, that is what I, my uh
my apology for not having that
nailed down, but I believe that
provide data for the communities
to make.
OK, other questions
If not, then thank you for the
report.
We'll move on to the next item.
Mr. Chair, members, for sake of
time, I'm going to condense this
considerably.
Uh, item 8B in your books this
morning is an update to the
teacher housing pilot program is
some key points to the start
start the discussion.
at the PSCOC meeting of last
members expressed concerns about
the teacher, pilot program,
causing the initiative,
addressing specifically the
program's cost.
sustainability, and lack of
clear evaluation criteria along
the program has been in place
long-term costs and viability of
the program, and the state's
investment to date.
I provided a executive summary
with background and history over
time, the last 6 years of what
we've done as a uh agency
supported by the PSCOC for
funding of teacher housing,
which leads quite simply into a
an additional document which is
in your exhibits called The
Evolution of Teacher housing.
the quick overview of that
evolution of teacher housing
recognizes that there's an
absolute need to support future
housing under the criteria that
we've created over time.
The only agency currently that's
supporting teacher housing
formally is the PSFA through the
PSCOC fund.
We have it in two mechanisms.
One, we can integrate it through
our standards-based programs to
some extent, and then we have
the 5 pilot teacher housing
programs, which are identified
in the evolution of teacher
housing
document
and the success story, uh, there
is, we've seen success
We've seen costs below the
recommended $500,000 per home if
we head down the path of the
pre-manufactured home type
builds. Uh, it does support
teachers moving into communities
to better support the
educational programs. We had
some great lengthy discussion on
it at the AMS subcommittee, uh,
which Miss Leach chairs, and I
think she would uh to talk about
this program and the opportunity
for it to continue.
through the PSFA to support
features throughout the state.
Mr. Chair, thank you. So I think
um what I, one thing I would
start in, um, if you haven't had
a chance to look through Larry's
summary, um, in the packet. I
think it's very, very helpful,
and I think it's very
informative on the history of
this program. I think this
program has been challenging,
um, and I think we have seen
success with the pilot program.
I believe that the request to
kind of have staff bring this
back was there are concerns
primarily coming from awards on
on the policy,
on the pilot program, what, you
know, the cost, the evaluation
criteria. So I think for an AMS
perspective, what we discussed
is like we're happy to open the
door back up, but I think we
need to understand the concerns
that awards a scene, so that we
can better guide staff and
target what needs to be adjusted
in this program because from an
AMS standpoint, we can sort of
see some of the concerns, but
the awards are actually coming
to awards and, and we don't
always get into the nitty and
gritty as awards does, so I
think, you know, personally for
next steps if AMS needs to
revisit this pilot program, um.
I think we need a a better
understanding, a clear
understanding from awards, you
know, on what their key concerns
are, so we can target those in
any revised, um, you know, uh,
pilot program or policy or
anything like that related to
this program, um, but I do one
thing I will say and conclude on
is that in or in AMS.
we there, we were very strong
proponents of continuing teacher
programs, you know, teacher,
teachers and supporting
teachers. Uh, we do believe that
there's a need and we believe
there's a need within um very
specific school districts,
particularly rural, tribal
districts, which is what the
pilot program and the policy
currently includes. So we felt
very strongly that this program
needs to continue, but if we,
you know, as there has been a
pause on these awards, we need
to understand a little bit
better at EMS, you know, what we
need to be considering in a
revision
of this program to meet, you
know, sort of the expectations
and and the needs of awards and
the full and the full council.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think uh
you're taking the right
approach. I think that we really
need to look at
the impact we're having
and certainly the need is there.
uh trying to maximize, I guess
the uh.
the impact this, but every
district, you know, I think
Santa Fe's has, has a, uh,
teachers.
you know, Albuquerque's though.
definitely the need is there.
It's just a matter of.
how much do we, can we chip away
at it.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Ashley, we'd
be happy to set up a meeting and
um.
with us and LESC and anyone else
on awards who might want to
participate to talk through that
more. I think there have been
the cost thing obviously, um,
but there's been other issues
that have come up that are more
substantive in nature, I would
say in terms of like what are we
actually trying to do and are we
doing it in the right way? Um,
both with, you know, I think the
10 mile.
thing in rural areas like
doesn't always make a lot of
sense. Um,
we have had some districts come
requesting to build teacher
housing in the district where
the teachers are actually
living, uh, maybe 30 miles away,
and the housing market in some
of those areas is challenging in
general to find adequate housing
and to find it at an affordable
price. Um, but when we've asked
like, well, where do the
teachers want to live? It's
like, well, they wanna live in
Riodoso, and that's where
they're living now, but it's
challenging to find housing
there, but then we're
building housing for them
somewhere else, um, and that's
kind of raised a question of uh
whether we should be supporting
and incentivizing um,
collaboration among districts in
certain areas to build the
housing for multiple districts
in the place that the teachers
want to be, um, and how could we
do that as well as I think, you
know, what the chair was.
Um,
indicating, uh, in terms of, you
know, the, the state now is
investing in housing in a lot of
different areas, and we've had a
little concern about, uh, it
getting kind of siloed and is
there a way to, you know, kind
of, uh, incorporate.
teacher housing efforts into
larger workforce housing efforts
in the state. Um, so I, yeah, I,
I think there's kind of a, a lot
of different questions and we
could set up a time offline to
talk through maybe what the
largest ones are in um, think
about where um this program
might make some policy
adjustments to uh start to
address those things and then,
you know, probably it's gonna be
a thing we need to like.
revisit um on somewhat of a.
regular
ish basis going forward. So
thank you.
And Mr. Chair, to that, I would
just add, I, I appreciate that,
and I think we can definitely
work with staff to start getting
just kind of that small working
group conversation going. I
mean, sometimes I question
whether this program really fits
within the traditional.
application process of PSFA in
general, right? Like for awards,
like, should we be looking at it
from a broader perspective. I
don't want to like traumatize
anyone by bringing up broadband,
but you know something similar
to that, right? where we're
looking at a more, a different
type of program than just oh
come for awards during the cycle
and we'll fund you, and here's
the parameters. It may need to
be, we need, we need to be a
little bit more creative on what
that type of a program could
look like, and it will be
challenging, you know, because
it is outside
of, I think we're used to doing
and, but I think it's is, is,
uh, the chairman mentioned, uh,
the need is there. So, thank
you.
So, Larry, thank you for
bringing this forward. So, uh
my concerns are
is, you know
it being a level playing field,
you know, for everybody. And I
don't think we're there. I think
uh
every school district that comes
forward.
or teacher housing is, it's,
it's not always the same, you
know, so I, I am concerned about
that. So I am in support of it.
I think it's something that we
do have to support, you know,
move forward with, but uh.
I think there needs to be uh a
better policy on, you know, what
those requirements are as far as
teachers' housing as an example,
uh, last week on the teacher's
housing for uh Maxwell, so in
the current policy that we have
now or even others, other school
districts, are we funding
accessory items such as carports
and generators and in all the
information that I've seen, I'm
not seen where, you know, that's
anywhere on here that those are
costs that we should be
absorbing, so I am concerned
about that, and the other
concern I'm about is is uh uh
infrastructure costs. I think
these infrastructure costs are
coming in extremely high, so I
am concerned about that, so I
think that's something that we
need to take a closer look at.
So, but it, it just for the sake
of time, if there is an LFC
meeting that you guys put
together, I definitely want to
be a part of that and, and, uh,
and I even be willing to voice
my concerns on the front end
just for the sake of time.
uh, just so you guys can have an
agenda or something, but I
definitely want to be a part of
that.
So thank you, thank you
Mr. Chair, members to hone in on
really quickly the success of
the teacher housing program is
at the very top of page 188.
That's only the teacher housing
pilot program.
It does not include the
standards-based teacher housing
that we provided over the last
several years, and the
investment for this particular
teacher housing pilot program,
number one, has been roughly
$5.1 million.
and the outcome was 16 teacher
housing units built.
6 site built.
units and 10 manufactured homes,
um, so that in itself is a
support infrastructure to the
schools, and then on page 189 is
a policy, a draft policy that we
could modify
as we progress with these, these
meetings, um, to help us better
drive
specific criteria on what we
will. Thank you.
All right, there's no questions,
good discussion.
No, then let's move on to
quarterly maintenance program.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the council, um, Jeff
McCurdy, PSFA Maintenance
Operations Support Manager.
Uh, as of July 31st, 2025.
We have seen an increase in
preventive maintenance planning
currency rate. We have improved
from 61.54% to 70.33%.
Um, that's due to my staff's
outreach and
their continued efforts to
communicate with New Mexico
school districts.
Scrolling down that page, you
can also see a roughly 1%
increase in each one of the
three, FIMS modules that'd be
maintenance direct preventative
maintenance direct, and utility
direct.
and then scrolling down a little
on the next page to the um FMA
ratings. We have increased again
from 76.39 to 76.62.
Um, we have 342 schools out of
708 being assessed.
and the charter FMAR average is
77.22%.
There are some exhibits attached
to the maintenance definitions,
um
and the program status as a
whole. And with that, I will
stay.
questions
What is the comparison again
between charters and districts.
Uh, it's the same assessment for
charters and public schools, but
that is the difference in um
state charters versus public
school districts. All the state
charters are grouped into one.
That's their average
Mr. Chair, member state charters
are performing just a little bit
higher than the public schools
are across, I've heard that from
Matt Paul and and just wanted to
make sure that was the.
Any additional
questions, comments? Yes, sir.
Um, so there's a number of
districts whose, who's, uh,
plans are not up to date.
and I know you're reaching out
Are, are there, are there sort
of trends as to why that's not
happening? Is there something
that you all need?
try to get more people to get
their maintenance stuff up to
date. Let's.
uh Mr. Chair, Mr. Senate, so the
difficulty we have is usually
with district turnover, um, a
maintenance director will leave
or our new superintendent shows
up and so there's
communication at the district,
but then there's also the
the time we see to, we usually
see a little bit of a lower
rating right before school
starts because the maiden staff.
and the leadership are trying to
get the school ready for the new
school year.
And so about this time, late
August, early September, we'll
see another uptick in um game
plants, Plan currency.
but most of it is staffing when
it comes to not getting a plan
updated or
possible lack of knowledge. Um,
my staff does reach out on a
monthly basis and a quarterly
basis with different
notifications and
you know, offers up any
assistance that we can.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Yes, sir.
So when you reach out to some of
these school districts, what did
they tell you?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Romero.
most of it is, oh, we'll get
back to you when we have the
time, um, or can you provide us
with
the template or assistance and
so at that point, um, template
gets provided to them and then
myself or someone on my staff
will work with the district to
hopefully schedule a time where
they can go out in person, if
that's what they're looking for.
Um
but it sometimes this is a
communication error, sometimes
we don't hear back from the
school district after multiple
attempts.
and it, you know, could be
because they, when they don't
have the time or somebody has
left, so.
One of the school districts
that's uh.
big red flag for me is the
Questa, because there was
already issues there.
uh, like big issues. So, uh, and
then the other, and I do agree
with you on, you know, turnover
facilities, directors leaving,
and I know that's the case that
happened, but people walk in.
and they see their score all the
way down to 44.59 now.
So that's rather concerning, but
I do agree with you.
Thank you.
thank you for the report.
Appreciate it. Move on.
Uh, we
have determined there's a need
to go into executive session.
Uh, so, um,
I'll, I'll read the uh
item on the agenda. It's the
consideration of approval to
adjourn into executive session,
ending threatened uh to discuss
pending and threatened
litigation, matters are subject
to uh uh attorney-client
privilege, uh, regarding Eaton
scope.
