Thank you very much for Annika
so there's.
Okay and good morning everyone
we're going to start this
morning with Senate bill two
ninety seven state agency
renewable energy purchases
Senator Hickey and Senator
Stewart and then we will go to
Senate bill three twelve I am
expecting that Senate bill three
to help twelve might take the
rest of the morning but we will
keep everybody apprised of
whether or not you need to hang
out for any further bills.
So Senator Hickey I see you good
morning would you like to
present your bill I would thank
you madam chair and senators on
the committee
I'm bringing forth a bill this
morning.
Senate bill two ninety seven
that the sensually amends the
procurement code that would
allow a state agencies are
entering into our purchases to
do a contract essentially up to
the life of the equipment that
provides remote the term
contracts with verse electricity
produced from solar wind
landfill gas and biogas and I do
have Senator Hickey.
I just got a message that the
webcast is not on or working
traverso could you reject that.
Chair it's on them okay thank
you thank you very much sorry
Senator Hickey for interrupting
no would you like me to start
again I yes I think so okay good
morning madam chair and senators
Senator Hickey here and I'm
bringing forth the bill Senate
bill two ninety seven which
amends the procurement code and
it allows state agencies to
enter into longer term contracts
or essentially actress the
produced from solar wind
landfill gases and bio gas
currently are the limits for the
state agencies about ten years
and this would go on that
through to the essentially the
life of the equipment
but somewhere around thirty plus
years the I have experts with me
this morning our first is Jason
marks and although I have not
seen them on the.
Of.
Zoom yet also Ryan center while
in more Fleischer but I'd like
to introduce Jason marks now who
will be my expert witness and go
into further detail on the cell
Mr marks please.
Here's the funding X..
Text messages appointment matter
from Mr Fleischer and he's
trying to get in and if you
could just the technical people
to let Mr Fleischer and Mr
Senator and if there is a point.
At the minute Senator Hickey.
So besides mark Fleischer who
else is that you one is an
expert yes Jason marks to just
focus right here and Ryan center
wall.
Okay so term or if you can let
in more I see mark and the other
one was Jason center mark no it
is Friday Ryan center wall.
Jason marks right now Jason okay
so I and let's move Center souls
up
to the first two rows thank you.
Great okay so Jason please go
ahead.
Thank you madam chairs to
finance and members of the
committee good morning.
The as you said the this is a
simple well it amounts to be
determined code to create a
special exception for renewable
energy for power purchase
agreements from the ordinary ten
year term that's imposed on all
contracts and procurement code
the procurement code allows
state agencies and local
governments to produce you are
electricity from the utility
without going through the
procurement code but.
EPA goes the code and faces the
the ten year
term that's in their maximum or
there's a workaround which can
allow twenty five year term
which is also to shorten up
briefly addressed that up but
the background is.
Why do a power purchase
agreement.
Is an agreement where a private
dentist and to the finances
constructs the solar system at a
state or local government
facility and then enters into a
long term contract to sell the
power to the facility at a
certain and at a price per
kilowatt hour for the typically
for life of the equipment and
the reason why they might do
that and why they definitely
would do that is because it's
cheaper that way that for the
government entity to purchase
the system itself because the
private entity is able to take
advantage of very materials
federal tax benefits which
include an investment tax credit
would also include depreciation
a governmental agency which
doesn't pay taxes just doesn't
get the budget so it will be
cheaper for the governmental
entity to acquire
green solar energy or other
renewable energy with the PPA
but I think women themselves
and also be less risky because
the private entity is bearing
all the rest of equipment
failure obsolescence and so
forth this the HSD is just
agreeing to buy the output at a
rate per kilowatt hour when it's
made available on that rates
going to be cheaper than grid
electricity.
The.
Obviously.
An arrangement like that.
Having the contract term match
the life of the equipment is
going to lead to the lowest
price it's just not economic and
you could do this with a ten
year term the equipment has
useful life of thirty years
these days and so that's
typically the term that you see
in a commercial arrangement
there is no way to do that under
the state procurement code up it
is possible to do a twenty five
year contract which is not quite
as economical and has to do fax
whether the facts using the
public facilities energy
conservation.
Energy efficient.
Ation Act but that's just not an
ideal work around because the
twenty five year limit there and
also because it just wasn't
written for these kind of
contracts and.
The way you have to to to write
them to make them fit in that
work but they don't look that
good and has led to some
national entities saying Hey we
don't even want to do that so if
we make this change it'll save
money for state and local
government what them contract
for thirty years with a claim
contract get more competition
for those are just PED's again
this is all going to be even
though we're asking for change
the gentleman procurement code
to remove the ten year limit
this is still going to be in the
code it's still can't require
competitive procurement agencies
can be a short or the or this
committee can be assured that
agencies will get the best price
this is
You know the these days there's
a very viable market at.
Some of the considerations that.
Maybe we had twenty years ago
about solar contracts just apply
thank you for your time of your
answer questions thank you your
next expert Senator.
Yes of.
Mark slide chair or Ryan center
wall why is not going to join
this I wasn't participation
expert I was going to just give
testimony testified you have for
supporters thank you madam okay
very good so madam chair in
senators that is our
presentation and
we stand for commenting
questions I thank you before we
moved to your opponents and
you're up proponents Senator is
this a state agency bill or you
all are bringing it
independently.
Mr marks this is we are bringing
this and madam chair members of
the committee
this is being brought
independently it arises from
some issues we I will call
issues but.
Some experiences we've had with
the Albuquerque Bernalillo water
utility authority and the water
utility authority supports this
bill okay well thank you thank
you for that Mr marks Senator
you need to know that the
Judiciary Committee which you're
going on to this not like to
change the procurement code so
you might want to
See if your state agencies are
on board with this okay covered
let's please go to the proposed
let's see if there's any
opponents to this bill.
in the past I had somebody by
the name.
Jim Trujillo.
If that person on.
Okay let's go to the proponents.
So there's only like a three to
five so go head.
Marc Fleisher.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Marc Fleisher registered
lobbyists for affordable solar
an extensive part of this
legislation SB two nine seven.
Currently is a nation marks
mentioned procurement code
limits the term of the contract
to act ten years.
SB two ninety seven remove that
ten year limit the Mexico
procurement code to allow for
the purchase electricity
produced by renewable energy for
the useful life of the equipment
this will allow for the most
cost efficient and reservations
solar equipment which generally
has a useful life of thirty to
thirty five years.
Allowing the procurement of
renewable energy for pre longer
than ten years B. is beneficial
for local governments and
citizens New Mexico provided the
most cost efficient renewable
energy source thank you very
much.
Thank you very much next we're.
Jim division.
Okay let's move on more of a
ship's troops.
Semantic al.
Thank you everybody hear me yes
okay thank you madam chair and
thank you to the members of the
committee my name is Samantha
cow I'm the Clemente energy
advocate with conservation
voters New Mexico thank you for
allowing me time to testify in
support of the Senate bill took
to ninety seven.
as we've heard Senate bill
twenty seven is an expansion of
New Mexico state law and this
expansion and codification of
Law list for her.
Your line on mute cover.
I'm sorry this expansion
codification of why is in
alignment with New Mexico's
goals for climate change
mitigation and by giving our
state agencies explicit
permission to purchase renewable
energy for multi term contracts
we continue to encourage
Mexico's progress to be a carbon
free by twenty fifty for these
for these reasons and others
that will be mentioned by
proponents of this bill we have
this committee sees fit to
support Senate bill to the
Senate as well thank you madam
chair.
Thank you next madam chair.
I'm.
Speaking.
Yes madam chair this model is
shows I apologize I just wanted
to briefly stand in support the
lobbyist for registered
lobbyists for the Albuquerque
Bernalillo county water utility
authority and that Mr mark
mentioned we stand in support of
this legislation and thank the
sponsor for bringing this
amendment to the procurement
code allowing agencies are local
public body to enter into long
term contracts for renewable
power purchases for up to the
useful life of the equipment
thank you.
Thank you Mara
next I see Camilla.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee we also
stand in support of the bill we
think it's fiscally wise to
allow a length and amortization
combining that with the low
price of renewable energy it's
the best decision for New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you very much.
Where is there anyone else.
Everyone on the list and I don't
see anyone else raising their
hand.
Thank you so now we go to
committee for questions and
discussion.
Senator Nobel.
Thank you madam chair just one
quick question.
As things like subsidies and tax
credits nose things kind of the
start to expire and I they may
not expired that they may be if
fight up front so the
depreciation will be less but
will any of those things affect
the long term price service
second because of the issue Jan
twenty years down the road
whenever those things are not in
place.
Thank.
Thank you for that cool question
Senator Neville and madam chair
adjacent new answer that.
Madam chair of center in the
bill as I mentioned I I agree
with you the investment tax
credit is not going to be here
forever
there is still a well two things
one is there still is a
depreciation benefits and we all
hope the armrest and Congress
doesn't change that in general
so there will still be benefits
to doing this but they'll be no
rest the state agencies these
contracts that that's what's the
beauty of this this contract is
going to be when the agency
doesn't under the criminal code
it'll be locked in and economics
at a fixed price
which may have been escalated
but it's still a fixed price per
kilowatt of electricity will be
locked in for thirty years and
the government agency will bear
no rest that tax law changes or
any changes will affect that
price that is going to be borne
by the private entity.
I guess my concern was the
private entity I understand
contract state would be locked
in to some degree but to with
the private entities find
themselves in a bind twenty
years out.
Madam chair Senator they'll
I think generally not as as we
know the the tax advantages what
what makes this so beneficial
these days the tax benefits come
from on the front end
so an entity that enters into
one of these PPAs on the private
side is going to be monetizing
the ITC and it's already
depreciation in the near term
and then providing the benefits
to itself and to its customer
over thirty years so I think
that's not likely.
That's what I assumed but I just
want to make sure that we're not
putting some company specially
some we talked about community
solar thanks this recession so
if it were a small incident
sometimes I could see were if
the tax credits for ongoing or
or whatever units in city things
are ongoing thank you find
themselves in a real hard ten
twenty years out so I just wanna
make sure we're not putting up
another company up I'm not
worried about you I'm worried
about something else state
agencies.
That's all madam chair thank you
thank you very much I next have
Senator Sedillo Lopez and then
Senator gate goes.
Thank you madam chair.
The.
The the I really love this idea
I think it is a fantastic idea I
just wanted to give you an
opportunity to respond to what
of the Energy minerals natural
resources department said in in
the FIR
they said that not all stated
state agencies local governments
have technical staff to conduct
in the engineering analysis of
renewable prop purchased
projects and that
And basically what they say is
that this bill by passes an
independent review process to
verify that would verify the
cost savings in the budget
how do you address that that
concern in the FIR.
Hello this is Jeff.
Thank you.
As of of this Jason please madam
chair Senator Sedillo Lopez.
The short answer well.
The most important answer is
between this committee and the
next committee as the chair has
suggested will be meeting with
the energy and minerals to
trying get on the same page
because energy and minerals has
always been a supporter of clean
energy
they've worked with us on these
contracts in the past and I
think there's some.
Possibly a call misunderstanding
miscommunication but
the public facilities act which
EMNRD administers is primarily
designed around conservation
measures efficiency measures and
buildings which are complex
engineering questions that they
have specialized expertise at
this point a solar PPA is not an
engineering.
Question it's a pure finance
public finance question you're
buying a product were you buying
a service of the lectures the
from so many cents per kilowatt
hour this is and the only
analysis that needs to be
conducted is what is the price
of this PPA what is the
escalator and what to expect
that my great at what our
Tricity will be realize so it's
a question of public finance as
opposed to your retrofitting the
building and you need
engineering to figure out how
much you'll say because of
insulation and windows in
different lighting those are
engineering questions that the
facilities act is designed to
address solar has moved beyond
that it's a commodity at this
point and the
of and so the analysis that
needs to be done is a public
finance analysis that.
We believe most agencies have
the ability to do themselves and
we'll be discussing that with
that EMNRD between this and the
next committee.
Thank you madam chair that's
that's a very helpful response.
Thank you Senator Gallegos David
Senator Montes Senator Gallegos.
Thank you senator appreciate
discussion of gonna very little
background took me two years
change care with cover up and
still the discussions have been
with you.
The for this.
Because.
No.
The resolution.
A few questions in the.
Why.
That.
Contract.
For thirty years and.
A long term contract everything
is market driven have a list.
The state question television
that is.
Hello.
Things happen
better it is.
And so.
The state.
What is the best C. bit walking.
From Concord.
Thank you senator guy a ghosts
of Mr marks if you could answer
please.
Madam chair Senate Gaydos.
This doesn't force any
governmental entity or any local
any state or local government to
do one of these contracting it
gives them the option to do the
analysis and decide if it can
save them money and give them
The the clean energy that if
they would like clean energy if
they think they can save money
put out our own state confirm
that there will actually be a
cost savings and that that will
not be addressed to their
taxpayers and then if they
decide to do it to do it so this
is not compelling any agencies
to do this this is giving them
the choice.
Madam chair center and expert
witness I appreciate that use of
the hello of others group that
came into the state of looking
at.
More customers
I thank you madam.
What is it just it not work out.
Groups that wants to do this.
But.
What you do just that.
Did you.
Representative managed.
You have the intention of trying
to make a subsidiary company to
try to push this to contract
and.
Up Matt madam chair Senator
Gaydos
I I'm Senator yes I'm familiar
with what you're talking about
and that was
That was just a run deal for New
Mexico was before I learned
about it when I served on the
public regulation commission and
it happened a little bit before
my time
and so I I know what you're
talking about that this is not
that this is not
there there is no
There's no entity that we know
of that is waiting in the wings
to scoop these up and.
These are one off projects that
are being driven by the
customer.
Mr needs and customers
The state agency and local
government our expertise.
And I don't think go.
I don't foresee this is trying
to create an alternative utility
this is a matter of self
generation and working with
utility on the grant but I do
appreciate the question because
I do recall the scenario that
you are referring to that
happened about fifteen to twenty
years ago.
I'd like to remind people that
when they're asked to question
the question is to the sponsor
and the sponsored can either
answer or they can refer to the
experts thank you very much
Senator Gallegos you still have
the floor.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and senator I guess
my next question.
is the.
You have to talk about the
useful life.
Thirty five.
Years.
So when.
I.
Past the.
Let.
The state numbers.
Thank you senator guy goes Mr
marks could you again provided
answers for him.
Chairman miss onyx Senator goes
the.
For you to page three of the
bill
line twenty two.
The.
Bill does not rate in thirty
years
are.
My industry experts tell me
thirty years is standard
but this bill.
Limits the life of these
contracts to the actual useful
life of the equipment that will
be installed and and so it's
fun.
And and again my information and
what I've seen for example the
water utility authority system
as useful life of eight thirty
years of.
This allows it to correspond to
that it does not allow it ever
to exceed the designated useful
life and equipment and the not
so so that would be our response
thank you.
Thank you senator guy it goes.
Thank you for that the stern.
madam chair and senator an
expert witness I would just
that.
Last question I do have the
same.
Here's on.
Other state.
With
the rest of it thank you.
Thank you so much Senator von
case.
Thank you madam chair.
In their yes we are we can you
okay good madam chair I was
amused by your statement a
minute ago it for the sponsor
use of what senator Judiciary
doesn't like speeches to the
procurement echo.
I I appreciate the comment you
must've had a bill before us I
can't remember yes I had passed
the bill on the Senator of Leo
hi Leo and the he's trying to
get the revision to your
committee now.
Okay all right good well I think
you know I think you you begin
that analysis I'm on this
committee and Judiciary by
asking why do we even have a
procurement code the I think you
have to ask yourself that
question when we have it
the arguments we made today that
this would be cheaper it would
always be cheaper to exempt
everything from the procurement
code in other words if we didn't
have to build school buildings
under the procurement code you
wouldn't have to pay Davis bacon
you would have to pay prevailing
wages you would have to hire you
Services and you can build
schools much cheaper that way
and colleges and and really just
about anything a state building
to build much cheaper you have
to comply with procurement code
and we didn't have to
competitively bid things so that
we have to ask ourselves why we
would have a procurement code if
if the issue is costs and and
really I think the reason we
have a procurement because we
decided there are things that
are that we need to consider
more than just cost
in in the so that's why madam
chair you may have observed that
sometimes the that some of us
that our lawyers are very
protective of the procurement
so.
I I hope that
This would never be an issue of
support for renewables are non
renewables I fully support
renewables I don't think that's
what this issue is about what I
do think and and you're right
this goes to Judiciary and it
makes this committee against
heard in in the issue really is
the legal implications of what
you're doing here because
candidly Center Hickey I'm not
sure this is I'm not really sure
this is lawful or it is lawful
is probably not enforceable let
me explain why the the issue
here is that you would avoid the
procurement code for contracts
in this is contract recruited
time deemed in the best
interests and not to exceed the
useful life for the facilities
used to supply excellent let me
just give an example
let's just take PNM is an
example but there may be a
better example to give me the
the facilities that are used to
supply power are often times
multiple different sources of of
power I would assume I would
assume somebody supplying said
city of Los crucis of it was
senator this contract maybe
generating power from.
Some from
natural gas some from renewable
severance solar suffer when but
the but your bill would allow
the contract to go up to a term
to the useful life of the
facilities use and the question
I would have first of all which
facilities at all the facilities
or the one of the facilities you
get the picture how does how
does that work.
We've got multiple facilities
providing power.
Thank you Mr Servan tastes I
could take a track a crack at
that but I'll refer to Mr marks.
serve on days I I want to be
clear that this is not and and I
I think you raise a very
interesting philosophical point
this is not a derogation of the
procurement code
this is a change to one
particular part of that which is
a ten year limit on the length
of terms of contracts and we
could think about why the
legislature might enacted that
at one time
and.
What what might be behind that
but what is different here is
that we have a particular type
of product what to see which is
defined in law as an intangible
personal.
personal property purchases of
tangible personal property.
And the.
This is to allow contracts for
more than a ten year term for
that which will lower the price
of those contracts because it's
a.
It's an economic transaction
that is just very much more cost
effective for twenty five or
thirty year sentence for ten
because you're installing
equipment at a particular
location Mr marks and Mr Mr
marks I don't mean to be rude
all the.
I think expects me to ask
pointed questions get direct
answers none of that matters
which you just said addresses my
question can you get my
question.
Chair of center provide I'm
sorry I was leading up to it and
I'm sorry for that Mr marks
please be brief yeah okay.
The.
This is for a specific.
Installation at a customer
location this is not for our.
An alternative utility as
Senator DiSanto suggested where
you might get into a power
supply contract for electricity
to be we all from a utility
system to a governmental
customer that's just not legal
under New Mexico law
what the only things that are
legal under New Mexico law is to
buy your your electricity from
your utility such as PNM we're
all past electric or to produce
it yourself on site using
designated quit meant so the
life of the equipment would be
the life of your equipment that
was installed at the government
utility the government purchases
hi it's typically gonna be solar
equipment and it's going to be
the life of the modules and the
inverters.
And of Senator Hickey how what I
know any of that from this bill.
Our in other words this this
says that the term of the
contract can be for the of with
the term issues first I gotta
tell you I think I would never
be able to understand what this
means of course to be a good
source for litigation.
Most of us employed which is the
contract can be for the useful
life of the facilities so useful
life is going to be a huge
debate discussion because use
use why has no meaning really
contractually or in the bill or
legally so they'll be a debate
about what the useful life is
and you feel like a lot of
things can be debated I've got
friends were driving cars from
the nineteen eighties with the
three or four hundred thousand
miles on it and they may have a
different idea what are used for
life is the that I may of the
roof of a car but but there's
ambiguity there and and I guess
the question here is we're in
the bill doesn't say anything
about what the useful life of
the of the facilities would be
in order why wouldn't a past
elector given selling the power
to the city of Los crucis under
this contract which facilities
of across the letter are are the
useful life that will limit the
procurement contract which was
still in the about selector
would would be limited.
Thank you Senator Cervantes I
see the point that you're making
about the potential ambiguity I
do believe that before we get to
the Judiciary Committee that we
would be able to give a more
precise definition another words
for within a a bracket of a
range in that range to provide
secondly I do find myself the
word facilities confusing when
really it's equipment.
And so I think we could make
those changes going forward.
Mr marks you have any other
brief comments.
No.
Senator I don't know I hope no
offense the committee members
I'm not seeing my face on the
screen but I want to let
everybody know I've clicked the
video open button sentences the
videos open on but I'm on to
devices those zoom master may
need to make some adjustments
but I I don't wanna go filling
that.
I'm giving you just might my
name on the screen but anybody.
Iraqis we see your hair cut.
Well then there you are there.
I can help it's really weird all
I see is my name on the screen
but anyway I I I appreciate that
Senator Hickey.
Yeah it if you we get to a
hearing in Judiciary I agree
with the I think facilities is
ambiguous I think this allows Mr
marks this does not do away with
the procurement code but it but
it expands it or the term it's a
lot of procurement code the
question is how far been
expansion are we talking about
here I know it also the
ambiguity of the contract can be
when it's in the best interests
I'm not sure what the best
interests would be although I'm
sure would be interpreted to
probably be the best interest of
the agency where the local
government that being maybe what
it says
but ultimately I I'll tell you
that the there's a few other
things others identifying for
you to get a fair opportunity to
work and perhaps one is that the
the new language in refers to a
multi term contract.
I don't know why this would be a
multi term contract and and
maybe Mr marks can make some
notes and disk address all these
at the M. but but this seems to
be limited to multi term
contracts I don't know I would
be a multi term contract may
just be one contract for twenty
years it would seem to me so I
don't I don't know why would be
multi term and then then I to
say the last the last issues are
got the kind of more interesting
ones which is really this bill
really has no effect at all if
you look at the last couple of
sentences because it has
language would which it needs to
have a real curious who added
the last couple of sentences to
the bill I'd love to know who
did it because whoever light at
the end of last two sentences
the bills really smart so Pat on
the back of that's Mr market
somebody else they know what
they're doing and the reason for
that is if you look at the last
couple of sentences the bills it
says that the contract is always
only subject to appropriation by
the by the a governmental body.
Which means that that and and
that's always true it is true
are what's what I say that a boy
to ever did I see Mr marketing
is that what this means is the
city can get out of the contract
anytime it wants.
In any given year because it
just it doesn't appropriate the
money to do the contract so the
city gets a better deal from
somebody else in your eight or
ten or twelve the city can just
decide not to appropriate the
money for this project and go
with the other deal and so the
city is in a position to always
effectively unilaterally get out
of the contract.
and that language there at the
end is in place in part because
there is some long in New Mexico
that limits the ability of one
governmental group elected route
to bind other groups into the
future and I have done analysis
of that is an applies this bill
but we can understand that
number was one one city council
cannot enter a contract that
would bind all future city
councils or else they'll be no
point to having an election you
know that the city council each
incoming county commission was
sent to say well Madam top
because the preceding city
council and county commission
passed a law that I'm stuck with
and and that would be to us on
the legislature to we're not we
we can't pass a budget that
binds huge your legislature's
I'll be on a certain period of
time so so the languages
centers is smart it's good it's
actually says well now yeah
we're the city again again a a
provider of energy water
contract the city can get out of
it it doesn't appropriate the
money or or do what it wants to
do and and up so you those are
my thoughts at this point time.
The language and subject to
appropriation means that
ultimately the government agency
would decide what they want to
do this at any given budget
cycle and so I'm not sure
whether the bill would
actually entice anyone to enter
into a contract but perhaps
perhaps the provider might be
willing to do that under the
circumstances so I'm sure we'll
look at all these again madam
chair on down the road that will
make this a Judiciary Committee
hearing thanks thank you very
much Senator rockets Senator
Sedillo Lopez you still that you
have your hand up but for a
second time.
Okay so what is the pleasure of
the committee.
Madam chair I move forward to
pass on Senate bill two ninety
seven.
Thank you senator published
their second.
All seconded.
Okay we grant good could you
please take the vote.
Yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes Senate Bill.
Although no.
Senator pope.
Senator pope just.
Thank you Senator soul.
Senator Smitty.
No.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Stefanics yes.
Sixty three.
Senator Hickey you have a do
pass good luck in the next
committee.
Thank you very much madam chair
I look forward to the Judiciary
Committee and appreciate.
the gentleman's comments and we
will work those.
Madam chair repeat madam chair
we being sarcastic.
Was I being sarcastic yes.
It wasn't zoom sometimes yes I
yes I want.
Okay committee members we are
moving on to our next bill this
bill might take up the rest of
the morning we'll see what
happens.
Bill three twelve at game and
fish and wildlife changes I know
that we have been inundated.
With thousands of emails and
phone calls on each side of this
bill.
And
You do have of the bill to
amendments and a revised
analysis with the amendments in
looking at the amendments that
pretty minor Senator Steinborn
are you on I sure am madam chair
ready to go.
So we do not see you.
You cannot me I'm on my videos
on as well okay so I see no
chair okay so
He's on the third page madam
chair okay so currently move
Senator Steinborn.
To the first page.
And Committee members if you
remember I asked your opinion
about besides the presentation
and expert witnesses how many
people we want one here on each
side we agree to twenty people
on each side
recommended a piece but we're
going to hear the presentation
then we're going to hear about
the amendments I think the
amendments don't make sense
until we hear about the bill so
Senator Steinborn please go
ahead.
You are on mute Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you madam chair is that
better yes it is okay committee
first of all last night I sent
you over a table are you might
look for an email for me that
has a table of exactly what's in
the bill.
I am the page numbers because I
think it'll be very helpful to
see what's in the bill what's
not in doubt
most of the bill is is the name
change of the department most of
the length of the bill and so
the table will help you
navigate.
You know the other pieces which
are really the substantive
pieces I'm Madam and that was an
email I sent last evening if
you're looking for that.
Madam chair committee Senate
bill three twelve is a really
significant piece of
conservation legislation.
It.
I'm really honored to be joined
by probably one of the largest
coalition of both conservation
groups and sporting groups it's
ever come together over a piece
of legislation to modernize our
wildlife management in the state
of New Mexico.
It up it certainly puts New
Mexico on a monitored half but
it in and of itself regarding
wildlife doesn't change the
management of any given species
our last we were to do that by
law or the commission my role
but we certainly expect forty of
the.
Commission and of the department
to do that.
commission committee you may not
be aware I was not aware but.
New Mexico New Mexico is the
most is the second most
biodiverse statement country we
have the third most amount of
animals and mammals second most
amount of birds.
And really we manage these
resources we give the authority
to game and fish department to
manage but really we manage them
almost with the nineteenth
century system designed for a
different era in time.
And now quite frankly with the
challenges of climate change in
species decline.
It sure is crucially important
that we get more modern
management guidance to our
department and that's what this
bill does madam chair and also.
Addressing some historic
inequities as far as the
distribution of hunting tax and
there's many sportsmen online
who will talk about why that's
important if I can madam chair I
just we'll summarize what this
bill does it changes the name of
the department to the department
of wildlife conservation I will
say committee only eleven states
in the country still use the
name came and fetched.
Morton that use the name
wildlife and more than that.
I have wrapped up in the right
natural resources conservation
department
it expands the mission of the
department appropriately to give
them the authority to manage all
wildlife if decided by rule or
law.
right now we have a we have a
patchwork of protections and
that's simply not appropriate we
we definitely deal with some
depredation and some wanton
waste statutes regarding the
Humane
Treatment of animals in in
killing of animals including
dealing with a load of law that
currently on the books commonly
known as is Jennings Law.
And
And there are some other.
and then of course out some
smaller kind of changes to
wanton waste and some license
issues that was suggested by
frankly some game commissions
finally not insured includes
appropriations to not only
funding change assuming that
there will be a cost and one of
the amendment deals with that.
and then number two to further
help the committee help the
department manage non game
species and this is in the past
the legislature used to give
General Fund support to the
department to do this they moved
away from the last
administration we believe Holly
that if we want to have a first
you know class wildlife
management system we need to
fund it appropriately this bill
makes a down payment in that
regard gives funding to species
of greatest conservation need
which is a term that all states
have to use federally to define
their threatened species and
it's it's it's again the
stepchild in our system of
wildlife management so we get
some funding towards that with
that Madam chair.
I'd love to invite
representative Nathan small to
to speak Amanda that are expert
witnesses if I may.
We will go to representative
Nathan small and then we will
consider it whether we go to the
amendments go ahead
Representative small.
Madam chair committee thank you
very much for giving me this
opportunity and I'm very proud
to be here with Senator
Steinborn today madam chair
committee behind me you see a
picture of a pullout at that
stage I won that at a a banquet
put on by the wild Turkey
sportsman's association and down
in Los crucis over ten years ago
and so as we know New Mexico has
a rich heritage of hunters and
anglers who care deeply about
conservation that is why SB
three twelve has been built from
its infancy and from the ground
up with date input and
participation from many
sportsmen across the state madam
chair committee as Senator
Steinborn mention that's why
things like removing the ability
to leave some game animals
probably in a cougar and bear in
the field without taking the
some of the meat as is required
in for other animals otherwise
known as wanton waste hunters
brought that forward madam chair
and committee.
That additionally
madam chair Committee hunters
brought forward the idea that
there should be a separate
system that it trapping licenses
revoked then it should be
revoked for the same amount of
time that I think religious or
revoked once someone crosses the
line now say madam chair and
committee growing up my
grandfather and I used to
collect cans in order to be able
to have the money to put in for
big game hunts specifically for
out she suffered a stroke soon
after our last current together
I harvested my first out my
first take Turkey up on mount
Taylor with them before that
stroke when I was eight or nine
and ten years old but those
lessons and that ability to
pursue wildlife in New Mexico's
public lands have
frankly been such a blessing to
me madam chair and committee and
when we look at New Mexico where
we are uniquely
At a disadvantage with other
western states like Arizona
where residents of Arizona get
ninety percent of that tags the
allotments that are put into the
public drop in New Mexico it's
only eighty four percent with
eight.
Very high numbers that are taken
off of the top frankly I fear
madam chair and committee that
in last we do what's in SB three
twelve improving resident
opportunity that children and
families all across the state
won't get to enjoy the
opportunities that I and so many
others have been fortunate so
what we do is we simply bring
New Mexico up to the same
standard as Arizona and other
states by creating a ninety
percent standard for resident
hunting opportunity.
This will not affect the
outfitting industry which.
The the makes most of its
revenue based off of a number of
different private land hunting
opportunities and all of these
hunters will still be free to
hire outfitters if they wish
finally madam chair and
committee we bring up the we
simply standardized
the cost for non resident
hunting licenses for ball out
perhaps New Mexico's most sought
after species from non resident
hunters and in so doing madam
chair and committee we make this
a revenue positive piece of
legislation that will support
our game and yes our New Mexico
wildlife department better
conserve wildlife right more
hunting opportunity and more
opportunity for all New Mexicans
so madam chair and committee I
know time is short appreciate
the for the opportunity to
expand on a few of these points
and very much look forward to
today's discussion thank you
madam chair thank you committee.
Thank you very much
Representative small Senator
Steinborn which amendment would
you like to take first.
Did we Senator Steinborn.
Is in the last agencies muted.
Okay you get it and I
know that parents which
amendment would you like to take
first Senator Steinborn and I am
not a cat
I would lie H. nine four point
one madam chair okay so Senator
Steinborn to explain point two
two zero zero nine four point
one it's an amendment and for
the public
we Trevor would you please put
it on the screen.
And Senator Steinborn I'd like
for you to read the amendment
because many of the public
members don't know what we're
talking about.
Please proceed.
Okay thank you madam chair so
okay.
Madam chairman some technician
on page two forty one point
seven after the word commission
insert provided that the
department and commission shall
not be required you know what
madam chair I'm sorry we have
point four point one.
Four point one.
Okay well this is this is the
appropriation okay on page two
forty one line ten actor
Commission insert provided the
department commission shall not
be required to replace any item
currently bearing the name
department of game and fish or
state game commission until that
item has reached its normal
replacement period.
Thank you.
Do and explain anything about
that before we go to come.
There Committee what this
amendment does is that it
doesn't require after we the
name change goes into a fact it
does not require the department
actually physically replaced any
item Intel it would normally be
replaced thereby minimizing the
expense to the department to do
this name change.
It doesn't job it gets on the
flexibility also doesn't require
them to wait until after that
time but it certainly gets that
flexibility and this is to
address whatever fiscal impact
the name change may be.
Thank you.
Thank you are there any members
of the public.
That how does the amendment that
are on this zoom.
Are there any members of the
public that how does.
This ammendment while they're on
the zoom.
Okay I I prefer I'm assuming
there's some probably proponents
so on the amendment we're going
to comments Senator Schmedes.
Thank you just just one question
madam chair and senator I I
support your man that I think
this will kind of soften the
so often that that fiscal impact
of it
I'm just curious have you had a
fiscal analysis comparing the
original bill you know with and
without this amendment and is
there a do we have any sort of
estimates on a on a dollar
amount here.
Madam chair Senator Schmedes now
we we sent the amendment
requests to the department we
didn't hear back from him until
last night
but I mean certainly that this
would in theory make the fiscal
impact go down to almost zero.
Because if you don't have to
change any item until you would
normally replace that and.
There's no new expense with this
having said that of course
you'll be some expenses and
they're some of their some basic
things we would all expect would
be changed like a website and
things like that but as far as
probably the major part cost of
replacement they would not have
to do it and so I would think
this would drive it very very
low.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Sir thank you what is the
pleasure of the committee on the
amendment.
Madam chair.
The amendment.
Senator Hamblen thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez of
Veronica could you please take
the vote on the first amendment
and the first amendment is point
two two zero zero nine four
point one.
Wanted yes Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator Schmedes yes Senator
souls.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
chairman Stefanics yes.
Senator you have your first
amendment adopted.
Let's please go on to the second
one very good madam chair of the
second amendment is two two zero
zero nine five point one.
Trevor's pulling it.
In.
Okay I'll read it a number one
on page one thirty eight yes
ma'am on page one thirty eight
line five strike outs provided
an insert in lieu thereof if
required by and after nineteen
seventy eight and Sir quote for
rules promulgated pursuant to
that chapter.
Number two on page one thirty
eight line eleven after nineteen
seventy eight insert or rules
promulgated pursuant to that
chapter.
New Mexico.
Madam chair I can explain please
what this does is.
This addresses any concerns you
may be out there that by giving
the game commission expanded
authority by updating the
definition of wildlife that
anybody is that anyone could be
required to have a permanent.
Or be under a different.
Management structure of any
wildlife.
Other than those required by
rule or or law and so what this
amendment does is it clarifies
that only permits required it
cetera or only those required by
rule or law we I know the
committee got an email from a
very nice lady who raises
butterflies into science
education she wanted to know was
this bill now going to require
to have a permit we believe the
current law was clear on that
but we added this amendment to
make it very very clear that now
only only wildlife required
under rule or law
What a fact anyone having to
have a permit civil this bill
itself does not.
At in any requirement so that's
what the but what the manager's
manager committee stand for
questions.
Thank you in the public on the
soon are there any opponents to
this ammendment.
Mr Carroll.
Our agency I'm I'm sorry I don't
know who that is.
Did you want to say something
about why you're posting this
ammendment.
Yes Carroll.
Okay your hand is down not cover
is that correct.
Yes they did lower okay now I
have Senator Schmedes and
Senators souls on the amendment
senators committee.
Sorry madam chair I I think my
hand is still up from the last
one I don't have any questions
thank you thank you Senator
self.
Thank you madam chair just a
very quick question and I think
it does clarify some things but
is this referring back.
Senator to page forty four work
talked about why I like to be
protected and then on page forty
five alright see I'm online
thirteen where it indicates of
all the different types of
wildlife but those are only if
they are already under the
protection of and management
that it is unlawful to have
possession of the my
understanding that correctly.
Well I'm sorry I don't quite
understand that the question
Senator but yes I mean it is it
is designed to be very clear
that we're not any more any
update to the definition of
wildlife does not then add in if
you fall under a species that
may be under that expanded
definitional a lot you're not
required to have a permit unless
it's required by rule or law.
A different way to answer your
question so so madam chair I if
I understand what this is doing
is clarifying who has to have.
Yeah what a license or permit to
do so and refers back to the
area of wildlife to be protected
by management which I believe is
on page forty four.
That if the department does not
have that under its management
then you don't have to have a
permit and but it on page forty
five it with the wildlife that
could be protected at some point
in which case there might be a
permit required but does not
currently require.
Okay that sounds good to me
Madam chair Senator what I'm
gonna agree that.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you what the committee on
the second amendment.
I'm moving to pass.
makes a motion for do passes
their second.
Okay we have a tie for second.
With Senator Hamlin Center pope.
So could you please call the
vote on the second amendment.
Senator wanted is Senator
Gallegos.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator Smitty yes Senator
souls yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes.
Gentleman CENIC's yes.
So Senator and Representative
your second amendment has been
adopted
Senator Steinborn would you like
to identify your experts so they
can make their presentation on
the bill.
I sure would madam chair and I
just but you know the better I
lady also supported the
amendment which is great so
madam chair the our experts
today are just need to build
those exact director of the New
Mexico wildlife federation.
Kevin Bixby whose executive
director
Of the southwest environmental
center and John Crenshaw who is
a.
Are respected.
A career employee of the New
Mexico game and fish department
and a chairman of the board The
New Mexico wildlife federation.
So madam chair with your
pleasure maybe they can each
make percent.
Certainly let's keep it brief
but we can always come back to
questions for your experience
but right now we had so many
people waiting as well.
Members of the committee on
Jesse do bills executive
director of the New Mexico
wildlife federation and I
appreciate this opportunity
madam chair and committee to
discuss this monumental wildlife
advocacy legislation I believe
it is critical for the future of
hunting in New Mexico critical
critical for the future
sustainable wildlife populations
in this casting State
In which the board and continue
to live I want to mention
briefly that the L. LFC staff
recently conducted an audit of
the department of game and fish
and one of the conclusions as a
result on it was in this is a
direct quote game and fish takes
great effort that hot levels for
big game in a way that sustains
herds however landowners in out
of state hunters not New
Mexicans in public landowners
are the beneficiaries of
department policy I'm sure we'll
discuss that in more detail
coming up will now turn the
floor over to one of the other
students much opportunity.
Thank you.
Okay yes thank you good morning
madam chair members of the
committee.
My name is Kevin Bixby in the
founder and executive director
of the southwest environmental
center in Los crucis.
No three twelve would update the
system of wildlife management
that is developed in New Mexico
over the past one hundred forty
years to address today's
challenges and realities.
The stakes are high in New
Mexico as senator Stein board
mentioned we are blessed with
extraordinary richness of
species.
The entities entrusted to
protect this bounty The New
Mexico game commission the
department of game fish actively
have their hands tied.
They're authority to manage our
wildlife is limited to a Hodge
podge of groups of animals
identified in statute
representing only sixty percent
of the state's native vertebrate
species at best and virtually
none of its invertebrates
leaving much of the state's
wildlife heritage unprotected.
Senate bill three twelve would
remedy the situation by giving
the commission a department the
thorny and flexibility to
actively manage additional
species as needed to respond to
emerging threats such as climate
change it would update the
mission of these entities to
reflect the understanding that
wildlife is a public trust that
is important all New Mexicans
including future generations
whether they hunt fish joy
watching wildlife.
Or benefit is we all do from the
essential services provided by
healthy ecosystems Senate bill
three twelve would bring
wildlife management in New
Mexico into the twenty first
century and equip our state
wildlife managers with the tools
they need to safeguard our
state's irreplaceable wildlife
heritage which is why it is
supported by the broadest
coalition of sportsmen's groups
and wildlife advocacy
organizations that I've ever
seen in the thirty years and
work in wildlife conservation in
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Steinborn any further
expressed shock thank you madam
chair John print shop.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity
John requests are president New
Mexico wildlife federation I did
a little leasing addition this
morning and realized I've been
in this business thirty five
years more than half my life
and first career conservation
officer and employee our our
communications officer with
fresh Department and another ten
years as a board member and
president of the federation and
my dad introduced me to hunting
and fishing when I was a child
so that was a long time ago to
our has.
There.
Parents I hope all those are
going to cause hope cause me
some credibility when I
unabashedly support are with all
those credentials behind me that
Arianna Bashley our this very
highly involved in very broadly
supported Senate bill three one
two point today are we believe a
correction historic wrongs
Senator Steinborn and
Representative the small touched
on some of those and while also
leading us into the future
and Senator Steinborn reminded
us and called yesterday we
didn't get here recently at took
for years and several bills and
some hard work and occasionally
as she put it some hard feelings
to get us where we are
I won't go into any further
detail.
About all that lot of it was
covered very well already I do
want to repeat that I do believe
that there's got to support such
a broad range of hunting arguing
environmental Pueblo landed
minimal collect hi please
advocacy groups excuse me S. R.
itself testimony to this bill's
value I'm proud that the
federation is part of it and our
our church back passage.
Thank you very much anymore
Senator Steinborn that's it
Madam chair thank you thank you
so what we will do Senator
Steinborn and Representative
small if you're still on we will
hear from the opponents we will
hear from the proponents and
then Senator and Representative
you have any comments to make
based upon those then we will go
to the committee after that.
Now Trevor
I believe you have a list of
opponents that were submitted
and we had agreed upon that we
would take twenty people on each
side for one minute.
So if you'd call them please.
Yes madam chair.
Very **** Romero.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kerry Romero on
behalf of the New Mexico council
of outfitters and guides this
bill has a whole litany of
problems which were outlined in
the coalition letter from
eighteen concerns state and
national organizations which you
received last week the
elimination of the outdoor pool
and establishment of the ninety
ten quota are the outfitting
industry primary concern.
The author pool is a successful
and classic example of the
Legislature providing industry
incentive to help promote local
businesses outfitters provide
employment gross receipts taxes
and they help support New
Mexico's most rural communities
where hunting and fishing are
often the only tourism draw in
the area it is also extremely
important to recognize that New
Mexico resident hunters already
receive ninety percent of the
public land hunting opportunity
by statute New Mexico residents
received one hundred percent of
the public land cow elk permits
and one hundred percent of the
wildlife management area permits
and this is on top of the eighty
four percent of the tax they
receive in the draw this bill is
not about feeding families there
are literally hundreds of
leftover dear tech.
Next.
The Rivera.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is here of
iron and the registered
lobbyists for New Mexico
formalized Dr out today stand
before you and respectful
opposition to Senate bill three
twelve there are a multitude of
issues with this proposed
legislation.
Apple this bill removes the
ability of our landowners to
take an animal on private land
that place is an immediate
threat to their private property
or crops.
Wildlife species are responsible
for damaging utilization of
resources.
Creek wildlife that recalls
other damage to private property
are in effect taking private
property any take of private
property for public use without
just compensation is a violation
of the properties owners
constitutional rights under the
state and federal constitution
eight plus program under the New
Mexico department of game.
Private property owners the
losses incurred by such well
like damage this bill seeks to
repeal that important provision
and abolish the plus programs we
respectfully request that you
oppose SB three twelve.
Thank you next.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members chairmanship
with the and national rifle
association NRA opposes Senate
bill three twelve as it
fundamentally alters wildlife
management in New Mexico game
officials done an excellent job
managing state resources yet
this highly prescriptive bill
seeks to change much of what the
department has done and the
rules and regulations it is made
for engagement with the public
and industry interested groups
in the state it expands our
section of the department to
actually violates New Mexico
Supreme Court case law
department of agriculture laws
in federal law the bill also
severely restricts private
property owners ability to
protect their land and livestock
from predators when private
property owners protect their
land from creditors they're also
protecting the wildlife on that
land from predators we urge you
to oppose Senate bill three
twelve thank you.
Thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the.
My name is Lawrence Kight was in
on the New Mexico field
organizer for the western
landowners alliance and
Western landowners alliance and
are members of our stand in
opposition to Senate bill three
twelve and it is our belief that
that this Wiltord landowners it
is specially in our
Rural communities
you know things like.
Climate change and stuff but
it's it's thanks a harder for
our and our wildlife to be
sustainable but with this bill
we feel is pretty.
So some of our wildlife against
the sustainability of some of
the landowners especially in
our.
Some of the.
Communities where the our our
landowners especially in the
Hispanic community that are
smaller landowners and we feel
that that in the long run this
is just going to really hurt.
he's the you know the the thank
you.
Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director public policy for the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
we oppose this bill oftentimes
in New Mexico it seems as though
there's a huge urban rural
divide during the pandemic we
especially sought to divide
widening regarding things like
broadband access for distance
learning teleworking and
telehealth our rural community
the experience the most
disparity now we have before us
the bill that we yet again but
rural New Mexico at a
disadvantage although
Representative small said this
bill will not affect outfitters
we respectfully disagree and
believe it will put many public
land outfitters out of business
especially in the last I would
also kindly point out that the
L. tags the representative one
at the wild Turkey federation
but actually donated by an
outsider as we seek to recover
our economy and Dr towards them
back into New Mexico as it is
safe to do so this bill will
stymie that effort in our small
towns This Is tourism health
centers provide employment in
rural communities and the pain
New Mexico gross receipts taxes
on every trip the state of New
Mexico will lose over three
hundred.
Ellery took a Williams.
Thank you very much chairman
Stefanics member of the
committee my name is Ellery
Tucker Williams I'm with the
congressional sportsmen's
foundation I'm testifying today
in opposition of Senate bill
three one two in its current
format.
Appreciate the amendments made
addressing the budget deficit
however we now have an issue
with name discrepancy between
drugs with the department the
staggered approach creates
inconsistencies with current and
proposed department name and
could to potentially put the
department and shake on shaky
legal ground as a witch statute
is required to abide by due to
the inconsistent name
representation to the public.
The majority of bill proponents
are well known for being
antagonised of the sportsman's
community in New Mexico and
nationwide highlighted by the
eighteen reputable organizations
on the coalition letter in
opposition provided to each of
you little effort to engages
questions community or other key
stakeholder groups directly
impacted by Senate bill three
one two was made much of these
concerns could have been avoided
had there been better
representation in twenty twenty
New Mexico's questions committed
contributed over forty million
dollars a state based
conservation conservation is
unclear how while I've
definition changes will and.
Jackson.
My name is Kyle Jackson speaking
of the male part French
the mailers thankfully Fund
Senate bill three twelve based
on several issues we there are
committee on commercial issues
rolled into this bill for each
and then the address and then
mission you bring beneficial
solution are you interested
stakeholders specifically the
name also change the New Mexico
department in this is concerning
we also such monuments
consequence next generation and
standalone legislation without
fully understanding economic
drivers involved your response
just legislation that enacts
such large young ones also for
you to consider then president
and defense that have led to the
decision fund our selves and the
pandemic the change in the way
that more representatives now
interact with each other in the
public access for the public to
make their voices heard has been
drastically drastically reduced
virtual community hearings and
public and not just in certain
New Mexico while we believe that
there is more to specific
products legislative legislation
tends to address.
Rodney would.
Thank you one of my biggest
concerns as a resident sportsmen
is that people's voices are not
being heard local and national
groups support this bill despite
the wishes of many New Mexico
sports.
Changes have been supported in
the past by the same groups such
as roundup tax he was touted by
these organizations attacked for
being stolen from us and that we
should support removing when in
fact the removal of these
roundup Tax cost New Mexico
residents dearly and hunting
opportunity and the New Mexico
department of game and fish tens
of thousands and revenue just as
we predicted.
Bill this bill goes so far
beyond the promised more tax it
is generally used by these
groups to gain support
unfortunately it works.
Many hunters who do support this
bill do so for the promise of
those tax but are not aware of
the far reaching problems this
bill will cause in the future
thank you.
Lauren Patterson.
Thank you chairman Esteban ex
members the committee warned
Patterson on behalf New Mexico
cattle growers association our
membership of Family ranchers
stands in opposition to Senate
bill three twelve wildlife
species are frequently
responsible for damage to
private property integrate a
livestock and occasionally
threats to human life our
members observed deal with these
interactions daily in most cases
wildlife interactions are
rewarding and give us
indications that our land
stewardship is on a positive
path.
Beginnings law recognizes that
state trust wildlife can have
impacts on private property and
Representative taking a personal
property protected under the
Fifth Amendment of the
constitution in article two
section twenty of New Mexico
constitution stretching to the
state of New Mexico was
provided a symbiotic
relationship for many species of
state trust wildlife in
basements maybe.
Right it state trust in
federally administered lands
have improved wildlife habitat
and population.
Lee Weiss.
Madam chair
set forth in this bill would be
devastating for residents of
rural in New Mexico proposed
elimination of the LFC that our
pool would create job loss and
small business your nearest the
state that the most economically
depressed yep there pool was
originally created to help
support the small businesses so
that they might find job
opportunity both direct and
indirect within their
communities many other
industries in the state enjoys
such incidents such as the
movie industry because of the
opportunity thank find The New
Mexico outdoor recreation
division was recently created to
help increase tourism and create
outdoor recreation based on
economic development many
elements of this bill are aimed
at eliminating the opportunity
for outdoor recreation business
owners to survive well I
understand that well up in New
Mexico it's for the benefit of
the people of New Mexico this
does not mean only for the
residents to be able to Lujan on
a recreational basis benefit can
also mean the creation of an
industry to help provide
employment for many New Mexicans
thank you.
Yes young.
Good morning my name is Jeff
young director than works New
Mexico sportsmen's and
conservation slides
Representative resident hunters
in the state of New Mexico we
are not guides outfitters
landowners and hot mostly how
public lands Mexico but we came
up this receives no taxpayer was
entirely one of a sportsman.
These are many reasons for us to
oppose this bill but lack
involvement from all parties
impact as an up.
As.
Keeping the seventy nine
thousand nine hundred and ninety
five sportsmen who did not know
this bill is going to be
introduced know what we have in
the state and that was written
developed we're going to see a
coalition letter we came up with
their own position statement by
reading the analyzing all two
hundred and forty one pages we
propose that on many levels it
is bad legislation back for
school to an impact for New
Mexico we ask you to vote no on
SB three one two thanks to time
and wish you best of luck.
Thank you.
Okay.
I am a contractor owner of sever
Cisco river outfitters at
Glenwood catching County New
Mexico this bill affects myself
and my family dramatically
impacting our ability to draw on
that partners to stay in
business we have been offering
our specialize wilderness
outfitting services to the
handing public for thirty four
years we find it back in but our
back and meal into the remote
portions of the halo wilderness
this is a family operation that
depends on the present gossips
them to go on that public land
hunting permits to allow us to
operate we bring in Costa heard
sixty thousand new dollars into
the state of New Mexico annually
and we pay upwards of nine
thousand dollars to the state in
gross receipts tax.
It depends on the operating
business to his degree in land
pi up to twelve bags cooks
Wranglers and Packers all who
rely heavily on this income for
the annual economic well being
thank you madam chair committee
members.
William Skaggs.
Your name is called you need on
your true self so you can talk.
All.
Earl's kitchen.
Shankara.
Yes my name is John Carroll the
president New Mexico
conservation officers officers
association we oppose this bill
as written the department of
game and fish's been agency
since nineteen oh three nine
years older than Santa Fe New
Mexico it is the only state
agency that is solely funded by
sportsmen four hundred eighteen
years and now after a hundred
eighteen years you want to
change the whole main the
mission in the history of this
department this on the main
change will cost three million
dollars where is this other two
million dollars coming from it's
most likely going to come from
wildlife management.
So as you see in FIR issues
remember Colorado has less land
mass currently spends ten point
five million dollars on some of
the species here wanted to
project we're these funds coming
from.
Also with the deprivation
abilities this is the way it is
written this will cost more
exorbitant amount of money and
time to departments that that
took that you just took two
million dollars from Furthermore
you're taking ability from
homeowners to chill while
animals are either chickens or.
Danny Carter.
What number is this one Trevor.
fourteen okay thank you.
Any cover.
The cover you just need to meet
yourself.
We are opposed to this.
Bill as
small landowners are gonna take
the biggest hit in rural Mexico.
And we find most of the habitat.
L. couldn't get water and
couldn't get feed.
they've bash fences.
And we would take the biggest
hit we also bring in a lot of
money for the state and tourism
in ways that.
People don't see.
If.
when people come to the state
you know they buy things to take
back their family.
And that we would be hit the
hardest.
Thank you next term.
Kerry.
My name is Kerry on manage
Of the forest reserve company
which manages ranches across
northern New Mexico.
I see this as a
A conflict between
the public values of wildlife.
Grazing on taking for time
private lands.
The so I would propose the
changes to the Genting all the
law in section fifty.
And I see three three options
one is to.
Reckon pence landowners out of
the general fund second would be
to increase on the cost of tags
on the in order to recommence
landowners the third would be to
leave things as they are thank
you.
Thank you for this
recommendations next.
Andriy McQueen.
So I'm better small outfitter in
Linden New Mexico as a single
mother of four and this is my
second generation of outfitting.
And it's going to totally ruin
my way of life my kids were
alliance I employee twenty five
different guides their families
depend on every year I am.
I pay between thirty and fifty
thousand dollars a year gross
receipts taxes.
The money that this is going to
cost the state is in and is not
good I is just I oppose this
bill completely and the little
the stores restaurants everyone
and Catherine county where I
live the pandemic on hunting
season season.
That's the their most
That's the most.
Money they get during the year
for everything for tourism as
what the hunters bring in and
out of state hunters and so I.
I completely oppose this bill
thanks.
Is.
Ashley Ashley Bock.
Thank you I am Ashley Bock I am
strongly opposed the other
stakeholders holders were not
part of the discussion I am
happy with the current system
because out of state hunters and
outfitters bring in so much to
the table in the form of
financial gain section twenty
six one hundred thank you very
adjacent to hunting Rangers why
is the word molestation used in
reference to hunters there is no
time frame for closing water
ways to fishing after stocking
will there be notice for people
traveling to New Mexico to fish
section ninety six and ninety
eight the director has all the
control and I do not see any
checks and balances section one
twenty nine eminent domain I
thought we had learned that
lesson section four item to
recruit out of state outdoor
recreation businesses to
relocate to New Mexico instead
of promoting the ones we already
have I am against this bill is
been poorly written and has gone
through a hundred and fifty
eight pages in one week a
changes thank you.
Thank you.
Jim Dougherty.
The morning thank you madam
chair.
The opportunity to respond to
this bill today we at some point
if they would like to openly
oppose Senate bill three twelve
due to the fact that this bill
S. Census proposing a potential
change of the entire mission of
the New Mexico department of
game and fish.
The use of this brought opening
the language is slippery slope
that will lead to the limits of
the land of course right as well
as the changes to the jaguar and
potentially limit This Is
inability of wildlife however
make the department more
inclusive to all while are built
for propose ways in which the
dollar create revenue for the
department all monies currently
generated are generated for
sportsmen and hunters which we
have active members in our
chapter but the language change
the money's in the conservation
fund for use of the current
conservation manager practices
will be spent amongst all while
let us not allowing the current
and that the matter research and
conservation that we currently
enjoy in the large games be
spent this habitat of New Mexico
to put it bluntly with this
change there won't be enough
funds to go around and it will
do current justice to the large
game the way we enjoy it and
currently drive traction to New
Mexico we drastically opposed
this.
James Glover.
Dever New Mexico the state's new
outdoor recreation business
alliances comprised about or
recreation businesses and
organizations that are
positively contributing to New
Mexico's outdoor recreation
economy regarding legislation
with potential impact on
endeavor members we respectfully
request that lawmakers engage
sincerely with the affected our
industry in order to mitigate
any avoidable negative impact to
that sector of the economy it's
endeavors position that such
to such discussions can and will
yield solutions solutions that
will expand and enhance New
Mexico's outdoor recreation
economy and during these times
of COVID they're already
struggling so these
conversations are very important
to ensure that these businesses
stay afloat and make ends meet
in the coming year thank you.
Lastly Jack diamond.
Hello my name is Jack diamond I
own and operate a rancher not
been business we hired between
fifteen to twenty five people
and I have become part of our
family we pay gross receipts tax
on every hot and pay three
percent of our gross to
government agencies for permit
us we have a state land up in
permit and we are licensed by
the New Mexico game and fish in
two thousand eleven the current
law was negotiated by many of
the same groups it gives all of
the draw contracts draw state
wildlife areas and also mess
resident residents apply in the
office pull by doing this of
quotas under eleven percent so
why are we even talking about
this I support all New Mexico
hunters I am one myself this is
important by changing the court
quota it gives resident hunters
less than one percent better
odds of drone attack bottom line
is there's not enough help for
everyone to have almost every
western state except for Arizona
has a set aside for the
operating industry please do not
let this bill move forward.
Thank you so and that was twenty
on the opponents yes that was
okay so we will now go to twenty
on the proponents side.
Senator Candelaria.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
address you today in support of
Senate bill three twelve my name
is Sarah Candelaria and on these
program director with the New
Mexico wildlife federation my
work centres around introducing
children and young people to the
state's wildlife and natural
places I'm a new to hunting and
just this past weekend I took my
very first big game animal
javelina and southern New Mexico
the experience was amazing not
just because I successfully
harvested a javelina for my
freezer because of the
incredible biodiversity I
witnessed during the hunt it's
been a hundred years since the
New Mexico legislature enacted
our state's first three member
came commission but while
management has involved over the
last hundred years the name of
our wildlife agency has remained
the same the New Mexico
department of game and fish
Senate bill three twelve will
change the name of the agency to
the department of wildlife
conservation this name change
will signal to our children that
New Mexico is ready to embark on
the next hundred years of
wildlife management with a
greater vision and understanding
of our responsibility towards of
natural world voting yes for the
Senate bill three twelve is a
huge step in ensuring.
Katie DeLorenzo.
Thank you for the opportunity to
testify today my name is Katie
Taylor and so I'm a hunter
lifelong Mexican and I represent
the New Mexico chapter of
backcountry hunters and anglers
the future of hunting depends on
hunters continuing to
demonstrate that we are
competent stewards of the
resources we we strongly support
revising the existing language
on the Jennings law for this
reason I this section and
chapter seventeen has a lot of
small number of unethical
landowners to senselessly kill
elk antelope and other big game
for perceived threats to their
crops and property under this
new bill landowners would be
required simply to work more
closely with the game and fish
department to resolve
depredation problems rather than
taking matters into their own
hands I'm importantly the bill
demonstrates to the public that
big game animals should not be
killed without the involvement
of state wildlife managers thank
you.
Okay Basque was.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is give us
some Las Cruces city council the
founder of the next agenda
conservation project an
organization founded to take
underserved youth in southern
New Mexico faced by camp and
more I'm I'm also one of the co
authors of the New Mexico
outdoor equity fund because I
strongly believe that our youth
and our families especially
those in rural and underserved
communities in New Mexico
deserve the same opportunities
to enjoy and learn from wildlife
and the great outdoors as those
with wealth and privilege SB
three twelve is truly
transformative in the way that
reallocated unfair subsidy that
benefits out of state wealthy
hunters and returns increase
hunting opportunities to in
state residents families and
youth additionally I think we're
forms or that hunter's creek
wildlife by changing the want to
waste rule eliminates the
discussing an unfair killing of
wildlife promoted by the
Jennings Law and transforms our
game and fish department to the
department of conservation more
accurately representing how we
should manage wildlife as a
champion for equity rural
economic development and as an
avid hunter and angler I whole
heartedly support SB three
twelve encourage you support to
thank you.
John Cornell.
Hello can you hear me.
Good morning yes.
Sorry about that madam chair
well well good morning madam
chair and committee members John
Cornell and the vice president
of the Dona ana county
associated sportsmen known as
Dhaka's we've been active in Los
crucis for fifty years and as
you heard SB three twelve would
standardize what came statutes
for have only in a very uber it
would add the species to
existing statues and ensure meat
from other game species are not
wasted Mexico's boards from
pride ourselves in consuming
what we are fortunate enough to
harvest in Avellino bear cougar
should be an exception if you
haven't sat around in their camp
in Turkey camp and had
originally have a lien to breed
you don't know what you're
missing.
Doctors strongly supports three
SB three twelve and we we are
just committee to also do the
same thank you.
Thank you for.
Yes good Johnson.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members Jessica
Johnson with animal protection
voters we strongly support this
bill which makes a number of
needed changes including the
reform of the controversial
Jennings Law on that allows
landowners to gratuitously kids
protected wildlife without
department permission or
oversight because the wildlife
posed to proceed threat to their
crops for property so
importantly the bill does leave
intact provisions of the law
that allow property owners to
protect human life or safety as
well as their livestock and
legal control still permitted
with all the proper permits and
if nonlethal measures have
failed but when it comes to non
imminent threats such as
potential proper property damage
and now makes sense for New
Mexico to return to ensuring
that our state wildlife agency
is working with landowners to
address issues with purpose it's
developed over the years and
duly managing the protected
wildlife it holds in trust for
all New Mexicans so we
respectfully urge your yes vote
for these and other reasons
stated by the proponents thank
you.
It sounds.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to address this
bill I am Kinsella's.
Mexico resident sportsmen and
anglers I've been putting in the
state since I was ten years old
my family owns a ranch in
northern New Mexico in what
county and I overcame
commissioner and I'm speaking in
representation of actual
Hispanics enjoying camping
hunting and the outdoors.
It stands in strong support SP
three twelve we feel that the
changes incorporating this bill
support our heritage of
sustainable funding in our
traditional love in connection
to our lands are at NCI NCI of
our of our land and our
wildlife.
It is it is all it becomes
harder and harder to read across
tax we feel that even a small
portion of tax we'll we'll find
a little bit of relief.
Overall it will not affect the
the guides and outfitters there
are still plenty of out of state
tags for them to oversee we also
feel that this bill supports our
tradition of respect for
wildlife.
Thank you my address.
Yes my name is Matthew Majoris
and I run a small nonprofit here
in New Mexico called impact
outdoors we take you into the
environment we do habitat
restoration and habitat
I improvements on several
different community are areas
and we try to look with are used
to the bigger picture that there
are so many codependent
relationships that.
Are in each and every
environment that we have here in
New Mexico we stand strongly in
support for Bill three twelves
in hopes that this bill maybe
the glue that binds two sides
that often see opposition but
both love the same resource on
as a bigger picture we need to
look at the state for
conservation for our habitat in
on in hopes that this bill will
bring both sides together to
just see that bigger picture and
help those resources that are
here are you it's also Lujan
over those improvements and so
we are avid hunters as well and
we strongly support the bill.
Thank you thank you.
Judy Calman.
I see here and she's not on
mute.
Go on to the next one would come
back.
Your.
Good morning madam chair members
committee Care Bennett costs
Mexico wild lady of perspective
as a former hunting and fishing
guide I still have many friends
that are public and private land
hunting guides and I really
respect the way they earn their
living it's important know that
without exception each and
everyone of these people learn
their remarkable hunting and
guiding skills because they're
available to public lands and
public lands hunting tax to be
successful guiding and
outfitting is a client paying
for the guides knowledge came
and landscape the and have it
was never until recently about
the commodity commodification
Pueblo wildlife.
The former guide I cannot
condone wildlife work welfare
system that favors wealthy non
resident at the expense of
underserved New Mexican resident
lost the December estimate or
young New Mexican wants to
someday become a hunting guide.
Hi time New Mexico's approach
wildlife stewardship is truly
based on the quality science and
the benefit of all wildlife
please support Senate bill three
twelve.
Greg Peters.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to provide comment
today my name is Greg Peters on
the public lands wildlife
advocate for conservation voters
New Mexico your stand strong
supported SB three twelve
Senator Steinborn pointed out
his opening remarks in addition
to the much needed modernization
wildlife management New Mexico
this bill addresses the historic
inequity in the distribution of
hunting access across the state
this will help support
traditional land users
connections with the outdoors
increasing accessibility for
everyday New Mexicans to
participate just result
tradition it's food on the table
what I hear Jack supports our
state's heritage by providing
additional attacks in New Mexico
residents each year in the
outskirts of the suburb making
hunting opportunities more
equitable our state more in line
with other western states the
opportunity available to
residents sure that nobody gets
better chance over local New
Mexico hunter to hunt the public
trust resources plans just
because that person no matter
where they're from contain more
the right thing to do for both
our citizens and our economy
your to do passcode on espys.
Okay.
The products committee members
thank you for the opportunity to
speak today monitors Jolgeh as a
conservation minded New Mexico
under I support SB three twelve
in part because it would revise
our want to waste loss most
members of the public support
hunting even if they don't help
themselves but I believe public
support is strongest for hunters
to eat what they kill and don't
kill anything they won't eat
unfortunately are not our law
now requires hunters to take
hold it will portions of most
big game species except probably
not very Krueger that is old
school thinking times have
changed there's no reason to
allow hunters to take only the
head Haidar Clause and leave me
behind.
As we need to demonstrate that
we're careful stewards of the
public resources we are trusted
to harvest Senate bill three
twelve helps us become better
stewards thank you for your
time.
Montoya.
Madam chair committee in two
thousand and eight there was an
incident where an individual
kids thirty nine and a little
petition down with us for we are
and shooting on with the shock
of.
Not a very humane the way of
dealing with a wildlife issue
but legal yes under the Jennings
law that is legal
When this incident happened even
Mr Jennings said there could be
changes to the law this bill
provides the changes needed it
provides landowners a method of
filing a complaint so the
department has to work with
landowners on a plans of action
and once that plan of action is
in place
the department has to implement
within ten days it allows
hunters to just with just cause
to reject that that plan comes.
The proposed.
So.
What I like about this bill is
that it makes the department
work with landowners while
putting wildlife management back
in the professionals hands the
the department of game and fish
or the new conservation
department thank you for your
time.
Thank you are we going to go
back to Judy common or did you
not want to speak yeah we can go
back Judy Judy Collins.
Madam.
And madam madam chair I know she
wants to speak should just
having some problems with our
Mike I don't know she comparison
is needed but she's not
speaking.
We need to go on.
Correct it really likes the
bill.
Did you want to count as one of
your twenty people no ma'am okay
we're going and Trevor Michael
dax.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Michael tax
on the New Mexico representative
Anders of wildlife I was.
As as noted earlier on the
department of game and fish was
created more than a hundred
years ago at the time was
responding to declining help
here bighorn sheep populations
and was created with that in
mind and by that measure very
successful what a hundred years
later we have new challenges.
Wildlife.
These climate change drought
the prices we're seeing
globally up to one million
species facing extinction and
the department of game and fish
the wildlife conservation
department must have the tools
and thirty necessary to meet
those town the one million
dollars dedicated conservation
of species of greatest
conservation need is an
important start to.
Get the department on track to
fulfilling that duty that it
must serve if it's going to
protect our wildlife and Stewart
our lands and ecosystems
project.
Chris Smith.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
hearing this important
legislation my name is Chris
Smith I'm a native to New Mexico
and the sportsman I'm here on
behalf of WildEarth guardians we
support Senate bill three twelve
and urge you to do the same
among the many good reasons to
pass this bill is the
declaration of policy language
in section fourteen which makes
clear the relationship between
the department of game and fish
the people of New Mexico and
wildlife as a bill says wildlife
should be managed as a public
trust resource with intrinsic
and ecological value for the
benefit and use of all New
Mexicans including future
generations.
Certainly this includes those
who harvest wildlife for food
but it also includes every
single one of us who relies on
wildlife to in live in balance
and engineer the very ecosystems
soils and water resources that
allow us to live in New Mexico
this bill would position New
Mexico to confront crises and
show other states what twenty
first century wildlife
management should look like I
hope you can support this
legislation and help New Mexico
eight thank you.
Your.
Mary Catherine right.
Good morning senators can you
hear me I'm on the phone.
Yes we can hear you.
Thank you so much good morning
my name's Mary Catherine ray
wildlife chair for the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club in written policy for the
club hunting and fishing are
acceptable wildlife management
approaches when based on
sufficient scientifically valid
biological data.
The hunter and conservationist
Aldo Leopold wrote that
intelligent thinkers should
strive to keep every cog in we
open the biotic community I know
there is a direct line between
the insects that pollinate the
flower that makes a seed that
grows into a plant that in out
and eat the parts need each
other by giving authority to a
newly named department of
wildlife conservation over all
the animal members of the biome
we ensure that we will be
intelligent thinkers saving all
the parts not only for hunters
and anglers but for wildlife
watchers and photographers who
are also an important part of
our state economy for future
generations and for the sake of
nature itself please vote yes on
SB three twelve thank you.
Thank you.
Christopher Pacheco.
Madam chair I know.
Getting to the has called the
COVID this call then I
understand to attempt a second
time.
Let's hear from Christopher
check on that we'll try at her
again.
Okay let's go back to Judy
common.
I think this will be our last
attempt and you knew that.
Common I understand you're on
the phone.
A I'm really sorry madam chair I
have no idea what's going on
with my computer so I tried
calling back in on the phone and
good morning madam chair members
of the committee and to the
common and the New Mexico policy
director for the Audubon society
which has over thirteen thousand
members in New Mexico we
strongly support and P. three
twelve for many reasons but I'm
going to focus my comments today
on the funding it would provide
fifty she's the greatest
conservation need funding is
always an issue at the
department and it's something
conservation community has been
working on fixing for many years
they needed great and while SB
three twelve thousand public
problem permanently it would
provide much needed funding for
existing projects like habitat
restoration for the pinyon Jay
an average thank you for
experiencing sharp population
decline population declines in
New Mexico and regionally it
could even be used as a match
for available federal funds to
create new critical programs
such as technical assistance
programs for landowners wanting
to manage their land and more
ecologically healthy way
something New Mexico is
currently lacking for these and
many other reasons stated by my
colleagues I hope you'll depart
at the three twelve and I'm
sorry again for the technical
difficulty thank you.
Thank you next.
Right three help.
Good morning my name is right
there at home and I'm a hunter
and business owners southwestern
New Mexico and I am in full
support of Senate bill three
twelve as a business business
owner and the son of a longtime
business owner we were not given
increased odds in our businesses
I personally do not know of any
other business currently that
have increased odds to do
business as a former hunting
guide also remember guiding
mostly Texas with big bank
accounts looking for an animal
that met their standard not
caring about the mate most of
them donated to me turn out
there which in turn was given to
some of the guys which for me
was a blessing since I had never
had the opportunity in my state
to draw rifle antelope tag point
being they were trophy hunters
while plan while paying their
way to the front of the line I
remember my son at a young age
asked me how is it that that
song so gets Amanda okay every
year and you can not I simply
said to a it's economics on and
he said but your tier I left it
at that.
Namik status should not be an
indicator for more hunting
opportunity in our state level
the playing field for New
Mexicans and I can assure you
the quality outfitters of.
Right when.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Brandon when I'm a fifth
generation New Mexico and I'm a
hunter conservationist in a long
time public lands and public
hunting advocate in New Mexico
the primary target for continue
the outfitter draw side set
aside is that absent set aside
the rural economies will suffer
but the economic effective
should be honestly evaluate it
if there is a budget should be
balanced against the negatives
and who is negatively impacted
all the other nine western
states either have no out that
are set aside for now but are
setasides that are literally a
routing error compared to New
Mexico on both a proportional
and absolute bases yet these
nine other western states the
role Congress are thriving and
the out in the industry also
thriving the actual impair
pickle evidence is clear out the
process sites are simply not
required for rural economic and
outfitting in gathering industry
success this analysis doesn't
even include the tremendous
direct benefit and advantage to
the New Mexico outfitting
industry of the expansive
private land or purposes since
that we have in New Mexico much
greater than any.
Oscar Simpson.
Thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Oscar Simpson I'm a
lifelong resident I've been
monitoring the game and fish for
the last forty years so I've
witnessed how the game is
managed to not managed.
Senate Bill.
Three twelve is a modern
approach to manage more wildlife
which would have a ecological
and economic benefit for New
Mexico and its residents.
Therefore I ask you to consider
the economics of the residents
and there's new agency reports
that says.
Residents spend more money
hunting fishing and recreation
than out of staters basically we
need to step up to the twenty
first century and we need to
develop our tourism business and
this is one approach which the
game department can help manage
a broader array of wildlife for
wildlife viewing which is the
number one economic draw thank
you much.
Thank you.
Jesse do Raul.
On madam chair members of the
committee all allow someone else
to have this opportunity being
that expert witness.
Thank you.
Kevin Bixby.
Madam chair I'll do the same is
just as he did to allow someone
else to use my time.
Adrian and hello.
Madam chair committee I believe
Senator Candelaria already
testified.
On behalf of the New Mexico
wildlife federation so I'll give
my time.
Stewart what's.
What's on.
One.
Linda star.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members I am going to
star in I am commenting on and
representing the Rio Grande
Valley of the.
Real broads for wilderness and
we are in favor of SB three one
two with the term.
What Mexico is about time all
wildlife would be considered for
the management by the state not
simply big game sport fishing
conservation should be added so
that this diversity of wildlife
can be protected while still
here rather than when it's too
late to save it.
Well I've require protection
through science based management
considering wildlife as a
resource and trusted to the
public to be if ecological value
to all of this the bill this
bill applies not just to deer
elk and sport fish what wildlife
provider flies and bees to be
the snakes and lizards and
wolves and bobcats.
Our heard breaks away and.
Thank you.
Are we on our last one we are
the last one and I'm not there's
no one else on the list that is
in the room if there's anyone
else in the room the wishes to
speak for this bill just raise
your hand using the reaction
button.
Okay thank you everyone in the
public who came to speak for and
against this bill Senator
Steinborn you want to address
any remarks.
Thank you madam chair just to to
remarks of the actual address
one and have Representative
small address the other I just
want to speak to the Jennings
law provision right now
Madam chair the the law in New
Mexico.
Allows landowners
indiscriminately kill wildlife
really they're very broad.
Rations
Thanks committee has a.
Somebody has.
On on their on their page what
what the bill does not own
shares it doesn't preclude the
possibility that if there's all
wildlife conflict the land owner
will be able to take an animal
but what it does do is required
to game and fish department or
hopefully the wildlife
conservation department to and
the commission to make rules on
how that should happen so it
creates some quarter and process
to a system that doesn't have
any now I also want to educate
people that aren't landowners
course landowners noticed that
the state of New Mexico has a
multi million dollar fund that
does nothing other than mitigate
conflicts with landowners and
wildlife and in fact the state
of New Mexico collects money for
that funding it has a multi
million dollar balance and and
the state game and fish
department has staff that that's
all they do so we are still very
much in the business of conflict
mitigation between landowners on
wildlife and they're still
opportunities to create sensible
rules what we're doing is
getting rid of a of a notice
provision that has resulted and
lots and lots of needless animal
killing so with that I'd like to
a representative small I know
who'd like to just address the
outfitter issue really quick.
Thank you Representative small
thank you very much madam chair
madam chair and committee to be
very clear
under the passage of SB three
twelve thirty percent of all elk
licenses in the state of New
Mexico would
Go to non residents and mainly
to
through the landowner ePlus
system that is twenty percent
higher madam chair and committee
which equals over ten thousand
raw licenses higher than the
neighboring state of Arizona
similarly met and that's after
passage of this legislation that
insurers madam chair and
committee that the vibrant guide
and outfitter industry.
Will continue to thrive madam
chair committee the numbers are
even higher for prong horn
antelope in that case after
passage of this legislation
still there would be fifty
percent of all antelope tags
that would go through the
private land to private
landowners into this outfit our
system madam chair and committee
to be very clear what we're
talking about is slightly over
one thousand tags hunting
opportunities and this is
employee equalizing the
opportunity for New Mexicans to
hunt on public land in New
Mexico and to not be
disadvantaged madam chair and
committee when it comes to
drawing what can be a very rare
opportunity.
Disadvantaged as they currently
are to non resident hunters who
put in through this set aside
and therefore have a specialized
tool of licenses so madam chair
in committee thank you for
giving me the opportunity to
clear that up I would just also
finally closed and it was as
part of what I said the
landowner ePlus system is not
affected at all in SB three
twelve that is where thirty
percent of all LFC licences
currently go to in wrong numbers
here in the state of New Mexico
it is the foundation of the out
of state hunting interest and
the guide in outfitting industry
and it is not affected in any
way by SB three twelve thank you
very much madam chair and
committee.
Thank you not to questions and
discussion from committee
members I have Senator Sedillo
Lopez center Novell and Senator
souls Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair
I think that this is a very
important bill and of if it
bothers me that it it feels like
there
There's kind of a lack of
communication or a lack of of
of.
Understanding my my brother is
an avid hunter and I grew up in
a in a hunting family and one of
the concerts.
Yes side of who are outfitters.
Senate Bill.
Coming in and out take off your
picture why you talk.
And see if that help okay.
Okay now now I'm just try
talking okay thank you so my
brother
Who has relatives
Through his wife for outfitters
was very very concerned about
the shift and I just heard us
senator and representative
Nathan talk about ten thousand
of.
Permits that would be available
to non residents can you explain
the shift Sen very clearly so
that everybody can and that this
is a small shift and that the
LFC and and outfitting the
outfitting business particularly
for local local people will not
be affected as dramatically as
they they are concerned.
I'm very happy I'm sure.
Representative was for the
public might have missed
something you want to clear
explanation of how this would
not or would affect.
I'll fitters in the bill thank
you.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much Senator Sibley said DO
Lopez madam chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez this is roughly
about a thousand licenses that
is currently in the set aside
madam chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Outside of this there will be
well over fifteen thousand five
hundred elk licenses alone that
will are unaffected by this
legislation that will continue
to go primarily through the E.
plus program that's managed by
the department and the vast
majority of those licenses are
sold to outfitters who then sell
them to clients willing and able
to pay a fair market price for
those additionally madam chair
and
Senator Sedillo Lopez that
equates to about thirty percent
of alkali senses in the state
fifty percent of prong horn
licenses would continue to go
through that private land
system.
We're talking about here madam
chair and senator only two
percent shift in our licenses of
all of licenses sold and
critically madam chair Senator
these licenses if New Mexicans
when New Mexicans are fortunate
enough to draw those tax they
will still be able to hire those
same outfitters if they so
choose so this
we think madam chair and senator
reserves the overwhelming
majority of where that current
market is and it ensures that
that market with guides and
outfitters who New Mexicans
after they have better resident
hunting opportunity are still
free to
go through those guides and
outfitters thank you very much
madam chair thank you senator
that is a very important point
too because outfitters there are
not that many opportunities in
our rural communities of for
economic development and so that
this this is a very important
source of income for many for
many outfitters so I really
appreciate that answer the other
concern that I heard that can
that bothered me is that this
that some people believe that
the New Mexico game and fish
were not involved and I have
worked closely with New Mexico
game and fish dealing with the
raccoon issues in our
neighborhood and I've been so
impressed with their
sophistication in understanding
of trapping and how it works and
the whole issue of urban urban
wildlife so my question is is
how how involved were they the
end of the crafting of this
bill.
Okay madam chair Senator thank
you for asking that question we
are they were as involved as
they wanted to be we we reached
out to them frankly before there
even was a bill I reached out to
the director to talk about
species of greatest conservation
need and if we if the
Legislature were to get more
funding to target non game
species was at the appropriate
round we had a good conversation
about that then we presented we
sought feedback frankly on
previous efforts are there was
not given we we sent over a copy
of the draft bill we got
literally zero feedback from
them I could which is regretful
We are on the amendments that we
presented this morning we sent
them to the update in here from
till last night with no specific
suggestions so I that's just
kind of their posture on this
legislation but we certainly
reached out to them every step
along the way I will say though
that I know that as you can see
the breadth of people involved
in this bill we were also
soliciting feedback from several
active members of the game
commission who of course you
know they're neutral on the bill
but China but I'm sure they were
running the traps on many of
these provisions with the
department itself some of the
provisions that you've heard
here are things that the
department has been wanting to
address as well
Ezzell so they've been heavily
involved and and they've been
able to give feedback every step
along the way if they so just.
Thank you and one final question
on page eighteen line seven of
the bill it talks about the
public trust responsibility and
I think that is probably the
most important part of the bill
for orienting our
Our natural resources that are
wildlife that the conservation
because also in speaking with
the number New Mexico game and
fish they are very very
sophisticated in their
understanding at least the
employees that I talk with and
also very sophisticated about
what their limitations are and
so giving them authority to
preserve and to really work on
all the wildlife in the state I
think it's a real step forward
can you comment on your
understanding of the public
trust
Respond and what that means well
thank you that that is such a
great question because just kind
of gets to do a understanding
wildlife and how this department
really has to manage it for all
New Mexicans wildlife in your
internet madam chair and senator
so you will kind of appreciate
this but through the years and
through common law and and going
back a very long time it's been
established that wildlife it is
the sovereign we owned resource
of the state of New Mexico and
of a state in a and there's a
concept called the public trust
doctrine that basically says
that the wildlife is owned by
the public and is to be managed
as a public trust resource kind
of like your green and that
talks about the air in the land
it's the same exact concept that
it is a it's it's a publicly
owned resource to be managed by
all so in fact to stay in this
bill the wildlife is a public
trust resource manager for all
what that stupid it says is it's
a recognition that the wildlife
is in fact owned by the state by
all the people not just the one
who actually gets a license to
kill it when we talk about
trapping you know those animals
are actually owned by the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico we all have the state and
the decision in in the
management and the shared
Use to join it of that resource
so that's what that word public
trust what it.
Means legally and what it means
philosophically thank thank you
Mr chair I just got a text and
I'll just read because again I
really would love better
communication and understanding
and I'll just read this text
Representative small is trying
to merge the private land system
and the public land hunting
system they are separate ePlus
is a system that provides
payment to landowners for
wildlife habitat habitat through
landowner permits which can be
sold to either residents or
nonresidents a resident can buy
landowner tag just as easily as
a non resident they are two
separate systems this bill would
affect any outfitter who
operates on public land it would
be devastating for public land
outfitters.
I I want that if if you could
just clarify that that question
and that will be my last
question
or clarify that for the for the
person who texted me.
Thank you thank you very much
madam chair thank you very much
Senator
The the eight plus system.
By providing over fifteen
thousand five hundred elk
licenses thirty percent of all
licenses for elk in the state of
New Mexico is absolutely a very
significant part of the hi
guiding and outfitting industry
and this bill does not change
that madam chair and senator
currently there is.
Roughly a little over one
thousand hunting opportunities
that is set aside in this pool
therefore
anyone mostly the vast majority
non residents are required to
apply for that opportunity
through this pool thereby really
placing these licenses one of
the major these for non
residents that change that we
envision and it is appropriate
to consider both the E. plus
system as well as the antelope
system where you have tens of
thousands of licenses that are
currently private and go to the
outfitting industry in order to
be sold for non resident hunters
and we want to make that point
very clearly madam chair and
senator that that system is
unaffected by this legislation
further madam chair and senator
the small the shift from this
set aside these licenses once
someone puts into the draw
resident hunter puts into the
draw they drop that tags for a
unit say it's.
you know out where where we are
unit twenty one they are still
absolutely free to look up a
list of outfitters in unit
twenty one and say I want to go
with this outfit or in unit
twenty one because I just drew a
hunting tag that I hadn't been
able to draw for years prior to
this so we we do make the point
madam chair and senator that the
E. plus system and the other
private land authorizations that
are part of the current process
are foundational to the guide in
outfitting industry.
Thirty times or more
idiom fifteen times or more what
this current small set aside is
and that those private land
systems continue on altered by
SB three twelve.
Thank you madam chair.
That's.
Next senator Neville Senator
souls.
Then Senator Hamblen we will
next go to center renewable.
Thank you madam chair what the
Representative small was talking
about has to do with the vote
wrong numbers and I don't know
how many out of staters
participate in that what this
bill does do and as I understand
it I want to clarify is it
reduces the draw them the I'm
sorry cool numbers from the
current eighty four percent and
and again we've excluded job
tags in the state reserves and
some other areas like that but
it reduces the draw numbers from
eighty four percent to ninety
percent is that not correct
sponsors Madam chair Senator
yes.
That is about a forty percent
reduction in the business that's
hello allotted to the guides is
well about forty percent your
take is that not.
A correct statement.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator to my understanding
madam chair and senator because
the these private land
authorizations are the fed the
vast majority of that business
for the vast majority of guides
and outfitters that that that is
not.
Wait when we look at the
entirety of hunting in New
Mexico the guiding and
outfitting industry madam chair
and senator that
Then that no that would not be
the case and madam chair and
senator we don't know how many
New Mexicans if given these
extra thousand plus hunting
opportunities will choose to
contract with guides and
outfitters
But but I think we I believe
that some will and the they
would they have that fair market
opportunity under the
legislation but isn't it fair to
state madam chairman so
Representative that or or
Senator you the one that most in
state hunters do not contract
with the director with the guide
some do I grant you but most in
state hunters like you go out
with the grandfather of they go
out with their son like I would
go with my son every year if I
can we don't draw either but we
go out and we hunt and we don't
engage you guys we go out and
camp somewhere go to somebody's
cabin or whatever works out
forced.
That is the the general
situation so most of the what I
guess what I'm getting at is
most of the permits were talking
about reducing.
Are sold for the most part to
out of staters.
You madam chair of your.
Madam chair and senator it yes.
And.
Did you and the the other
sponsor senator didn't you guys
cosponsored with me an outdoor
recreation bill a couple years
ago.
Madam chair Senator out proudly.
We did and it was one of the
governor's bills and it was the
idea was we want to promote and
enhance outdoor recreation state
in New Mexico under water but
it's thinking about but outdoor
recreation in rat tone and
reserving more a role in spring
or an eagle nest and trauma all
of those communities and a whole
bunch of others are reliant
heavily upon these outdoor this
outdoor recreation which is
coming tax and that concerns me
I I think I've got a lot of
things in your bill I like to
misunderstand but when it comes
to the guide to the landowners
I'm gonna talk about this a
little bit because I think we're
actually if you to make this
into three bills I'm not a voted
for two but the one that deals
with the the landowners in the
and the.
The guides that are gonna
actually hamper and hurt
economic development rural New
Mexico I have to be very very
concerned about.
That's eighty four dollars
ninety percent chain or nineteen
whatever that is ninety to
percent change in permits is
going to devastate all of those
guys and it's you take forty
percent of the revenue it has
to.
I'm.
Very concerned about that I
don't think people I believe
there the carcass laying up in
the hills I don't mind that part
of the of the bill.
The math doesn't bother me much
what you want to call the agency
that doesn't bother you too much
either it does bother me though
that we're changing some.
additional longstanding
tradition Mexico.
That have established these
businesses and cause them to to
thrive in the red tones and in
those communities excuse me it
does concern me a great deal we
take that section of the bill
and we are going to put people
at issue ten yeah they can sell
a few tags to some Albuquerque
guy or whatever but.
When they rely on bringing
people from out of state bring
dollars from out of state and
helping people to.
Make a living and support
families hire people in those
kind of things I'm very very
concerned about that.
Something like I was told that
are of the some accurate number
not there's two hundred and
fifty to three hundred died
companies in the state the
higher through four thousand
people told that you take forty
percent out of that is it's
going to kill some of it just
has to what really concerns me I
I would listen to responsibly
that the Sanchez wanted to say
anything about that.
I'm just saying that I'm I'm
concerned about it and I think
it goes against what we all
supported when we're trying to
do the outdoor recreation bill
couple years.
Well.
Representative madam chair
Senator.
I know Representative small has
on on the the abundant
opportunities that exist in a
plus and the fact that local
residents to hire out that are
sometimes but I appreciate your
concern more certainly intend to
the bill isn't hurt anybody we
are trying to certainly create
some equity for New Mexico
residents but up but I just want
to say as far as the economic
impacts rural New Mexico I would
remind everybody that if you
replace who that tag goes to.
You're still gonna have a hunter
going traveling into a community
spending money on gas.
Going to a hotel meeting up on
and in fact I think that public
Oscar sit inside this earlier
but they have done studies that
talk about that a resident
sportsmen is going to spend more
money in the state of New Mexico
buying their gear buying your
weapon behind their their
ammunition so I think actually
you you you may replace the
economic impact of someone
coming from out of state for
someone coming from within the
state except that person coming
within the state is actually
spending more money on I'm here
and staff and not bring that
weapon with them so from out of
state but that but I would let
Representative small if he had
anything else he wanted out
about the the impact of the
authors and sells.
Senator.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and thank you senator
briefly
to to emphasize the point madam
chair and senator that if we
find more resident hunting
opportunity that's going to be a
higher economic value year round
buying guns archery equipment
ammunition.
Year round and then the same hot
will take place during the
season and madam chair and
senator.
The last numbers that I saw in
the Alps that our pool for last
year there are roughly one
hundred and seventy or so
outfitters some of those
outfitters madam chair and
senator we're actually out of
state in Arizona and other
states so they simply use the
set aside as a way to funnel
business their way yet they
don't live in the state of New
Mexico they don't serve New
Mexico high honors and finally
madam chair and senator.
When we look at the
the roughly one thousand or so
licenses that we're talking
about here the majority of which
go to non residents a minority
that are currently order by and
by residents providing revenue
they are you know you we're
looking at my numbers madam
chair and senator there's over
fifteen thousand five hundred
just LFC licenses that go
through that you plus system and
and all of these communities
that were mentioned we have
private land some like in the
north and northeast part of the
state that are very large
private a you know very land
large landholding systems others
that are smaller even the small
ones receive through the E. plus
system and through the private
land authorizations for both
deer and antelope significant
opportunity they get those
licenses madam chair and senator
and usually those licenses are
sold to outfitters in order to
then sell to the highest bidder
which is almost always out of
state so madam chair Senator I I
firmly believe that this is not
a forty percent impact to the
guide in outfitting industry in
the state madam chair and
senator I think at most when
we're looking at these licenses
it may be
It is a much much smaller.
Potential number and the fact
that the New Mexico residents
can continue to hire those
guides and outfitters is think
finally have just closed chair
and senator and deeply
appreciating your work and your
leadership Senator renewable
is that.
Many New Mexico outfitters and
guides choose not to participate
in this pool.
For myriad reasons they have
existing relationships with
landowners that are long
standing and that stand both the
landowner and the outfit or well
they are uncertain about this
system because the system can
promote financial speculation
and forcing folks to go through
just to have the chance they
have to enter into financial
contracts that can rub some
people the wrong way so I think
that
not all many New Mexico guides
and outfitters don't participate
in this pool they do their
business in an incredible way in
outside means and therefore in
the ways of trying to find a
little more resident opportunity
and get up to that ninety ten
standard this legislation
strikes the right balance thank
you madam chair.
Thank you thank you for
Representative Madam chair of.
The I haven't touched on
landowners but landowner permits
or another concern I have.
If if those numbers are impacted
significantly.
I think you're looking at not
all ranchers are rich of Chicago
based financiers own ranches and
so permits many of more small
landowners they're a family
owned the they've been there my
dad's ranch forever was a family
on deal.
You.
The smaller farms and ranches
heavily rely on sometime in many
cases these permits to.
They may or may not use guides
of people come out and hunt they
charge a couple grand or some
number like that but it's half
of what the then make to support
their operation may actually
come from these purposes they
sell.
And I'm concerned about what
we're doing to the game permits
and the.
I I'm I think we're looking at
devastating a lot of people if
this bill goes through its
current form if you again if you
split a couple things out
separately market supported with
the bill having this these two
provisions which brought
provisions I'm very concerned.
Madam chair I'm a member of
pheasants forever rocky mountain
elk foundation San Juan wildlife
foundation sportsmen's caucus
I'm really and conservation
activities I was a district
conservation district in RCS for
a long time this is stuff I live
and breathe but this concerns me
madam chair I think.
Economic development standpoint
to.
The rural areas are going to
suffer significantly some more
than others I grant you one guy
maybe a better marketer than
another and he maybe I'll draw
some of the instruments down to
his location but overall broadly
it's it's a significant
reduction of the permits for the
guides and landowners can be
effective I'm very concerned
about it and in supported in its
current form and I hope that the
rest of committee will listen
and and discuss it hello thank
you madam.
Thank you where you are now
going to Senator soul soul
committee
Center hand one hundred question
asked in center city Lopez I'm
asking you to take over.
Okay.
Are
you ready for me.
Yes Senator.
Thank you.
And first you madam chair is
Mike Sloan available is the
director of the.
And I think he is in the waiting
room and that I've got some
questions that are very specific
to the current condition.
If I can direct some of that
direction with the doctor.
Mr went.
Madam chair I am.
Thank you I just want to make
sure that he did get on it would
be available for answering some
of the questions first question
is what was the public input
process for developing this
bill.
Madam chair I'm I'm directed to
the sponsor Senator Steinborn or
districts are small
Representative small Senator
Senator.
Madam chair the concept.
From.
I'm not I'm.
Okay welcome you to I'm Madam
chair Senator you know these
protections in these bills have
been discussed for years now I
know in one particular case on
the process day wildlife
federation put it out to their
members to have thousands of
responses we are set to these I
know you have introduced pieces
of this question so what I want
to say we have added this to the
best we could between a variety
of groups and and that it public
forms for years it at the
department and in committee
first as well so I think we did
a lot of that in this
legislation.
Madam chair my question was what
was the public input process for
this particular bill because we
have never seen a bill two
hundred forty one pages yeah we
had bits and pieces what was the
public input process with this
bill.
madam chair Senator the same is
all built we're having we're
having a committee hearing right
now and probably I don't know
how many hearings on any bill
that any member introduced as
part of the session if they held
a public hearing for the
legislature.
Yes probably zero but but I
think in this particular case on
that sort of invented heavily
over the years and the
legislature and with
organizations and and in this
case with our equipment off.
So madam chair and senator what
you're saying is there was not a
public input process as part of
this bill
and so not Senator.
Senator it indicated I think I
remember which Senator but asked
about.
Two other things you indicated
the draft bill was presented to.
Alright and when was that and
Well madam chair I I probably
should look at my email and get
an exact date but I mean that
we're we're talking.
Months ago prior to the
legislative session to the
direct to his deputy.
To a game commissioners.
Madam chair and senator I'm sure
he would care.
Verify that right now online.
Madam chair and and senator as
does the game commission support
this bill.
But not.
Sir Senator your your sheet it's
freezing a little bit.
I don't know if my fetus reason
at all but
I think what you said is does
again commissions forward as I
said earlier there are neutral
on it I was just making the
point that we have had with the
people who professionally
managed just are not.
At a time.
So I guess my question might be
to to director Sloan as the game
and fish department.
When did you first see this bill
and that will you all support
the the changes in the name and
other provisions within this
bill.
Madam chair center thanks for
the question
I guess I think that her side
version of the bill sometime
before the holidays those are an
eighty nine version we had a
teleconference with the Senator
Steinborn Representative small
your discussed technical issues
with that
Next time I saw the bill was
Saturday before was introduced
at which point it was two
hundred and thirty six pages.
And the bill as introduced as
two hundred and forty one
As the state.
The state game commission has
not taken a position on it.
Madam chair and and director
Sloan as the commission had any
public discussions of the
provisions within this bill.
Madam chair Senator now.
Thank you
I've got a couple of different
sets of notes that I've been
trying to work through here
What
what portion of this bill is
madam chair and senator is
changing the name of yeah there
was a fiscal impact report that
first indicated three million
dollars what was that based on
is there examples of any other
states should have done this and
it cost in both states.
What are you asking me well it's
it's a curious question
madam chair standard because the
same I'll have a fiscal impact
one one point five million just
a year ago so apparently the
most inflationary R. thank you
to do in in in other countries
to change the name of the
department I don't know what
it's based upon I will say that
research looking at Californians
some other states the impact has
been in the hundreds of
thousands of dollars so it's
it's a moving target.
And one that
Has not been transparent we
don't see what that is based
upon but having said that the
the amendment that we introduced
I think kind of mitigates that
in the house.
But.
This made me on both for Senator
and for director Sloan two years
ago when a bill was introduced
like this one of the major
concern was that there was no
funding attached for an
increased mission of the
department what the projected.
increased costs for expanding
the mission and director phone
that yeah I might ask you first
what what do you see as the
fiscal impact of an expanded
authority.
Madam chair Senator at the way
the bills drafted that will
really depend partly on on what
species the commission chooses
to adopt
but relative if we just take a
group of species of greatest
conservation need us there to
find both in our our wildlife
plan and in the very that
statute the proposed bill
our estimation of the cost
manage those is about twenty
seven million dollars annually.
And and we we develop that cost
based on looking at something
called the recovering America's
wildlife act which would provide
federal funding to the state for
those nations greatest
conservation need
And that that we would need
about nine million dollars in
match to be able to attend that
funding should the that pastor
federal program Congress.
Senator please well I'm not
always.
Yes I would just say that's not
right thank you madam chair
that's an outrageous statement
to make are you madam chair that
not this bill would cost twenty
seven million R. at the first
statement is an accurate
statement the second statement
is typical game researching
amount around the legislature
where are.
You know where we stand
inflation numbers kind of like
we saw with the doubling of the
value of the name change is just
the year of this bill does not
mandate any species be managed
beyond what is manage right now
if the if the commission chooses
to manage a species Department
then they incur a cost for that
I will say that we have secured.
Oxley three hundred thousand in
junior funding this session
already for the species of
conservation greatest concern to
do proactive management but the
bill itself doesn't actually in
current other you know penny of
liability to the Department
Alaska liability chooses to do
that so that's the the true and
correct answer.
Chair Senators souls of.
Senator so do you want to to
given opportunity of for a
director slow to respond.
And madam chair that some other
questions along the state line
that might help clarify things a
little bit.
Well my concern is my concern is
to give him an opportunity to
respond to what Senator
Steinborn said which was a
little bit and senator which we
we don't want to have that of
what we want to have is a debate
and so I'm just asking if it
like senator like
Mr Sloan wanted to respond
director someone to respond
would you you all for that.
If that object.
Chair thank you and I I
apologize the sponsor really
didn't mean to imply costs where
what I was trying to say was it
the state game commission chose
to adopt coverage for all
species of greatest conservation
need to give a sense of scale
that would be about twenty seven
million dollars for as I started
my conversation with it really
would depend on what the
commission under statutory
construction chose to cover so
they chose not to cover any
additional species there would
be no additional cost to cover
all species of greatest
conservation need there would be
a twenty seven million dollar
cost potentially and so I
apologize for my lack of
clarity.
Thank you director.
Thank you madam chair one of the
comments that was made by a one
of the experts I think it was a
the speech was had to do with it
with additional authority
usually becomes with additional
resources this indicates that
the commission is equipped with
all the tools to manage
wildlife.
Is there a cost for those
additional tools to manage all
wildlife we we we need to be
equipped with the tools that
additional authority usually
requires additional resources
this greatly increases the
authority of the commission.
And madam chair Senator I agree
that we need to get additional
resources for the department
that is why we secured that's
why the bill contains an
appropriation because Senate
finance that is why you know we
secured three hundred thousand
dollars of funding that exist
right now in your funding
the Ming a good sign in a lot
too as a down payment now that
building those over that house
we will hopefully secure more
money and that is why the
department itself and this was
kind of a challenge frankly with
this bill at this moment from a
funding perspective the
department itself is doing the
funding study of permanent
funding streams potential
funding streams to increase the
resources to this department so
I think you know obviously you
have my commitment we have
You know it is the goal of this
bill to to raise revenue along
with us.
But the good thing is it doesn't
force the commission to do
anything it that the commission
ultimately have the levers of.
You know they're able to make
decisions based upon resources
which the wildlife conservation
act within chapter seventeen or
you got it it yes we talk about
you know dealing with he sees it
as special the recovery's plans
when practicable it there's all
kinds language already on law
that has that gas totaled based
upon resources what we're
certainly trying to do though is
put us on a trajectory to not
only get more action but thank
you raise the funding level for
this department moving forward
but I mean we're certainly
backing that up with action.
Hence the junior money in the
appropriation of the bill.
The madam chair I might point
out the appropriation bill is
just for all the technical thing
it doesn't do much on the
expanded authority three hundred
thousand in the big scheme of
things for what for this
department is pretty small for
the expanded authority to all
wildlife as opposed to get
fishing game wildlife and so I
know as far as for the
commissioners it with them in
the the position of having to
deal with all kinds of other
wildlife situations and
management without the money for
the tools to manage that two and
again to equipped with the tools
to manage is we've given them
the authority we haven't put
them with the tools to manage
and so I've I've got a huge
concern there about the cost of
all of it that when those are
not part of the bill those are
all we hope to get yeah we we
can in the future to do so hides
the budget and senator I just
want to be clear number one the
bill and I appreciate your
concern madam chair
billing million dollar
appropriation for species of
greatest conservation need.
It also has a million for the
name change but it has
specifically money for this
expanded authority to manage
species of greatest conservation
eight that was the very first
call I had with the director
before there was about I said if
we were to get you funding
should be this be where we
target and he said yes so I want
to be clear on that
So anyway and you know for the
the the department itself and
and some of the leadership they
did not want to pre judge the
funding study that's being done
to look at permanent funding
streams so what this bill does
is it creates a a create to
await a prank bring funding now
while we wait on that study to
happen but again the department
has but on the gas on how much
they do or don't.
One and two one of the other
areas the the Japanese law I
actually carry that might when I
got into the legislature I think
yeah the way it currently is
written is is has serious
problems
with the expanded up toward the
of the commission and with the
changes in the Jennings while
I've got taken out of my house
right almost right on the edge
of the national monument
am I able to coyotes killing my
chickens.
Yes ma'am madam chair Senator
yes because because the generate
because the cut that a child is
an unprotected I manage the seas
of the state of New Mexico where
Jennings really what would put
some restrictions is having to
do with protected species
killing them out of season and
issues like that with a coyote
that's an advantage.
A species or other managed
species the Jennings those are
impact that.
So madam chair just arrived
we're killing my chickens would
I be able to shoot the cover.
Madam chair it's I will just say
that if it is an animal that
falls under I Jennings under a
managed managed basis like that
it's completely possible again
it was the I will say again
commissioner specifically.
You may now who suggested
language that would require that
the commission and this is in
this legislation that would
require that the commission
actually make a role to give
guidance on when and how what
economic an animal may be taken
so I I think the anticipation
was they want to create an order
to that to that rather than have
it just be
no no structure to it whatsoever
so it's it's completely possible
to answer your question is yes
but we would be we can have
authority to the game commission
right roll call on that.
You know it would be expanded
authority of the came back with
you if it helps we got John
Crenshaw here who can answer
that specifically as well I know
he's been very involved in that.
Madam chair with the expanded
rulemaking authority for the
state game commission if the
gate Christian justice stripper
tiles and I know through some of
the animal
I don't want a mammal protection
because they're not the ones
that people that are out very
much concerned about animal
welfare if they choose
projectiles with that then they
get where it was killing my
chickens I would be allowed to
protect my chickens.
madam chair again that's you
know kind of a hypothetical
situation you could you could
come up with any kind of
hypothetical so I don't know
that that's necessarily
reasonable to make me defend
what may be an unreasonable
scenario you're painting that
hasn't occurred so I I can't
speak for the come on that it
center would be helpful it it
might let me just ask it is
that.
RT.
Good again Commission
projectiles.
I'm madam chair Senator they
could and also under the same
authority they could say that
you could probably kill a coyote
if they were threatening your
check.
The madam chair I think under
the most common depredation
concerns within the commission
right now is deprivations Iraqi
the box
Our record boxes managed to
protected species.
Good question if they are
managed for bears I would
actually deferred to to John
Crenshaw if you know the answer
to that and if not maybe the
maybe the director we know the
answer.
R. yes thank you R. Jonker
Jareth wildlife federation madam
chair committee members
raccoons and date are the
leading cause of depredation
complaints to the gamefish
Armos Irish and that there are
protected for more
and yes
the landowner property owner
could be a quite legally kill a
raccoon if they so chose
and I think we're the the real
impetus for this change came
from is has far more to do with
state governments really agreed
yes Representative the killing
So.
We're basically
to real truthful they were done
as a great big middle finger to
the game and fish department
into the sports net New Mexico
who can not a bite this time but
not to go in wasteful.
What kind of activity
and I would really hope that the
agricultural community will look
to itself and look away and and
recent move their support for
this but the the fact is in
terms of the conspecific way yes
you gain Commission under this
new law chose to give protection
to a copy of the signed while
also gives the commission the
option of not responding to
depredation complaints by
Countyto and our I would really
hope that that would be of the
path I chose of Senator souls
this product one of the very
serious concerns disorganization
of the sportsman hand of our
having the department
responsible for representation
by coyotes so is one and and I'm
not making this up in my case
packrats they do a tremendous
amount of damage to automobiles
for instance and
but that that clause in the wall
that would give the commission
options not to address
depredation and nuisance
complaints by.
Protected species are made it
palatable to our organization is
there some helpful of we're
gonna pass her having a question
asked.
Thank you madam chair and and
that is helpful and I realize
what's the the concerns about
this Larson very egregious
things wear out landowners went
out blasted and injured a whole
herd of elk to the middle Rio
Grande area it was was
horrendous I'll but I think it's
important because what we write
law the words back adders all of
the hypotheticals have to be
accountable because I thought
that it goes to happen in the in
the future.
And.
I I guess I'd like to ask
director Sloan
Now if you have kind of
deprivation does the commission
deal with those and with the
changes in authority does that
change anything as far as how
the commission would deal with
depredation of species such as
coyotes raccoons foxes.
Madam chair Senator
I I think what you're asking is
no.
The commission would have to
take by the way the statute
instruction the commission would
have to take authority over
Highlights and then would have
to determine by rule how
deprivation would be addressed I
believe that's that's
essentially what the proposal is
so you know I I would anticipate
that we would get input from a
large number of folks on a
variety of species and the
commission would have to Wade
through what the issues were
were not appropriate to try to
regulate and how fast if at all
to address depredation issues I
will say that if hi it's we're
protected and were the
commission opted for doing that
with deprivation it would be a
massive undertaking.
Thank you
Something very technical on page
forty five of the forty four and
forty five of the bill.
And.
Page forty four online seventeen
in under deal with Terry with
the wildlife to be protected
I got the number of calls to
people that indicate that all
kinds of things are going to be
a legal with this bill.
Under that to be protected are
there any expansions of what is
protected.
Over what's currently protected
as a result of this report is
this just give beginning the
commission the ability to
protect those if needed in the
future.
I just want to remind you to go
through the chair Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you madam chair Senator I
know you you're you're a lot of
state was correct Senator it
does not the the the the bills
does not preach defacto protect
anything else it gives authority
to to the to the commission and
Furthermore the amendment we
added to beginning a meeting
Furthermore says that any.
Madam requisite permits or
anything that would flow from
that also would only happen by a
permit for.
sorry by rule or law.
And so madam chair over on page
forty five now where it lists
what wildlife needs the
definition and the thing that
people would call that we're
concerned about what shed
antlers that they would be
prohibited from collecting shed
antlers it and maybe this is a
question for director Sloan is
under the current Authority has
the commission in that **** at
employers are prohibited or need
a permit or anything of that
sort at this time.
Mr Sloan.
Madam chair Senator the
commission has.
Heard from that other states
have programs where they permit
shed collection electors but the
department and the commission do
not have any regulations
regarding those right now.
Thank you and I think that's
important point because I've had
several calls madam chair who.
Indicated that they would be
prevented from doing that it's
going to be what that they can't
do that and that's clearly not
the case this is just a little
technical thank god for the
sponsor on section state Yanick
clearly indicates yes eggs on
offspring's gentler towards that
body parts of non domestic
animals birds reptiles
amphibians fish or a bird street
species am I wrong is there
anything that is not either a
bird recording.
Right we all.
I think my biology it's either a
bird breeder and invertebrate I
don't think we got
I'm gonna turn my wildlife
biologist expert here if I may
madam chair senator Kevin Bixby
and I John to answer that
question because they workers.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Madam chair Senator.
Your racks the.
Mammal bird reptile amphibian
fish.
Covers.
All right so I'm aware of.
And then it so yes.
You it probably could be written
more efficiently but it this
gives it a certain amount of
clarity I spoke.
Madam chair I understand but as
I was reading through it I think
vertebrates and invertebrates
pretty darn clear I doubt yeah
I'm not sure that necessarily
has to be changed but I was
trying very hard to think of it
back to my biology and and
Comparative anatomy is the steep
there was anything that didn't
under those categories up and I
know I'm going on but this is a
big deal with multiple sections
that are very dispiriting from
each other up and so I want to
now get into all of the concerns
about the guides and outfitters
and the licenses and tags that
no all of those different pieces
and so madam chair and senator.
Is mentioned in this bill.
Madam chair Senator now.
What the discussion about the E.
plus system which is that
private landowner draw system
where private landowners are
guaranteed a number of bonds
This might be more for director
slowing what is the current cost
of an in state license and then
I would have state of crisis and
and I realized how the bulls are
different so let's ask Google.
Madam chair center so that way
that a resident pays around
seventy dollars plus stamps and
things like that and a
nonresident depending on the
type of on they have is the the
five hundred and twenty five or
seven fifty.
Madam chair and in this
particular legislation what is
the host of fees for in state
and out out of state for
licenses.
Madam chair senator thank the
resident hunting license stays
the same and the non resident
ball out licenses standardized
so that seven hundred fifty
dollars Madam chair Senator.
Madam chair in and this is
probably to director slowed out
what is the typical out of state
the license in our neighboring
states our our auto Arizona.
Madam chair center I I don't
have that in front of me right
this minute but I I think we are
we've been evaluating that and I
think we're a little bit on the
low end but close to the
average.
So madam chair when when people
are indicating that you know all
of the out of state hunters are
going to be.
It's New Mexico still a bargain
for a out of state license
compared to other states and we
might even include my opinion
that.
Madam chair Senator yes.
Thank you
Madam chair and senator and I'm
not sure who wants to answer are
there any other areas where
private businesses have a
guaranteed right to a public
resource wait while by.
I'm having some problems of my
computer's moving a little bit
slow with the tracking I didn't
hear the first part of your
question if something else did
you what.
Senator I I am not aware of
those private setasides of these
public resources madam chair and
senator.
Thank you madam chair and I
couldn't think of any other
place where I public resource as
a guarantee setasides a private
business.
and so I I realize the guides
and outfitters that the joint
that I mean it's been very
lucrative to them I believe the
cost for hiring a guide for that
ten percent guarantee setasides
is on the order of five thousand
dollars and for the purchase of
the Hey for the right to private
the hashtags another couple of
thousand dollars for an L. and
so we of the state are giving
some of our private resource our
state resources to private
entities
and I'm not a lawyer but that
sure seems like that's violating
some of the anti donation clause
is that we may have within a
state.
under the three twelve can
openers purchased license for
their clients from the private
landowners.
Madam chair Senator yes.
Madam chair and and
Representative can they be
either from a unit wider
originally.
Madam chair Senator yes.
And Madam chair representative
on the ranch only tags whether
only able to the hunt on a
particular branch of the very
large ranches use those ranchers
eserver those for the outfitters
and not allow others on.
Madam chair Senator yes that's
my understanding.
On the ranch only tags that are
that are available you I can
private landowners then charge
an access fee for hunters to
come on in addition to the tag.
Madam chair Senator yes.
All
there is under this bill won't
have a guaranteed allotment.
Is that likely to drive up the
value of the landowner tags okay
the unit wide in the rent only
tags because that's where the
out of state hunters would have
access to.
Madam chair Senator slightly
yes.
Madam chair representative with
this benefit benefit wildlife as
the landowners what you're going
to be there while.
Madam chair Senator yes.
And so you know I I think some
of the sky is falling of that
the other bidders will have no
clients go out of business
it is difficult to comprehend
that is there anything that the
the the outfitters from guiding
in state residents.
The thing that prohibits that
madam chair and senator.
And so and I I might ask two
questions on you other states
have a set aside for driving
this might be that the
directors funding to other state
certified public proper
equipment for guides and
outfitters.
Madam chair senator I'm not
aware that they do.
What you're saying you this is
unique to New Mexico to have any
guarantee draw for a guaranteed
amount of licenses for a private
organization
Do other states have such a
large set aside for private
landowners.
And again this probably the
directors loan manager.
You're just.
Madam chair Senator it it it's
very difficult to compare New
Mexico to other states I I
recognize that the program
evaluation of the LFC tried to
do that not sure okay the
caption reality of of the
systems in each state Utah for
example.
There is a your different
on means of applying sort of a
landowner system.
So.
Our system here is is unique and
is non I think you top pays
compensation direct cast your
procs.
of incentivizing Senator allow
animals on that property.
So it's a it's a very mixed bag
it's really difficult to compare
across states.
Your I would just add.
However that a a neighbor state
that is the state of Arizona
shares perhaps the most
valuable.
wildlife resources that is L.
Campbell out we believe over the
roughly thirty percent after
passage of three twelve oak
licenses would go through that
try that.
Landowner system and and and as
you establish Senator most of
those will go to non residents
at very high prices in Arizona
madam chair and senator it's
less than ten percent of total
licenses in on rural so we're
three acts in New Mexico more
licenses going to non residents
in the in the elk for LFC
specifically than in our
neighboring state of Arizona
that shares the same habitat in
in some cases they more.
Thank you and and and.
Just about done I promise
under the north American model
of hunting which is often seen
this guy the gold standard in
the world for ensuring that the
wildlife belong to the people at
the residence of the state.
One of the basic tenants is the
non Kirk commercialization of
wildlife out.
Madam chair and senator or
representative do you see that
the they guarantee set aside
for.
Guides and outfitters that is
that a commercialization of the
Mexico's while.
Madam chair Senator yes.
And then my last question along
these lines madam chair our
guidance out there is allowed to
guide at white sands missile
range for the order.
On federal property.
Is.
Madam chair.
That all directors loan please.
Madam chair Senator now.
And madam chair and director is
there reason for that you know
what what that is.
Madam chair Senator you know
that such a controlled area of
that usually are person that
this court or military personnel
that have scored hunters it's a
very controlled environment.
Madam chair and and director I I
are there out of state licenses
available there.
Madam chair Senator yes.
Chair and director what is the
cost of an out of state works
license on the range.
Again madam chair center don't
have that right in front of me
but I think it's on the order of
fifteen to sixteen hundred
dollars.
Thank you and I think that's
important that we already have
areas of New Mexico that
guidance what about a state
hunters are hunting very
successfully without being
required required to hire a
guide and I better in order to
come and hunt the state lands of
New Mexico madam chair this bill
gives me lots of problems
It it's a bill that deal goes
into a number of areas some of
which are highly supportive of
and some areas where I'm very
critical out of I hate bills
like this eight in general
because I don't think we get the
best law out of the bills like
this where we put some things
everybody likes can we get some
things people don't like you
they're together instead of
debating these individual issues
and I think very much like
senator Neville I would have
much preferred that was done as
three or four separate bills
because I'm really torn as to
how I need to vote on a bill
like this because as I indicated
there some parts that I think
needed to be done and fixed and
there are some parts that I
think this is where
overstretched without the
resources to do so so I'm sure
I'll relinquish at that point
thank you for allowing me to ask
questions.
Thank you senator souls Senator
smitteez.
Let me please make a comment
here thank you center city Lopez
as many as and then Senator gray
because we are going to try to
take a vote by one o'clock and
finish up on this bill so it is
not carried over so Senator
committee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee and
senator
actually I just love serving on
this committee it's it's this
bill and and people's comments
of been so insightful and it
just brings in so many issues
together so it's it's really
been a pleasure to to learn a
lot from for you all
I'm gonna just just say that
you know I I I I think like like
everyone on this committee I
love my district alone
representing my district and I I
come from a.
My district has taken a great
deal of interest in in this bill
we have a lot of public lands
you know people live I I live
out here because I live I don't
own a rancher anything but we
will space out here we we get to
do birdwatching event bears deer
in in in our our yard and all
kinds of wildlife is just
amazing and then the the portion
of my district that lives in
Albuquerque proper they live
right there in the foothills
they they love to go out hiking
and and the public lands are
just right there so it's it's
just been a real neat process
not given this bill grateful I
spend a lot of time on the
phone.
Constituents lot of time looking
at emails and things and so I
want to just take you know a lot
of issues been brought up I I'm
I'm I'm gonna try to be highly
selective of of of the issues
but I I found it very
interesting.
Then I I think Senator was just
a question about where do we you
know probably privatize.
Public resources in and when we
talk about water because water
has been a very important issue
in my district and I sponsored
legislation on on water in the
past and was in the house
I you know water if you read the
New Mexico station it says the
water our water belongs to us as
long as the people in Mexico but
we do guarantee people Water
Rights we we we guarantee
private companies Water Rights
and so I I do think that is an
example maybe of what you're
seeing now is not the exact same
thing but we do guarantee that
public resources for private
entities as well as private
landowners and which brings me
to my first point
The mid madam chair in center
have have have you seen the New
Mexico state the NMAA use
a position paper on the Jennings
Law.
Madam chair Senator no I have
not okay
madam chair and senator this was
just brought to me wasn't
brought to me by an organization
it was just brought to me by a
constituent who's a friend of
mine he said Hey this bills
coming up here you go and I
think you know even in these
areas obviously that this is a
fairly you know what a lot of a
lot of tension here lot lot lot
lot of support and a lot of
opposition and so I try to
remain as academic as possible
we when we have a contentious
bills or or controversial bills
when I just read a couple of
things from their position paper
it's pretty easy to find online
if you want to find it but
the end they talk about water
development which I find highly
fascinating so New Mexico state
when they when they studied this
they said and I quote
substantial water development
across private property state
police and federal lands by
private property owners has led
to increased wildlife carrying
capacities were no naturally
occurring water existed
resettlement they go to the
history of that and so what that
means to me is it means okay
you've got these people that
have.
At their own costs developed
wells and then now B. because we
have a high value for bowl L.
they they pump water not only
for their livestock but they
they pump water for the benefit
of a lot of public resources and
so on the other hand you know we
have we have a proc private
entities.
Private landowners that are
contributing to the overall
welfare of the public shared
resource so I want to make sure
that we are at least.
Respecting.
The the there's there's give and
take on the public private issue
the the U. S. we don't want
private.
Our public resources but we also
want to recognize for the
benefit of the public how all
those private entities are
contributing in so New Mexico
state did this great analysis
and they found that because of
of what private property owners
have done they've brought in
water resources to benefit our
wildlife populations is so when
we when we compare New Mexico to
Colorado Wyoming Arizona it's so
different because we don't
really have right we don't have
great rainfall and we don't have
great service water you know we
we we rely a lot on ground water
and that's what these private
property owners have done for
the public at the benefit of the
public however they are
compensated.
By being able to sell both LFC
tax because Boyle just happen to
be very valuable and and which
gets me to another point if we
do value wildlife woe to the
wildlife if if our private
property owner stop pumping
water at their expense.
What's going to happen to the
habitat for a lot of not just L.
but a lot of other animals that
benefit from that water so the
water has been brought up but it
was brought up on Mexico state
and I just wanted to in that
into the conversation because if
if we start even even
By by accident or by the
incident you know incidentally
unintentionally if we start
messing with our our water
developments we're we're we're
gonna get ready to take a close
look at that I think and and I
don't think we have time to
really go fully into that maybe
Mexico state can continue to
look at this issue all this
region more quotes from their
study and I quote reasonable
regulatory mechanisms are
essential in providing relief to
private property owners okay so
they're talking about Jennings
Law.
and then finally at the bottom
the other quote the current New
Mexico law is a reasonable
working solution so you know
personally I mean I don't you
know and I don't own chickens
and things and I don't I haven't
had any damage my property I'm
just trying to go with what the
academics are saying and so they
seem to think this is a proper
balance although I would say
that listening to this
conversation
I you know I I I don't want to
nobody wants to see these abuses
were someone's killing an elk
herd and so I I don't think
there's gonna be any you're not
gonna hear opposition to that
for anybody and so I think as to
what's under schools and
centered on renewable or saying
that perhaps we need to revisit
some enforceability there to
prevent some sort of Regis
behavior but I I think at this
point based on what what I'm
looking at from our premier
agricultural university I I I
feel like we should leave us
alone
and then finally it also say
with with we know Wyoming
Montana Arizona in I'm not
trying to be partisan you know
you talk the the states have an
even Colorado Colorado has
traditionally been read the to
develop their private property
policy over years of of having
more conservative approach to
this in in private property on
the policy has become kind of a
partisan deal in in their in
recent years and so you know
there I I looked up Montana's
laws and and they have maybe I
think at fourteen I counted
fourteen different programs for
compensating private property
owners and so I you know my my
understanding of of of this back
to the private and public
tension is constitutionally fit
federal are US constitution in
the state constitution both say
that the public a public entity
cannot take your private
property or or damage your
private property if that first
compensation has to occur in so
many a question here and madam
chair and senator
that to me when we're removing
the Jennings Law and we're
putting in rural and saying okay
you guys make a rule I mean this
this is kind of advocating some
of our legislative authority
which which I think all of us
are a little hesitant to do
sometimes but but because we're
dealing with a constitutional
problem and potential while.
Education here.
Do you do I mean is this was
this intentional to to take this
power away from the legislature
instead of reforming in state
statute just saying to the game
commission here you go just go
make a rural and and you it
better be constitutional.
Well and I don't madam chair
Senator Representative really
what we're doing is we're
treating landowners M. as we
treat hunters what we have a lot
right now is an exception to the
way we treat these protected
wildlife so what we're actually
we're actually kind of leveling
that the treatment of those
animals to are to the same kind
of ethics issues that that dealt
with with protected animals in
the normal researching by having
the game commission evaluate the
appropriate
situational responses to those
threats rather than just thank
you can cart lunch car plunged
Gillen I will states interesting
there's a bill in the past we
had a former legislative Dona
Ana County who introduced bills
every year to try to create a.
A fund to compensate landowners
I think it was the game and fish
directly because I was on the
house Appropriations Committee
at that time and I remember
director Santa former director
came and fetched projector Sloan
coming and they were opposed to
the bill and they said that that
was anti donation.
It was the department's position
on that just a little bit of
interesting history but it's on
that would be my answer
Representative you madam chair
Senator just also to point out
that the by far the greatest
source of camp compensation for
landowners Pacific Lee without
but also the other species is
the plus system Madam chair
Senator that system is unchanged
by this legislation in that
system thirty percent of all elk
licenses in New Mexico will
continue to go to landowners and
that for presents a severity
significant market opportunity
for those landowners that has
very much translated into many
of the habitat improvements and
other things that you rightly
noted and that's unchanged in
this bill madam chair and
senator.
Okay and so let me just ask one
technical issue on the same
topic madam chair and senator
Representative so if we take the
Jennings law out of state
statute.
Knowing that people have a
constitutional right to be
compensated for damage to
private property and there's
been a lot of litigation on this
and we talk about you know
avoiding litigation so we take
this rule out of statute I don't
know how long it's going to take
the game commission to come up
with the rule I mean the
rulemaking process is gonna take
some amount of time a lot of
public input and I don't know
let me throw number out there
six to twelve months I'm not
sure
in that time if some if some
person comes with a claim and
says you know Hey I I have a
constitutional right to to to
take this out of depredation
issue here or someone you know
something's you know damaging my
fence or property what what's
gonna happen are we gonna
trigger some litigation there
because we have a time lapse
between the statute change in
the in the rule making process.
Madam chair senator I would
really doubt it and Furthermore
what I want to be clear for you
in the committee so we are not
completely removing and Jennings
law there's a big project
legislative session and Jennings
law that requires the department
to actually do extensive
conflict mitigation efforts
which by the way I will tell you
there some of the department
you'd rather not even do that
which we which we were resist.
It and would not agree to take
that out of the bill.
Okay.
Okay.
Madam chair and and center I
don't know if you're still with
it he.
But that there still are
provisions in there that if
there is a conflict the
department.
Okay sorry out of the as I said
earlier they have a fund with
millions of dollars to have
staff to do nothing about this
so I think it's it's a good
question to ask but but my guess
is the commission will replace
this car wash property it just
hello wildlife with a reasonable
policy to deal with these issues
and and if someone if something
happens in the intervening time
I'm sure they will be dealt
with.
Add madam chair and senator the
effective date is June twenty
twenty three giving.
Time madam chair and senator to
formulate that rule and madam
chair Senator if that two years
is it efficient and there was
not a rule on the books that
defines this than those private
landowners couldn't be ticketed
so there's multiple layers madam
chair starting with the delayed
implementation that we think
make this a balanced approach
that will preserve those
opportunities to protect private
property and hopefully madam
chair Senator enhance the
department's ability to mitigate
and prevent conflicts from
beginning in the first place.
Okay thank you and and madam
chair and senator I on a move on
from that landowner issue I
think that there's some other
things but I just don't I don't
quite have the confidence that
that our state has the
robustness in compensating the
private landowners the the way
that these other states that
we're comparing ourselves to
but just a couple other things
I'm gonna leave other time for
the other people on the
committee
but you know I I and I talked
about my district at the
beginning I also have the
privilege of in my day to day
job seeing people from all over
New Mexico including a lot of
people from northern New Mexico
and I I'd like to ask them for
the special I found people in
their sixties and seventies all
come to us Hey how are things
going up there how's your family
doing how have you guys done in
the last couple of decades and
things and they seem to always
say that things are worse and
they tell me that they have
increasing difficulty living off
the land there frustrated that
their needs or their son or
their granddaughter you know has
to move down to Rio Rancho to
make a living and I do have some
concerns about this bill
especially when I I just got a
Facebook message this morning
from a young woman in Cuba
explaining how how this bill
will will harm their ability to
to live off the land and and and
I know there's some disagreement
on that I know and I understand
in the bill Sanchez no intention
at all to for the heart of these
people thank you it comes down
to our idea of
of economics and I just want to
spend just one or two minutes on
this I'm not gonna I'm not gonna
the labor the point but we we
talking about a a public
resource in New Mexico and and
how we're going to share that
with out of state folks and for
me you know the issue with New
Mexico once again being very
unique we are number one in the
country in childhood poverty we.
Our number one in the country in
Medicaid per capita.
we have a lot of problems with
poverty in our in our in our
state there is you know has
those things too but I am you
know not not not to the did to
the degree we have Colorado
certainly I think Colorado has
the number either number one or
number two median household
income per capita in the
country.
The affluent state in general
so.
What am I getting at here well
what I'm getting at is is the
out of state outfitters and the
ability for landowners to to
survive in in the fact that we
have a single mom out for their
call in opposing this bill gives
me concern in so what in my
opinion the only way we can help
alleviate poverty in New Mexico
is increasing the GDP per capita
in so you know instate commerce
doesn't really do that in less
we're we're we're going to
produce new products and
services so if if the residents
The New Mexico get a few more
hunting tax but if they just go
to balance and by their hunting
stuff I mean we're not really
bringing we're not really
increasing the GDP per capita of
New Mexico whereas if we do it
this way if we say look New
Mexico's is wonderful state
we've got amazing it would
generate an elk population
amazing outdoor tourism and
we're to develop those natural
resources so people bring their
out of state dollars into New
Mexico well then then if we have
that attitude we are alleviating
poverty New Mexico we are
increasing the GDP per capita in
New Mexico and we are increasing
the overall prosperity and so I
think I I understand the tension
of privatizing a public resource
however we do it with water here
and we do it I think because it
was a
Whatever a compromise however
people on our land owners are
living off the land because of
our state that you now this
single mom called and she's
making her living we we have
agreed to because it it's not
just about the hunter right it's
not just about the hundreds
about the overall welfare of New
Mexicans to to make a living and
and to to get out of poverty in
to to you know to provide for
their families and so I just
want to bring that up that I
think we have to consider our
poverty issue here we have to
consider how are we developing
our natural resources for the
benefit of all New Mexicans in
some of that does involve
bringing in out of state money
so I I I just I I think that's
that's the in you know kind of
the end of my concerns with the
bill those are kind of
philosophical objections to the
bill I I do support all as as
some of the other committee
members of said I do support a
good portion of this bill but I
I have those other concerns that
are are we taking into account
our water development and are
gonna hurt our water development
are we going to harm people's
way of life to live off the land
especially northern New Mexico
and are are we going to pay
attention to our premier
agricultural institution went
when they feel like this is a a
good idea to keep that that
questions Jennings law so those
are my my concerns I I obviously
support a lot of the bill and
but I'm I'm gonna conclude their
for for time's sake and I I
think that other people have
questions but I think you have
really really enjoyed the the
discussion so far thank you
Madam.
Thank you Senator Gallegos are
blast speaker I'll make a few
final comments and then I'll ask
for a motion Senator Gallegos.
Be right madam chair and senator
I appreciate discussion I I like
seeing that you had both sides
the question on the bill here I
wish they would all be in in the
drafting of the bill but
I'm gonna go down sort of the
same road to sure sure many
stand and minus more about
tourism and I know earlier on
you guys to talk about tourism
was not going to be affected and
I and I look at the the money's
coming from out of state and and
I'll go back to the mother of
four in catching County well do
we have any numbers and and and
I know you guys should be
minimal do we have any numbers
of how many actually outfitters
and guides would be affected
with your proposed legislation.
Mmhm.
More Senator making sure I'm not
needed here you'll hear me it's
it's a good question I think
there are several hundred
register your guides in the
state having said that as
Representative small said not
all of them enter.
This particular draw a and B.
there's.
Respectable amount of on or not
in state Representative they're
out of state.
Out of state outfitters so you
got a factor those two things
and you consider.
The ultimate number the answer
your question which I couldn't
say precisely.
Well thank you for that and
madam chair center and the risk
factors set up I just recently
sold my family's heritage
property in Colorado and my
self boundaries actually New
Mexico state line or was it
wanted to cousin cousin right
now but my youngest brother did
a lot of guiding out there in it
was in Colorado and I would talk
to the game fish often because
at one time I had a herd of elk
and through to come out of all
in state of quarter mile fans in
five hundred bales of hay in in
I had a really hard time getting
Colorado to
cover the cost of
it's been sent to no cost ended
up putting getting thing for
money my losses and that that
brought me to the Jenny's law
and and I just wonder if if we
do that.
I I just see that there's gonna
be some some points time that
that we need to be able to
recover some of our costs and
and I'm I'm just worried about
some of the wording your bill
the the next piece that I have
is the conflict with the in in.
madam chair center
Representative bandy had brought
up bill a few years back in an
intense stream access on it and
I'm learning that with some
putting in the public trust
doctrine into law if that would
conflict with the current stream
access law and with that lead us
to trespass issues with waters
on located on private lands.
Madam nice try I can't answer
that that is not something that
the Attorney General in the
courts are looking out in our
our are not part of bills but I
mean it.
So I should just leave it at
that.
Both thank you for that Mr madam
chair and and senator little
bring my next question then
previously New Mexico state
Supreme Court ruled in of the
file verses have one the court
made the determination that the
legislature could not delegate
the termination of species to be
protected to the commission and
if I understand as we three
twelve we would authorize a
commission by rule or policy to
extend protection from game
species to any wildlife species
and provide wildlife is a living
animal or any part Aid Spahn
offspring should antlers or
horns for the dead body parts
there in the non disk which
domestic mammal bird reptile
amphibian fish for bird species
number and I'm just wondering if
that's another point we've heard
a lot of different points in
the.
with that I think that we're
shown conflict in your bill but
if you looked at that spring
court hearing or do you think
that that would be a call from
with your legislation.
So madam chair Senator great
question yes we have had a lot
of conversations about afternoon
decision I have read the
happening decisions it's not
that long Google Google pages
it's a very very old decision
from the in thirty seven believe
but we what we have done we have
crafted with attorneys various
attorneys looking at on page
forty five of the bill.
What it does to Florida E. for
the department we have
established a set of criteria
that.
That allow this authority to be
expanded in a calibrated
criteria if the.
That way so no we believe that
we believe are not that there is
absolutely.
Not be and violation of that
president not to say that you
know many people don't believe
that Halford and just because of
how long ago long ago it was
even as a.
Kind of defining statute kind of
a defining opinion that we've
been guidance now but none the
last we have crafted this what
happened and money to give very
specific criteria to the
commission on how they can
expand the forty it's as opposed
to kind of an arbitrary decision
making process.
Well madam chair and senator I
appreciate enough
Right re read over B. and C. on
page forty five and I still
don't see were we wouldn't have
that conflict but with that all
yield I just want to bring those
points up very good dialogue
always through want to see your
bill goes thank you madam chair
you.
Thank you very much senator
Senator Montes said you have
anything you wanted to add.
Okay I will make a few comments.
If this bill goes forward
I think you need to look at when
you're amendments I think it's
lined incorrectly it was just
brought to my attention
but I
Continue to have reservations in
my and I would like to point
out.
My district is parts of six
counties it is all rural.
And I in this case I'm going to
have to support my constituents
so I wanted to just put that out
there I am now vote for a motion
on the bill as twice amended.
Your.
All
is a motion from Santo Nobel to
table there is a second.
That is a non debatable motion
Veronica please call.
The.
We seconded Senator.
I'm sorry I.
Thank.
Senator Cervantes.
Just wanted to.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen.
Well.
Senator Neville yes.
Senator pope.
Senator so.
Senator Schmedes yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Thanks.
Hi this is our I'm sorry Senator
Cervantes.
You want to vote on this bill it
is a motion.
Okay running will go to my the
okay.
Next yes.
K. five to table three not to
and one excuse I only have forty
four.
For for.
How my incorrect.
Hamblen yes renewable yes.
In.
Hammon was a no no I'm sorry I
heard yes sorry.
That's why we needed Senator
Montes okay yes it's four four
four I'm sorry.
Okay Sir Senator Steinborn.
Representative small you are
bill is laid on the table
and I thank you very much for a
the robust conversation I think
it came out a couple times.
And if this is three separate
bills you might have passed a
couple of the.
Thank you very much and members
I'd like to comment on the rest
of the week.
I'm thirsty we have Thursday
morning we will start at eight
thirty due to the floor session
and love in thirty.
We have the three are.
I'll use the investor owned
utilities plus the.
coops to present their plans on
rolling cut offs.
And the future and allow a
little bit of time so from
probably eight thirty to ten
that will take place at ten we
will go back to our agenda.
I will say publicly we'll go to
Senate bills first to complete.
So in order to complete all the
Senate bills I do think we will
end up with the Saturday morning
session from nine to noon to try
to finish up all the Senate
bills this week and we will go
on to the house bill's next
week.
And I'd like to offer an apology
to Representative McQueen who
thinks he was going to be heard
today are thirsty and
Representative McQueen I will be
hearing house bill starting next
week so hopefully this week
Thursday and Saturday we will
finish up with the Senate bills
are there any questions or
comments from the committee.
Thank you committee members for
sticking with us for the extra
hour and we're recessed until
Thursday thank you thirty eight
eight thirty thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
