You look at your analyses and
it's very important to us.
The morning Senator Stewart of
Madam pro tem we're happy to
have you with us and we are
going to get started with Senate
bill one owes three and I
understand there is an amendment
that before we go to your
amendment let's hear a little
bit about the bill please.
Thank you madam chair let me
also say that I have.
Two expert witnesses Michael dax
from the defenders of wildlife
and I made Kodi coat of from
those Garcia society.
for invertebrate conservation
also online is Brad Lewis from
the department of agriculture.
Yes.
I also have a Stephen Baca from
the department of ag.
Yes also I did not realize he
would be on that's great.
Chair I would like to introduce
the bill I would like a couple
of my Michael and I made to make
a brief statements and then
we'll do the amendment okay.
Under
you just a procedural issue
Trevor.
Could you please put Senator in
front of our all of our
committee members so that the
public knows who the committee
members are some of us have it
some of us don't and if you
would please do that for us I'd
appreciate it I know you're busy
letting people into yes.
I'm sorry for the interruption
Senator Stewart please go ahead
all right thank you madam chair
so Senate bill one oh three is
directed at the preservation of
pollinators well we are amending
that pesticide control act to
restrict transportation use and
distribution of the
neonicotinoid class of
pesticides except with very
specific exemptions so this bill
also supports the continued
efforts by our New Mexico
department of that related to
pollinator protection outreach
they have been doing.
So in over the past seventy
years we've had a lot of issues
with our pollinator populations
including native species I had
no idea we had so many native
bees in New Mexico upwards of
two thousand native bees in New
Mexico but there the decline has
been pretty a dramatic and it
celebrated over recent decades
of our B. population so we have
about forty percent of honey
bees a decline in the US it's
not just in the US in twenty
eighteen the European Union
banned the use of nicotine
lights especially those that are
the most harmful to bees and in
February of last year the US EPA
of proposed ways to medicate the
use of neonicotinoids none of
that happened so we really want
to bring some of this effort to
address pollinators to New
Mexico we just do a few things
in this bill we banned the sale
and use of neonicotinoids and
outdoor residential settings we
require licensure for use in
commercial agriculture and this
institute's labeling
requirements and educational
materials for consumers so we
start to educate people about
the use of neonicotinoids so the
exemptions are significant we
have heard from a whole variety
of people about a changes to the
bill and the amendment I think
will address a ninety percent of
those concerns so the approved
uses remain a pet care to
control parasites of domestic
animals a controlled light for
bed bugs who knew that's what
kids bed bugs was near naked to
Noites indoor use to.
Control pest treated wood
products are specifically
exempted the sale and use of
neonicotinoid treated seeds and
plants distributed for
agricultural and residential use
and what we call for there is a
labeling of products so that
consumers understand what's in
the product with signage
addressing the potential risks
of using a product with you
tonight that is damaging to
pollinators and finally a
commercial agriculture crops not
pollinated by insects as
identified by the New Mexico
department of that we have an
incredible part of agriculture
in the state they have been
helping us produce the best
chili in the world so they have
been trying to deal with this
pollinator issued this bill
gives them a rulemaking
authority to put in place these
changes so that madam chair if
we could hear from Michael dax
and make code of briefly before
we present the amendment.
Please go ahead for your
expertise.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
Jackson the New Mexico
representative for defenders of
wildlife.
I'll just add a couple things
from from what Senator discussed
about the bill of the New Mexico
legislature has taken number of
steps to recognize the important
role that pollinators play over
the past several several years
starting with the memorial in
two thousand ten followed by
several more memorials on in two
thousand sixteen seventeen and
eighteen and then in two
thousand nineteen of the New
Mexico legislature sure created
a pollinator license plate with
proceeds from that license plate
go to of planting pollinator
friendly plants in median right
of ways
planted by deities so there's
been a number of proactive steps
of the ledgers legislature's
taken over the past few years
recognizing the role that
pollinators play but it the time
has come that we take the next
step and you know in addition to
being proactive and recognizing
the role that pollinators play
and planting more pollinator
friendly plants we also have
start limiting the threats to
pollinators and I'm sure we will
hear today that unix notes are
not the only threat facing
pollinators but there
significant one as the most
widely used class of pesticides
in the world we will this bill
restricts certain uses it is you
know not an outright ban by any
by any imagination but it is
taking meaningful steps towards
ensuring that we are limited
limiting the the severe impacts
that these chemicals have on
homemakers in other wildlife as
well birds as well as aquatic
species like fish and with that
I will I will pause and passed
on to a may.
Okay your second expert.
Good morning madam chair Senator
Stewart members of the committee
my name is a may come out and I
work for this our society for
vertebrate conservation I live
in Eugene Oregon but I do have
staff members that live and work
in New Mexico.
Last week we met to discuss
policy to habitat in Santa Fe.
You know I think Senator Stewart
covered really well our
pollinators are struggling both
our native bees as well as our
honey bees we're seeing record
losses for beekeepers every year
one quarter of the bumble bee
species from New Mexico are at
risk of extinction.
As Michael noted
there are multiple threats right
habitat loss degradation climate
change disease but pesticides
are part of the equation and
this bill begins to address that
and when we're thinking about
the risks of pesticides in the
neck providing unique insights
they're being addressed in in
this have multiple strikes
against them so one they are
highly toxic so we're looking at
minute levels levels that are
found in our environment that
can cause harm to Arby's they
are long lived that means that
those toxic chemicals are
available for these to be
exposed for a very long time
sometimes months even years
after an application.
Their systemic so systemic means
are going to be they actually
designed to be taken by plant
they'd be up taken and they can
be expressed in pollen and
nectar that means there's a
direct route of exposure for
bees to be for bees to be harmed
and then as as Michael said
they're commonly used they are
the most commonly used
insecticide class well fine.
These can be exposed in the
backyard in a city park in and
throughout our agricultural
areas sometimes even other areas
so we have.
We have multiple strikes against
these chemicals and I'm not
saying that every use is going
to cause harm to HB what I'm
saying is that but on balance
the research shows that existing
levels of neonicotinoid
pollution this resulted from
authorized uses can exceed
harmful levels.
And therefore could have large
scale wide ranging negative
impacts.
The take home message from the
research and from the
information that we have is that
we need to be very careful about
when and how we use these
chemicals New Mexico with this
bill has the opportunity to
manage the risk of Munich
two nights in a state specific
manner that's gonna be
responsive to your pest
management needs and your
conservation units.
Last thing I want to close on is
that New Mexico isn't alone with
this in fact later today I'm
gonna be talking with a group of
retailers who want to stop the
use of neonicotinoids in their
stores.
Throughout the country we've got
states Maryland and Connecticut
both have targeted reductions of
New York location I tell to
multiple uses the state of New
York is currently grappling with
how do they balance.
Our cultural needs and the risks
of neonicotinoids looking at how
to limit their uses and as I
mentioned retailers across the
country are looking at this
California's looking to build
their this is something that is
happening across the country
discussing these particular
chemicals because.
On left highly toxic director
Avid pleasure to our pollinators
pollinators that are clearly at
risk.
That's all thank you.
Thank you very much before you
go to the amendment I have
another process issue to deal
with
But if you would if anybody has
their hand up which is center
city Lopez would you put it down
we're trying to move the
committee members to the first
two rows and we can't do that
while there is any hands up.
Senator von case were moving up
so that you know he's here and I
think the only member we are
missing at this point is Senator
Schmedes but we didn't start the
committee with a quorum and we
are on Senate bill one owes
three so Senator chair Senators
metes madam chair up smitteez is
in the waiting room okay okay so
if you can get very keeps their
hands down
of the coverage gonna move
Senator bond is up and he's
going to move Senator
communities in and up to the
second row as well
thank you so much and Senator
Stewart why don't you go ahead
please with your amendment.
Thank you madam chair and as I
said before the majority of
these came from apartment that
and there were also several
other groups so if you can can
your secretary put those I don't
know how you do amendments this
is the two seven nine point two
with that that's all we have we
have seven items so can they
share screen is that the way
you.
We can all the committee members
you did receive this
Proposed amendment this
amendment is included in your
analysis and it is now on the
screen for the public to see as
well.
So please go ahead okay so madam
chair would you like me to go
through each of these one by one
well All move the amendment is
their second.
Thank you we have a motion and a
second for discussion purposes
so please Senator Stewart go
ahead all right so madam chair
on page six on page five line
fifteen after not you strike
three manger of that line item
line sixteen and insert.
In lieu thereof dependent on
insect pollination so this is
the the definition section.
And the we work with department
of that to find this not
pollinated by insects so it
would right now not validated by
insets means agriculture crops
not dependent on insect
pollination.
The next one is on page six.
Fourteen districts the words
highly toxic so licensed to
distribute this is part of the
pesticide dealer license to
distribute pesticides on page
nine line to.
Straight and unreasonable and
insert in lieu thereof eight so
it would read means a risk to
humans.
On page fourteen.
Nineteen.
District in the clothes space
and insert in lieu thereof or
outside around foundations and
other parts of structures.
This section is.
Section four this is a
exceptions to the restricted use
of neonicotinoids.
And it follows under section be
saying that alright and may
allow the sale or use of
neonicotinoid class pesticides
in the following cases and so on
page fourteen lines twenty one
and twenty two we strike in
their entirety and insert the
new following paragraph a wood
preservative pesticide or wood
preservative products that
contain neonicotinoid class
pesticides or similar pesticides
used to treat with drugs and
again these are the allowable
uses on page fifteen line three
before the period insert.
Provided that if the distributor
cannot confirm the blooming or
flowering plant material.
Materials are seed was not
treated with the neonicotinoid
class pesticide product must
have a clear and constituent
conspicuous label indicating
that a neonicotinoid class
pesticide may have been used and
included a description of the
risks to pollinators and other
non organic organisms associated
with the use of neonicotinoid
class pesticides you for the
product may be sold and finally
on page twenty eight.
Which is the outreach
educational plan educational
training materials on page
twenty eight line eighteen well
we've put apple Google of the
four classes so you redesign the
education training materials so
as to ensure that all apple
Google classes of pesticide
applicator supplying or
supervising cetera so those are
the amendments madam chair.
Thank you very much Senator so
are there members who wish are
there members of the public who
wish to speak only on the
amendment.
Well my analyst I apologize does
not have this version.
And I was wondering when it was
sent out.
Madam chair you said this over a
week okay so you've been on your
committee agenda since the first
day you started so.
Senator we have reversion one.
Here we just added one issue at
the end of this that came from
the department of that so you've
had point two for a week.
Representative still we're gonna
look this up for that Senator
and because we are sending these
out
So I am looking here.
In my emails.
Senator the one I have is dated
February fifth.
Madam chair we have that is
version one.
I am looking at my distant.
Yes one of running.
Can you identify when you send
out version to please I'm
checking on that senator thank
you.
Madam chair our date the point
two version is February second
yes I see that.
And madam chair my expert
witness says I have this
amendment and email from the
bill drafter on February second
that was sent directly to your
secretary Veronica Ortega.
Senator Stewart what is the
difference again between the
first amendment and the second.
You indicated was my it was just
and then.
One addition a yes madam chair
it's number six.
On page fifteen.
On page fourteen.
It's it's the issue about the
wood preservative pesticide that
we were asked to change that and
so that was the only other
edition that came directly from
that industry and we added that
to the rest and sent it to your
secretary February second yes I
understand okay so
Can your analysts work with that
are not.
Madam chair I'm sending him a
text currently.
I think we're talking about it's
just termites.
No madam chair is just the wood
preservative.
This is the wood preservatives
pesticide they wanted different
language we accepted their
amendment that came from the
industry.
Might be able to find exactly
where that came from.
That came from the western wood
preservers institute.
Is that miss madam chair so
excuse me is that not for much
so reserve reward.
Madam chair of might be.
I I understand the question so I
think that the wood preservative
has to do with tests that would
in fact would in turn my two are
one of them.
I'm not being a scientist I
can't identify if there are
other house that infiltrate.
my infiltrate would.
Madam chair if I may on this is
Michael Jackson defenders of
wildlife I spoke with the
gentleman from the western
would institute it is preserved
as the original language only
applied to would that have been
treated with a preservative the
new language that they are ask
for includes the wood
preservative itself in addition
to work that's already been
treated and yes the concern here
is termites and especially with
new construction homes.
Thank you Mr decks okay Senator
Gallegos are you
I know you're waiting to hear
from your analyst but I I
believe that clarified that one.
Issue and everything else and
met.
Go ahead madam madam chair I
think we'll go ahead except at
this time I just the I would
appreciate the actual changes to
be sent to us so
we appreciate thank you thank
you well noted thank you so much
okay so we're back on the
amendment members of the public
is there anybody opposed to the
amendment.
However are there any hands up
from the public opposed to the
amendment.
I'm not seeing okay.
Are there from the public only
on the amendment are there.
Proponents of the amendment.
Okay I don't hear anybody
Senator Vontaze you have your
hand up you're being recognized.
Thank you madam chair on the
memory taking the committee on
the amendment yes please on the
amendment okay thank you Senator
Stewart Dutch you questions
the other man was up on the
screen and then it's not now and
I certainly want to track the
amendment within the bill
itself.
So with the many years of sure
so you know better you thank you
so if I'm trying to put this all
together and and interpreted in
the context of the bill itself.
I'm gonna try to do that well
maybe other members speak and so
forth but
Yes first of all it's what I
madam chair as a committee.
And as we go forward when I seen
a member like this this year and
are these being emailed to us as
members the the amendments
themselves yes Senator on K.
granica has been instructed to
send the bill the F. I. R. the
any amendments in the committee
and Alice's of the amended
built to us in advance of the
meetings.
Did do that with this bill but
she did version point one on the
amendment so Senator Stewart
indicated that number I on this
amendment is the
language from the first
amendment that you received in
your email I.
All right ma'am transcends all
we try to put this together from
the email that we got from run
to get within the bill itself so
I'll try to understand the movie
more clearly what I what I
really want understand drugs
etcetera Stewart I'm sure she
can answer this well the the
other amendments I think you
mentioned in particular the
agency amendments number we ask
a number one.
I believe that you said a moment
ago your presentation some of
this amendment process involves
input from the department of
agriculture.
Is that what I recall you saying
Senator so that does with with
these amendments this department
agriculture some support the
bill.
Madam chair Senator von case we
yeah we've worked on this for a
year we work for the department
of that they have the most of
the amendments offered today are
from the department of fact I
think there I don't know they
might be in the agnostic but the
other part of this bill as that
we were able to make structural
changes in this pesticide
control act that has not been
amended in a long time based on
what the department of at the a
request so there's changes
Justin procedures and language
etcetera throughout this bill so
it's an update of this pesticide
control act so as to you know I
mean I I think most state
agencies try to stay neutral
especially if we accept all
their amendment so you'll have
to ask them that yourself I I
prefer that we can continue a
bit more down this road so we
can get public comment about the
bill before we talk about the
bill itself.
Okay I appreciate the all the
all the deferred that's the
restored is the reason I
Representative prompted me to
get in on the amendment was in
the presentation of the ma'am I
wrecked my recollection was
a statement made to the fact
that these were requested by the
department of ag I think we're
at least one or more of these
chairman department of actually
trying to be because they were
asking for the moment so we're
all.
Want to understand which ones
they and asked for and then
whether with the with the
amendments they would support
the bill simply just a matter
understand the position I I hear
what you're saying Sir strip of
I think you said you said
agencies try to stay neutral I
think they're a there's a we're
we use for that on the part but
I can't repeat in public.
But bottom line is you know you
got to take a position near the
apartment back in supposed to be
representing I am the department
act I would I would I can
understand how they could not
have a position on this bill but
I guess we'll find out a little
bit later and you know you can
only stick your head in the sand
so all right so I'll always hear
from them thanks.
Thank you.
While we're moving on Veronica
would you please stand this
version of the amendment to our
list of committee members and
analysts.
There about thirteen people on
that list well thank you so much
okay so those people who are
Senator Cervantes can you take
your hand down and I can come
back to
With the next issue.
I hear from anybody else
opposing or supporting the
amendment.
Now is the department of
agriculture on.
I have.
Stephen Baca and red blue are
they on.
Yes Representative Lewis is on
okay you have been asked that
question by Senator von case
about the position on the
amendment.
You madam chair committee
members
Senator Stewart to Brad Lewis to
Mexico department of
agriculture.
The department either really
stands in opposition to are in
favor of this bill we've been
working with.
Senator Stewart and Michael
Jackson the contents of the bill
and our role has primarily been
in providing information and and
points where their intent
maybe need clarification
regarding agricultural uses and
so or within the industry and so
we have been communicating back
and forth on on points and your
last letting them know that
this.
Raised in the bill may have this
impact on the.
On the growers and on the
industry within the state.
Thank you.
So back to committee members.
We are now on the amendment
questions and comments Senator
Sedillo Lopez has her hand up
please.
Thank you madam chair.
It is I take that first
amendment has I'm understanding
it and and I think that was
confirmed by with the department
of and just said is that this
would be clear that it would
accept and Shelly and pecans
because they're they're not
pollinate their wind pollinated
and not pollinated by in by
these.
I just I just want to be
absolutely clear.
Madam chair and senator Steele
Lopez that the first amendment
is.
Sorry the wrong one.
Yes we need to be clear that
what not pollinated by insects
meetings and so that was the
suggestion from the department
of that
and of course remember that
really it's the department of
act that will have rulemaking
and their comments to us also
say that they think this
definition they understand how
do we Sen crops like Chile
con cetera that's that's exactly
what I wanted to clarify thank
you madam chair.
Thank you other committee
members on the amendment.
Senator Neville.
Thank you madam chair just.
Give me some examples of crops
that are pollinated I mean I'm
in the act it wasn't existed so
I know some of the what are we
going to in New Mexico crops
what we're going to not allow
this to be used what are typical
crops that you're seeing that
are major crops in our state you
give me some ideas of that.
you madam chair if I can ask of
my expert witness to answer that
certainly.
Thanks for New Mexico
agriculture apples melons things
like that they're more smaller
scale crops are the ones where
A new unix would no longer be
allowed to be used in addition
to cons and Chiles according to
statues are to other crops that
are wind pollinated where
communicates noted there we have
all your to I was asking about
which crops right
Mr backs be very clear with your
answer to his question yes I'm
sorry apples and melons are two
good examples of crops that are
dependent upon insect
pollination.
Okay that's what most would be
mostly than vegetable crops as
Richard Darman.
Market yes correct who are major
cash crops for Khan's alfalfa
for cell phones are suspected of
pollinated
what else corn chili all of
those would be exempt.
Correct I believe alfalfa is
dependent on insect pollination
thank.
X. could you go through the
chair into the Senator when you
respond.
I just madam chair apologies.
So I'm I'm just so I want to see
what this is a major chemical
that is used widely in
agriculture in New Mexico if
we're gonna devastating
industry.
Farming industry I want to make
sure we know what we're getting
into so that's my concern so
alfalfa farmers may be in
trouble if they don't have an
alternative what what are there
alternatives.
Senator Stewart.
Chair if I could ask my experts
be clear concise in his answers
thank you.
Next yes
Senator I will defer to the NMAA
would be better able to answer
this question.
Madam chair representative
alfalfa often uses treated seed
and that is now exempt from this
and so the neonicotinoid use an
off off off off in is click on
the seed when planted
we can look into the department
of ag one know more about
alfalfa specific in your area
whether also was over the top
application of neonicotinoids
oftentimes there's not because
it is not as high value of crop.
But I am unfortunately not quite
familiar with this specific
applications there so I don't
think we have to look into
alfalfa specifically I don't
know if Brad or Steve Baca or
the act we have more
information.
Okay maybe my department of ag
guy could.
Get the name of the the
gentleman for the I can we what
major crops would be affected by
this we know that corn and.
Cornyn Chilean to conjure safe
water and alfalfa apparently
succint what else would we have.
Madam chair Senator committee
members read US department of
agriculture.
Mr dax is is is correct that
primarily.
does that will be impacted will
be are minor crops and he went
over the list of that with
respect to alfalfa.
Its use in alfalfa is.
Primarily or pollination in
alfalfa is is restricted almost
only seed alfalfa so it's only
those breeders in the state and
there's three or four of them
our handful that breed alfalfa
for alfalfa seed and so that
becomes the issue with alfalfa
is during for those limited
acres in the state typically the
forage alfalfa is not not an
issue and not does not require
bees for or any other function
within the crop okay so well I
would be.
The permit if there a reason
that the current permissible
what are there any there are no
major crops that are going to
be.
Drastically affected that's what
I'm trying to get at.
There were no major crops that
would meet the definition of
requiring insects for
pollination that is correct
senator.
Okay that's what I want to know
that's all I have madam chair
thank you thank you on the
amendment senators committees.
Thank you madam chair and and
kind of on that point really
if we the the question was about
alfalfa seed and someone had
said that that that was exempted
but when I'm looking at so this
is on that point real and we're
still in the amendment but I
think it applies.
Page fourteen.
lines the three ladies is it on
the amendment.
well I don't have the amendment
in front of me because it wasn't
email to me if if we put it back
on the screen this is pertinent
to drive to Center novels
question about.
things their pollinator not
pollinated which is the in the
in yes thank you okay.
Go ahead so that so the question
was we're we're gonna change the
definition of.
Of the pollinators I guess this
is number.
Thank you for putting that back
number one okay number one on
the amendment is the definition
but.
When we go down to page fourteen
lines one through three work
we're not allowing these seeds
that have been treated with neo
neonates so.
I I just want to clear up that
that other comments from the
other expert it it sounded to me
like she said that we're
allowing alfalfa.
Seeds they're treated with this
pesticide but when I read the
bill.
Especially with in the context
of this amendment it seems like
that would that type of C. for
all south of would.
B.
Impermissible.
Now is that correct.
The madam chair you have to
continue to read the page so
after lines one two three the
department may allow the Saylor
use of near naked to class
pesticides in the following case
number one the distribution of
the neonicotinoid class
pesticide or substance
containing and then at that
point Class As decide for use in
commercial agriculture crops not
pollinated by insects it goes on
for spring used to take care
tended.
The blooming of.
And so so that allowed usage for
commercial agriculture of
neonicotinoid suits like we just
discussed about alfalfa is
allowed eight fourteen fifteen
goes through all the exemptions
so what what you do and crafting
legislation has that you lay out
what you want to restrict and
then you set aside the
exemptions so the exemptions
trump all of the language before
that.
Okay madam chair I I think if I
if I could this was more than on
the point question I I think
we're if we continue to go down
this road we're going to get off
the amendment so I think I'm I
want to come back to this
question as we go on to the bill
if that's okay with you
certainly thank you very much
Senator smitteez are there any
other questions or comments on
the amendment from the committee
members.
Okay we have a motion for it to
pass on the second on the
amendment what the secretary
please call the vote on the
amendment.
Yes Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville.
Yes.
Senator Paypen.
Yes.
Senator so yes.
Senator Smitty yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
German annex yes.
Thank you you have an adopted
amendment now we have several
people who want to speak on the
bill against and at four so
Senator Stewart I communicate
ten at one minute each or I that
two minutes each what and what
do you prefer.
madam chair it it's really up to
you okay you're doing amazing
job so just keep doing.
Thank you very much Trevor we're
gonna let in the opponents for
one minute each let's do ten
opponents and proponents but as
you know it's one minute it has
to be very tight your name
introduction of your affiliation
in your statement so Trevor go
ahead.
You.
Thank.
Gail Evans these are for more on
opponents thank.
We see.
Rivera.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me yes
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to testify this
morning my name is Tiffany
Rivera and I'm the director of
government affairs and
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
I stand here before you on
behalf of our state's farmers
and ranchers urging you to vote
in opposition to Senate bill one
of three unfortunately we're not
granted the ability to work with
the sponsor on the amendments of
the bill also my comments this
morning are reflective of the
original bill.
you know it's are federally
approved class of pesticides
would agricultural lands heavily
upon to prevent damage caused by
pests in New Mexico producers
use these insect control the
production of on.
Allen's and much more.
Mexico is ranked number one for
me because Angeli production the
wide.
We are naked tonight they're all
thank you has that been a minute
cover.
Yes okay so you can either make
a sound at ten or twenty seconds
but before the end or you can
just kind of law one minute
warning to everybody for these
at testimonies please the next
person.
Thirty Trujillo.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Tony
Trujillo thank you for the
opportunity to provide comments
today I'm a registered lobbyist
for strategies three sixty.
Whose client is CropLife.
In order to respect to the
excellent sponsor we are at
opposition to this bill we the
the the make concerns we have
that is the this bill is passed
it would be the most expensive
restriction bad of the index and
there we find it the budget
testimony written testimony the
committee we also provided a lot
of documents in those documents
the it'll show that there's no
evidence of pollinator
populations are impacted in New
Mexico.
And lastly DO next have already
been thoroughly reviewed by
USEPA uses have been.
Adjusted to provide greater
safety to pollinators lastly we
remain concerned about the crops
that have been dissed discussed
and pointed out of the the.
We believe that if this bill
passes gonna leave the New
Mexico farmers ranchers and
businesses at a severe
competitive disadvantage so we
urge you to vote no on this
bill.
Thank you next person.
Thank.
Is Mr Ogden on.
Okay let's keep going and
Veronica we can hear you please
meet yourself.
Ben action very.
Can you hear me alright yes we
can.
Name is.
the stop thank.
And the.
Yes
please stay on the amendment.
it's.
It'll.
To earn.
Everybody who's gonna speak
must have their webcast turned
off or else you have this
delayed double echo.
So anyone who wants to speak on
any bill pro or con must have
their webcast turned off.
So then you have your webcast
off now.
let's go on Trevor we can always
bring them back is the.
Later person.
Next we have our not.
Rob.
Hello madam chair committee
members can hear me all right
yes we can.
Thank you I am the executive
director for the New Mexico
Chile Association.
we respectfully oppose Senate
bill one of three.
Banning annex will be
devastating to the cherry
industry as well as farmers that
produce pecans cotton corn wheat
and sorghum and other fruits
throughout the state of New
Mexico.
Even if this bill is exempt
certain crops like Jerry batons.
Most farmers in the state
produce a variety of crops and
we worry that this bill will
damage their ability to use
rotation crops in their
operations.
the unexpected Jareth farmers
best defense against the pepper
weevil and the deeply proper.
The be the proper translate
curly top virus which damages
crops every year.
Without the use of mandates
farmers will be forced years
older chemistries that do not
offer the same selected benefits
this will result in reduced
yearly yields and require more
frequent application of other
pesticides.
Your ex are regulated by the EPA
and I've been accepted as safe
practices both agencies.
The New Mexico Jared industry is
already in a steep decline and
we're losing most parts of the
market to Mexico where they can
grow chili without any costly
regulations.
Next we have Craig W..
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Greg
dobby and I'm a former role the
farmers to grow AT safe
affordable and abundant food
supply excuse me could you could
you just speak up a little
louder sure a broad selection of
chemistry using very militant
actions is critical to managing
pesticide resistance.
The ability to rotate pesticides
for hard to manage pests enables
us to use less toxic pesticides
with lower quantities and
concentrations applied across
unix nodes are one of those
canisters that cannot simply be
replaced it for native as a
treatment option the great state
of New Mexico in agriculture of
profound importance to everyone
here however are total Ag output
is insufficient to warrant
special labeling for the tools
we use agricultural suppliers
cannot justify the cost of
unique labeling for New Mexico
users of their products these
products will be unavailable to
our producers while remaining
available to producers in
neighboring states this creates
a significant disadvantaged New
Mexicans I urge you to keep our
regulations aligned with those
set at the federal level and
avoid making New Mexico uniquely
unserviceable for agricultural
suppliers madam chair members of
committee thank you for the
opportunity to address you.
Thank you.
Next we have Walter Bradley.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Mr chairman our madam chairman I
guess I'm going to get director
and members of the committee.
I I used to call in the lives of
our.
Sign in with a welcome
lieutenant governor.
Thank you.
Members of the committee have
Representative very farmers of
America and we are heavily
dependent on the these crops for
feed in this particular.
Just to side is already
regulated as a our others and to
jeopardize our cash crops that
the that we're depending on as I
stated earlier.
It is is approaches with that
would drive our prices sky high
if if we take these these crops
up when you start talking about
alfalfa one it's not mentioned
is
cottonseed we we use all these
products from a feeding.
Over half a million dairy cows
in the state of New Mexico so we
stand strongly in opposition to
another regulation on top and
most restrictive growth as I
understand it in the nation so
we will just to committee to.
Well you know thank you madam
chair.
Thank you let's go back to then
thank you very and see if you
have better sound now.
Is this better madam chair yes
it is thank you my name is been
it's very I'm the vice chair of
the Mexico crop.
sorry Julie Commission The New
Mexico Chile Association
secretary I just kinda want to
point out that.
With Chile production we're
losing pesticides through
legislation and we're also we're
not taking care of when it comes
to research for new chemistries
so every time we lose one we
lose one more tool in our back
to help fight insects and keep
chilly in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you very much okay go
ahead Trevor.
Next we have Beverly insignia.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Beverly it's
an executive director of dairy
producers of New Mexico we stand
in opposition to this bill
because for some specific crops
the loss of these pesticides
would force production costs
excessively high or eliminate
the only tools available for
controlling certain tests the
negative negative impact would
extend to the loss of rural
community infrastructure and the
economy thank you.
Thank you next driver.
Next June this morning.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Jonas more and executive
director Reginald registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
will go we're seeing
as of right now we propose
Senate bill one oh three I will
our members are severely thank
they're concerned about the
increased cost in crops that
this is a if this bill was to
pass that would have with that
directly affect them and then
also to we found out that some
of our producers do you use this
and your text the use to repel
pests so this would have an
impact on the the sheep industry
in New Mexico and as of right
now we oppose this bill so thank
you very much for the allow me
the opportunity to comment.
Thank you Trevor two more
opponents.
Next we have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy at the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
although we understand the good
intentions behind this bill we
are concerned that it would
force farmers to use older
chemistries with applications
are actually much more toxic to
insects fish mammals and humans
we could also see more frequent
application reduced crop yields
which would directly harm
agriculture businesses and local
food security this bill further
put our agriculture producers at
a disadvantage because it places
more stringent use requirements
on New Mexicans in those
requirements at the federal
level once again leading
industry to be in New Mexico is
not having a stable regulatory
environment thank you.
Thank you and the last opponent
last we have done Hartman.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is don Hartman and I propose
Senate bill one oh three I'm a
farmer and gaming and I grow
chilli onions watermelons and
small grains I personally use
neonicotinoids on my farm to
protect my crops I also use bees
to pollinate Micropterix show of
two highs for acre.
this class of chemical is
important.
Is an important crop protection
tool.
Banning these chemicals forces
us as producers to use harsher
chemicals which.
President increased toxicity to
humans and our environment as
well as increased exposure at
the risk of the producer this
class of chemical also reduces
the potential for disease are
for chemical resistance in
insects without neonicotinoids
we would have to use alternative
chemistry more frequently
causing insects to become immune
to these pesticides much flight
much the same as using the same
antibiotic in humans over and
over they.
Become resistant to the
antibiotic we are licensed and
we have to have can.
Thank you very much Trevor let's
now go to ten proponents one
minute each.
First we have Gail Evans.
Thank you my name is Gail Evans
I am an attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
and the New Mexico environmental
law center strongly supports
this piece of legislation for
all of the reasons that were
stated by the sponsor and by the
experts on this is an
opportunity for to New Mexico to
be a leader in addressing this
aspect of the climate crisis
which is the loss of our
pollinators we heard people say
that already this pesticide is
regulated by the EPA will
clearly that regulation is and
I'm not because we're losing our
beats of the farming industry
will have to adapt and I'm
confident that the farming and
farming industry can adapt
because continuing to use of
pesticide that is killing our
bees is simply not sustainable
and so this needs to end and for
these reasons we support this
bill thank you.
Thank you next.
Next we have from the bank of
our.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is for the
privada and I am an attorney at
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty agricultural workers
deserve to neighboring healthy
and stay settings that limit and
in some cases prohibit their
exposure to pesticides harmful
to people and the environment
like in many other states New
Mexicans including large
agricultural producers often use
neonicotinoid pesticides compact
S. R. put other agriculture
products research over the past
few years however suggests that
you know it's are unsafe
environment Senator organisms
funded a politician thank you
therefore it is imperative that
you must limit and in some cases
prohibit the use of
neonicotinoids by those
gardening farming or any other
way harvesting agricultural
products we think Senator
Stewart for introducing this
this legislation and we ask that
the committee passes thank you.
Thank you.
Next next we have Anna Hansen.
Hi good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I am a
Santa Fe county commissioner on
enhancement in Santa Fe County
stands in support of this bill
we have passed I'm a resolution
to protect and enhance
pollinator species and their
habitat throughout Santa Fe
County I'm also bringing forward
a resolution to the national
association of counties to also
protect pollinators and their
habitats
we need to this regulation I
want to thank Senator Stewart
for her work on the pesticide
control act this needs updating
I am grateful to your work on
this it is extraordinarily
important Stephen Hawkins said
it will be greed and stupidity
that will tell us this bill is
just not about the bees and the
pot on it or it's it's about us
we need to protect our bodies
and our pollinators so that we
will survive thank you.
Thank you next.
We have Lori Gloria.
Hi my name is Laurie I am twelve
years old and a member of the
global emergency kits board I'm
here to speak in support of the
S. B. one of three bill
restricting the use of chemicals
known as the unica tights these
chemicals kill bees and Harman
violent use of these chemicals
ignores the obvious that these
are important for food security
and for lives because they pony
our plants and trees and provide
our food use of chemicals that
kill bees is not in our interest
today we have sufficient
research and knowledge that
shows that this is the case we
should not continue our olds and
harmful waste changes only
viable passport as a seven year
old I experience the harm that
chemicals costs to be
populations I had a we had in my
backyard Albuquerque New Mexico
my neighbor used roundup weed
killer and even after I
explained the situation and
asked that she stop when I
opened my beehive I found that
all my these were debt I tried
to restart was the hive but the
bees never came back the just my
pieces for me inside for
everyone the use of chemicals
known as neonicotinoids will
continue to hardy's ourselves
and we finally stop I want to
thank the Senator Mimi Stewart
and the co sponsors of eight of
SB at one at three and I urge
you to vote in favor of it thank
you.
Thank you next.
John Brown.
Yes good morning committee chair
and committee and sponsor of SB
one of three thank you so much
for this bill my name is John
Brown in the Franciscan sister
and the executive director of
New Mexico interfaith power and
light and many of our fees
people supports this kind of
bill in this action these are
sort of like a Canary in the
coal mine there diminishment
should be of great concern to
all of us because it is
essential for our food
production whether we're farmers
or consumers we have peace here
in our backyard we had them for
about twenty years and they
continually die very often we
don't get the for honey we keep
them to try to help pollinate
our fruits and vegetables in our
city so that we might have food
that we share with those who are
in need as well as canning for
ourself we need to look at these
challenges we can't just keep
putting our heads in the sand
it's our moral responsibility to
see the inner connection with
all these little creatures that
have a very very important part
in our hold file system thank
you so much and please support
this bill.
Thank you next.
The for the patch.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is C. pouring nefesh and I'm a
registered lobbyist for covenant
pathways covenant pathways uses
healthy soil practices and
traditional Navajo farming
practices to prove that it is
possible to grow coffee crops
without pesticides and covenant
pathways stance in support of
Senate bill one of three thank
you.
Thank you next.
Judy common.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Judy COVID and I'm The New
Mexico policy director for the
Audubon society we're in strong
support of SB one oh three has
decides like neonicotinoids have
great impacts to birds in
addition to impacts to insect
pollinators New Mexico
technically applied as seed
treatments for crops and so they
most directly affect insects and
seeding birds like the stealth
scaled quail and western
meadowlark but they're also
typically found in agricultural
runoff affecting other parts of
the ecosystem like rivers and
streams grassland birds most
affected by any NXR also the
group of bird species showing
the greatest declines in North
America but more than half lost
since the nineteen sixties just
decides effects on birds can be
direct mortality but smaller
doses can also affect birds
ability to properly navigate
migration as well as the
reproductive success with birds
facing overwhelming threats in
New Mexico now from climate
change and long term drought
restricting the use of this
class of pesticide and
encouraging a transition to
other kinds of pest management
is something relatively easy
that we can do now to help so on
behalf of Audubon's thirteen
thousand members in New Mexico I
hope you'll support this bill
thank you.
Thank you the next.
Brad Lewis.
Hi Brad Lewis was one of our
expert witnesses would you go.
Drew to over.
Good morning thank you madam
chair the rest the committee for
the opportunity to speak I'm
sure to our community resource
and policy director at the
national nonprofit beyond
pesticides I'm here today on
behalf beyond just as members
and supporters in New Mexico to
urge the committee to pass SB
one of three in order protecting
Mexico's declining pollinator
populations from Munich
insecticides the last four years
of highlighted the deficiencies
in EPA's oversight of toxic
pesticides the literature
reveals that even when agency
identity adequately identifies
risk it is not effectively
acting upon that information
under federal pesticides
pesticide law states are
empowered to fill in these gaps
in the case of need to
consecutively urged a lot state
lawmakers to exercise their
authority.
EPA's own review of the unix
identified hazards to human
health pollinators birds and
aquatic wildlife it will Canada
and the European Union acted
upon the science to ban these
chemicals EPA is only proposing
limited label changes around
application timing and amounts
in one puzzling instance
concerning the use of the Munich
it's no it emit a cloak on turf
grass EPA suggesting changes to
the label quote advising
homeowners not to use
neonicotinoid products that is
correct EPA intends to approve a
product for sale it does not
wish people to use the danger of
continue to allow an unix tried
use is clear with robust
evidence on the hazards of these
chemicals we urge lawmakers not
to wait for you PA to follow the
science.
Madam chair we said one minute
for both sides I've sent you
some texts and and they're
running over a minute he was
minutes eighteen seconds.
Okay Trevor next we have Dan
Roper okay we have two people
left for the proponents that's
all.
Morning committee members for
the record Dan Roper with trout
unlimited and like to spend my
sixty seconds highlighting some
of the science about the impacts
of neonicotinoids to our water
waste into our quality care
systems this is not just about
pollinators the science is clear
on this and here's just one
example from frontiers in
environmental science November
twenty sixteen.
The article I contamination of
the aquatic environment unix
noise and its implications for
ecosystems.
Following the decline of many
populations of invertebrates due
mostly to the widespread
presence of waterborne residues
in the extreme chronic toxicity
in need Munich it's annoying.
As affecting the structure and
function of I keep assistance.
Finally vertebrates that depend
on insects and other chronic
invertebrates does there's our
main food source are being
affected so this is birds
fission and intendants declines
in insectivore bird species are
quite evident so far in many
other terrestrial.
And lastly Jessica Johnson.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I Jessica
Johnson with animal protection
voters I just wanted to share
that we strongly support this
bill we read the bill to be a
very measured restriction and
tailored through very targeted
exceptions on some uses of
neonicotinoids in order to slow
the decline of the and other
pollinator species which we know
is so important to protect our
fragile ecosystems thank you.
Thank you very much okay we are
now going to the committee we've
had ten opponents ten proponents
you had your expert witnesses so
committee members I have center
Gaydos first.
As.
Madam chair are you broke up
there now in my first yes you
representative gave us.
Thank you madam chair and Madam
pro tem um I appreciate this
discussion I've just give you a
little background I've got a
brother in Colorado that has
bees and I had not heard the
word Neil next till twenty
nineteen plan so approach to
save his hive said having kinda
losses in in his discussion with
them his was more due to the
weather the extreme cold in
Denver
but I was gonna ask madam chair
and madam pro tem um and I'd I'd
seen FIR earlier.
Do you consider that
we had the the discussion from
of lieutenant governor and given
the chilli producers do we know
if we have an overall loss to
these industry that's calculated
in the F. I. R. I'm just not
sure if we take out in our Chile
production New Mexico well known
for it I know that our our Gary
productions are pretty unique
also we've got a lot of really
good Derry's in in New Mexico
and I'm just wondering if for
calculating all the considered
losses or where we came up with
the FIR numbers.
There is Senator we work in
putting this together with
although organizations in the
state that have beats and of the
information from them is that it
it's hard to tell what really is
impacting the losses you really
have to drill down to the
science because as someone
mentioned earlier whether
climate change is definitely a
producing changes other diseases
but if you listen to the science
from trout unlimited I've got so
many studies on my desk I could
send them all to you that when
you drill down to what is
happening with the
neonicotinoids they are just a
systemic problem for pollinators
in particular and for as you
heard from tried unlimited there
in the water weights so and I
I'll just have to reiterate that
most of the people who are
against this bill are not
understanding what it does is
just not impact our chili's
doesn't affect her pecans
doesn't affect fell for a dozen
impact their major crops it's
and this mostly outdoor
residential settings where
people animals these at cetera
are congregating it requires a
more labeling requirements and
educational material so that we
try to educate people about
neonicotinoids and it gives the
department of the act the
ability to set up for rulemaking
a procedure to ensure that we're
not impacting major crops so I'm
not sure I've answered your
question there are so many parts
to it.
madam chair and.
Both them.
You did in in a way get to the
heart of my questioning I guess
my my thought is and I
appreciate you saying that it's
not going to affect all those
industries I think this year has
been here from my point of view
we're trying to kill industry
here in New Mexico with that all
yield thank you madam chair
thank you next I have Senator
Sedillo Lopez and Senator
communities Senator Sedillo
Lopez please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
I really appreciate you bringing
this bill actually was a
beekeeper a backyard beekeeper
for a few years and I lost my
bees and I started doing
research to see whether it's
possible to to bring them back
and what with the issues and you
were absolutely correct there
are many potential issues
affecting bees with this being
one of them and so but one of
the things that I I never found
and I don't know if you were
your experts have did the pant
banning in Europe has the
banning of neo disconnecting a
good.
They can or it's Neil Nitin
rates in Europe as that resulted
in reduced colony collapse
disorder.
And madam chair that is a
question I cannot answer I don't
know if I may code can do it.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
I in Europe we're actually
seeing colony collapse disorder
across the world diminishing to
very specific sat
ambulance but we are still
seeing annual losses at a much
higher level than we used to and
I think you I so appreciate
these are there are multiple
causes of that.
So just quickly on County
classes sort of that's not
something we're seeing is often
the Collett and the declines are
still there what I see mostly
through Europe is that the
impacts to add that were that
were consistent were expressed
ahead of the band did not
realize which is a good reminder
for us that we do that yes you
can make some restrictions
you're not necessarily going to
see that the fears not
necessarily realized but I do
have not seen research into
specific.
Changes for bees that is
something is also going to take
time to find.
Madam chair
Madam pro tem.
Will we be able if you if if
this bill passes and we
Institute this part district
partial partial ban will we be
able to measure in time to see
if they're effective.
madam chair and senator.
You know we do have scientists
who are studying this you know
in our department of that is
also very good yes they do when
there's of colony collapses they
do send out on their own experts
to look at this that they have
been a really good partner in
working with us on this bills so
I I certainly you know this this
is this is not going away this
is a very effective very cheap a
very dangerous insecticide that
we're using and so this effort
to rein it in and restricted I
believe is the first step to try
to keep that out of our
waterways out of fire.
Food cetera.
Okay and finally I hate
listening to all of the
testimony by the opponents I
became curious about what are
alternatives to Neil Neil the
controller generates Neil
nectaries.
Well and madam chair I'll just
say again that the majority of
the opponents don't understand
what the bill does because it
does not affect I'm all of these
crops that they're worried about
you know some people in our
group just want to ban
neonicotinoids you know frankly
if I could I would do that I
know that's a terrible statement
of people hate me for it but if
you really look at what is going
on with it it's dangerous it's
like round up which means Santo
now has billions of dollars they
must pay out because people have
have gotten cancer from it so
this is a very narrow
restriction it's it's a way for
us to reduce the use of New York
taken are now in the kitchen
arts in those areas where we can
more easily and educate people
through the labeling and and and
require that the department of
that do more education and and
set up a process to certify
applicators so
I.
Lost track of your question.
Well yes and budget.
So they mentioned alternatives
there certainly using them all
over the European Union and the
United Kingdom both of whom
have either banned outright
banned certain class so we have
five states that have already
restricted for looking at
Minnesota Maryland Connecticut
Vermont so I just
there certainly alternatives out
there and.
You know I'm not enough of the
farmer to talk about them but
I'm a might be able to weigh in
on that.
Senator chair members of the
committee there are a lot of
alternatives and its crop by
crop and one of the great things
is you know there are
researchers at the universities
looking into apple's what steps
do we need to take in order to
better protect pollinators if
there isn't it isn't like let's
just trade you know medical
grade floor Cllr internal
problem which is another
insecticide but we have cropping
systems and you know research
entities that are finding
solutions and all the time
finding ways to be better
protective of human health of
our environment so yes there are
definitely alternatives there
are many many growers are out
there that are that are
successful without using these
chemicals and quickly on the
science you asked about a moment
ago there are a lot of ways to
evaluate the efficacy of this we
can get based on information on
both of these and also
communication I contamination
around areas then you can look
after it and see the difference
we've done that in our own
office and looked and seen a
dramatic change in the level of
contamination and health of
these in areas with change and
has decided to use so yes that
is measurable.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair I think that it's
really important to try to
tackle this problem I and I.
I I support this bill I also
think that we really need to
well and I guess this is a
question too when I buy organic
am I buying a crop you know
whatever is apples or anything
and my buying
The vegetables or fruit that is
not tainted with this poison.
Sure that's a good question I
can't answer it.
I mean I I'm afraid of the
answer but to me might be able
to answer it.
Well the research shows that are
organic crops are much less
contaminated that conventional
crops the reality is that was
these are chemicals that move
and so you there are times when
you can't when conventional
press crops use unlikely in the
re and all regions are working
to ensure.
Used in schools homes crops so
yes madam chair madam pretend it
does seem should buy organic to
try to create a market that will
encourage people to testify.
My dog is going crazy excuse me
thank you very much for those
answers.
Thank you Senator Schmedes.
Thank you madam chair.
And senator I wanted to go back
to my question that I had asked
earlier if we could on
Age fourteen lines one through
three.
And
Madam pro tem I I ate I have
read the exceptions.
And once again there was a
comment made that a alfalfa
producer.
Would be able to use the seeds
that have been treated with this
pesticide but I do not see it in
the.
You show me in the bill where it
would allow.
In alfalfa farmer to use seeds
treated with neonicotinoids.
Madam chair and Senators
communities of page fourteen
line twenty three the blooming
are flowering plants plant
materials or see as clearly and
conspicuously labeled as having
been treated with the
neonicotinoid class pesticide
and includes a description of
the risk the New Mexico
department of that RT requires
labeling of treated seats so
those treated seeds we use all
over New Mexico okay.
Thank part of the exceptions.
Okay and so
Madam chair and and senator so.
If if the department it says
they are at the top of these
exceptions it says they may
allow so in the rulemaking
process what they have the
ability to.
To be stricter Amanda says they
may allow it but it doesn't say
shall so how how would the.
I guess what I'm saying is with
this legislation with the
department have rule making
authority to be more strict and
not allow these these practices.
Madam chair I think the
department of agriculture has
these has the ability right now
they control this is a pesticide
control act that you have before
you we already have this in
place they already make these
rules and regulations certainly
the last thing they're going to
do is take away the ability of
New Mexico farmers to grow
Chile and comments at cetera
HealthSouth so they are one of
our best state agencies they
know what they're doing they
were easy to work with they're
already concerned about
pollinators they've been working
with us for many years on that
but we accepted ninety five
percent of their amendments to
the bill I believe this allows
them to continue to do the work
they're doing now with some
changes.
Okay thank you that that's how
helpful answer Senator
Madam chair and senator and.
Back to the overall issue so so
really with these exceptions.
the use of these plus size would
be allowed in in most
circumstances but not in.
At.
No not in and I'm trying to get
the the bill with the amendment
in context it would still not be
allowed in any.
And such as say we reason
apple's is an example so this
bill essentially is is the even
with apple's there's no
exception you couldn't you
couldn't do different labeling
on the apples is that correct.
Madam chair Senators communities
that will be part of the
rulemaking process that the
department of that goes through
it is the plants that are
impacted the most with these the
the these and their flowers
that's not our main crops the
main crops use neonicotinoid
treated seeds that would be
exempt so
of they will work on that
regulations to make sure that
we're not using neonicotinoids
on plants like that I certainly
don't want to eat an apple it
gives me neonicotinoid.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator and I'm not going to
belabor that part
my you know this is the one of
the problems with why we set up
a you know scientific
commissions that have science
says to try to take some of the.
Politics out that that get
inside the legislative bodies I
went when I looked at some of
the science it seems that the
New York Knicks are pretty darn
selected for invertebrates
and as far as harm to to
vertebrates it doesn't seem at
least in the in the way we have
we.
I am it doesn't seem very toxic
to vertebrates but
I think we should go on I think
we could probably just spend a
lot of time on that and not be
fruitful
does the and madam chair and
senator is the department of ag
have an updated status on how
these have done in New Mexico
over the last whatever few years
ten years.
Chair Senators maybe say a
continued to respond to a
peacekeepers all over the state
they do have data on issues
they're not they don't do that a
deep scientists scientific
research that other companies to
other states to other institutes
to but they certainly continue
to keep track of of the the
population and the producers and
so they you know they have the
information.
So madam chair and senator what
will so what is the what is the
date it what is the data showing
in New Mexico I've seen very
alarming data out of the Midwest
as well as the west coast but
what will I mean what what
Arby's doing what what is their
data show.
Madam chair you would have to
ask them that I don't I don't
think they have that kind of
analysis that's behind the deep
scientific research behind this
bill but they you know respond
when issues of beekeepers come
up with issues I saw them do it
so they had data you'll have to
ask them.
Okay.
I think I will I will try to
reach out I am.
Madam madam chair and senator
because here here's what I'm
getting at.
Is clearly and scientific models
the new next are showing some
harm to pollinators I don't
think that's that there that's
not I think I don't think
anybody in this audience would
disagree with that statement
and then we are seeing declining
bee populations in certain areas
of the US.
no one's gonna debate that's
the.
But what what what my question
is what is New Mexico doing you
know I mean we we see some
models and we see other parts of
the of the country but you know
I don't know is is New Mexico
are are you know are we using
these pesticides in a way that
is sparse enough or infrequent
enough that that it we're
actually not harming our
regional or local the population
so I I would just love to see
that day that because you know
as everyone is that on both
sides of very complex issue I
mean we have green chilli
farmers coming and saying it's
going to harm them even though
they're exempted you know it
says you know it can be because
of the crop rotation issues and
all sorts of other things and so
I I hear the concerns I see it
but I I I want to just follow
are specific data because if
we're doing something what let's
say in New Mexico we're doing
some is actually benefiting our
pollinator populations work or
maybe it's because of the
uniqueness of our agricultural
industry that it's actually not
that harmful to bee bee
population we're just redo three
headlines.
Where I am seeing a lot of the
the devastation your three
headlines.
US while be numbers decline as
land is converted for bio fuel.
Number two ethanol program
contributing to honeybee decline
number three US government
policies to increase renewable
fuel production it up killing
the country's bees so you know
we when we get politics
involving kind of have a
political ideology that more
favors for renewables and
doesn't favor pesticides and
then we we we we I feel like
we're getting in danger of being
too political with more or
making these decisions based
upon our world views and not not
the science and so on but that's
why I will follow up with them
about their data because I think
it'll be very important but I I
just have one or two more
questions but I in order to move
on and discuss that further I
think we need to have that they
can and I'll reach out to them.
I am.
The I guess the last thing
really is just the.
The surrounding states and
surrounding countries are you
know with this issue if it does
put our farmers at a
disadvantage
you know are are they just gonna
buy their products from Texas so
that is going to import other
products from Mexico and and and
I don't you know once again
because of the regional
competitiveness in the market so
I I'm I'm not sure how that is
going to that reaction is going
to actually benefit our our bees
So I I I guess you know I I to
conclude to wrap this up I I
want to see more more evidence
here I also hope that this
committee can see in the big
picture that let's not just zero
in on pesticides let's look at
all of these Energy sparse
technologies that we are kind of
in my opinion going a bit
overboard on this destroying our
land
and it has been clearly also
shown to destroy our bees
let's look at the local and
regional data and not
necessarily the data from the
Midwest and see what we're doing
I'm very sensitive to it
but I I I'm not sure that that
this bill in the context of our
neighbors and in the context of
everything else going on I'm
not.
I'm not sure the harms.
the benefits are going to
outweigh the outweigh the risks
especially with other pesticides
that are still going to be used
and we we can't all forty
organic I mean that's the
reality if if if we go if we if
we went to full organic I mean
we would have I don't know I
mean tons of people would starve
to death across the globe so
that that's not a suitable
solution for either.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator.
So madam chair I finally did
find an answer to Senators
meetings we have a we have a
forty seven percent colony loss
reported in New Mexico and
twenty nineteen to twenty
twenty.
Thank you very much ma'am
appropriations.
Is our chair with that maybe
she's on mute I think.
Okay I'll take over now I'm.
I'm sorry.
Oh no I'm sorry senators about
this I believe is next yes
center again this is going for
the second time so we usually
take members for the first time
and then we'll go to the second
round Senator Cervantes.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I'm hoping that
Some of the comments we've heard
of late are accurate and that
with the amendment the concerns
of some of the
Folks the Representative farming
here are perhaps concerns that
that have been resolved by those
amendments I'm gonna trust
that's to be the case when it
comes down to voting for this
matter but again if that's not
the case and and we haven't been
able to keep track of the
amendments and what their
implications are I assumed all
hear from those folks and then
my position on this bill may
change as the president to make
progress.
We so a lot of time always in
all the years I've been here
talking about diversifying our
economy in New Mexico
diversifying our private sector
and so forth we never really
make any progress we're always
chasing the latest shiny object
whether it's film or whether
it's space or whatever it may be
we're always chasing things that
are shining and and promising
and frankly always seems almost
always fail to deliver on the
promises.
But but farming is an important
one to consider because we're in
business one thing to consider
is the fact that farming can't
up and leave they're not going
to go anywhere farming is going
to be here forever it's a
permanent investment in our
state unlike some of the other
places we're putting our
energies in our efforts
farming's gonna stay here and
it's a big part of our economy.
And even on like oil and gas
which we should acknowledge is
is an industry that a resource
that we're all working to see
decline
in its use of of certain fossil
fuels and so forth.
But farmers gonna be different
farming we're we're gonna need
to feed and increasingly growing
population on the planet we're
gonna need to do it more and
more with less water with less
land with more technology and
we're we're gonna need to always
continue to feed people so we've
got a support act.
And I'll just tell you that
growing up in the valley I did
when I grew up here in the C. a
valley we used to grow tomatoes
and lettuce and onions and all
kind of vegetables you name it
we did it all show you
everything through it all.
The fact of the matter is that
now we don't growing much of any
that anymore almost everything
we grow is of mechanized
production so pecans and other
crops alfalfa cotton we grow
things that do not require human
beings to labor in the fields
anymore because we've we've
eliminated labor from from
farming and all those crops are
still being grown in fact our
chili use is gone through the
roof we just all grow to New
Mexico anymore all grown now New
Mexico or or elsewhere so we
have to be careful with the harm
that we may due
to the farming I think we should
be considered an important vital
part of our economy and it's a
clean industry I'll tell you
that I think farmers tend to be
conservationists of their there
is committed as anyone to clean
water into clean air I believe
and to and to preserving species
like our our pollinators so I
don't I don't think we have to
make this a political issue I
just don't see it that way this
was the bipartisan at all but
but I'm hoping I trust Senator
Stewart that that she's made
good amendments that that the
effectively exempt application
amended this to important crops
like Chile of the funds and
others
I think Senator will ask the
right question earlier and I
hope we'll get more information
about that who is this now going
to affect it with with the
amendment so we put on this bill
here in this committee who is in
effect what I heard.
The only thing I think I heard
where were apps fruit tree
producers and Mallon our farmers
and I so if there's more than
that I hope we'll hear from them
but I but I'm trusting what I'm
hearing is twenty today that
Bakan farmers Chile farmers and
others of well the farmers are
effectively exempted now for
many in the implication of this
of this bill.
And then I would just like to
reemphasize with been said about
we have to be a competitive
state.
Of the the I think the
presentation I heard is that two
states have adopted something
similar to this law Connecticut
Massachusetts as I recall.
Those are not in my mind big
farm production states they're
not competitors with New Mexico
that's not our our economy or
our market place.
And I and I would be concerned
if Texas and Arizona have a
competitive advantage or we're
even California my god say this
probably will is known as any
for a highly regulated farming
say a highly regulated state
period is New Mexico is more
heavily regulated in California
we risk the fact that that more
more of the food production will
just go to other states that
don't don't make it so hard on
us so I I I trust and restore
the struck a good balance your
appreciate putting amendments I
think does that I hope the
opposition from from a farm a
spokesperson here we go back and
look at this legislation with
the amendment and and correct me
if I'm misunderstanding it but I
believe the amendment largely
exempt just about any farming.
The impact of this legislation
except other than fruit tree
farming and and mailing growers
and and for those that are in
those industries I trust the
love make their voices heard and
we'll get good advice from
Department acts of thank you
madam chair those are my
thoughts.
Thank you Senator von case is
there anybody wanting to speak
for the first time on the
committee before I go back to
center Gaydos.
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chairman and
madam pro tempore.
Just a couple of follow up
questions and discussion with
Senator Mary's
Madam pro tem you said that the
department of ag didn't have the
of scientific capabilities to do
the deep scientific research
could you tell me for are you
guys receive that research in
preparation for this bill.
Madam chair Senator right
because you know I have so many
I have so many resources of this
and I've been working on
pollinators for many many years
along with the national caucus
been barman legislators
Rick Hansen state representative
out of Minnesota it's Minnesota
Maryland Connecticut Connecticut
and Vermont that have
restrictions like I'm suggesting
to date so you can find it
everywhere now I did not say
that our department of that did
not do scientific research.
What I'm saying is that the
research that underscores the
problems with neonicotinoid is
everywhere so I can send you a
long list of research documents
that you can reach yourself I
said that they do a good job of
paying attention to the loss and
when we reached out to them they
gave us information the forty
seven percent of colony loss
that we experienced in twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty they
have that information so it
certainly didn't mean to say
that they didn't have the deep
scientific research but there
are scientists all over the
world that are looking at the
knee and the kitchen arts.
The European Union has put bands
especially related to the B. as
the United Kingdom have so this
is not just in New Mexico issue
you know these birds fish thank
they don't have any that they
don't have any politics and they
don't adhere to state boundaries
so this is this is now a poison
that is in our water and is in
our food system is in our soil
and is in our pollinators and no
one disputes that.
Well madam chair and and madam
pro tem I may have taken that
discussion different when I'd
heard that the department had
not interject in the scientific
research my last question is
madam chair and madam chair pro
tem in drafting this legislation
for the
Of the industries involved in
this as far as you know I guess
I have a concern on why the
chilli producers and the other
of industry experts in this area
are confused on the bill I would
have expected that they would
have been brought in at the
start of the bill so they would
have the same understanding and
be at the table with you during
that discussion where they
brought in madam chairman chair
guy it goes the one person who
said that she was involved with
actually involved in a work
group that the department of
access.
So when we were working on the
bill we reached out to our that
show them what we were working
on they met with other people
not me personally but certainly
Michael dax and make code and
others in our group have looked
at the industry we certainly
have met with some of them I I
don't you know people just get
afraid when your bills and
everybody thinks this is a ban
of neonicotinoids it's not it's
a restriction of the main
restriction really is a naked
Kate nicotine noted the
cannabinoid based insecticide by
homeowners and professionals for
pest control protection on
landscapes it prohibits
the external use related to
protection structures from
permanent tested infestations
with the exception of the wood
preservatives wood preservative
in the what that's been
preserved so it's a way for us
to restrict of.
Those areas where we really can
restrict.
All madam chair settlement of
pro tem I appreciate I think all
all the yield I just know that
you know in this in the center
survive this that the currently
I'm not
Comfortable I will be voting no
but I'd hope as this goes
forward that those that are in
the industry would be able to
understand the changes in the
amendment and be able to support
the the overall
Reason for the bill so with that
all you'll thank.
Thank you very much what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Okay so I hear Senator Hamblen
first he had a motion for a due
pass is there.
I would like to move to table
madam chair.
Okay I tabling motion is not
debatable.
The grey goose is moved to table
Veronica please call the roll.
It really motion.
Senator serve on.
No.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
No.
Senator Neville.
Yes Senator Paypen.
No.
Senator so.
Senator smitteez.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Chairman next now.
Yes three and six no.
Okay that motion has failed we
have a due pass motion by
Senator Hamblen and the second
by Senator Sedillo Lopez could
the
secretary please call the vote
roll Senator someone just yes.
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator Paypen.
Just.
Senator so.
Yes for.
Committees.
No.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Chairman CENIC's.
Yes explain my boat.
I six yes and three no.
Thank you have a do pass Madam
pro tem my comment I voted yes
but I'm hopeful that if there is
an issue with our industry in
the future that we would come
back and revisit this bill thank
you very much for presenting
today and giving us all of this
information thank you very much
madam chair committee members
thank you.
Okay we're now on to we had
started working on
Senate bill eighty six use the
water for oil and gas
operations.
And.
We were going to continue that
bill today.
The.
All my papers.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez can you
refresh my memory about how far
we got.
Thank you madam chair what I
recall is that we carry this
forward because they have not
received that the
Not everybody received the
amendment on time that's correct
okay well I've got the
amendments and I'm happy to
explain it.
Okay so
We have heard from you about the
bill we heard from your expert
witnesses and we had not been on
the amendment because we didn't
the current the new amendment
had not gotten to everyone it is
a point to it has gone out to
everyone now.
So
Senator let's have a motion to
accept the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Also moved just for discussion
is their second.
A second madam chair okay so we
have a amendment for discussion
purposes Senator studio Lopez
please explain your mouth.
And.
I just want to make sure to say
when I have because the one I
have.
Six point one.
I'm looking at a point to okay.
What Jeez okay I'm okay well
I'll just go through it on page
one line thirteen strike gas or
and after water insert or other
non domestic liquid waste that
is a clarifying amendment.
On page one line twenty five
after field insert prohibiting
the discharge or disposition of
untreated produced water for
activities unrelated to oil and
gas operations requiring care
digit characterization and
public disclosure of
contaminants to use treated
produced water outside the oil
field and the reason for that
amendment is to make sure that
the title indicates precisely
what's in the bill.
On page
on page two line seventeen
strike gas and after non
domestic insert liquid again a
clarifying amendment on page
nine line fourteen after water
insert recycled produced water
again a clarifying amendment on
page nine line twenty four after
water insert recycled produced
water on page ten line three
after water in search recycled
produced water.
The necessity for these bills
were paid for these
amendments were mostly to
clarify the bill
I frankly this would what like
to call the produced water toxic
waste but I'm trying to be very
consistent with what is in the
statutory scheme already and
these amendments accomplish
that.
Thank you are there are we are
now on the amendment only.
Their opponents in the public a
public opponents to the
amendment.
We are on amendment.
Two one nine two four one point
two it is on the screen.
Two Senate bill eighty six I'm
advocating for opponents.
In the public to the amendment
however you see any.
I'm not seeing no in New Mexico.
Okay are there are proponents of
the amendment in the public.
Okay back to the committee on
the amendment.
Are there any questions or
comments from committee members
on the amendment.
Senator smitteez.
Thank you madam chair just one
question I.
For for center city Lopez so it
the the you said I just wanna be
clear on this you said this is a
eight clarifying amendment it's
it's not it's not really
changing anything that did I
hear you right.
Wrecked okay thank you thank you
mentioned.
Thank you is there any other
comments or questions from
committee members.
Okay we have a motion for a do
pass on the second on the
amendment with the secretary
please call the vote on the
amendment.
Thank you.
Yes.
Thank you.
I'm sorry this this.
Senator.
Okay Senator Gallegos yes I
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator.
Senator souls.
Senate committee.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Stefanics.
Yes and we got centers around
his road I'm yes there's Rogers
yes.
Thank you very much I saw you
there okay.
We.
You we have an adopted are we
have an amended bill so we are
now going to the opponents and
the proponents of Trevor
indicates there's about ten on
each side we will give each
speaker one minute cover go
ahead.
First we have he rob right.
Barbie.
Are you here.
Okay let's keep gone.
We have Camillus Ableman.
Proponents
Jennifer Bradfute.
Madam chair and members of the
committee can you hear me OK yes
we can thank you thank you my
name is Jennifer Bradfute senior
attorney and registered
lobbyists for marathon oil
company I'm rest respectfully
appearing in opposition to
Senate bill eighty six data
prepared by the office of the
state engineer shows the
industry only uses around one
point five percent of the
state's total water supply the
question in front of you today
is less about oil and gas
industry use of water and more
about whether or not the state
wants to continue pursuing the
use of recycled and treated
produced water this is a very
technical issue that was
addressed in twenty nineteen in
the produced water act which was
a bill created with technical
input from a wide variety of
stakeholders many of whom are
not at this hearing industry is
very concerned that Senate bill
eighty six seeks to change the
produced water act without
seeking technical input from
recycling companies water
treatment companies the produced
water consortium Moquino Mexico
agencies and water rights
holders the bill hinges on an
overly broad definition of the
term fresh water it relies on a
high level of TVS that's not
based on science the Bill
modifies the jurisdiction of the
oil conservation division and
the environment department and
make unintentionally impact
rules that were issued in twenty
twenty.
The bill will wait water.
Next Liz Taylor.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
I am Liz Taylor I've been water
water for twenty nine years in
New Mexico Representative go
public and private around the
state
I'm here today on behalf of the
San Juan water commission in
northwest New Mexico and select
energy services in southeast New
Mexico both entities propose
Senate bill eighty six.
The possibility because it would
force oil and gas operators to
eight New Mexico take away good
jobs revenue for the state
operators have told select that
this bill would force them to
leave as stated before the
standard of Kerr of protected
freshwater resource zone is not
defined that's very very
difficult to administer from the
states you as the FIR said and
hard to understand is a water
provider in both the San Juan
water commission and selector
Water providers the oil and gas
industry produced water is not
always available so we still
need fresh water operators are
moving toward using produced
water but it will take some time
so please consider that in
please vote against Senate bill
eighty six thank you very much.
Next Jim Winchester.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jim Winchester with
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico we do
stand in opposition to SB eighty
six I. P. line disagree that
environmental stewardship and
responsible oil and gas
development especially when it
pertains to water is important
we did support the twenty
nineteen produced water portion
of the increase in March H. B.
five forty six you guys hear me
okay.
Some I'm sorry Richard someone
interrupting but I just want to
repeat that we did
support HB five forty six two
years ago and allows companies
to have ownership of produced
water off lease thus we see
really no need to revise this
produced water legislation in
there also is new regulatory
civil penalty authority in place
at OCD just stated oil and gas
only uses a one point five
percent of water in New Mexico
from a technical standpoint a
fresh water use is necessary to
achieve proper operational
feasibility that safeguards well
integrity so for these reasons
and many more we do stand
opposed to SB eighty six thank
you for your time.
Next Lauren Patterson.
Yes chairman Stefan ex members
of the committee warned Paterson
New Mexico cattle growers
association and we stand in
opposition to SB eighty six we
believe this might be an
invasion of the water rights for
beneficial uses granted by the
state engineer we also believe
this bill contradicts the twenty
nineteen produced water act as
already stated and clarifies the
recycling and reuse of water as
well as regulatory oversight and
that was in the industry input
legislation for these reasons we
oppose it and we appreciate your
time thank you.
Next JD Bullington.
Thank you madam spare this is JD
Bullington speaking to you today
on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
when we tout New Mexico as an
energy leader that means a
leader in all sectors solar wind
geothermal and it includes oil
and gas greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce believes
this bill will make it more
difficult to produce oil and gas
in New Mexico which is not in
the best overall interest for
the state and the people who
reside here we urge the
legislature to refrain from
restraining this industry
through onerous regulations and
penalties thank you.
Next Caitlyn Hart.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee and Caitlin hard
representing line over the
coalition a group of farmers and
ranchers who manage land and
water in New Mexico totaling
approximately one point five
million acres a C. and lease
land we stand in opposition to
SB eighty six our group makes a
living from the land and water
that their families have cared
for generationally our members
take their stewardship of the
land water seriously and intend
to conserve the land and water
in combination with using those
resources to make a sustainable
living in a sustainable legacy
for future generations.
This bill removes their ability
to fully manage their assets in
particular water rights to the
benefit of their investments and
sustainability of community and
families in addition many
members have probably private
property rights that will be
infringed upon by this bill make
you think living through farming
and ranching is difficult
especially when they're
flexibility is limited by over
reaching statutes we think
Senate Senator city Sedillo
passer rating this legislation
board and the intense part tax
freshwater resources however we
have to propose a current
language into possibility of
this legislation thank you.
We have more Riley.
Madam chairman Senator Sedillo
Lopez committee members.
I'm Laura Riley today I'm
representing have a lan
solutions our company provides
consulting and regulatory
services to clients in both
agriculture and extractive
industries.
In regards to the specifics of
this bill the ban on freshwater
use could constitute a class I
taking by removing marketing
uses for private property right
these are rights that required
investment in terms of time and
money by many landowners
additionally we have concerns
with the bill as it means the
produced water bill passed in
two thousand nineteen agencies
at EMNRD and the environment
department have not even had an
opportunity to implement the
regulations and rules as set
forth in the original bill
the HSD FIR is right significant
concern about the fiscal impact
both of budgeted FTEs without
any associated funding for these
reasons we are unable to support
this bill thank you.
Next we have Patrick Callan.
Madam chair committee members
Patrick Killen registered
lobbyists for chevron we
respectfully oppose SB six it
will stifle the progress
currently being made through the
implementation of the produced
water act which governor Lujan
Grisham signed into law less
than two years ago the produced
water access led to the creation
of the produced water consortium
a groundbreaking collaboration
between New Mexico State
University and the state
environment department SB six
will roll back progress the
produced water consortium in New
Mexico State University is
making to promote fresh water
conservation and encourage
produced water recycling in
closing respectfully ask the you
vote no on SB eighty six please
allow full implementation of the
produced water act to continue
and keep the great work of the
produced water consortium at New
Mexico State University moving
forward thank you.
Next we have Arthur whole.
Madam chair.
Excuse me madam chair members of
the committee my name is art
hall I'm a registered lobbyist
for Devon energy.
Devon energy has been a leader
in water conservation practices
that started when we began
recycling water in the Barnett
shale in north taxes in two
thousand and four.
Over the years we have
collaborated.
With government industry and
community stakeholders to find
innovative ways to conserve
water in our drilling and
completions operations Devin has
invested significant capital and
our efforts to reduce our
reliance on fresh water.
In twenty twenty reused and
brackish water accounted for
more than ninety percent of
water used in Devon's Delaware
basin operations.
Debin  has a total of nine
recycling facilities operated in
the Delaware basin.
Madam chair members of the
committee our industry has made
significant strides in
minimizing fresh water use by
partnering with government
industry and academia not due to
government mandates like this
legislation this legislation
will likely hinder continued
advancement in water
conservation and we urge you to
vote against it thank you madam
chair members.
Lastly we have a needs very.
Thank you Trevor good morning
madam chair and committee
members my name is Amy berry and
I'm the registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico oil and gas
association two years ago the
legislature in its wisdom and
without full consideration to
the prognostic of New Mexicos
limited water supply past the
produced water act as others
have and will continue to
explain the act as it was signed
by the governor was the product
of tireless collaboration led by
Representative small and
included state agencies and both
environmental and oil and gas
stakeholders the prettiest Water
Act is a great example of our
state's potential every January
the scarcity of water in New
Mexico has been a problem since
the beginning he and is
recognized by everyone.
Oil and gas industry employs
some of the world's leading
scientists and recognize a
responsibility this precious
resource I can share it again
working with the state agencies
and the environmental groups the
unified group point out that
while still being implemented
has led to the creation of the
New Mexico water produced water
research consortium and the
highest rates of water reuse and
recycling ever in the oil field
Berenson says that we will
always need to use fresh water I
do not believe it is the
intention of the members of this
committee.
Madam chair you're on mute.
I'm sorry we're going to ten
proponents Trevor.
First we have Camilla.
Fume.
Hi there thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Camilla I woman representing the
Sierra Club and R. thirty five
thousand members and supporters
around the state we support
these amendments and just be
eighty six they're simple
clarifications to the original
bill that are more protective of
fresh water the environment and
public health currently spills
are not subject to penalty.
The agency can permit that
doesn't have all the tools
necessary to protect people and
our communities what is the
economic impact of toxic oil and
gas waste on our fresh water
public health and the
environment please vote in
support thank you.
Next we have Eleanor problems.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Eleanor Bravo
speaking for new energy economy
and common ground rising.
The original produced water bill
was fast tracked through the
legislature and is flawed in
these amendments will correct
those problems and and and
protect the people of New Mexico
I concur with the Sierra Club
Camilla I meant in her comments
that spills are not
reported and are not enforced so
we urge you to vote for this
these amendments thank you.
Next we have our TV CEO Romero.
Thank you Trevor and Ben madam
chair Canadian Army sure merry
cover representing you should
not for kind of crisis action
talk to fracking flowback is not
water it is a fluid continual
carcinogens and no proprietary
chemicals it is radioactive
waste but it is not be treated
as such the passage of the
produced water act last year
allows this radioactive waste
product off the oil field I
potentially into agricultural
fields and ultimately into our
groundwater courses already made
its way that to more than one
thousand five hundred forty
schools in twenty eighteen the
first half of twenty twenty
legislation upwards of one point
four million gallons what I can
refer to with no exaggeration as
cancer causing sludge there's no
economically viable method of
transforming fracking flowback
into safe drinking water we must
act immediately and pass SB
eighty six to protect our health
our environment and our water.
I am eighteen years old I
deserve a responsible legacy
from you are doing the elected
lawmakers and leaders please do
not leave much generation with a
reversible radioactive mass our
future our health and our water
could not be treated as for for.
Thank you.
Mexico Paul Gibson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and I
especially want to thank our
bill sponsors for introducing
this important legislation my
name is Paul Gibson co founder
retake Our Democracy an all
volunteer organization with
twenty five hundred member
statewide this year we identify
twenty bills we call
transformational bills that we
support and SB eighty six use of
water and gas and oil operations
is one of them in twenty
nineteen legislation legislative
session we experience the
consequences of unpaid
legislators and inadequate
staffing and sufficient time for
deliberation legislation the
devil is in the details and with
HB five forty six the cruise
Water Act The details undermine
the intent you get a chance to
get it right now you heard from
Marathon Oil this that they had
a vast amount of input into HB
five five forty six not many our
constituents did as the bill was
through rush through at the last
minute we strongly support just
eighty six and hope you will
passed that bill and thank you
for your service and you're
risking your health and service
of our democracy.
Weisberg.
Madam chair I committee members
including my own Senator
definition eighties I live in
to various this year three.
Eighty eight neighbors had to
drill new five hundred feet
wells at a cost of thirty to
fifty thousand dollars each some
of my less fortunate neighbors
who live to the south of me
cannot afford to drill new wells
and they have to have all of
their water trucked in so when I
hear that each well in the
Permian basin uses eleven
million gallons of water a day
and chevron's website says that
they have innovated strategies
to eliminate most fresh water
use in the Permian it seems like
just be eighty six limited fresh
water makes a lot of sense I
also support SB eighty six
provisions that encourage
companies to report and handle
produced water spills more we
responsibly for the sake of
their workers our wildlife the
people living near those areas
as well as our state's
reputation as a beautiful and
chanted place thank you very
much.
We have Mike niece yes.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is Mike needs
I Representative my water here
today
It has been argued today that
oil and gas industry uses one
point five percent of the water
New Mexico annually and a
comparison is often made related
to the amount of water that
every culture uses agriculture
does not change water into toxic
waste and it does not
permanently remove the water
from the natural water cycle if
one point five percent of our
clean water is despoiled every
year and removed what is the
formula to figure out the ten
year fresh water on us we're the
twenty year fresh water law.
It seems that one point five
percent of our water is we need
to much what other industries
prisons all of the water the
touch and then once more you can
stop this craziness do passed
please.
Next we have Jose Navarro.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is was
within the November
Representative that sent the
present policy I would strongly
support SB eighty six because
you ensure that our communities
environment remains clean and
healthy without a doubt oil and
gas operations come with many
drastic consequences it
worsening climate crisis and the
direct questioning of water in
our state unfortunately the
release of fracking waste
continues to disproportionately
affect low income communities
and communities of color and the
state well at times the pleading
of fresh water sources that
continue to become more and more
scars for far too long our
communities have been impacted
by the ecological destruction
from oil and gas we have to stop
that SB eighty six make sure
pressures Water New Mexico's not
wasted for oil and gas
operations and ensures our
communities in the end up
drinking portion is what because
safeguarding our natural
resources and the health of our
communities must continue to be
goal number one for the.
Bill mid cap.
Thank you senator funding some
members of the committee for
allowing me to test and
supporters SB six my name is
Norman cap on.
I work for recommends you.
Percent discussed produced water
and links.
Organizations ox waste can be a
win win for ag producers.
I'm not to tell you all how dry
we are in New Mexico.
There are many producers that
need additional water resources.
Members believe and agree that
the oil and gas industry must
use or reuse of produced water
before any other waters use each
time these fluids changed hands
so does the liability.
For any of this toxic waters
used for added protection we
must assure one harmful
chemicals are in the water and
make sure it's safe.
I have that is sure it's today
this legislation would hold oil
and gas responsible for its own
waste and not pass of liability
on the farmers and ranchers
thank you for all you do.
Next verse struggle.
Madam chair in senators thank
you for the opportunity to speak
my name is Ruth street all I'm
on the board of New Mexico
interfaith power and light our
organization and many people
face around the state support SB
eighty six.
Water is sacred in all religious
and spiritual traditions without
water there is no life we are
draining the aquifer underneath
southeast New Mexico and an
alarming rate once the water is
gone it will take hundreds of
years to replace it I have
visited the Carlsbad area and
spoken to farmers who see their
water being drained away for use
in fracking.
Tracking produced water and
creating enforceable
consequences for spills are
important steps in keeping local
communities healthy now and in
the future we must work to
protect the most vulnerable
among us southeast New Mexico is
a beautiful place and must not
become a sacrifice on thank you.
And lastly we have just such as
depend.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee chose you can I'm
executive director of Amigos
bravos we're in our thirty third
year of protecting and restoring
the watersheds of New Mexico.
I want to build on Mr nieces
point about the one and a half
percent.
In twenty sixteen we did a study
called the water energy nexus
where we analyze the impact
energy development had on our
water resources to kind of re
frame the opponent's point a
little bit.
All right now I estimate that
twelve percent of New Mexicos
public water supply the
equipment is being consumed in
oil and gas operations that
would be for cities the size of
Santa Fe
and Mr nieces point is very well
taken that unlike agriculture or
community use
oil and gas use of of water
fresh water is consumptive and
not a net neutral.
Thank you for your consideration
please support the bill.
Thank you very much I would like
to thank all the of proponents
and the opponents who signed up
to speak there were many more
that actually signed up but we
only heard ten from each side
and center Gaydos did send me
some more names some of them did
get on
and of course so we are limiting
this for the public so that we
can get to committee questions
and comments so we are now going
to the committee on Senate bill
eighty six as it has been
amended so everyone who's on
could you put your hands down
because we are now going to
committee time.
Okay committee members.
Any questions or comments on the
bill Senator Hamblen understand.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the opportunity and
committee members to speak there
are several folks who have been
that able to be heard today and
there's just a Fernandes was not
able to be heard but I've heard
him speak before and really I I
feel this is more of a COVID is
and something that aren't they
had had mentioned of putting
responsibility on us as a
committee to protect the water
and so I appreciate our way in
our day and Joseph who didn't
get a chance to speak but I have
a feeling I understand where
he's going is that it is our
responsibility to make sure that
our our our water is safe for
future generations we have
behaved in a way that has been
way more proactive in terms of
getting the most out of our
extractive resources and not
using foresight to make sure
that we do what we can to
protect the water resources and
so my comment is to think our
young folks who have been able
to speak today and also I voice
my support of this bill thank
you madam chair.
Thank you so much committee
members any further.
Comments.
Is the committee ready for a
motion.
Madam chair I move for us to do
pass on Senate bill.
I'm sorry for getting the number
right now eighty six as amended
I'm sorry Senate bill eighty six
as amended.
Is there a second second.
So Senator Gallegos.
Senator guidance you muted.
madam chair well as I was on was
senator rand asking any question
on on now where we were on the
people were invited to speak and
I was not able to ask questions
and and I probably past that
point.
Do that I'd ask the table.
Okay so
and tabling motion is not
debatable but after a motion for
it to pass I would take other.
Tions and comments but we are on
the table in motion.
So Branigan will you please call
the vote.
Senator Cervantes yes.
Sorry yes.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Senator Hamblen show.
Senator Neville.
Yes.
Senator Paypen.
No.
Senator so also.
Centers of your goals.
So sorry.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no to
table.
Senator I'm sorry chairman
Stefanics.
No cable.
I know to table in for yes to
table.
Okay thank you the tabling
motion has failed of there was a
motion made.
My Senator pope Senator Hamblen
and pope is that correct Senator
Paypen Senator Sedillo Lopez
second okay thank you Senator
meetings your hand is up.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one question certainly.
Senator do do we have any data.
On various industries in New
Mexico and how much water they
use.
Yes Senator smitteez we do.
Thank you.
madam chair and senator I think
we're where can I find that.
The state engineers office
publishes.
The vote is would you please go
to the chair and and address the
Senators well thank thank you
thank you for the reminder.
Madam chair Senators maybes
there are various places that
that data is kept among them the
state engineers office we passed
the water data act as well two
years ago to try to compile this
data and get it in one place but
also like to defer to my experts
warn gone who has also looked
into this issue very deeply.
You want Mr gone to answer.
Well.
Madam chair I don't.
I don't think it's going to
really affect the the vote I'm
just trying to
You know for the so for example
Intel.
Intel uses billions and billions
of gallons of water
you know per per year
And you know I I just I feel
like trying to be a little more
approaching this issue a little
more scientifically and saying
look okay we have a certain
industries that uses and I I I
believe.
I'm not looking at the table
right now I'd like to look it up
maybe as the bill progresses but
I believe that use about three
percent of the water.
In in the Albuquerque area where
I live you know what we're it
just once again it just seems
like we're kind of singling out
the oil and gas industry.
when I want to be a little more
scientific about how much water
do other industries use
for example we we talk about
batteries a lot and electric
cars but it takes five hundred
thousand gallons of water to
extract one metric tons of
lithium.
So I you know I I just want to
know what the trade offs are
here instead of just.
You know it just seems to me is
a listing for a lot of the
comments that we just say well
oil and gas is bad
well I want to see the data
because they're using a very
energy dense source.
One last comment on this issue
is is fracking so this is going
to limit fracking however.
Fracking drastically reduced the
price of natural gas okay what
did that do well natural gas out
competed coal.
The the end of coal in in
America was is not really an
environmentalist movement it's
an economic.
It's it's just straight math.
Because of fracking in because
of the decrease price of natural
gas.
Hello is no longer economically
viable with it you know the big
came it was not even a partisan
issue and I think people think
it was just because of
environmental issues so I just
want to approach the bill that
way and and so that's why I'll
be voting no today even though I
I do support actually a large
amount of the.
but I'd like to see that I'm
gonna look at the the OSC data
to try to come at this a little
more mathematical so thank you
and thank you for the the
pointer there Senator I will get
that data thank you thank you I
have Senator von case and then
Center greatest.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator the if you're looking at
the bill as I understand it this
bill goes from this committee to
judiciary's era.
That's correct madam chair
Senator does not have a referral
to finances while also right
about that that's that's
correct.
Yeah so you and I were together
for a long time Senator I
applaud this United were one of
only two I think senators to
vote against the produced water
bill in the Senate I thank you I
look back on the what with a lot
of pride because I think we
realize there were a lot of
flaws in that legislation and I
appreciate your trying to
correct some of that here by by
doing this I I don't think that
to make sense for us to put
blanket prohibitions on on water
use in a in a state where of
we've I think we've got to be
flexible with the guys gonna be
some flexibility and some
recognition about of the local
issues but I I know for example
in section one.
By the bill center city what was
the many of the committee I
hired him as when I Law School
professor so I was trying get
owners points with but session
one of your bill describes
something as
restrictions and prohibitions on
protected freshwater resource
zones and and Senator Sedillo
Lopez you and I were critical of
the last bill that was passed
because it had undefined terms
and and what terms there were no
in the law no water what all
they were introduced the bill to
try and and I get nuanced around
things but I I'm not familiar
with that the term you're using
here protected of fresh water
resources on is that is that
does not have a legal meaning to
you you
actually more than a legal
meaning it has an engineering
meeting and the
An industry meeting and those
are the zones the reason it's
very important when people say
this is a ban on national ban on
the use of fresh water it is not
it is fresh water would be used
to most of when it is near when
this drilling is near freshwater
zones and that's very important
because we would not once that
the toxic water the produced
water to be anywhere near
freshwater zones and so this is
it's a very important techno
technologically and
scientifically and I'm glad you
asked that question I'd also
like to defer to my experts more
going on that.
So you want to hear from Mr gone
well let me ask the question
again he may answer it more
directly off and that's the
question asked with more
directly.
I agree with Senator Sedillo
Lopez the bill the implications
of the bill would be to put
restrictions on water in
relationship or proximity to
fresh water resources owns so
that's gonna be a fight right is
was where you in proximity to
fresh water resources owns and
are you below that I think is
the with the language your bill
restricts is the use of water it
that's lower than protective
freshwater resources also the
whole interest okay what is a
protected freshwater resources
own that was my last question
and I I didn't see a definition
for that the bill was well we
have some questions now is there
a definition of that in the
bill.
No Senator that is not that
would be left to regulations by
the agency in working with
industry okay and then you and
then you answered my question
madam chair Senators eleven
judge my question about you but
it has an engineering meeting
but what I liked give you an our
lawyers you know that that's
where lawyers make our living is
by fighting over the definition
so we have a bill that restricts
use of water produced water
fresh water and we we we the
restriction is imposed one it is
that that's lower than the
protected freshwater resource
owns so the question is okay
what is going to be that zone
that's going to fight and we do
have a definition the bill so
we're going to say that's going
to be in the regulations will
that'll take you know HSD was
five six seven years to develop
those regulations will probably
be into the next administration
or that happens and so what we
do we're we're restricting water
in in fresh water resources owns
and and let me just ask Miss you
can be made a part of the
mystery drama or answers all
center are are you are you Sir
would you said there was a said
that everybody's gonna agree is
everybody going to agree on what
that means protected freshwater
resource zones or is there room
here for some a debate some
argument some difference of
opinion and if there is where
site a lot so we out here help
me to make sure we're not just
creating a lot of work for a lot
of lawyers madam chair senator
my my expert M. to Remus just
and I wasn't aware of this it
said that it is in the current
OCD roll this definition and so
there is a legal definition that
already exists and that the
industry has been working with I
will defer to her if that you
care for elaboration I would
please this is important to me.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator serve on K.
it's to be clear it's not
actually a definition but in the
rules for drilling and
production
there is quite a bit of
Regulations and and structure on
how to steal all the fresh
waters them and it it actually
refers to
they can thousand TDS as the
project the protected waters so
it's in two places that I can
find I am no.
Expert in
OCD rules but I have studied
them in the process of this
rulemaking I mean is statute.
And this bill and so there's two
places that you find.
A discussion on how to protect
the freshwater sense and one is
in that rural and the second is
in the underground injection of
fluids into reservoirs rule
there is that a.
A good chunk of regulations
there that talks about how the
division is allowed where where
they're allowed to permit
disposal rounds of waters and
and it again refers to the ten
thousand milligrams per liter
Our last.
So hopefully that is helpful.
It does help some of the madam
chair Senator does it really
doesn't.
resolve my concern which is the
the whole point of this bill
makes a restriction based on it
to provide of water resources
but then we don't define without
water resources so I would Madam
you a busy agenda flexibility
built I want to be labor this
I've I've repeatedly told the
committee the the conservation
committee in all years past was
as many Judiciary Committee I'm
trying to avoid that I'm making
at that again and and I know
this goes to the Judiciary
Committee where we will I'm sure
consider these issues at some
great length some of the bill
passes through this committee
will we'll look for will look
for definitions and and a tight
law that that doesn't really do
nothing but but open the doors
to a lot of litigation thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you senator goes.
Madam chair thank you and.
Senator Sedillo Lopez just have
a few questions and and concerns
and want to start off with.
Madam chair in center city Lopez
does does this bill well let me
back up explained so
Aubrey Dunn who was the state
I'll just lost it
always overstate lance state
land commissioner he'd found on
the Texas state line that water
was caught crossing from Texas
to New Mexico on a regular basis
through pipelines does your bill
of address any of that and does
it have any discussions with
Texas on what they're
What obligations are to this.
Bring water across Madam chair
representative that is a good
question because Texas does have
regulations on on this water I
haven't gone side by side for
side by side comparison but I
think it's important that they
are they do try to protect their
water sources
hi this bill does not address an
obviously couldn't address
industry in in Texas I was
disappointed to hear ms Taylor
say that you thought the
businesses would leave I think
it's unlikely that that they
would leave for Texas because in
Texas the royalties charge there
are twenty five percent of the
gross income and here we only
charge twenty percent on on the
next in so I don't know where
they would go to but I always
say and this is my response is
we should be open for business
not opened for us exploitation.
Hi all madam chairman and repair
center us today Lopez and and
I'm hearing from the people here
the we aren't open for business
with all the anti fracking in
closing all the old gas industry
down there only option is to go
to Texas because Texas is
welcoming to the well gas
industry so my next question
madam chair is
and center is.
The produced water legislation
was enacted in twenty nineteen
voted in so it's only have two
years of to prove itself why are
we dealing with at this early in
in this life is there something
major that you see that's wrong
I I I I think we're doing an
over reach personally but I'm
wondering why we wouldn't give
it time to prove itself on
trying to do what's right by the
state.
Madam chair senator I I really
appreciate that question because
what the bill in two thousand
nineteen did that bill that was
rushed through in less than a
month
I I will not I had a produced
water bill that never even got a
hearing but that bill creating a
possessory interest in water
which one of the Sanchez called
eight ownership interest
possessory interest in water is
actually not something that is
known in water law what we did
encourage was a lot of
development in
sort of the middle industry of
cleaning up water transport
pipelines transporting water and
and that that I suppose that was
a good thing because it helped a
the the the industry feel
comfortable with with
transporting and cleaning clean
water however a major major flaw
was that there is no consequence
for sales and I believe you
heard the testimony by eight by
preacher Dave last week when he
talked about what a spill the
devastation additional cost to a
family and that family lost
their goats there are more
chickens and their dog because
of the of the the toxicity in
this water what this bill does
is it provides for transparency
in we will now know what are the
poisons because the company that
that the pipeline that burst
came to their family farm and
scraped off the talks that talk
the topics Lael which create
continuing radiation because
there is naturally record
occurring radiation in this
water the scrape it off and they
hold it away I think that was
destruction of evidence.
Because we don't know what what
toxins were in that water and
what this bill does is it
provides current transparencies
after a spill we're not asking
for the propriety information
we're talking about afterwards
if they still water the need to
notify the state and those
affected what was in that water
what would the toxins and and
how much radiation was in that
water so that that would have
required the company that that's
still the pipeline company
that's bill that water on the
farm to tell that family what
poisons fell on their animals
their land and their their
bodies.
Madam chair and senator and I
appreciate that and and I guess
to me the the company's already
do really good I've had spilled
on our property were ladies work
and they come in and they do
extensive testing and dig down
to the point that they know
they've gone beyond what the
leaching is done and it's just a
little odd that you know we're
we're worried about goats
chickens and dogs but then the
state protects Kyle to typically
takes goats chickens and dogs so
but my next question madam chair
and Senator is it go back to
your talking about
the interest of the water
I've had people call me and talk
to me about of the the.
Opportunity that they're gonna
lose we we have ranchers and and
farmers in the area that have
water rights and they look this
is the taking of they they look
this is they would be able to
sell their water free market
manner and
They're just wondering why we as
a state our starters starting to
hinder them in that and one of
the gentleman from the
agriculture industry told me
that if he's got three acres of
water our feet per acre when it
goes to are you being used
outside of agriculture the.
Off the state engineer already
cuts that to two point one acre
from three so there's a a factor
in there that they take so that
they're not depleting the
aquifer to be able to use it for
industrial use and I was
wondering what we're doing for
them as far as individual owners
of the water and being able to
take away their opportunity to
sell if you had very many calls
on that.
Madam chair senator I'm
surprised that you say there's a
free market in water because
that's not how water law works
transfers in water have to be
reviewed by the state engineers
office and the state engineer
then determines whether the
transfer of furthers the
interests of beneficial work use
and also whether it might impair
other users and so there is not
a and as I understand water
lights noted free market in
water and that process this bill
would not change that process
they would still be able to to
do that and and go through the
staters looking at state
engineers office what I have
heard and received a lot of
calls about is that and the
state engineer and in admitted
to me they don't have the staff
to review all of the transfers a
lot of transfers and releases of
water are going forward without
state engineer reviews.
Which is another problem that
unfortunately this bill does not
address no.
Could we wrap this up a little
bit because we did have some
motions I let people go back
because they didn't raise your
hand right away so.
Senator Gallegos you still have
the floor but maybe that
responses in the dialogue could
go offline at some point.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
try to keep the pre-filled go to
my last a real major question
and and I am not a water law
attorney but I just know that
the off the state engineer
already.
Cuts the upper feet acre from
three to two and will two one
two point one acre feet for
Industrious my last question is
in section to the bill it talks
about the leaks and spills and
other releases and in that area
madam chair I was wondering if
I could work with you on on
management because I think if
you're doing this to energy
sector it oughta be tall energy
sector and I wish I'd had time
to send this to you and I don't
know if you can see this picture
it's so one of the windmills in
I believe it's curry county that
is spilling oil of the eight it
contains they carry up to four
hundred gallons of oil and if
we're talking to of heard one
part of the energy industry I
think we need to be fair and do
it all energy sectors I've never
heard of a solar panel leaking
but I know the windmills do and
I was wondering if you would
work with me on an amendment to
your bill before the next
committee so that we can treat
all energy sectors the same way.
Madam chair center madam chair
senator I will certainly look at
it because I think we should
treat all looters the same way
so thank you.
Thank you with that I will
yield.
Thank you I appreciate the
discussion so we do have a do
pass motion from just amended on
the bill as amended from Santo
hope in a second from Senator
Sedillo Lopez could Veronica
please call the vote.
No ma'am.
Yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator program.
Yes Senator so yes.
Senator Smith.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
I yes and for no.
So I guess the work will be and
Judiciary thank you very much
for a spirited discussion on
this we are now legal thank you
madam chair members of the
committee and I look forward to
working with the with Senators
Subban design approving this
bill before judiciary okay thank
on his amendment thank you so we
are now going on to Senate bill
one thirty two photo voltaic
systems and new home Senators
souls.
Thank you madam chair and up if
you look at this bill It is
substantially simpler and easier
than the ones we have been
dealing with
our in home construction we
require people to put insulation
and it's never seen it has
nothing other than to say energy
are what this is is moving
forward that all new
construction in the state of New
Mexico would have potable takes
would on as part of the new
construction I want to point out
there is a major major error in
the FY are in the DFI are
grossly over estimates what the
cost is I think where that came
from is on page to line one
where this bill says that you
have to have one what of
capacity per square foot what
you did area that they analyze
that as if you had to have our
electric heating per square foot
of area the typical cost for new
construction is somewhere
between four and five dollars
per square foot to put
photovoltaics what this does is
it sets a level of standards
that would come close to about
the rowing out a new home
instructions electric bill by
saying that the what.
The of the solar system must be
will be heated square footage so
for instance a two thousand
square foot house would have to
have a two thousand what system
would be in on it in order to
about zero that out a larger
house would have to have a
larger system with the I'll
certainly there is no
restriction on putting in the
system larger than that that
would be the minimum size system
I just for some comparisons I
put solar on my home it's about
a two thousand square foot hole
I did ten years ago my total
cost for the system came in at
somewhere around twelve thousand
dollars at that time then there
were some tax breaks after that
that actually lowered my total
cost out prices today ten years
later have some estimates
indicate it's almost half of
that two thirds of those costs
and so what two thousand square
foot home if you estimated at
five dollars per square foot I
believe get you up to about ten
thousand dollars for the fifth.
the that is more than made up in
the reduction in the electric
bill the very first month
somebody moves in is the
additional cost on the mortgage
for ten thousand additional cost
is more than made up for in the
reduction of electric bill from
on the order of a hundred
dollars down to zero dollars for
the electric system and the
value of the home is gone up at
the same time
with that I'd be happy to to try
and answer any questions.
Senator do you have an expert
witness with you today.
I don't have anybody
particularly on as an expert
witness but another number of
people who would like to speak
from the solar industry.
Thank you okay right now all
Trevor is telling me we have
about three people on each side
of who would like to speak so
let's go to opponents and if
there truly are only three
people will take a minute and a
half.
Trevor go ahead Hey.
Mr call I missed your call.
You're not muted
Trevor.
We have Randy trainer.
Can you hear me Madam chair yes
that yes we can.
Thank you thank you Committee
members for this opportunity my
name is Randy trainer on the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico home builders association
we did speak with the sponsor
about this and we know there are
concerns about the cost and many
times it's not just the I know
he noted that the reduction in
the utility costs would offset
the cost of the improvement but
we find it very difficult for
people to simply qualify for the
home to begin and so we see that
as a problem but I would note
that we've adopted a new energy
code in our state up to
conserve energy I would also
note that we have more housing
related bills this session that
I recall in my entire career we
in may it is many things that we
have no policy in the state on
housing.
And I think this pandemic is
kind of raise that up.
In so we're making a lot of
significant decisions about
housing but yes thank you one
second local somebody is not on
mute and we have a speaker I'm
sorry to interrupt everybody
should be on mute except for the
speaker.
I'm sorry go ahead thank you in
terms of energy conservation I
would suggest that we could save
far more energy if we were to
put our focus on the existing
housing stock that we have now
it is that is clearly the area
that we can gain more energy
conservation that all new
construction but on existing
homes which were built a
hundred.
Building codes that one is
stringent as in this provision
as they are today so we really
we oppose this bill we
understand what the ascenders
trying to do and we we
understand that we're all going
in that direction we just think
this is a major jobs thank you
thank you very much nextra were.
We have Steve help.
The location.
Steve Steve Hale had yes I am on
but I still hear Randy trainer.
Overview in the
form of.
We really this madam chair I am.
Just one minute he has his madam
chair yes as webcast on okay so
everyone needs to have your web
cast all of these you cannot be
on the zoom and to be on the
webcast.
If you want to be on the zoom
and to testify in you must turn
off your webcast.
The.
Yes still.
The.
The the the.
Wait wait a minute state.
What.
From okay so everyone needs to
have your brand but have all.
Not be on their own.
Next.
Okay so does everybody have the
webcast off.
Now Steve let's try.
Madam chair thank you of my name
is Steve Hale I am a custom home
builder that specializes in
green building and I am also
program director for built green
New Mexico.
I build all my custom homes up
to the bill green New Mexico
program and while I don't build
a whole bunch of homes the last
seven homes are built all have
four wheel takes on them as part
of the construction.
I oppose this bill because what
it's doing is eliminating
customer choice you have a
substantial investment if you're
considering of putting solar on
a home and that investment could
well be better spent
improving the indoor air quality
for the mechanical equipment
before you go to adding TV.
It's also should be noted that
mortgages do not really take
energy efficiency into account
when they qualify homebuyer much
like a swimming pool yes it's an
added cost but it's not counted
as adding value to the house and
while you could say there are
some energy efficient mortgages
out there they are not
competitive with the regular
mortgage.
The the expansion and
possibility of photovoltaic
farms put on by the utilities is
really a much more efficient way
to of to use us you know solar
for advantage to all of the
community not just the
individual home on.
We're also.
Last we have Jack mark.
Madam chair.
Yes okay I'm I'm Jack Miller
come with New Mexico home
builders association.
I just stated we oppose the bill
I have a number of things I'd
like to talk about but let me
just give you one or two here we
believe it's just simply too
soon for this requirement this
is a developing technology and
it has all the characteristics
of that were the people that are
interested and they have the
money can go ahead and put this
on their house but if we require
this on everybody's house over
thirty years it's going to be a
lot of maintenance these are our
equipment intensive systems a
lot of it's up on the roof
exposed to harsh conditions and
if people don't keep it up it's
going to be a waste of
investment in time this may be
the right thing to do but we're
opposed to it now it's too soon
thank you.
Thank you okay proponent.
First we have Connor Lawrence.
Yes thank you madam chair and
the committee I also want to go
out and congratulate senator
Neville souls on being such a
proponent for solar here in New
Mexico I think it's going to be
a tremendous effort that will
help generations of New Mexicans
as we go.
I am the chief operating officer
at so most solar a Santa Fe
solar company we whole heartedly
support this bill I believe that
we need to take a more
sustainable approach towards
clean energy and energy
production the science behind
climate change is it speaks for
itself New Mexico has an amazing
resource we are the second Sonny
a state in the nation are we
have because of this natural
access we have the.
potential to really change how
we produce energy we currently
rank is the eighteenth our state
which solar production but I
think that we have a very unique
opportunity here to become a
leader industry you're not only
in New Mexico but in in the
United States there's gonna be
several other benefits from this
bill one jobs will be increased
are we already see that there is
a an expectation for in more
growth in the solar industry
here and I think this will
definitely push it into the
right direction will also
benefit New Mexicans fiscal year
one it will increase the
property values of homes this is
been a proven.
Real estate metric typically on
the realm of about five percent
increase on top of that there
will be fiscal savings on
utility side of not having to
pay.
Next we have Jim the Georgians.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and now
thank you for having me my name
is Jim danger Dan and I'm the
executive director of the
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico where
a group of predominately local
solar companies we also have a
major credit union is a member
Google manufacturers and we're
really excited about this bill
and we commend dollars Sander
Sauls for bringing it up to the
legislature.
By making photovoltaic solar
systems a requirement in new
home construction will enable
New Mexicans to help now
basically what is the home of
the future they will be able to
realize energy savings and they
will also help lower cost of
homeownership would also like to
point out that will take solar
systems and I had one for over
ten years I personally know
maintenance means like
maintaining a television set or
something and there's about
twenty five thousand
photovoltaic solar systems on
homes installed in New Mexico
right now so it's not at a new
technology so I would just like
to close by saying that this is
a really great way to grow our
economy grow up in the right way
and basically add more good
paying jobs for our economy
thank you very much.
Thank you next.
By Tammy feeble corn.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I am Tammy people
corn with southwest energy
efficiency project or sleep we
support H. B. one thirty two
specifically we support
provisions of the bill that
required to make new homes to be
electric vehicle ready EV's are
the future they're coming soon
we see an ounce funds from a
leading manufacturer of car
manufacturers all the time
Senator increasing the number of
the these are going to be
releasing and some of the things
that they're going to transfer
to one hundred percent even.
We want to make sure that those
benefits get to New Mexicans
it's very inexpensive to
building a new home that is Evey
ready it's dramatically more
expensive by a factor of eight
or more to build a new to
retrofit an existing home to
become the the right so for that
reason we support this bill and
we hope that you will to you
thanks for your time.
Thank you madam.
And that is because well.
I'm sorry we were taking we had
three opponents and that's why
we went to three proponents are
there any more opponents if
there are that will allow more
proponents.
Point are there any more Ponant.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair I know the Carlos on
take a is in and she's.
Could not get to the hand
raising a portion of it she
could not find that but I know
she's in the room.
Okay.
Thank out now.
okay who just that.
Bye impact within okay would.
Just a minute Carla is there any
besides Carl is there anybody
else who wants to propose.
Okay mark Duran so we'll have
two more opponents and two more
proponents okay so Carla doll
and then mark and then we will
go to proponents.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Carella
Fund had with the New Mexico
business coalition.
We represent hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans our focus is to make
New Mexico a better place to do
business so that our people have
jobs and can provide for their
family.
We oppose this bill because
we're against solar I've got
solar on my home.
And I have it very ready as well
we support the industry and we
think that's really good use of
resources.
But what we would like to see is
the use of incentives rather
than those that could be into
client.
This is expensive and it should
be B. consumers all right.
Rather than forcing home
builders to do that when the
consumer doesn't want it thank
you for allowing me to speak and
I appreciate your consideration
I urge you to oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr Duran.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee marked around I
represent the New Mexico
manufactured housing
association.
And that representation
Representative many factors
homes and modular homes
I've talked to Senator souls
about the piece of legislation
your status of the reasons why
we need your posted bail those
are.
Madam chair members of the
committee first and foremost
we've just gone through an
extensive process to pass new
energy conservation programs in
the state they took years in the
making they include several
provisions that will be.
Fairly X. Senator expensive and
extensive employment.
But we're doing that.
By the way for my more housing
of production plants many of
those.
Production plants are out of
state and they have chosen not
to adopt the New Mexico energy
conservation codes that have
just been implemented that means
they're not going to be shipping
Montreal's in the state that
will let the left only to one
plant operating in New Mexico or
matters cars homes.
and by the way modular housing
although it is built to the R.
C. code of reflects much like
many factors walls and that
there is a more affordable
residential homes in the state.
Thank you Mr Duran okay Trevor
to proponents it looks like
there's two with their hands up.
With Anna Hansen.
Madam chair and members of the
committee Santa Fe County
commissioner on Hanson I wish to
speak in favor of this bill I
think Senator souls is bringing
forward a really progressive
build to keep so we're
moving to provide jobs we are
talking about new construction
so it is extremely easy to do
our add.
I'm solar to new construction I
have had solar on my house for
over eleven years I have never
had one maintenance issue ever
I I'm put it on a fifteen
hundred square foot home I'm I
it has been paid for itself with
the energy rebates and I think
that we are in the climate
crisis and we need to be moving
in a direction where everything
we can possibly do community
solar.
So are on all new construction
everything that we can do to
stop the architect from melting
thank you very much.
Thank you and it looks like
Camilla your next thank you so
much chairman and members of the
committee I did see that
renewable industry association
was trying to raise their hand
as well but I will say you know
the majority of low income New
Mexicans are going to be renters
who will benefit from living in
new homes with solar installed
because it'll result in monthly
savings on their energy bills
those of us who are trying to
buy new homes are going to see a
negligible increase on our
monthly mortgage payments from
an inclusion of solar on the
home and it will again amount to
monthly savings on our energy
bills at home not to mention all
the climate benefits so please
we ask you to vote in favour
thanks so very much thank you
we're gonna and public comment
and go to
Committee questions and comments
and I would like to start which
is unusual usually the chair and
waits but I would like to know
Senators souls what
provisions you have made in this
bill for a affordable housing.
Thank you madam chair there are
not a specific
Asians portable housing I was
mentioned that manufactured
housing lots of those are lower
and homes This bill does not
will not affect that at all in
that whoever's putting that
input within a ground mounted
system Graham added systems
would not be required to be on
the roof out again the main
thing with this particular bill
is the overall savings on the
monthly expense for housing goes
down the mortgage cost is more
than offset by the reduced
energy savings.
Well my comment I'll go on to
the members of my COVID really
has to do with qualifying.
Qualifying for a mortgage or
purchasing doesn't relate to
future savings it relates to
what you have at the moment I
next have center renewable and
then Senator Cervantes.
Thank you madam chair and and
you you've captured my concept
of that's what I did for a
living for thirty seven years as
real estate appraisal building
houses development all of that
kind of thing and I'm shopping
around for solar don't get me
wrong I'm not an opposed all and
I hope that the guys it
testified earlier don't start
calling me because I don't want
to go through a sales pitch
right now but madam chair that
is my concern is qualifying for
loans the cost to build and just
mandating that people have to do
something that they may or may
not be interested in having or
doing and certainly it's a
concern of mine that we would be
Possibly raising the cost of
properties to where people can't
ripped.
I have rental property student
trying to keep the rents and
where I profit the best I can
and it's it's still affordable
for my customers that's that's
always a balancing act to add
additional costs into the
properties especially if you
start mandating and on multi
family and so forth you may be
looking at a situation where
people can't afford the rent so
I'm I'm a little concerned about
it overall from that standpoint
I think we shouldn't necessarily
get into the California concept
of mandating how everybody lives
their lives and that's what we
seem to be doing a lot of madam
chair thank you that's all in my
comments.
Thank you David I have a Senator
Monday Senators community center
got it goes Senator Mondays.
Thank you madam chair
Center souls question for you we
we spent a lot of time this
session and prior sessions on
community solar make sure I
understand this right so if your
bill is we have passed everybody
would have to have solar
installed on all new home
construction so what what does
that work with in your mind with
community solar in other words
very has have a solar system on
the roof now we're creating
community solar systems for
people to participate in
how do those two things job for
me.
Madam chair and answers about
this a community solar is an
option for people and so if they
want to instead of putting the
solar on an existing all they
could buy into a community solar
system if you buy a new home
that is already fit for solar
you would be buying into a
community solar system.
So so I guess I would would be
this would I be able to get an
exemption from the requirement
of solar on my new home
construction if I'm gonna be
part of a community solar
system.
Madam chair and senator and I
think I understand where you're
going and I think it would be
more if the builder set up a
community solar as one of the
lots in the development right
there where all houses were
hooked up to that solar that
would be a different situation
but I don't think that's what
we're talking about with
community solar and that's not
what would be with this system
community solar is where
individuals buy into a system
like that but they have an out
option to opt out of that at any
time and so this would is not
dealing with those systems at
all somebody who bought a new
home after they are required to
have solar installed there would
be no use for them to go on to a
community solar.
Thank you different subjects
Senator Doug does any other
state in the country do this
now.
Madam chair and senator I don't
know
it be nice if New Mexico we're
one of the leaders there are
some other states that have some
building codes that are part of
this but I don't know of any
specific states.
Senator so madam chair to do you
know Senator or Roadrunner may
want to but one of the
representatives of the home
building industry you know how
many new homes are built your
New Mexico that would be
implicated by this law.
Madam chair representative I
don't know some of the old
building people might might have
some ideas that how many new
homes are built it out goes up
and down a lot I know some
construction went up through
COVID some went down and it does
depend a whole lot on the
economy what we have the last
couple of economic downturn
there was a significant downturn
in new home construction of that
started to go back up until
COVID so I don't know what the
recent ones but if fluctuates
tremendously depending on what
the the national economy is
doing our manager manager for
one of the other presenters in
the home building industry there
Jack are for Randy trainer yes
certainly I would like to answer
that.
Randy are you on.
That is a
Very difficult number to be
Frank about it
We tried for years to come up
with a number of total
construction for a year and it's
incredibly difficult I don't
know why it is I'm gonna say
probably the neighborhood of ten
thousand units a year.
Hi.
Thank you madam chair for
letting me get an asset question
here's a here's my fundamental
concern here which is that if we
mandate is a state that every
new home has to have this system
on it we have to make sure that
there are the resources to
comply with that law almost
people you'll get homes built so
homes will get held up and
let's that and that's oftentimes
the case down here losses for
any number of different things
to get the suppliers of the
subcontractors good contractors
get the building officials get
the inspectors comment made all
that very very hard you got to
get all these people involved to
make things happen so what we're
going to mandate that every new
home has a solar system
installed on the roof or or on
the ground and and if there are
new stranger says you can't tell
me what the number of houses
each year and I understand that
may be hard to pin down but we
will I would have to really
answer that I want to say your
review of one of ten thousand
new homes has to have this
system I'm gonna make sure there
are ten thousand subcontractors
suppliers units system is ready
to go or else what's going to
happen is our homebuilding of
process in the state will will
delay will shut down install
while we're waiting to comply
with these laws and I don't want
to do that.
I I can certainly understand why
those who do the systems are in
the hearing today support this
because it be great for business
you know if we require many
participants will be good for
the full business you know so up
I'm not making light of the
importance of solar except to
say that we mandate that a
certain thing be done other
people who do those things will
will of course be very
supportive and and do very well
financially as a result I just
want to make sure that would be
the resources to meet this
because I'm very strong believer
in home ownership as of this
important part of.
Of getting ahead in life and and
I I would want to have folks not
be able to build a new home
because we don't have the
resources to meet this this the
requirement that's why Senators
was asked about whether other
states are doing this or not
but I would have to know what
the implications would be to to
homebuilding whether that this
this might stall slow were or
adversely affect the new home
construction which is a very
important part of our economy
all over the state and
particularly here in southern
New Mexico thank you madam
chair.
Thank you I have Senator she
metes.
Your hand.
Thank you madam chair well
actually I I just have one last
question Senator Vontaze
actually addressed my my biggest
concern but I will just ask
very specifically Senator on the
bill
The is this are we just talking
about the wiring infrastructure
or are we talking about solar
panels actually going up on the
on the rooftops or someone else
in the somewhere else on the
property.
Madam chair and on this bill we
are talking about a fully
functioning turnkey ready no
electric bills.
Okay so this.
Madam chair and senator.
So that that doesn't all the
panels going is what I'm
hearing.
so it cut kind of back to the
Senator mind is concerned with.
If you you know this is going to
have panel on the home.
All right of center street is
excuse me somebody has their
microphone on.
And we're getting background
noise.
Is that right guy is it somebody
else driver could you make sure
everybody's muted except our
senator speaking.
Thank you I don't see any others
thank you senator Sweeney's
thank you madam chair and
senator so might.
My other concern would be you
know I I'm very interested in
efficiency here efficiency of
cost and so back to Senator
mantas point about community
solar you large utility scale
solar is cheaper than you know
at home solar and so I guess I
have a concern there that we can
have a home that could plug into
utility scale solar it's cheaper
right overall not talking about
just for for one person but but
overall efficiency to the entire
population so that's a concern
but
I have a another very specific
question on on the first page
Senator chair and center it says
that the home.
Maybe either great side or
hybrid or off grid so my
question is Senator is it
possible to satisfy the
requirement of in off grid
system without satisfying the
other to either great tiger
great hybrid.
Madam chair I'm not sure I
understand the question that an
off grid system doesn't tie in
at all it's got that level of
capacity and that they've got
the wall battery to manage
things they would meet the
requirements.
Okay so madam chair and senator
so the the home builder.
If we mandate them to do this
they would be free to choose
from either grid tied or grid
hybrid or off grid is that
correct.
Okay yes.
Okay I'm I'm madam chair and
senator I'm just curious
I I'm not gonna ask anymore
questions on that but I'm I'm
curious how the industry would
respond
you know to say.
Let's say somebody says that
they don't have a plan on on
relying on solar for some reason
and I wonder if the builders
would choose to put off grid
systems and or something and
then hi and other other areas I
don't know I mean we don't know
how the the industry would
Mesilla respond to the mandate
but that was my my main question
madam chair is just what that
actually means so I I just echo
some of the other concerns I
are probably my biggest concern
is I do see this as a bit of a a
regressive
Feet so to speak or a regressive
investment meaning if you have a
very large amount of million
dollar home well yeah maybe the
you know it's gonna be probably
very that person probably four
to be very energy efficient is
it gonna be you know I
understand you scale that you
know for heating notes per
square footage but
you know this bill is all
encompassing is going to apply
to the manufactured homes it's
going to provide a big pretty
snazzy custom home and I think
the the scale there with the up
front cost could be a bit
regressive
and so I have a concern there
too but anyway I I think most of
my other questions were
addressed by the former comments
on the on the committee so all
yield manager.
Thank you we have senator gray
go since then Senator Hamblen
and actually I'd like to tell
Senator Steinborn that we're
gonna be rolling your bill over
to the next committee meeting
which will be Thursday morning
at eight thirty.
So Senator Gallegos please
proceed.
Madam chair Senators souls I
appreciate this Center souls if
you could one of the opponents
made a comment that the renters
would benefit from
rental facility that would have
the solar on their I was just
wondering if that's a true
statement or would the owners
budget.
Madam chair I'm not sure I'm
able to answer that directly it
would depend someone how the
situation set up there are some
rental agreements where the
electricity is included in the
cost of the rental there are
other situations where the
renter is responsible for the
electricity in which case there
wouldn't be an electric bill in
that particular rental because
there are that it's covered by
the PED system that's on the
roof
that the owner could either
recoup any of that the cost from
that by increasing the rent by
say fifty dollars a month that
pays off the PED system that
they have besides the fact that
the value of the property
increases with the PED system so
I'm not sure I quite understand
where the question is or what's
coming from that.
Well Mr Chairman madam chair and
in center souls and I just a
when I'd heard her make that
statement I thought in in the
Peavey systems that the owner of
the Peavey system would retain
the cost sharing of the
it make Mitchell elector see in
but I could see what they can do
it up the rental agreement cost
in order to offset that so that
does give me clarity to what I
was wondering I just I just did
not see the renter without
having an investment would be
the beneficiary of the free
electricity so
Madam chair and and Sir sold my
next question is on the square
foot cost of a facility do we
have a current square foot cost
without this in a court the cost
of a building with this
mandated on.
Do you know what that would be.
Madam chair and some of the home
builders might know more
specifically but typically as I
in apprehension please may I
have your attention please.
Fire reported in the building.
We proceed to the nearest exit
and leave the building.
May I have.
Retention please so are reported
in the building.
Thank.
Senator stole building and we
have to leave because of the
building.
What.
Thanks to everybody.
Absolutely and I will continue
to hearing.
What what are what will send is.
Without.
Okay.
Senator schools is the presenter
and he had to be on the building
so that is unfortunate.
Could you use Intersil's.
Okay
Okay
Senator Steinborn said
what that means is out of work
that will increase annual.
Could you move president.
Yeah I'm going to madam chair it
might be rivers also in the
building and also I just
realized that and I don't have
control.
I would recommend that we
actually table this is the first
if this is the appropriate
procedure table it for Thursday
morning first thing because the
sponsor is not here to answer
any questions that many of us
still have.
Absolutely the only thing I was
thinking about was although she
did announce that water rolling
over us Senator Steinborn spill
Senator Steinborn said that he
would be back he stepped out and
send us by twelve thirty what is
the committee pleasure do you
want to just are we want to
address Senator Steinborn.
You madam chair the
Senator Hamblen.
Maybe they have the same
sentiment is Senator guy a goes
this is going to be very
distracting since no one is able
to mute Senator souls Mike and
so because of the fire in the
building I don't think we're
going to be able to continue to
get business done I I do believe
that we my suggestion madam
chair is to to to end the
meeting.
Senator souls legislation first
thing Thursday morning.
That you're you're sentiment is
yes.
Is is that the will of the
committee.
I see not.
Get to that we okay members of
the public and and witnesses I
apologize but we will have to be
cable Senator.
And we will take it up at the
next meeting our bills are
rolled over and we will now have
to terminate.
We thank you very much
you're more power for the number
of pro yes adequate that'll
increase.
Thank you adequate balance will
be.
I want
to yeah I'm going to introduce.
Only.
The on that has the capacity to
term according to the US
adequate that'll increased.
And your balance will be.
I want to
yeah I'm going to introduce you
know there are or may I have
your attention please may I have
your attention please.
Is
it has the capacity to terminate
this
you're reading and to stop the
video recording may I have your
attention please may I have your
attention please.
There are reported building.
We proceeded to the nearest exit
we building what what what what
what what what what we think is
