Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, I'm here to present
House Bill 93 along with my
Senate sponsor. Uh, this bill is
meant to address, uh, one of the
problems that our electric grid
is facing, which is congested
transmission lines. We have
incredible energy resources in
the state, but getting these new
utility scale sources of, of
energy, including clean energy
like wind, solar, and geothermal
hooked up to the grid is a
pretty slow process. Uh, the
wires that carry that energy are
Congested and there's just not
often enough capacity to carry
the electricity from where it is
generated to where it is needed.
So this bill addresses that
issue um by helping our
utilities to make use of
advanced grid technologies that
can really unlock the capacity
of the grid that we already
have. Um, so I want you to think
about advanced grid technologies
is kind of like an energy
efficiency for the electric
grid, um, you don't need to
build.
New transmission lines. You
don't necessarily need to um go
through the process of right of
ways, uh, you just disturbing
new land, we can just make our
existing grid more efficient, so
think about it like um a really
old, but a good house with good
bones, uh, this allows, uh, some
energy efficiency updates to
happen in that good house so
that you can, you don't have to
burn it down. Um.
I want to tell you exactly how
it works. Um, we ask utilities
to uh include an advanced grid
technology uh plan in their 20
year process, which is their
integrated resource plans, uh,
the secondly, the build
guidelines and guardrails, the
public regulation commission to
approve for cost recovery, um,
of the, for the investments that
they're making in advanced grid
technology. We do that under the
grid modernization Act. Um, I
have, uh,
an expert here today with me,
Doctor Anna Lindon Weller from
uh Western Resource Advocates,
and with that, Madam Chair, we
stand up for questions.
Madam Chair, um, my son would
like to speak a little bit.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, I'm chair vice
chair and ranking member, uh, I
want to thank Representative
Ortez for asking me to join her
on this effort. Another thing,
secondary and tertiary to what
you just heard is this is going
to help us with our, our
economic development goals that
we have here in the state of New
Mexico.
A lot of the stuff you see that
I carry through this
legislature.
is around economic development
and job creation. This is going
to absolutely help us in this
very critical area. Um, and
again, you did hear that, you
know, we, we might not have to
build as many transmission lines
by making our current scenario
as efficient as possible. So I
wanted to join this effort and
that's why I'm here. And Madam
sure I'm in finance this
morning, so I'm gonna excuse
myself momentarily. Thank you.
Thank you very much. And did you
want your expert to speak?
one.
Madam Chair, uh, committee
members, um, I don't have all
that much to add. I feel like
between Cortez and Senator
Padilla, we pretty much covered
it. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience to support this
bill, if you would raise your
hands.
OK, 123.
67 8 in the room 9. Is there
anybody online? No.
Is there anybody in the room
opposing this bill.
Anybody online?
To oppose
OK, could we have about 5
people, please line up to speak.
Who are supporting this bill.
We'd like to know who you are
and where you're from.
And if you don't stand up, then
there's no support.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Sayeri Yamad. I'm the registered
lobbyist for Clean Air Task
Force, and we stand in support
of this bill because it promotes
advanced grid technology that
can optimize the capacity of
existing grid infrastructure,
these technologies include
hardware and software that
increases efficiencies and
reliability, reduces congestion,
enhances flexibility. This bill
will complement work to plan and
expand critical needs of new
grid infras.
Structure. With that, we stand
and support. Thank you very
much.
You
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Deborah Conn did. I'm the
registered lobbyist for Inner
West Energy Alliance, and we're
a trade association that
represents wind, solar, storage
and transmission. We stand in
strong support of House Bill 93.
Any any way that we could uh
work with the existing
transmission lines to a better,
uh, uh, to better supply energy
from one line to another is uh
is a good deal. I mean, we've
noticed everybody likes to talk
renewable energy and nobody
likes to talk transmission, so
we
support this bill and, and, and
ask for your support with it as
well. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim De Chardin. I'm the
executive director of the
renewable Energy Industries
Association of New Mexico. We
have about 60 members and we've
run since 2004.
There's a profound change
happening in the energy world
and we're on our way to 100%
carbon-free electricity by 2045.
We also have a big increase in
demand for electricity with
electric vehicles, building
electrification and data
centers. This bill helps to
address the changing energy
world by allowing utilities to
file plans at the PRC that use
methodologies to defer
investments in poles and wires.
Uh, expensive infrastructure
investments with newer
technologies that maximize the
efficiency of existing
transmission infrastructure. We
believe this additional planning
will help and a cost-effective
way to achieve our goals of zero
emission economy and accommodate
new electrical load, we urge a
due pass. Thank you.
To committee members, my name's
Athena Christodoulou. I'm an
energy and environmental
engineer and did it for what Jim
said before me. Thank you, Madam
Chair, committee members. My
name is Carlos Matutes. I am the
New Mexico Community advocate
for green Latinos. We are a
national environmental justice
Organization dedicated to
fighting for Latina communities
and other communities of color.
We do support this bill.
The increase in technology for
our grids means that we don't
need to disturb our
environments, disturb our
communities. It means that
electricity can be more
affordable for our vulnerable
communities.
Because of these facts, we do
urge you to vote do pass on this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, and we have one
person we'll hear from online,
Camilla.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Camila
Feibelman, director of the
Sierra Clus Rio Grande chapter
and our 35,000 members and
supporters. I'll say our support
in one word. It's
reconductoring, and I think
that's the word of the year.
It's understanding that our
transmission lines themselves
are outdated and can be upgraded
in ways that others, as others
have said, are less disturbing
and more efficient. This bill
helps.
set the conditions for
reconductoring and many other
efficiency technologies. Thanks
to the members of the committee
and to the sponsors.
Thank you very much. We are now
going to commence uh from the
comments and questions from the
committee. We'll start with
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Deja vu.
I must call you representative.
And that'd be fine. It works.
Tell me, um, um, Madam chair and
representative, what is the
driving?
Reason for this piece of
legislature.
Madam Chair, Senator, that's a
great question. I think it's
really, it's economics and using
Be more efficient with what we
already have, so that we can
save a ratepayers' money, and we
can save the utilities money,
get to, so that we can address
really the um you know, system
challenges that we have.
So we provide more reliability.
chair and representative if, if
the point is to save ratepayers'
money are their price gaps
within your field to prevent
escalation of.
electrical.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
no.
Right
Well, uh, it's a good question.
I don't think we need it.
Madam chair, if, if the
I
We have a stagnant population
and
We haven't grown several years.
Um
And
We didn't have that I remember.
We didn't have alerts from our
utilities that.
had potential brownouts and
blackouts until recent years.
What's changed? I mean, why?
Why are we having those and if
we're not having an increased
load, why are we having to spend
money and raise rates.
On
consumers.
Um
I mean,
what's happening in the world
that's caused this.
Well, Senator, Madam Chair.
There's a lot of different
aspects, and I, I was also
concerned by the possible brown
blackout alert last week.
Um
The high winds that were
scheduled um that we luckily did
not experience, Senator, Madam
Chair, um.
I mean, we, we have high winds
in the spring in New Mexico.
That's a normal thing. But the
degree of those high winds is
increasing and that's due to
climate change. It happens more
often.
And the winds are higher.
Um, our grid.
Like any
Big infrastructure projects. A
lot of it was built in the
1960s.
Madam Chair, Senator, I actually
was looking at um our public
regulation commission's e-docket
system yesterday, um, and I saw
a request from PNM to upgrade
some of their substations, and I
read it because I'm interested
in that kind of thing and that
request was to upgrade
substations that had been
installed in 1965.
Um
So we're dealing with
The normal obsolescence of
Parts of our grid.
Senator, Madam Chair, at the
same time as we're dealing with
higher stressors.
On the grid
Um, this bill, well, it doesn't
fix all of those things.
tries to encourage utilities to
when they are replacing and
doing those upgrades to our
existing transmission grid and
the substations and
transformers.
Um
That they choose or can choose
to use these advanced grid
technologies that provide
Greater efficiency at lower cost
than building something new.
Madam Chair, and
Ex
representative.
Um
Great rider cases and the
ability of utilities to recover
investments.
This part of ongoing.
Great places
Why do they need this piece of
legislation to do what they have
done for years and years.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
because he's a grants advanced
grid technologies are not
covered in um existing PRC rules
and regs, so you can't, uh, you
can't get cost recovery for
Dynamic line readings or other
equipment that you put on the
new lines on the existing lines
to make them more efficient.
I think, Madam Chair, I'd argue
with that because I think uh
technology.
An improved technologies are all
part of the rate-based cases,
and if you go back and look,
I see you're shaking your head,
you're agreeing with me that
they have been able to recover.
Improvements, the systems that
Reduced
Oh, load or spread the load out
or um
Certainly if they reduce
costumer.
Madam Chair, Senator, so in a
regular rape case, the utility
does request um operations and
maintenance, uh, which would
cover could cover right now
these things. However, there has
not ever been to representative
Ortez's point, um, a specific
set of guidelines for what we
want these projects to do.
Um, and
They have never yet been
included in the planning process
that
is visible and transparent to
great players, the commission,
and anyone who's interested.
So that's the point of bringing
them.
Oh
Madam chair and
Representative is.
Is this a way.
I mean, seems like what we're
doing is we're empowering a
private entity, a utility.
To have a
Another method.
To to make money.
They can invest in this way.
They can make, they can make.
return on their investment.
Is this specific to one utility
or does it cover all utilities,
including rural electric co ops,
I mean, what?
What is covered in this and what
isn't.
Thank you for that question, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, you
know, all the utilities, you
know, will be asked to uh submit
plans for their use of advanced
technologies, co-ops are a
little bit different, um, they
don't do the IRPs the way that
the um utilities that invest
your own utilities do, um, but
they do have to file an annual
report, so we're asking those
co-ops to let us know, let the
PRC know what kinds of advanced
grid technologies they are
using, and if they
using them at all. This bill
doesn't require them to use
those advanced technologies just
to let the PRC know.
If they, if they are.
them or not.
But
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, does it require
the large ability
to upgrade, I mean, does it give
him the opportunity to recover
costs that they go out and dance
on that right, that's, I guess
that Madam Chair, Senator,
that's really the, that's the
sort of crux of this bill is
that we ask those utilities to
the best of your utilities and
the co-ops to let the PRC know
um what they're gonna use if
they're gonna use anything at
all. And then it got, we
guideline.
How the PRC can allow um that
utility to get cost recovery for
the investments that they're
making.
I think I see why Madam chair
that there's no cap.
pricing because this will
definitely increase.
I mean,
They're making a
They will be making an
investment that
That they are due a return on
their capital. So this will
increase the cost of power to
many consumers across New
Mexico. Is that?
Am I missing something, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, I, I
think you're, I think you're
missing a little bit. Um, I
think there's a possibility for,
for increase, but if you're
building new transmission lines
to meet your load needs, which a
lot of utilities are, they're,
those are very costly, just, you
know, the cost of lawyers to
manage and negotiate the right
of ways, that's costly, um,
building new infrastructure to
meet the demand is far costlier
than
Using an advanced technology to
make the lines more efficient. I
think I'm catching on.
this is not really about load.
This is about inputs, is that
correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, I mean,
It's about load also.
Um, it could be about load, uh,
because the advanced grid
technologies are so varied. I
don't want to say it's not about
load because we do have this
issue of people bringing new low
like uh private uh.
Developer builds a
Hypothetical, uh, builds an
advanced geothermal power plant
somewhere.
And
I don't know near Lordsburg.
Um, right now they that load may
not, they may not be capacity
for that load to join.
The grid.
So that's one of the things that
this can do.
But it's not the only thing that
this can do. The advanced grid
technologies can also make
The grid more reliable by
allowing the utility more
visibility into the voltages on
their lines, um, so that in
situations like last week's high
wind event.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, the
utility is more aware of which
lines might trip and which ones
are probably not going to. Madam
Chair, an expert representative.
What you're describing to me is
not a load. It's an input.
The geothermal plant doesn't
pull a load on the system.
They're an input into the
system.
So, and if you don't, if you
have a static population.
And you're not increasing the
load.
I mean, Albuquerque hasn't
grown, but, I mean, real Rancho
has, but I mean if you go around
the state, we're not really
talking about loads. We're
talking of, if I, if I
understand you right, we're
talking about
We're trying to
Assimilate and coordinate
different inputs into the
system, is, am I missing
something there?
Madam chair, Senator, um,
So
I don't think you're missing
something, but there are
increased loads in New Mexico
despite our relatively anemic
population growth. Where are
those loads? Where are those
loads? They come from Senator
Madam Chair, um,
electrification, they come from
those economic development
projects that Senator Padilla
was talking about earlier, um,
they come from data centers,
they come from EVs, they come
from
Um,
manufacturing, all sorts of
places.
So Senator, um, this bill is
about
planning and submission. So
could you tie your comments back
into the building. Oh well, I
think that's exactly what my
comments are, Madam chair. It's,
we're talking about grid as a
whole.
Um
And, and what I'm trying to,
what I'm trying to
Ascertain is.
Will this be raised the cost of
electricity to consumers in New
Mexico.
Yes or no.
Let him chair, Senator, I don't
think I can tell you that.
I, I don't think I can answer
that. Um, it will save a utility
money and will save ratepayers
money if we're able to maximize
efficiency if you don't mind if
I, I'll, I'll explain it. We can
maximize efficiency on the
existing lines, that is far
cheaper than building new
transmission lines, uh, so that
is, that would be a cost savings
to, to ratepayers.
So will they see a reduction in
rates if it's a cost saving.
Right.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, that
they could and that goes into
the, you know, the ratemaking
case, which is, you know, long
and complicated as you, as you
know.
I, I think I have a pretty good
understanding of those rape
cases of representative, I
think.
I mean, if your bill had
Price gaps
It had protections for
rural America.
It had
It had protections for those
people.
I'm all for it.
But
To blanket.
A
This is going to save people
money, but there's no price caps
in it, so there is no way that
it's going to save money because
they're gonna spend more money.
And if you give utilities
another tool to make an
investment where they're going
to return 7% on their
investment, they're gonna do it.
It makes money. That's a good
way to deploy capital.
I, I think we're playing around
and not being completely
The bolting and and the need for
this.
These systems, and I'll tell
you, madam chair.
The, the problem with the grid
today.
Is the
is that it's not high winds.
Never was high wheels.
Most of those are designed for
over 100 mill you know.
breast alongside him is an
issue, but it's not a structural
issue with, with, with the
facility. The problem is we have
so many inputs going into the,
into the grid now that we have.
Stabilize the grid to the point
that we need to make.
Change his investments in the
grid in order to make
All of these new inputs worked
together.
So, Madam Chair, I'll um, I'm
sure there's others that have
comments about it, but
I would, uh, I look forward to
this on the floor there.
Thank you. Um, other comments.
Uh, the only comment I'll make
before I go to Senator, I think
we have had the, this type of
bill in the past, not as
comprehensive.
For the IOUs and they were uh
neutral or supportive in the
past, and they're not present
today.
Could you comment on that?
Um, Madam Chair.
I, I thought they some of them
were present, but they have,
they supported the bill in uh in
committee.
In all the committees that I was
presenting in.
OK, thank you. Senator, you had,
you were next.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Uh, I have read your bills. I
liked what I was seeing on page
4 whenever you're talking under
Eve.
The provisions of this section
do not apply to a distribution
cooperative organized pursuant
to the rural Electric
Cooperative.
I'm glad to see that.
But you also have to keep in
mind that cooperatives, electric
cooperatives in the state of New
Mexico are owned.
By those they serve, right?
That's a very important aspect
of it because whenever
electricity dispersed out in our
rural areas.
They were the companies that did
it. It wasn't any of the big
names that were used to.
Oh
In reading the bill on page 9
under C Advance Grig Technology
means hardware, software
technology.
the sufficiency, capacity,
reliability, and it goes on on
to the next page.
telling about what all it's
gonna be doing.
But it still has to go through
the PRC. Is that correct, Madam
Chair and Representative
Ma'amen, yes. Is that going to
add any sort of a burden onto
the PRC.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Senator, we
worked with the PRC to make sure
that we were doing this in the
right way, especially with
sequencing um previous versions
of the bill had
Some very particular mandates of
when you, when you had to do it,
and um when you had to report
on, um,
On these kinds of projects that
you might be, that you might be
using.
That's changed. So we, we really
listen to what the PRC had to
say, and that's reflected in
this new bill, but I'll let
Melin
That's changed. So we, we really
listen to what the PRC had to
say, and that's reflected in
this new bill, but I'll let
Melinon
speak a little bit more to that.
Um
Senator, Madam Chair, what
Representative Ortez said we, we
had a lot of discussion with the
PRC trying to minimize the
burden that would.
occur. So, and the question of
timing, Madam Chair, senator was
what it came down to, and we
made changes to align the
planning with
Processes that already exist at
the PRC. So, the integrated
resource plans are already being
filed. We just added one element
that has to be in there, and the
annual reports from the co-ops
are already being filed. We just
added one reporting element.
So the workload for the PRC
shouldn't increase very much.
Excuse me, madam Chair and.
Representative Miss Weller.
I was reading the analysis from
the PRC and there is a physical
implication in their estimating
the annual cost to the PRC if
this bill does passes in excess
of $55,000 per year.
I understand the difference
going on down with their
comments. I do understand the
difference between the advanced
grid technology plans versus
integrated resource.
And
That is problematic to the
integrated resource plans.
Oh
Mainly because those have little
to no express resort of proof,
no cost approvals at all and
subject change without notice.
So I, whenever we're talking
about the advanced grad
technology plan.
It's adjudicated.
And it's it can be contested.
And uh
It has to it requires direct
binding approvals.
And it also has the place in
there for approved cause and
cost recovery.
But the thing that our bothers
me.
Yes.
This is currently in I think it
is, let me go back to my.
On page 14 of the bill it and
like it is current language.
Line 5
Distribution cooperative
utilities shall establish energy
efficiency and load management
orchids.
That was kind of problematic for
me, but going back to page 12.
I need more of a description
under your definitions a number
P line 5 topology optimization.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm, I'm
sorry, I'm just looking for, I'm
looking at the amendments in
context, so.
He would like us to it's
definitions. It's under
definitions and let me see if I
can I see it now.
Um, thank you. What would you
like us to, to define it a
little bit more I would like
more of an explanation on the
topology optimization.
Madam Chair, Senator, so
Topology optimization is a kind
of
Software that allows the
operator of the grid to sort of
see the entire grid at once, so
the shape of it, that's why it's
called topology. The shape of
where the load is, um, and it
allows the grid operator to
reroute power flows to avoid a
congested area.
Um, a good way of thinking about
it.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator is like
using um the Waz app to find a
way around um uh traffic.
jam.
Um, so it's kind of like that
for the grid.
OK, well, Madam Chair, I guess
that's where I do have a concern
if they're able to avoid.
a problem area, so this, this
energy that can then be sent
another direction. Is this
always applicable to the rural
areas and the reason I'm going
down this.
path that I'm on right now is
One of the
bigger
Utility company sets out in my
area.
Um
Whenever there is overload.
They don't have any place to.
Move around
So that usually means that that
farmer has now lost his
irrigation well.
Pumping right on it, but the
electricity for it.
It also means that whenever that
is shut down, it affects all
those houses down below it.
So what, what's the recourse
there, Madam Chair, because that
is definitely.
Congested or overloaded.
So I'm kind of curious how that
would be handled through this
bill.
Madam Chair, Senator.
It sounds like from the
situation you're describing that
topology optimization would be a
really good technology to
In soul in that area.
Um, so, I mean this bill doesn't
mandate any particular thing if
defines some solutions, which is
why we've included these
definitions, Madam Chair,
Senator, because these are the
state of the art technologies
right now, um, and
Quite honestly, Madam Chair,
Senator, I think this would be a
really good idea for the
situation that you're
describing.
Madam chair, a representative of
Miss.
Well, am I saying your name
right, Miss Wheeler? OK, thank
you for that.
Oh
In my opinion, what you've just
told me, Miss Willard.
Is that these particular.
Utility companies will have to
build more.
Transmission light
Because if they do.
Try to
This one particular area, and
I'm just talking about one area.
this goes on, especially during
the heat of the summer whenever
everybody's trying to stay cool
because we're only having 110
degree days down there, OK?
But the overload or a surge,
let's, let's say a power surge.
How was, how is that gonna
affect any surgeries? And the
reason I bring that up, Ma.
Madam Chair and Representative
Miss Weller.
And I say this from experience
cause it happened this past
summer.
There was a power surge that
went through there, OK?
I'm at the end of the line, so
you know what happened then.
I walked in my house. Everything
was just fine, and all of a
sudden it sounded like guns
going off inside my, it blew out
light bulbs. It blew out the
speaker on the radio that I had
on it, uh, fried 4 TVs it got
the electric, the uh.
Compressor on the air
conditioner, it
the top out and blew up one of
my ovens.
I was on the ground. I thought
there was a machine gun going
up.
And it was a power surge.
Because it not only affected my
house, it affected the bunk
house too and everything in
between.
So is this new technology going
to protect the consumers from
instances like I've just talked
about is there a brownout
situation.
Blackout situation.
a power search.
Are they, are all these utility
companies going to be able to be
I don't know, updated to the
point where none of this will
happen anymore.
I, I can't see this happening. I
really can't.
Because the demand out in our
area whenever you've got farmers
trying to pump water to their
crops to help feed the world.
And then you've got consumers
out there that are just.
More often than not are elder.
They do have to have cooling.
So I, I can see that there's
gonna be some problems here. Am
I just reading this wrong, Madam
Chair, Senator, this bill gives
utilities and co-ops more tools
to ensure that the grid has more
reliability, is more efficient,
um.
You know, they, it, it can give
them the technology to some are
already investing in right now
uh to ensure that that kind of
thing that happened to you and
to your neighbors doesn't
happen.
Be here I do have to point out
that 4 years ago they updated
everything and said we won't
ever have that problem again, so
therefore, I do have a problem.
So whenever we are.
Looking at that, I'm, I'm very
Very concerned that it's not
always going to be the case,
however this.
You know, you're trying to bring
in.
All the other stuff that goes
along with this.
Uh, the deployment of advanced
grid technology.
Help me out there.
Tell me what you mean by
advanced deployment of.
Um, madam chair Senator, uh,
those grid technologies are some
of the things that um we've,
we've just discussed, which
includes the topology
optimization includes dynamic
line reading so that utility
knows how a good event might
affect that line and they can
shut it down if there's high
temperatures or, or high winds,
um, there are all kinds of
other, um,
Technologies, the advanced
conductors that the utilities
can use to just make their lives
more efficient.
This would also, Madam Chair,
and Representative Miss Wilder
this would also include projects
as well but.
Projects
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
yes.
And
what was the question I'm
looking for real fast, Madam
Chair.
Will any of this be under the
under the jurisdiction of FERC.
Madam Chair, Senator, we um we
amended uh some language so that
um
So that that wouldn't be an
issue. I'll let uh Anna Lindon.
OK. Talk a little bit more about
that. Madam Chair, Senator Izel,
so
The rates for transmission lines
are set by the Federal Energy
Regulation Commission FERC as
you.
I'm sure you know, um, but
We have made sure in
Talking to the PRC, talking to
the utilities, talking to the
developers that nothing in this
bill violates that jurisdiction.
Um, we originally, Madam Chair,
Senator in a previous version of
the bill had some language that
tried to make that explicit, but
it turned out um after further
consideration and some advice
from a very smart committee
analyst, um, that
Actually, we didn't need that
language and it made it more
confusing, so we took it out
again.
OK, that's good to know,
Sometimes more languages better
off being less lame.
That is what we learned,
so I don't, OK.
Oh, senator, we have other
people on the list too. Thank
you, ma'am.
And with that, I'll stop.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Reportte is swell or I'm on page
6 G.
Looking at the golds and
objectives.
Before I get into these,
Would it be fair to say
Is this about doing more with
less.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
Yeah.
It is fair.
also Ortez not just FYI.
So
We can't build dispatchable
power.
And we, and we are approaching
the point where moving around is
the power that we have.
His handicapping.
In fact, eliminated.
Prospects
Or economic development.
Would that be a fair statement?
Uh, Senator, Madam Chair,
Senator, um, I, I don't, I don't
think so, but I'd like for maybe
perhaps you can elucidate me a
little bit more.
Well, we don't have any excess
power in the state, right?
And the power that we do have.
Battle chair and representative.
power that we do have is
becoming.
Increasingly unreliable.
See
We didn't have these issues 10
years ago.
that we have now.
one
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, there is
more demand for
Electricity.
Um, there have also been um
extreme events, weather events
that um down lines that happens
all the time, uh, more often
than I care to admit in my own
service area, so, you know, it's
important to
Make what we have more
efficient.
So that we can have more
reliability.
So bed and chair and
Representative, it's being
represented here today.
So
When events.
Yeah
No events or whatever.
Or necessitating the need for
significant investments in
modernization.
I
Is that what I
Mm
Senator, um, I think more demand
necessitates uh investments in
grid, uh, modernization.
And
That this bill allows for that
to happen in a way that's
efficient for utility and for
ratepayers as well.
The mountain chair, the only
significant economic activity
that I'm aware of in the state.
is occurring down in the
southeast in oil country.
Where we currently have a
two-year wait.
For new industrial connection.
As a consequence.
the lack of power.
And there is a.
5 600 mile energy corridor.
Be proposed currently.
To move power out of the
Midwest.
Down
Where it's needed.
Because we can't generate it.
Like
Is this piece of legislation
have any impact?
On
Cost associated with those.
Investments
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, this
bill would help get the power to
where it is needed.
So, it would have a it would
have a significant impacts.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, and
representative I'm going to
postulate.
The grid reliability has
suffered.
With the penetration of
renewables.
Over the last 10 years.
And that grid now has to be able
to accommodate.
Unsteady
Unstable
And
In non-dispatchable inputs.
Somehow moving what little power
we have.
Around to make it available
where it's needed.
Is, is
Is there any
Is there any error at all.
In that
Maen Scott.
I, I, I think that we have some
philosophical differences here.
But
More specifically, Senator
Scott, Madam Chair.
Yes, we have far more renewable
energy on the grid than we did
10 years ago.
And renewable energy has
different characteristics then
Fossil fueled energy, um, in
terms of how it ramps up and
ramps down when it is available.
Um, and how it can be moved
around, but I would not say,
Madam Chair, and Scott, that we
have less energy than we need.
In the last PNM resources call
that I had the privilege to be
present on what the utility said
was that we have, they have tons
of power. What they need is
storage capacity.
To hold on to that power.
Uh, which is why they have
requested.
To build more storage instead of
more generation. Um, the
greatest difference, Madam
Chairan Scott than it was.
That's very true.
Um, so I'm gonna, uh, interrupt
both sides need to be more
brief. We have other bills and
we have some guest speakers, so.
grief. Are you finished? or do
you, thank you, Senator Scott.
No mountain chair I was just
getting started.
Oh yeah.
I think the reason
that this is being brought
forward as we have destabilized.
Our power systems in this state.
In spite of low growth or no
growths in most of the state.
We now need
to improve
The management of these grid
systems dramatically.
Because if we don't,
We're gonna be sitting here in
the dark.
Madam Chair, I, I think.
And I was able to articulate
that.
In, in, in spite of the
Some of the responses that I.
But
Uh,
go on for much longer time.
If that was available.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you.
This.
Thank you. And I did get some of
your comments down so I'll
remember them. Anybody else?
I move adu past. Is there a
second?
There is a motion for Du pass.
And the second
And could the uh secretary,
please call the vote.
Senator Cervantes,
yes, Senator Charlie.
Charlie, yes, San Jose.
Excused Senator Hamlet. Senator
Hamlin, yes, Senator Pope.
Yes, explain my vote, yeah,
Senator Scott.
Uh no, ma'am, and I would like
to explain myenator Scott, no,
Senator Townsend.
Townsend, no, Senator Lopez,
yes, Lous, yes, send us toonics,
yes, Senhonics, yes. Senator
Pope to explain his vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, the
discussion was interesting
first.
Almost in need this, don't have
enough power to live.
Too much power and
Um, I just support this. Thank
you for bringing forward.
Um, because it's less impactful,
right? What we're doing. We're
really just trying to really
maximize that we have with
technology.
Um, before we just go and build.
All these are additional
infrastructure that we probably
don't need. So, thank you, thank
you, ma'am. Sure.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Madam Chair.
These proposals when they're
implemented, will
have the effect of raising.
As I
Yeah.
Fairly significantly on our
consumers because we are trying
to stretch the resources so
thin.
And
I
Very much looks forward to
having this conversation.
From the floor
When we get.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you. So, by a vote of 6 to
21 excuse the bill has a due
pass or the, the committee sub
has a due pass. Thank you very
much for coming. Next, we're
having uh representative
McQueen, uh, on another
committee substitute, free
roaming horses and livestock
code. We will hear this bill and
we won't go to the memorial
until the very end of the
meeting or at the next meeting
because we have invited guests
uh
To talk about uh brackish water,
the processes, etc. in
preparation for another vote
later this week.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee,
um, time here to present House
Bill 284, uh, free-roaming
horses and livestock code. I'm
sorry to report that my
co-sponsor, Senator Woods can't
be with us today. Um, I think,
uh, I think we all recognize
that um
Serving in the legislature in
this building will take a toll
on your health. Uh, apparently,
he's feeling under the weather.
I know I, I get the same crud
every year. Um,
So, uh, madam chair, members of
the committee House Bill 284,
uh, essentially does three
things uh to
Help us with our overpopulation
of free roaming horses. It
provides a mechanism to adopt or
relocate.
Some of the horses, uh, if there
is some place for them to go.
Uh, it provided it formalizes a
process to administer uh
fertility control.
Uh, to the free roaming horses.
Uh, and it prohibits the
slaughter of free roaming horses
once they enter that sort of uh
system uh set up by this bill.
Um,
Yeah
Preming horses is
For various reasons, something
that elicits uh a passionate
response on different sides.
Uh, this bill, uh, you know, in
that passionate response, I
think everyone seems to agree
that we have too many.
The herds are too big, they're
impacting uh the landscape,
they're reproducing on their
own, um, they're a threat to
public safety when they get out
on the roads.
Uh, what this bill seeks to do
is reduce the size of the herds.
Uh, in a humane and thoughtful
way.
Uh, I will not sit here and tell
you this bill.
Resolves all issues with free
running horses.
It doesn't.
But it takes a significant and I
think important step towards
addressing that population
issue.
I'm sure that I'd be happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you, Representative
McQueen.
OK, so we have a list of people
who would like to speak. First
of all, how many people in the
audience support this bill.
OK, 123456789. How many in the
audience oppose this bill.
One
2
OK. Anybody online in support or
opposition.
There are 2 in support online.
OK, if so if right now, if you
would come and line up, I have
Susan Harrelson.
Then Peggy Roberts.
In Sandoval County Commissioner
Catherine Brit.
Uh, Sabrina Pacha.
Mike knees
And Pamela, maybe just one of
the nieces can speak. OK, so
please go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you. My name is
Susan Harrelson. I'm
representing the Coronado Soil
and Water Conservation District.
That's just north of Albuquerque
and includes Placidus, where we
have uh a lot of horses which is
typical of many places
statewide. The latest census
data here shows an increase in
the herd even with
contraception. If we didn't have
contraception, this would be
much worse.
Right now there's not enough
grass to feed the 180 horses
that we have, and there never
will be enough grass to feed
that many horses, they will
starve.
Um, tens of thousands of acres
of in the state are turning into
dust and weeds. Um, I, I've seen
erosion getting worse, wildlife
habitat is being impacted.
Everything from birds to bobcats
is losing their habitat. So
something has to be done and we
believe that this bill is a big
step in the right direction.
Thank you. We hope you'll pass
it. Thank you very much. Uh,
next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Peggy
Roberts, and I live on a small
ranch in Placitas with my
horses.
The neighborhood where I live no
longer has grasses for the free
roaming horses or other wildlife
to eat, nor is there water in
the creek to drink.
Because of the limited
vegetation in the area, some
residents try to keep the horses
from starving by feeding them.
I've seen up to 50 horses at a
feeding location. At a minimum,
that is $80 a fee daily.
As well as a financial burden,
feeding locations cause food
aggression between the bands and
semi-domesticates the horses,
which increases their desire to
interact with people.
The horses caused major
conflicts between neighbors,
destroyed the landscape,
frighten people, and cause
property and vehicle damage.
During the 12 years I've lived
in Palitis, I have known of one
or two horses killed each year
by a vehicle.
HB 284 would provide a means to
remove at least some of the
horses from Placitas and
relocate them to lands that can
support them or rescues where
they can be cared for. Please
support this bill. Thank you
very much.
Next, please. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair, uh, commission
members of the committee, uh
Sanval County Commissioner
Catherine Brock, uh, we've been
working on this in Sandoval
County for many years and
officially since 2019 are her
numbers are a growing even
though we've uh executed the
PCP, the birth control for over
4 years and at least we're
stabilized, but in our 10 square
miles, we have
an extreme urban rural interface
where uh as other speakers have
mentioned, we have had
conflicts, not only among
community members over how to
handle the horses, but the
actual public safety issues that
have arisen, uh, with regards to
the horses on the roadways, and
we know this is happening in
other parts of our state, uh,
specifically in Lincoln County,
it's a, a very, it's an extreme
issue, uh, and there, because
they have not
Been able to start a PCP
program, um, it's their numbers
have really multiplied.
I just want to thank you for
your consideration, ask you for
the due pass on this, um, very,
very important legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please.
Yes, Madam Chair, Senators, my
name is Mike Neese. I'm from
Placides, New Mexico, and we do
have quite a few people from the
seas, but this is not a Placidus
area uh problem solely, so, um,
some of our senators here in the
room have experienced um the
overpopulation of horses,
especially on our roads in
Placidus in the last 13 years,
we have had over 30 horses dead
on our roads um.
Um, and I've got the proof of
that here through IPRA requests
from the NMDOT, the Sanwell
County Sheriff's Office in the
Sandoval County Fire Department.
So, um, none of these so-called
accidents, um, have been the
result of speeding or um alcohol
and we don't need any more dead
horses every, almost every time
the horse is dead or has to be
euthanized and hauled away on a
trailer. Picture that and um so
we need these horses off of our
roads, um, NMDOT cannot do
thing. The sheriff's department
cannot do anything because there
is no entity of jurisdiction in
the state of New Mexico. This
bill gives jurisdiction, please
pass this bill.
Thank you. And before I had
Belinda Garland speak, uh,
joyous Spartson is here from the
Association of Counties. She
raised her hand and support, so
I'm assuming the board took a
position.
OK, thank you for being here.
Uh, Belinda, are you here to
support or oppose?
Um, man, I met with the New
Mexico Livestock Board, we kind
of have a neutral stance on this
bill.
So I will tell you that we are
in support of the bill and the
fact that we believe this is a
positive step in the right
direction to assist these
horses. We think in some areas
of the state they are
overpopulated, um, there's
dangerous roadways, there are
parts of the state that it's
actually endangering children.
I've seen it myself. These
horses are on football fields,
soccer fields, so maybe with a
wild horse expert, which is
outlined in this bill that'd be
a positive.
up to maybe get some guidance
and some direction on how to not
only assist the horses, but to
assist the people.
Thank you. OK, thank you for
being here. I'm gonna go to 2
people, uh, support on Zoom and
then we'll go to the opponents.
Sabrina Pacha and then Anne
Hansen very briefly.
Uh hello, committee members.
Thank you for having me today.
My name is Sabrina Pat. I'm the
state legislative director, um,
for the ASPCA, the American
Society of the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals, uh, we are
in strong support of the bill
because we're confident that
those who care about equines and
the land that they reside on
share the common goals of humane
treatment, survival of these
horses and public safety and
health, doing nothing won't
achieve these goals and will
actually bring us further from
these goals and this bill is
exactly the thought.
approach that we need that will
allow for the humane free
roaming horse management that we
need to benefit our communities
and also ensure the survival and
well-being of these free roaming
courses. So with that, I urge
the committee to vote yes on the
bill and thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you, Anna Hansen.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and senators. Uh, my name is
Anna Hansen.
I am
The lobbyist for the blow up the
walk.
I'm sorry, I'm a little under
the weather, um, uh, the Pueblo
Pawai, uh, supports this bill
and feels that it is very
important the governor Janelle
Roybal actually called me and
wanted to make sure that they
support was
recorded for this important
bill, we request they do pass.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, we're
going to the opponents in the
room who would like to speak if
you'd come to the middle,
please.
I saw a couple of hands.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
My name is Sharon Ali Shar. OK,
so let me get, just let you know
about 2 minutes max. OK, cause
I'm settling in, right? OK. Um,
I'm formerly with the American
Wild Horse Campaign.
This bill does address problems
that we do have in the state,
and I acknowledge that. The
problem with this bill is it
addresses all wild horses in
this state and it will allow for
the removal of all wild horses.
There is no language in this
bill. Nothing that directs the
management of these horses to
preserve our free roaming wild
horses. There's no language in
here saying when you make the
decisions, our ultimate goal is
to preserve these wild horses.
Um, they give jurisdiction to
the Mexico livestock Board,
which
You know, and it gives the New
Mexico Livestock Board the
ability to find rules. There's
nothing about the rules. There's
no guardrails. There's no um
Definitions for preserving the
wild horses, and I'm against
this bill because even though
it's approaching a problem that
we do have to solve. It's
basically a mechanism for
eradicating all the wild horses
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Is there
any other opponent that would
like to speak?
OK, we are now going to
questions, comments from
committee members.
done is their emotion.
result.
Go ahead.
Please go ahead.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, uh, representative
McQueen, thank you for bringing
this forward.
Reading the title of it, though,
I do have a problem you're
saying allowing fertility
control. I understand for the
stallions that uh castration is
one way that we're going to
handle that.
Whenever you were talking about
non-surgical contraceptives, so
there's a problem there.
Because
According to what your bill
says, free roaming horses, I
call them feral horses. That's
what, how I'm going to refer to
him throughout my talk to you.
There is a product out there
that they can be injected with
called reguate. That's the trade
name of it. It's progesterone.
And uh
That's not always
Effective
So unless all the stallions, all
the studs or castrated, they're
still going to get pregnant, OK?
I would want to know if the
What do you, uh, the free
roaming horse expert will have
the ability to dart these mares
because it has to be done on a
regular basis.
Maner Sasel um.
The uh
method that's been used most
often recently is the PCP, uh,
which is administered to the
mayors uh through his art, and
they try to do it annually. They
have a, you know, running, um,
census of the herds and they
track, you know, who they
started and who they haven't.
castration is an option, but of
course, that's a lot uh more
work, uh, it's a surgical
procedure you need to capture
the horse, uh, things like that.
So the expectation of this bill
would be primarily the PCP or
the mayors.
And Madam chairs of
Representative McQueen, it
doesn't work. I will tell you
right up front, it doesn't work.
You can talk to any veterinarian
out there and unless they are on
top of this all the time.
And darting those mares will not
work. It's not effective all the
time, OK?
I have visited with several of
this is in regards to just the
Redosa area horses.
Madame Chair and Representative,
I have visited with lots of
veterinarians up in the Ridosa
area.
We have big problem up there
because these horses do get into
the downtown area of Riosa, they
do get out into areas where
Their soccer fields, football
fields, baseball fields, they
even go down to the racetrack.
These horses do carry diseases.
Madam Chair, whenever
I visited with these.
Veterinarians, they say they
have told me repeatedly.
If these horses can be gathered
up, we will donate our services
to guild these stallions, so
there's an option there that
will save the state some money.
All they have to do, and I'm
sure there's plenty of cowboys
out there that would, I would be
one of them to help gather these
horses to have that job done.
Madam chair, my next question
is.
Uh, on page two of your bill
under definitions whenever
you're changing the livestock
code.
Animals or livestock does not
include canine or feline
animals, but you've also added
in free roaming horses.
So Madame Cheer basically what
you have done is you've taken
domestic.
Domestic or domesticated
animals.
Which does include equines.
And you've changed.
The inclusion of felines,
canines, or free roaming courses
there. Can you tell me why you
did that, Madam Chair, and
Representative McQueen.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
uh, so a couple of points, the,
the fertility control, at least
in the placeus area has
substantially reduced the
reproduction rate.
Uh, so it's not 100% effective.
I agree with that. Uh, but it
does help.
Um, if there are opportunities
to gilt snail stallions. This
would be uh permitted under this
act. So that, that's good news.
Uh, that's something we can
follow up on.
Um, and then in terms of the
definitions, uh, I believe the
uh the
Cats and dogs were already
exempt. Um, I'm looking for that
language, uh, and we uh exempted
the carved out the free roaming
horses because we're, we're not
asking the livestock board to
take over management.
Uh, responsibility for the
horses. All that they're doing
is drafting rules for the horse
experts and administering those
so they don't have to bring um
They're not responsible for the
fertility control, they're not
responsible for management. They
don't have to bring money to the
table. They're just sort of
overseeing the process and then
it would be left up to uh local
political subdivisions, cities,
counties, whatnot uh to actually
engage in these programs.
Madam Chair, that's very
troublesome to me. We're gonna
leave it up to the counties to
take care of somebody else's
problem.
But pre-roaming horses added to
what is not animals or livestock
is very troublesome to me
because at one time the majority
of those horses that are fully
grown right now.
We domestic or domesticated
animals, so I do have a problem
with that one right there, Madam
chair on page 4 of your bill.
And astray, this is another
definition that is currently in
the livestock code and astray
means livestock found running at
large upon public or private
lands.
But whenever you drop down to
Uh
Are on line 10 where it states
free roaming course means an
unclaimed horse found at large.
What is the difference there?
Um
Manchinel and mainly the
difference is
Um, can we
Uh, return this horse to its
home. I mean, is it loose and
its owners are looking for it,
or has it been abandoned and we
can't identify who the owners
are.
And Madam Chair, I do want to
point out to the committee that
in the state of New Mexico,
cattle are required to be
branded horses are required.
Most horses right now if they
are uh
Performance horse, I'll put it
that way, they are either
chipped or have a lip tattoo on.
Though a person, the uh free
roaming horse expert just by
looking at a horse is not going
to be able to tell whether that
horse is.
An astray or a free roaming
course inn't that correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Rozee,
sometimes they can't tell,
sometimes the the horse still
has shoes, sometimes they are
saddle marks, Madam Chair, I
will point out that not all
horses, even if they're out on a
rent, sometimes they are not
shod. They just have their feet
trimmed and, and men chair
center, that's why I said
sometimes, you know, sometimes
there are indications that the
horse has been cared for, and
sometimes there's also someone
out looking for him.
So, you know, if, if there's a
horse who is, you know,
approachable, who is tame, who
has some of these indications of
having been, you know, cared
for, that's gonna be in the
stray.
And Madam chair.
Representative McQueen on my
will point out that some of the
comments that were made by
people from the audience also
said that these horses are so
used to being around people that
they will come up and they will
eat out of your hand. They do
want to be pe sometimes, so.
Does that make them domesticated
or are they still feral horses?
There's a concern there that
it's going to be pretty hard for
this free roaming horse expert.
And
just an eyeball of this horse is
not going to determine that,
that those horses or horse will
have to be pinned to make that
determination in my opinion.
Um, madam chair, let's see.
Whenever you're talking and this
is going back to page 4.
Line 10 of your free roaming
horse, feral horses.
Oh, let's see.
found it, found at large that is
not in this trait due to lack of
evidence of private ownership or
domestication.
Like I said earlier, there is no
brand on this, on these horses
the only way you're going to be
able to establish that is if
they are tipped or if they do
have a lip tattoo.
Going on down under your free
roaming horse expert on
definitions. Can you tell me
what sort of horse a herd
management service.
This free roaming horse expert
is going to be qualified to do
if one is selected.
By the board
Ma'am chair San her fertility
control.
That's, that's the primary one.
OK, and madam chair
representative
whenever you say again the
Non-surgical.
Contraceptive use.
you may probably.
Oh
The county you're asking that
the county where these horses
are located then to make uh to
come up with the cost of the
medicine that's going to be used
in the darting process.
Is that correct? Ma chair
center, that, that's up to the
county. Uh, we do have one
county with a county
representative here today,
Sandoval County, uh, who has
been engaged in this uh type of
activity, uh, this formalizes
that. And it also provides, you
know, the, the, the additional
elements of
Relocation and adoption if
there's some place to take the
horses.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, uh, Representative, I am
for this bill because we have to
do something before human beings
get caught, get killed, there
was an incident in Ridoso where
a got a person on a bicycle got
run over by a herd of horses and
had to be transported by
ambulance to the hospital.
Madam, cheer on page 6 of your
bill and
Glad to see uh Senator Cervantes
in here.
It states the board this is new
material. The board may
establish civil finds not
exceeding $1000 per violation
for violations of the section
and rules related to the equine
rescue and retirement facilities
promulgated by the board.
Who makes the decision that
Who will be checking these
facilities is what I'm needing
to ask and who makes the
determination they may be in
violation.
Ma'am chair, uh, Sara, the life
that board.
I'm sorry.
So Madam Chair.
Representative were adding
another layer of burden to the
livestock board, is that
correct?
Um, ma'am Chair Representativeel
it is additional work we have
talked, talked to them as you
heard they, they're neutral on
the bill, um, there is money in
the budget I'm told to uh help
them um defer expenses.
OK, Madam Chair, I'm just
rolling through this as fast as
I can on page 9 of your bill
under new material starting on
line 14. I'm gonna
Skip on down where it's talking
about any municipal state,
county municipal government or
governmental subdivision may
enter into an agreement with the
registered free roaming horse
expert to conduct free roaming
horse surveys and management and
determined land carrying
capacity.
So before anything can be done.
I mean a small municipality, a
county.
County commissioners are the
ones that are going to be
entering into this agreement
with the free roaming horse
expert.
Just to make sure that there is
a carrying capacity for these
horses. Is that correct? because
we have heard from testimony
testimony today, Madam Chair.
That these horses can't be
detrimental to the land.
And whenever that grass is gone,
that grass won't come back.
OK, so is that what you're
intending to do right here with
that area of your bill.
Ma'am Center, yes. OK.
Madam Cheer on page 10, line 7.
Let's see.
Uh
You may capture and relocation,
going into risk your retirement
facility equivalent if there is
nothing that is open at the
time, then these horses.
Can't be taken out of state the
facility that meets the
requirements.
For lifelong sanctuary care.
Who will be making that
determination, is that the
Pre-robbing.
For expert that we're talking
about over here and who will,
who will haul those horses to an
out of state facility.
Ma'am chair at the center, yes,
it's free running horse expert,
and it would be up to the
parties involved to arrange
transportation.
So it doesn't, it does not come
back to the livestock board or
the state.
OK.
And these horses, Madam Chair
and Representative are not
subject to the Federal while
free roaming horses and burros
Act. Is that correct?
Um, madam chair Senator, I would
say this bill doesn't apply to
horses that are subject to the
Federal Act.
OK, would that also entail,
let's see here.
It
So that would
But that entailed the BLM.
Forces that are currently being
held in the state of New Mexico.
Ma'am Cha center, no, this, this
bill, uh, because we don't have
authority over federal or or
tribal lands cars out.
OK, Madam Chair, I was, I was uh
talking about the horses that
came in from Nevada.
Through the VM Bureau of Land
Management Services, and there
is a herd of about 100 horses.
That are being held at a
facility.
In northwestern New Mexico. So
anyway.
Madam Chair,
I'm paid 11 under F.
A person shall not knowingly
slaughter.
Explain that to me.
Ma'am chair, um, center, what,
what, what this
What this provision does is it
prohibits the slaughter of
horses that are
Uh, adopted, captured, relocated
pursuant to this um uh pursuant
to this act. So once that
happens, that horse would be
microchipped or freeze branded,
uh, it's possible that
Um, through unforeseen
circumstances that horse comes
into possession of a third party
who is unaware that uh that
horse is a creamroing horse that
is subject to this protection.
So just the scienter requirement
to, to be a misdemeanors, you
have to know that before.
Uh
The horses slaughtered. So if,
if a horse was slaughtered
unknowingly.
Um, not that the slaughter
occurs unknowingly, but the, the
protection of the horse is not
known to the individual that
wouldn't be a violation, and
that's just I didn't hear it
would or wouldn't. It would not.
It would not be.
OK. That, that
Relieves a lot of my
For the question here because
I'm seeing a silver slaughter
cause they were allowed to be
slaughtered and transport for
slaughter released from an Equa.
Risk your retirement facility or
adoptive home into the wild
apes, feral.
And I'm saying feral horse.
Madam Cheer
The person who violates this
subsection is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which is a crime.
And upon convictions shall be
sentenced in accordance with all
the provisions.
And each free roaming horse had
a slaughtered, sulfur slaughter
caused or allowed to be
slaughtered, transported for
slaughtered or released in
violation of the subsection.
Constitutes a separate offense,
and I think that a senator.
Cervantes
would call that stacking.
And that was brought up the
other day in the
in it
Judiciary Committee.
Madam Cheer
That
This particular section right
here.
If a person
Does, let's say, let's say there
is an incident where
Some of these feral horses do
get onto somebody's private
property. That person that owns
that property does pin them. Do
they have the right to?
Do with what they want to with
these horses, or do they have
the right to or are they
required then to notify the
livestock Board.
Ma'am chair center, this bill
doesn't really reach that
situation. This bill creates
this, this horse expert, uh,
system entered into a contract
with a public entity, you know,
to adopt and relocate horses to
administer fertility control,
the sort of existing, we're not
really sure what happens to
these horses kind of thing with
uncertain private lands.
That, that's just outside the
scope of this bill, OK.
And, and that was where I was
going with that.
They are under really
No obligation then to call it
this worst management.
OK.
Madam Chair
Carrying capacity means blah
blah blah on page 12 of your
bill and then we're talking.
Uh, taking into account human
uses, including livestock
grazing, other agricultural
uses.
But you cannot gather them. This
is, I, I'm bothered by this.
Uh, it does not include you
cannot gather them into a
holding location by using
aircraft or motorized vehicles.
Can you tell me why those two?
Means of potential gathering.
You have stated in here.
Um,
man, um, center, uh, just
because it's my understanding
those are high stress, uh,
circumstances for the horses, so
the gathering would be done uh
by by cowboys or by um beaded
pants.
OK, well, Madam Chair, I guess
that's the problem I have
because I can remember a couple
of 3 years ago whenever those
A feral cattle, which were
really astrays, they're not,
they are strays. They were
branded and everything. They
were.
Of moved via aircraft, which
included.
Helicopters and they were
slaughtered.
Over in the healer, so I was
just kind of curious there,
Madam Cheer.
I agree that we have to do
something with these.
I do have a problem with
The free roaming horse expert.
I, I just have a problem with
them being called free roaming,
they are feral horses.
Um
I'm a pretty good horse expert
myself.
So would I be eligible to say,
here I am, folks, we have to do
something with this horse.
Cheer center, absolutely, you,
you would go, uh, you know,
submit your resume, your
application to the livestock
board and, and they would to
review that.
So anybody that lives within the
county would be able to do this
or can they come from anywhere
to be able to meet the
qualifications that are set
forward by the livestock.
Mate, Senator, I don't think we
have geographic restrictions on
can apply to be an expert.
And Madame
Maybe I didn't ask this. I can't
remember because I did have a
lot of questions regarding this.
Whenever
A livestock whenever any of
these.
poor sanctuary places are filled
up. What then?
Uh, ma'am Cha center, um, you
know, having a place to take the
horse horses is a major limiting
factor, and that's why
People who are concerned that
we're gonna take all the horses
somewhere. I am, I don't share
that worry because we just don't
have places to take them. So
that's, that's in the bill, uh,
we're looking for more horse
sanctuaries are trying to bring
out their horse stuaries, sort
of um up to snuff.
Uh, and in the meantime, we're
focusing on fertility control.
OK, Madam Chair and
representative Queen, like I
said, I do appreciate this bill.
It's greatly needed.
I
Know that these people that do
own these sanctuaries for
horses.
Uh, do the best they can, but I
also know the cost of.
Getting the horse back into
shape and maintaining that
particular weight that they're
They're good with, and it's very
costly to these people. I know
that right now they can get
contributions they can get
gifts.
So that they can come up with
other means, donations.
It's not up to the people of the
state to pay for somebody's.
Lack of responsibility for an
animal that they did a one of
those people did have the
opportunity.
Be able to sell that source.
There are plenty of people out
there that do want horses, so
these people would be able to
have adoption.
Of these horses taking place
through these facilities, is
that correct?
Ma'am chair Sander, yes,
perfect. I'm glad to hear that.
Madam Chair, I just want the
listening audience to know that
I am a horse lover. I had my
first horse whenever I was 4
years old. My granddad got me
one and I was the first person
to ever ride this little filly.
And I've had a love of horses
ever since. Right now I own way
too many, but I'm not going to
turn them loose.
That's not up to the state to be
able to have to take care of my
horse, I am responsible for
those horses we have to do
something before we have a loss
of human life.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, represent.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Townsend, then Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, my dear.
And
How do communities become
involved.
Setting the heart limit.
that.
How, how did they, how did they
You're gonna set her limit. I.
Um, correct.
Uh, Madam Chair, there's not
that incur limit per se. Um,
there's just the sense that we
have too many and we're trying
to reduce them, so there
wouldn't be a number set that
Um
You know, the, the sort of the
target number either.
to reduce down to or or to
maintain.
What I'm trying to find out now.
He had testimony this morning
that there was too many.
and
Every
How did they get their numbers
reduced with this, I mean, is it
just gonna
Maintain status quo and let them
I just, I offer, I mean, how,
how do we, how do we set, how,
how did they get relief under
this bill, but I'm.
So,
ma'am chair, Senator, that the
the populations have been
increasing, you know, in the
past either through reproduction
or through the abandonment of
additional horses. Um, this is
trying to, uh direct those trend
lines in the opposite direction.
You know, so through fertility
control, through uh adoption,
relocation and through some
natural attrition, we hope that
the herd numbers will go down.
OK.
Um, I'm sure, the other thing I
thought about years ago, I was
involved in a project on the US
ladder.
reservation and there's a herd
of horses out there, I think
they call them.
are
I think it's a bar breed.
Um, but, and they get on and off
the reservation would this
affect those?
Um
Me chair, uh, center, the, the
bill specifically carves out uh
tribal lands because of
sovereignty issues. Uh, so, so
tribes are free to, to manage uh
free horses on their lands as
they see fit, uh, that the
horses do, of course, move
about.
Uh, so there are horses that may
be on tribal lines at some point
and on private lands or other
public lands at other points.
Uh, those, those horses.
Depending on the circumstances
could be darted and potentially
could be adopted or relocated.
OK. And
There's no appropriations in
this bill, madam.
Represent
Right.
Uh, ma'am, Pierson, that is
correct. There is money in the
budget though, uh, for this film
and and.
and
And how much is that it's an HB2
I assume.
Uh chair center, yes, and HB2
and I forget that the number,
but it was uh
It was included in the budget.
And the Madam Chair, Senator,
the initial cost is
Early modest, we're talking
about rule making.
OK.
Um
You know,
done.
line item is.
That should bring them.
So let's ask Belinda Garland, do
you know the amount in the line
item.
When I come up quickly.
trying to finish this.
I'm sure I got a text that was
200,000. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Hamlin.
Madam chair, I move the do pass.
Is there a second
I like
There is a motion in the second
to the secretary please call the
vote.
The sinner Cervantes, excuse
Senator Charley.
Charlie, yes, San Joel.
Yes, and that I explain my vote,
yes, Senator Hamlin, yes, and
Hamlin, yes, Senator Pope.
Yes. And Pope, yes, and hers.
There's uh Fenner Townsend.
Townsend, no senator to De Lopez
is excuseden scu.
There's Scott knows.
centers uponics, yes, there's
phonics, yes. OK, send the
results to explain her vote and
then Senator Scott.
Madam Chair, thank you very much
for this. In essence, I do like
this bill, but there's some
language I'd like to see changed
in it, a free roaming.
What is it?
roaming horse expert, I do not
like that title at all.
Because that is
It could be any free roaming.
Expert out there.
This needs to be a feral horse
expert.
I'd like to see that changed and
then also.
Oh, what was that.
I, I'm sorry, I didn't. I, I
think there might be a problem
at the very end under page 11
under number F.
That does constitute stacking.
And I think that you need
clarification there and
Because that person does not
knowingly know where those
horses are going to end up.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Scott. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
the livestock board has the
expertise.
To manage these if they just
had the authority to do
something with them.
And I do not sing.
Now this legislation
Ultimately solves the problem.
Of overpopulation.
Thanks.
Thank you.
By a vote of 5 in the
affirmative, 2 and the negative
2 excused. You have a due pass.
Thank you very much for coming.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
So members we're going on to the
invited guests, uh, we have and
if they would come to the table,
please. We have Stacy Timmons,
who's the associate director for
Hydrology programs at the New
Mexico Bureau of Geology and
Mineral Resources at New Mexico
Tech.
And we have Robert Foley or
Foley.
Which way?
How,
uh, who is the vice president of
Jacobs Engineers who has direct
experience with brackish water
projects, and they are asked to
come and um educate us about uh
the
Receiving a brackish water, the
treatment, the uses, etc. we
will be dealing with the um
water supply Act on Saturday for
a vote.
And that's this is in
preparation. So who's gonna
start?
OK, Stacey, thank you and
welcome both. Thank you for
making time in your schedules to
do this.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
committee, good morning. Uh,
this is, uh, an interesting
opportunity to talk to you about
some science and brackish water
in particular here in New
Mexico. Um, I'm Stacy Timmins,
uh, as introduced, I'm the
associate director for
hydrogeology programs, which
includes the Aquifer mapping
program, the Water education
program, and the water data
initiative, which is collective
uh effort of multiple state
agencies convened at the Bureau
of Geology. Um, so I just want
to take 1 2nd to make a quick.
Plug that this is the last week
to sign up for the water
leader's education workshop,
which is in April in Silver
City. So I hope you all will
sign up. I will be sending
emails out this week as a last
call. Um, and it is free. It is
free for legislator legislators
to attend. We really want to
help you get educated about
water issues here in New Mexico,
um, particular southwest part,
this coming April 14th to 16th.
Um, so the aquifer mapping
program, I am talking to you
with regard to this particular
slide set for now, um, the one
with the New Mexico tech logo on
the front.
On slide 2, just to introduce
the aquifer mapping program. Um,
we are here for the state of New
Mexico, uh, at the State
Geologic survey. Our goal is to
characterize the quantity,
quality, and distribution of
groundwater across the state. We
use a variety of tools including
geologic mapping, geophysics,
hydrology, and chemistry to help
characterize our water
resources, um, here in New
Mexico, as you all know, we are
increasingly challenged for
water resources. Um, we need to
ensure we have safe.
Water, reliable water resources
for, especially for drinking
water in our communities and,
um, I think that is a
combination of conservation plus
alternative resources that we
can bring to bear to um
supplement and, and complement
our water portfolios.
So, bringing that to slide 3,
brackish water, just to kind of
set definitions for you,
brackish water is water that's a
little saltier than fresh. We
have arbitrarily called that at
about 1000 parts per million
total dissolved solids, parts
per million is the same in this
context as milligrams per liter,
so on the slides here, you'll
see a mixture of both. I
apologize that the units are
switched, but they'll, they mean
the same thing, parts per
million and milligrams per
liter.
Here in this context. And so,
total dissolved solids is just
the saltiness of the water, um,
as you get over 1000 parts per
million total dissolved solids.
It starts to taste a little
different and there can be um
scaling buildup on your
pipelines and on your glasses
and uh toilets, for example.
Um, so we characterize that as
brackish. Once you get um over
about 10,000 parts per million.
We call that saline. So we have
some different categories of
saltiness, um, seawater, for
example, is about 35,000 parts
per million total so solids,
much saltier. Um, so, brackish
water here in New Mexico has,
um, is basically just water
living within the rocks and as
it's within the rocks, it picks
up minerals of different
flavors, um, and so the longer
the water is in the sub
Surface, the more minerals it
can pick up. Um, and so the, and
the rock type really matters. So
knowing the saltier the rocks,
the, the more salt those waters
can pick up within them. So, um,
across New Mexico we have
different types of salty water.
Sometimes it's straight up
sodium chloride like you find on
your table salt, um, other
places in New Mexico, we see
other types of salt like calcium
sulfate. Uh, so I'll talk a
little bit more about that here
in a few slides.
Onto slide 4, which is the map
of the United States. Um, I just
want to highlight for you that
Brackenschwater is found across
the nation at different depths.
You can kind of pick out the
shape of New Mexico on the map
amongst all the blue, uh, you
can see that in some parts of
New Mexico, brackish water is
found less than 500 ft below the
surface. This is an estimated
depth map, um.
So, less than 500 ft in some
areas and greater or more likely
closer to 3000 ft in some other
parts of New Mexico. So we have
a wide variety of depths of
occurrence of brackish water,
and that's reflective of the,
the diverse geology that we have
across the state here. Um.
This map does not explain the
type of chemistry, so that type
of salt that's in the water is
not shown here. It also doesn't
really tell you anything about
how productive these rock units
are. So in some cases you can
find um
salty water at shallow depths in
a formation that isn't really
moving the water very well, so
it's um not gonna be a great
resource for brackish water.
Um, and this also doesn't tell
us anything about how these
waters or if they are recharged,
um.
The first there existing.
Um, slide 5 is
Uh, talking about some work that
we've done at the Bureau of
Geology back in the 2014 to 2016
range, we had some funding
available to us from the
environment department through
the drinking water bureau, and
through that project, uh, we
were able to compile a
substantial amount of work and
previous
data around the state to um
really try to characterize what
we know about brackish water
across the state. Um, the data
that we have available to us is
largely from, uh, drinking water
wells, domestic wells,
irrigation wells, uh, collected
from the USGS, the Environment
Department, and our agency as
well. And so we spent a lot of
time in those couple of years,
literally digitizing tables of
data so that we could try to
summarize for you what we know
about brackish water across the
state, and so that came out in
an open file report.
Um, the map that you see on the
slide here with blue and purple
and orange and red is a summary
map, not an aquifer map of those
brackish water, um, resources.
So in each of those regions, we
were able to compile the data
and do some just basic
evaluation of what the salinity
is, the brackishness of those
regions. And so, um, the areas
that are uh highlighted in blue
on average, are mostly fresh
waters, um, and they're, they're
in the little tables that.
To me are very hard to read. I
apologize, um, in the little
tables, there's a count of how
many records we had available in
each of those regions and what
the average total dissolved
salads are for those colored uh
matches.
And so blue is mostly
freshwater, purple are in the
brackish water range to 1000 to
3000 parts per million total
dissolved solids, so there's
some regions like the San Juan
Basin and the um raton basin
that have slightly saltier
waters on average than other
parts of the state.
Um, and then into the orange you
see um more just straight
brackish water, so that's, uh,
the two rows of basin and the
Roswell Basin. Those are in the
range of 3000 to 10,000 parts
per million total dissolved
solids.
And then red in the Capitan reef
is quite salty.
Um, so, as I said, this isn't
really a map of the aquifers,
just an average assessment of
what we had available. Also part
of that project is a study that
we did on the Tularosa Basin and
then a map that we built on the
web where anybody can go and
look and get more information on
uh water quality across the
state. So those are the three
products from that project, um.
Just to um kind of give you a
sense of where we have data
about our brackish water
resource and slideix has another
map for you with um a slightly
different color scale. Every
point that you see on the map
here has um brackish water and,
and that's a well location that
we have sampled information from
the salinity brackishness of
that water.
So, of, of the um
Entire state, all of the wells
that have ever been sampled, we
estimate there's about 2800
wells that have brackish water
across the state. So, it is
found across the state, um,
The brackish water occurs and,
and this is a representation of
where we've had um the ability
to sample and do some chemistry
analysis. Um, some of the work
that we've done, we have, um,
determined that several basins
are more likely to include
brackish water in part because
of the geology and in part
because of um the, the, the
water available in those
regions, so that's the
Albuquerque Basin, the San Juan
Basin, the Roswell Basin, the
Capitan Reef, Estancia Mesa, and
Tularossa basins all have some.
significant brackish water
expected to be found sometimes
at great depths.
Um, but in most cases, we need
to do some regionally specific
and focused studies to really
understand what those brackish
water resources are. And that
brings us to slide 7, the
Chiarosa basin. Wow, this is
again, uh the second product
that we built for that
environment department project.
Um, this project was again a
data compilation effort and we
were able to go out and collect
new samples to try to
characterize what's going on in
the Tularosa Basin in
particular, um, as they were,
uh, and still are considering.
Uh, a desal facility in that
location in A Roberto. So for
this study, um, we pulled
together a whole bunch of
different well samples. A lot of
them actually didn't have total
dissolved solids. They had a
sulfate measurement though, and
as many of you know, the white
sands at um the White Sands
National Monument are gypsum
sand, so that is calcium
sulfate. So that's the, the
predominant salt in this basin.
And so what we did was we found
any water sample that had a
sulfate measurement and then use
that as a proxy for total
dissolved solids to do a more
detailed analysis of, of the
Tularosa Basin and really try to
understand the salinity
brackishness of that region. And
so what we found is that in the
um what you can see on the maps
here is all draw your attention
to the um the green and the
yellow points. Those are the uh
brackish, slightly brackish to
brackish water range. So the
greens are the 1000 to 3000.
Total dissolved solids and then
the yellows are the um
3000 to 10,000 range.
So, um, in, as you're looking
just at the color scheme across
the map, you can see that
Alamogordo and Tularosa have a
lot of brackish water. There's a
lot of domestic and irrigation
wells in this area that are
currently using brackish water,
um, and some of the challenges
that come with that as we went
out and visited well knowers
there, and as many of you
probably heard, um, sometimes
this slightly salty water can
affect their animals. Um, I've
heard about dogs getting sick,
um, horses having trouble, um,
with this water and in one
particular.
in a well location right up by
um uh between tourists and Three
rivers, uh, the well owner told
us that water from this
particular world would not cook
her beans. She would soak them
and soak them and soak them, and
the beans would never softened
because of how salty this
particular water was and the
type of salt that it was.
So, um, it is an issue in this
region and there are a lot of
places that are already using to
let your brackish water, um, so
I think that the um the message
here is that uh using the data
that we have available, uh,
here, for example, in the Basin,
uh, there's, there's so much
that we can do, but there's also
a lot of gaps that we could
still continue to have. Most of
these laws are less than 400 ft
deep. So we're not seeing water
from deeper ranges for the most
part, um, so a lot of
So continued work needs to be
done to really understand our
regions of New Mexico and the,
the brackish water that we have
available. Um, there's a saying
that goes something like, you
always do what you've always
done, you'll always get what
you've always gotten, and I
think that really applies here
in terms of our, um, water
studies and that we do need to
kind of push our limits of
understanding and go beyond the
um domestic well debts to really
explore and understand what a
bracketsweater, um, options are.
So, um, on display date, just as
an example, um, I wanted to
highlight that a lot of the work
that we do for aquifer
characterization, um, is also
similar and can happen in
parallel while projects are
being um initiated or completed
towards treatment design, um,
of, of a desal facility. So the
kind of work that we do, um,
detailed geologic mapping and
hydrologic mapping, drilling
exploratory wells helps us
understand what's going on all
the way through the surface for
the freshwater and potentially
deep.
Um, brackish water resources
connecting what we know from
actual wells using geophysical
surveys really helps us piece
together the story. The wells
are just one snapshot through
that particular location using
geophysical surveys, we can kind
of read between those.
Um, water chemistry analysis,
including environmental tracers
so that we can really thoroughly
understand how or if um water is
being recharged and how or if
those waters are interacting
with freshwater or shallower um
aquifer resources. Uh,
additionally, hydraulic testing
needs to happen, so in any well,
um, we try to understand the
aquifer properties, how well
does that aquifer perform? You
have to run the well and pump
the water to see what that's
looking like. And so that's
also, um,
Part of our plan. Um, and then
additionally, any work, um, I
would say,
That we do, but certainly any
work that perhaps comes out of
um house Bill 137, where um
funding is coming from the
state,
and
according to the water Data Act,
that's currently in place, um,
the anything paid for by state
money should have data available
to the state. So that's also a
benefit to us if studies are
happening and funded by this,
that data should be available um
for continued characterization.
So, as um treatment facilities
perhaps are being planned.
There's a
number of steps which I think um
my colleague here, Robert Valley
will talk more about, um, as you
start to do projects, there's um
a lot of work that has to be
done for very site-specific
planning, and that includes um
data review and investigations,
modeling, exploratory drilling
and, and testing like I just
talked about aquifer testing,
um, designing the plant itself
and thinking about the waste
management is also tied to
similar to the kind of work we
do with hydrogeology. We really
want to understand what the
shallow resources are and
How, um, if there's a waste
stream potential um deeper units
that may be um good for
accepting that sort of um waste
from um D cell treatment.
And then water delivery system,
so all of those things happen at
the same time as planning
projects, um, for D cell
treatment.
are happening and they are
definitely in parallel, um, and,
and can happen at the same time
and also help us understand the
office of resources in more
detail, um.
So I just wanted to point that
out and um that's.
The last slide I have and I do
um include my email address if
you would like to reach out with
further questions.
Or for information about the
water leaders event coming up in
April.
Thank you.
Thank you. We're gonna have the
2nd presentation and then we all
have time for questions and
comments, but please, Mister
Fowley, right? Yes, madam Chair,
um.
Members of the committee, Madam
Chair, I'm Robert Fowley. I'm
from Jacobs Engineering in
Albuquerque. Pleasure to speak
with you today. Um, I've been
working on brackish water
projects in New Mexico and West.
16 years. Um, I've worked on a
number of projects in New
Mexico, um, the Amogordo desal
plant, New Mexico's first
municipal plant. I worked on the
expansion and evaluations of the
Kay Bailey Hutchinson plant over
in El Paso, which is an integral
part of their water supply
portfolio, um, a number of
feasibility studies within New
Mexico down south in the
Albuquerque area and my
presentation today, I wanted to
Give you an idea of what is
involved with brackish water
treatment with a focus on the
fact that it is a common
practice that the processes that
are used are time tested,
they're being used across the
border in El Paso and A Gordo
and maybe take away some of the
mystery around what could be
going on with brackish water
treatment.
So it was my colleague Stacy had
pointed out brackish water is
defined as being watered with a
TDS above 1000 mg per liter. To
give you an idea of what that
means in Albuquerque, their
water is about 250 to 300 mg per
liter TDS. It's good water, um,
a little on the hard side, but
that's not uncommon for
groundwater in New Mexico.
Um, in Almogordo, their law lose
wells, which are not.
Part of the brackish water basin
states is talking about, there
are about 1200 to 1300 mg per
liter. They're, they're salty.
And what they do is they take
that water and they mix it with
surface water that comes from
Benito Lake surface water
supply. They reduced the TDS
down to around 800 mg per liter
and put it into the system.
Um, the water does have a little
bit of that salty taste where.
Feels like you can drink a lot
of it and still have the salt,
that's, that's a function of the
chloride, the sulfates, the
items that are in it.
Down south, I have a client in
southern New Mexico when I
started working with them, their
wells were at about 700 to 800
mg per liter. Currently, the new
wells we drilled for them are
over 1000.
1200 to 13,000 mg per liter. So
what we're seeing is that the
good water that was in the upper
part of the aquifer is now being
replaced by the less good water
that is migrating up from the
aquifer as they're pumping, so.
They do have a slightly brackish
situation which does cause some
complaints from the customers
about taste.
In terms of industries that come
in, they do have some concerns
about the TDS because it impacts
cooling towers, manufacturing
processes, things like that.
However, when it comes to
treating it,
To reduce the TDS technology for
that is using reverse osmosis,
and I'm sure many of you have
heard reverse osmosis being used
for seawater treatment, Florida,
California all have massive
desalination plants for seawater
treatment. For brackish water
treatment, the type of it is an
aro membrane, but it's
specifically designed for a
reduced TDS level.
And so a membrane treatment.
is really just another
It's another material that is
useful for for filtration. And
what I often like to do is use
the swimming pool filter
analogy.
Um, we've probably all seen a
filter at neighbors swimming
pool, you might have one
yourself.
It's a pressure vessel and side
of it is a filter media, usually
sound, sometimes anthracite and
sand removes all the impurities
from the water and then you send
it back out into the pool.
A reverse osmosis membrane is a
tightly wound membrane with very
small openings in it, and those
small openings are what enable.
TBS, the bad stuff to be removed
and it removes everything.
Um, you end up with a very pure
water source that comes out of
an RO membrane.
Um, so basically distilled
water.
Contaminants are sent off in a
stream called concentrate.
And the the good water, which is
called permeate.
That is typically then blended
quite often with the original
water stream to bring the
chemistry back up again, raise
the pH, add a little bit more of
some of those things that we're
missing is drinking distilled
water is really not good and the
pH is around 4, so we don't want
to touch that.
So
And in this first slide, I
define what those things are,
permeate and concentrate.
Treatment of brackish water. I'm
fond of saying is easy. We know
what we're gonna do. We're going
to do reverse osmosis. Sometimes
we have to do a little bit of
pre-treatment to reduce silica
contaminants that may impact the
performance of the reverse
osmosis membrane.
But we, for all intents and
purposes, we know what we're
going to do.
The biggest challenge with
reverse osmosis treatment in
brackish water is what you do
with the concentrate or the
liquid waste product.
There are 3
common methods of waste
disposal.
Evaporation ponds where you put
it in a big double line pond
with lead detection and
monitoring wells around it, and
you simply let the sun and the
wind do their trick. What you're
left with at the end is a salt
is salt at the bottom of the
pond, which can then be removed
and then halt to the landfill.
The other way of doing it, and
this is what El Paso does. They
do deep well injection, and they
have a 230 23 mile long pipeline
where they pumped their
concentrate to deep wells close
to the Texas, New Mexico border,
and they are pumped way down
deep.
Into a BRCA shocker that does
not have any chance of polluting
any aquifers above it.
Um, the other way of doing it,
and believe it or not, sanitary
sewer disposal of brackish water
is possible with some control,
um, you're not injecting it as
one big slug because wastewater
plants are not designed to
remove TBS or for biological
purposes, but sanitary sewer is
a possibility and in fact in
Fabens, Texas, where I designed
a 1 million gallon a day
treatment plant. That's exactly
what we do. We send it to their
wastewater treatment plan.
Soastasia had sent her
presentation, brackish water
treatment facilities are
typically used to treat water
from a deeper aquifer, such as
wells and the Tularosa Basin,
which are fairly deep or it can
be shallow walking for like I
was describing before with the
water quality has slowly
degraded over the years.
Um, I think an important concept
that
We need to remember that
brackish water treatment
facilities are not intended to
be the only source of water for
a municipality or a community.
They are intended to be a
supplemental water source. In
other words, you are, if you're
on surface water or like surface
water is a good example. If
surface water supplies are
running low because of lack of
snow pack.
Then you could rely on your
brackish water supply to
supplement your source.
You can blend it and then when
surface water is back again,
then you can go back to doing
bra, going back to your old
water supply.
An example of this is how El
Paso was operating the K Bailey
Hutchinson plant over the years.
For years they ran 1 or 2 skids
and then in 2012, when they had
serious restrictions on water
that was sent in the Rio Grande.
They had to operate Kay Bailey
Hutchinson for the first time at
full capacity, primarily because
there was no water in the river
and El Paso does have surface
water plants to treat water from
the river.
They back off when they don't
need it. They crank it up when
they do need it, and that's
typically what you see for a
community or a utility that has
a brackish water treatment
facility.
As I had noted previously,
Almogordo has a brackish water
treatment plant, Billy
Hutchinson, Fabins. There's a
brackish water plant at the
Route 66 casino, primarily to
treat groundwater that was not
very good. So it is being used
in New Mexico, um, Anthony, New
Mexico was using RO membranes to
do nitrate removal. Like I said,
nitrate RO will remove pretty
much everything. So it's not,
it's a good method.
And it's very common.
In terms of browish water
regulation on the projects I've
worked on the New Mexico
Environment Department has a
huge role, as does the Office of
the State Engineer and any type
of brackish water treatment
project.
Drinking water bureau is
actively involved with anything
related to brackish water being
used for drinking water.
Um
They asked me EPA drinking water
standards, um,
They have a lot of oversight and
a lot of input to verify that
the processes are.
Meeting drinking water
standards.
Key element of brackish water
treatment that is before we do a
big full scale plant. We do
pilot testing and enemyD will
require that.
Pilot testing is a smaller scale
treatment process where we're
essentially verifying the
treatment parameters, chemical
addition, pre-treatment
requirements, recovery, which is
how much water we are producing.
From an oral treatment plant.
It's not 100%.
Where the water goes in is how
much you get out. Typically,
it's 80% of the water you put in
is what's going to be produced
for drinking water, the other
20% is waste. Sometimes we can
get it up to 83 to 85, but
typically 80% is a good rule of
thumb to use.
Also, when it comes to
discharging of ways.
Doing an evaporation pond, which
is very common for New Mexico.
We have lots of open land. We
have wind, we have sun. If we're
doing an evaporation pond the
groundwater quality Bureau will
be regulating that groundwater
discharge permit.
Um, there's public input, public
hearings, the standards for
designing a evaporation pond for
concentrate disposal, they're
very restrictive, not onerous.
They are very it's, you can meet
those requirements, but it is
well regulated and very well
understood.
well injection, that's something
a little different. Uh, that has
not been done in New Mexico for
brackish water treatment. It
requires a hydrogeologic study
requires a demonstration test.
Requires identifying an aquifer
that's not going to impact an
upper aquifer. It's something
that can be done but requires a
number of years and a lot of
study before you can implement
it.
Typically, I'm looking at
evaporation ponds is the first
order, sanitary sewer, a
combination of, of the two if we
can do it. And deep well
injection, if we really need to.
So the last slides that I have
in this presentation are some
pictures, and I always think a
picture is worth 1000 words and
I think I've said more than 1000
words in the time I've been
speaking. So the first slide on
number 5, this is Almogordo's
desal plant, and this is what I
would like to call a process
flow diagram.
And starting at the left hand
side of the of the
And up in the upper left corner,
we start with the brackish water
well and then we just follow
along the lines as it sends the
water to the treatment plant.
Which we divide, it's a 1
million gallon a day plant with
two half a million gallons a day
RO skids gives them flexibility
to treat a smaller amount or a
larger amount or take one skid
down for cleaning and operation
and operate the other one.
The waste product then follows
over.
Alms down and then goes over to
an evaporation pond.
Uh, we did evaporation ponds in
Almogordo. They had a lot of
land in which to use deep oil
injection was not possible, so
that's the method we used.
Um, down at the bottom we have
what they call clean and place
tanks. This is so you can clean
the oral membranes.
And we use permeate from the
process, citric acid to clean
the scaling of the membranes.
Typical and needed for any type
of brackish water treatment.
The finished water here, what we
did is we diverted a small
amount of the raw water coming
in and then blended it with the
treated water so that we could
send 100 million gallons a day.
With 800 mg per liter TDS to a
finished water tank and then we
pump it to one of their main um
drinking water reservoirs by
their surplus water plant, and
that's where they introduce it
to the system.
Um, very straightforward system
um.
First time we operated it, I was
very, very happy that it worked
exactly as we planned.
Um, notable thing about
Almogordo, it does not require
pumps to drive the treatment
process. RO processes require
pumping, that's where the big
energy cost is to overcome
osmotic pressure. In other
words, we need to pump it
through the membranes in order
for the process to happen.
He and Almoordo, there was a 250
ft elevation difference between
where the brackish water well is
located and where the plant was
located, so the head or the
available elevation and pressure
drives that process. And the
first time we ran it, um, we're
pushing through almost 100 PSI
of pressure to go through that
process, so it works and a lot
of those energy costs that you
sometimes see, which they, yes,
they are there, but they're not
as.
Great as they were before.
For this type of a plant are
just not there.
The other picture, if I'd like
to show you, this is the one
with the ponds with the
mountains in the background.
This is the evaporation pond for
Alagordo. Um, I like this
picture. It was a beautiful day,
and you can see water entering
into the evaporation pond. This
is a 5.6 acre pond, it's huge.
Um, it was designed to hold
about 4 months' worth of waste
product generated from
Almogordo's treatment plant.
Alamogordo's treatment plan is
designed to be a peaking plant,
in other words, to provide water
during the summer when their
demands are the highest. It's
not designed to run all year
long.
The other picture I have here of
the silver piping. This is the
piping inside the treatment
plant and I wanted to show this
to you just so you can see what
the piping layout looks like.
This is all stainless steel
pipe, um, brackish water tends
to be corrosive. That's why we
use stainless steel.
Those horizontal.
Objects that you see to the
right of the picture, those are
cartridge filters, and those are
used to remove suspended solids
that are inside that are still
in the water and it keeps the RO
membranes from clogging.
The last thing in the picture,
this, this is what an RO
membrane skin looks like.
This one can treat a half a
million gallons a day. Uh, you
can see the white PVC pipes,
those are called pressure
vessels. That's where the water
goes in and raw water goes in
one end and treated water comes
out the other end, and then
there's a pipe that captures the
waste product and conveys where
it needs to go.
blue water up on top is finished
water, and that is the treated
water that is being sent to the
system.
That concludes my presentation
and Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
time. Um, with the time
remaining, um, be happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you very much for that.
Um, I think that when we receive
whatever bill we're receiving
from the house.
This will help prepare us.
So questions, comments, we'll
start with Senator Townsend.
Thank you.
Um, pretty interesting stuff.
Um, half a million gallons a day
through one membrane. What does
that cost about round numbers.
I know it very good.
Depending on the inputs, but
Ed Amouro of that one.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, um, are you asking
what the construction cost is
operational costs.
So I can give you both.
Um
Because I think both, both will
be helpful. A lot of times the
construction costs tends to be
the number that comes up, um.
The Almogordo desal plant when
it was constructed in 2017 to
2019 cost $10 million for the
entire treatment plant, the
evaporation pond, all of the
All the components on site.
Uh, right now with inflation
with market factors. We're
looking at about 10 $10 a
gallon.
Just for the treatment
components. So 1 million gallons
a day just for the treatment
plant would be about 10 million.
I would push it up with all the
components now to probably 15 to
$20 million.
1 million gallon a day plant for
all the treatment facilities. So
say that again.
And
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, what, what I'm saying
is it's about $20 a gallon.
For a construction cost for a
for a reverse osmosis treatment
plant.
Operation or construction.
That's true,
yeah.
Operational costs.
Can vary depending on how often
the plant is running.
Um
I would have to go off the top
of my head on this one.
Um
In fact, I would ask if I could
get back to you on an
operational.
I, but I can't tell you
proportionally, it is a more
expensive operational process,
then the surface water
treatment.
Sure, that makes sense, but I
would like to give you accurate
numbers on that. And if with all
with your permission, I'd like
to get back to you with those
costs.
question
there.
Right
Are all of the constituents that
you're trying to remove during
To get to a
8
drinking water standard.
Do they all blend linearly or, I
mean,
Are are they a one on one deal
or
Is there a wild constituents
that you have to worry about.
a mo person or some other place.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
so with the blank, if I
understand your question, you're
talking about blending. Yes,
well, you're blending that's how
that works, yes, exactly. So it
is a one for one,
the only constituent that is
not, that does not work that way
and it's not so much a
constituents, but it's an
important factor is pH.
It doesn't quite work that way.
Thank you very much.
Um, thank you. I just have the
Senator Townsend on the list. Is
there anyone else?
Senator Rio and Senator Pope.
Madam, sir, thank you very much.
I would like, I think maybe
going to Miss Timmons does this
question. I'm not sure.
I, I'd like to know the depth of
the two of the wells in the
Tularosa basin, approximately
depth.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, the
average depth, the whales that
we looked at were about most of
the private domestic wells and
irrigation wells were in the
range of 400 ft or shallower.
OK. There are some deep, deeper
wells though, yes. I add a
little bit to that, uh, madam
chair, uh, Senator Azel, the
Almaordo brackish water well is
over 1000 ft deep.
OK.
All right, oh.
You said the domestic whales
were around 400 ft.
Thank you very much.
Senator Scott
Senator Scott
Thank you, Madam Chair, I just
looked up our cost per gallon.
And got 3 to 10 cents.
In operating costs of that.
OK
Madam Chad Senator Scott, it
could be, I would, I would need
to see the numbers and how they
calculated something like that.
But I do think, I do think that
is in the ballpark.
And when you're
in this uh
Concentrate
Into wastewater systems.
Basically
Madam Chair, Mr. Valley, the
only thing you can do there is
dilute that concentrate.
With a lot of influent.
To bring those PDS numbers down
to make them.
Low enough to put in the river.
It
Uh, Madam chair, Senator Scott.
Yes, to the aspect of we need a
lot of water, a lot of effluent
to put that concentrate into and
in fact,
We did that in Almogordo
primarily because Almogordo does
reuse.
They treat their, they use their
Treated wastewater for
irrigation.
Had there been, had they been
discharging to a water body like
a stream or a river.
The stream of the river will
have a permit restricting.
the constituents that can go
into that body of water. Most of
those NPDES discharge permits
will have a restriction on TBS
and other constituents, and I
would not, if I was designing
and you were going to a river
stream, I would not do any kind
of sanitary sewer.
Disposal
Uh, a lot depends on where the
effluent is going and what it's
being used for after it's
treated.
And Madam Chair and Mister
Valley.
I guess my last question was
You only get
Even starting with a
With a 1000 remain in water.
You only get a 5 to 1 reduction.
Is that accurate?
Uh,
Madam Chair, um, Senator Scott,
no, we get
Let me think about this.
No, actually, it's a much lower.
So, so the, the permeate that
comes out of an oral plant. So
we, it's like an Almagor where
we start with 2500 mg per liter.
The permeate that comes out is
at 50 mg per liter. It's very,
very low.
So you do get a very, you get a
very extensive reduction in TDS
as well as chlorides and all of
the other constituents that you
have in the water. So you do get
a very
cure, you get a much purer water
source than what you had before.
Oh, OK, Madam Chair and Mr.
Fowley.
If I put 100 gallons of water
through that system.
How much permeate do I get and
how much concentrate do I get?
I was.
Madam chair, Senator Scott, you
will get 80 gallons of permeate.
You will get 20 gallons of
waste.
Right
But that was the right show I
was looking for. Yes, yes, all
right.
80 8020 is.
of thumb.
Even if 1000 ppm, yes.
Yes, in fact, at 1000 1000 mg
per liter, it is very likely you
could get a much higher.
Rate of recovery because the
treatment, you're not as you're
not removing as much.
Constituents
So you could be pushing 85, 87%
recovery on something like that.
Recovery, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Scott, members of the
committee, is really a function
of how
Of what the TDS and the water is
and what what other constituents
you may have in there that could
impact treatment. So I use 80/20
as a good rule of thumb, but if
you're trying to treat something
that's like 1000 1200 mg per
liter, you're gonna get a lot,
you're gonna get a lot more
water out of that than you would
out of a 2500 mg per liter
water. I would do, uh, Madam
Chair and Mr.alliel would have
expected that ratio.
To be much, much.
Archer
Oh
Because if you're starting with
100,000 parts per million.
Oil field produced one.
You really got some issues to.
Yes, madam chair, um, Senator
Scott.
Yes, you do, um, trying to treat
that 100,000 mg per liter water
wherever it would may come from,
that is a huge challenge and you
would not get.
Very large recoveries out of
something that that that
contaminated with that high of
TBS. Um, it's a huge challenge
to give you, to give you an
example, seawater treatment
plants that are in the 300 to
35,000 recovery on something
like that is usually about 50 to
60%.
So, Madam Chair, Mr. Valley.
Have you had
Can you compare this with
distillation.
Or cryogenic processes that
might produce the same end
results.
To see
If those might be more
appropriate in
by tedious Madam chair, I'm
Senator Scott. I, I do not know
much about the chirogenic
process that you mentioned, um,
I do know a little bit about the
distillation process.
But my area of expertise is
primarily been in municipal
drinking water.
And so distillation processes
and I would imagine chirogenic.
Um, are potentially using more
of an industrial type of
application.
Uh, with, with probably not the
intended goal of providing water
for drinking or for consumption.
Um, I have had the opportunity
over the past few years to get
involved in some industrial
projects that were coming to New
Mexico that were requiring ultra
pure water sources, they are
typically using reverse osmosis
to try to get that to a very
pure level that I have seen
distillation process is used,
especially for trying to dispose
of the concentrate.
So I, I have typically seen
those processes used more for
either recovering additional
water or for trying to get rid
of the concentrate.
So I, I apologize, I can't.
be more knowledgeably about
those two processes.
So last question, Madam Chair,
Mr. Valley.
If not for the hideous cost.
In
With
Purifying 100,000.
There's no reason.
With a distillation.
Or
Perhaps cryogenic process.
There's no reason why that water
wouldn't be dislike.
fresh one.
I
Uh, Adam chair, Senator Scott, I
I apologize, I'm not.
Could you, could you restate the
question? I
Uh, Madam Chair and Mr. Crowley,
it's been represented that
water.
Purified
It's been attached to oil field
operations is unsuitable for use
regardless.
Of the process used to purify
that the fresh water.
And, uh, I have long held that
The barrier there is not
technological.
But economic.
Because the water at the end of
a purification process would be
suitable for use to grow crops.
Chairs Senator Scott, thank you
for the clarification. So I
would agree with you, um, the
cost of treating water that
With that type of TBS in it.
is extremely high, um,
And in is probably not being
intended for something like.
A drinking water process or
potentially even for irrigation
of crops. I do, I do think
In my experience with treating
The treating water that is
Very contaminated. You get to a
point where
The treatment technologies, the
volumes that you're treating,
the contaminants that are there,
it becomes very uneconomical.
Um, it, it's, it's very
challenging to treat it. There's
a waste product that will come
of it, and it, it just becomes a
very difficult situation.
Uh, center stock, we need to
move to the other people on the
list. That's all. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I have
Senator Pope and Senator Sidia
Lopez, Senator Pope, thank you,
Madam Chairman, Madam Chair, um,
thank you, Director Timmons, um,
The water
time. I think these questions
are more
foully, but you're welcome.
Um
We didn't discuss some of the
materials that are probably in
the brackish water radium,
possibly ringing 40. Can you
talk a little bit about that and
is there a way to kind of make
sure that this is the break is
one.
Madam Sheriff sending the Pope,
so the the radioucleides that
you are talking about would be
removed through the RO process.
Um, there would not be a problem
with that. What if we, if we did
detect that there were large
concentrations.
Of radionuclides in there, we
would have to take a look
though.
At what the constituents would
be in the waste product. Um,
quite often when you're doing.
radionuclei treatment like
uranium treatment, which there
are a few systems in New Mexico.
The waste that comes out of that
is not something that you can
just put in the landfill, you've
got to send it to.
Um, I've a place for special
handling.
From a, from a treatment
standpoint, we'll remove it. We
would just have to look really
hard at what's happening with
the concentrations and the
waste.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you for the response. So are you
saying that it's actually food
before.
Filter.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Pope, excuse me.
Um, yes, the, the radionuclides
can be removed prior to
treatment through a
pre-treatment process if needed,
or they will be removed through
the RO membranes.
Yes
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Next
question, have we identified any
other materials, all it is.
In Mexico has been sacrificed
them.
No
a lot of things.
They're testing
Um
and gas industry with a lot.
racing
Solutions that we don't even
know that are proprietary.
Do we know about that and their.
B
Madam Cha Senator Pope.
In my experience, I have not
encountered any of those
constituents in any of the
aquifers or projects that I have
worked on in the states and I've
done projects from Ratone to
Albuquerque to Santa Teresa to
Elmo Gordo, and if not
encountered any of that in a
drinking water aquifer.
Thank you, Madam Chair for the
answer.
I think this is something that's
going to, I just want.
That were
That the waters right now.
Um
Madam Cha next, I want to talk
about the disposal. So going
back to what we talked about.
Now it's going
And
Happy to hear you say that.
But
Um, are we?
Some of these materials and some
of these other
On it.
answered.
Things that could still be
hazardous.
drying in a pool and salt.
Are we they don't just.
to
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Pope, a
good question.
So it goes and and I like to
start out the answer by going
back to what my colleague was
talking about with
pilot testing and studies and
characterizing the water source
before we even get to the point
where we're considering
pilot testing and studies and
characterizing the water source
before we even get to the point
where we're
using it as a water source for
potable water or even an
industrial purpose.
So
We would be doing a lot, so.
For example, um, I've worked, I
was working on a project out in
the Santa Teresa area or a
brackish water aquifer has been
identified. However, the aquifer
properties such as how much
water is in there, with the
constituents are, how much water
can be produced over a certain
period of time.
All of that is unknown. So
before we even get to the point
of wanting to try to treat this.
We've got to characterize what's
there and that would include
extensive testing on the
constituents that are in the
water, including looking at
radionucleides.
Um
Arsenic, other things that would
impact a potential use primarily
for potable water.
For a system, for instance, in
Almogordo or maybe one of my
clients down in Santa Teresa,
where you already have a
well-known.
Audible water aquifer, we're
still going to do a lot of water
characterization, but it's just
verifying that the constituents
that we expected are there and
verifying that we don't see
anything like the radio.
guides or any other potential
contaminants are there. In
short, we do a lot of testing, a
lot of characterization before
we even.
Determine if that water can be
used and if it can't, um, we
won't pursue.
A treatment project.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the answer. That's an
important point.
I think we talk about.
We practice water.
characterizing it.
it
Well, um,
Characterized
Thank you, Madam Chair for the
question. Madam Chair, Senator
Pope, could I add just one
little aspect to this. So I'd
mentioned the Almogordo project,
that, that project took 11 years
to get to the point of study to
the point where they actually
just started designing the
treatment plant.
There were numerous steps that
went along with identifying
where the wells were located,
characterizing um, looking at
drawdowns, impacts to other
people in the area,
environmental concerns, there
are a lot of steps that go into
doing a project like this.
If a project were to come about
in the next few years, I would
hope it wouldn't take 11 years
to do it, but we're talking
something that's, you know, 23
years before you actually get to
the point where we know this is
what we're going to do.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Sah
Lopez, and she's gonna be the
last person to ask questions and
we're gonna finish that last
Senate memorial. And Sadi Lopez.
Thank you. I, I just have a
couple of questions. That pre
pre-treatment process for
radionucleides, what is that?
Oh, so there's a couple of
processes you can use, um.
There's a, there's a drinking
water process called ion
exchange.
Where we target.
Those particular radionuclides
and we
Put it resin into a filter
vessel and then we remove the
radionucleides, they stay with
the filter material and
them clean water goes out, and
then eventually when the resin
is exhausted, you take that and
you call it to a
was a Torm landfill that will
take radionuclei waste.
get that one right?
Yeah, Tor, there's one in Utah.
So it goes to a special place
where they will take radioactive
waste.
Great, um, and then, um, what is
the role of the state engineer
in all of this, because I know
they have jurisdiction over
shallow wealth.
Shello
brackish water
But not deeper water.
My experience with the state
engineer, and I'm sorry,
madam chair.
Sorry about that. um.
My experience with a state
engineer is on, on the, on the
brackish water projects has been
with with with.
walls from the aquifer, the
studies showing what water is in
the aquifer.
Uh, how much you can take and,
and the permitting surrounding
the walls. In addition, with
monitoring wells to check the
impacts of
Taking water from that aquifer
on surrounding areas, things
like that.
Um
They're, they're quite involved
with these types of projects
along with the
Environment Department.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
good to hear. That's all I have.
Thank you. Um, I would like to
thank both of you for taking the
time to come up very quickly to
the committee to have this
discussion, uh, we really
appreciate it and it will
prepare us for the work later
this week.
Thank you. Thank you for the
members, uh, we're gonna keep
going on this memorial, see how
far we can get here are 2
certificates on the um
Senate floor.
And uh one is on gifted and I
don't know what the other one
wanted it is if we can maintain
a quorum, great, if not, we will
operate in a subcommittee and do
a final vote on our next
committee.
Just to kind of prepare you for
the rest of the week.
There are 5 bills on Thursday of
um house bills, there are 5
bills on Saturday.
We will have breakfast on
Saturday. I'm gonna ask the
ranking member and the vice
chair to look at the bills for
each of those days.
See if there's anything that can
move quickly and we'll move it
to the top and move it on. If
not, we'll just have a regular
agenda.
So after this meeting we'll
provide that.
So Senator Hamlin, you're you're
doing Senate Memorial 3. Yes,
Madam Chair and committee, I am.
Um, there is uh an amendment
that we would like to bring into
this. If you'd like me to
discuss the bill first and then
discuss the amendment, I can do
so. Does everyone have the
amendment. It's 0.231768.1.
And I'm sure I move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
So please go ahead and explain.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And so
when we talk about the
amendment, this bill was
presented in rules, um, and
there was some great discussions
from uh public testimony about
including other groups, uh, that
just weren't thought of to be
part of this conversation
initially when this bill was
drafted. And so, um, the two
elements of the amendment are
first after jointly insert and
consultation with
representatives from soil and
water conservation districts,
the Association Farmers and
ranchers, because the public
testimony was fabulous in terms
of
Demonstrating the other groups
and, and, and, uh, and, and
folks were affected by uh the
American uh Northern Beaver, and
then the other one is just to
switch out which, uh, after
which to insert the word other.
And that's the only two aspects
of this, this amendment, Madam
Chair. OK, so we're having
discussion questions, comments
only on this amendment.
Is there any issue with the
amendment?
To include
These groups
OK, so could I have a motion?
Man sure I move the amendment.
I'll second.
OK, is there anyone who wishes
to vote no on the amendment.
So the secretary is going to
show those present voting yes on
the amendment only.
Back to the bill, Senator,
I'm sorry, it's a memorial
Senate Memorial Reness. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So Senate
Memorial 3 asks the Department
of Game and Fish, the Forestry
division of the Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources
Department, the Mexico
Department of Agriculture, the
New Mexico Environment
Department and the state land
Office to work jointly on a
statewide beaver management plan
and present their findings to
the appropriate legislative
committee or committees by
October 1st of this year.
The beaver ponds and their
associated Wetlands Act is
contaminate the act as
contaminant sinks, uh, sinks and
filters enhancing downstream
water quality and during an
extended periods of drought,
beaver ponds and their
associated wetlands greatly
enhanced the resiliency of
riparian zones, including
riverine plant communities and
fish and wildlife populations.
However, the Department of Game
and Fish includes the American
Beaver on its list of species of
greatest conservation need in
the draft of the 2025 State
Wildlife Action Plan because it
is a keystone species with an
important impact on the
environment and is threatened by
climate change and declining
populations. Just to give you a
little history on this in
Senator Townsend's already heard
this once before, but in 2014,
then Senator Keller and Senator
Gonzalez introduced Senate
Memorial 4, which is identical
to this, except for the data
report to.
an interim committee is due.
Senate Memorial for at the time
passed the Senate and was
signed, but uh in the previous
administration, it wasn't
signed, so a plan wasn't
developed. So the idea is, is to
go ahead and make sure that this
plan uh happens uh when we had
public comment and rules. There
were several groups including
the, the soil and Water
Conservation District, uh, who
were who had expressed concern
about making sure that this
moves forward just because of
the impacts that beavers have on
their uh their areas, especially
around rivers. And so
At this point, Madam Chair, I
welcome public comment and then
questions from the committee.
Thank you very much. So, is
there anybody in this audience
who supports
This bill is twice amended.
OK, 1234567. Is there anybody
online supporting this? No one.
Is there anyone in the audience
opposing
This
Memorial.
So if the groups who are
supporting could just stand up,
come up, tell us your name, and
if you represent a group, not a
long statement we're moving, we
have the floor that we have to
go to.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Gillian
Joyce. I'm representing Rocky
Mountain Farmers Union. We are
very grateful for the sponsors,
uh, including agriculture and
this, this is going to be very
important. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Carlos Matuis. I am
with Green Latinos. I thank
Senator Hamblin and we
definitely do support this
memorial. Thank you.
Thank you. My name is Stephen
Fry, and I'm with Amigos Bravos
and a member of the Mexico
Beaver Project. I also want to
thank the senator for bringing
this forward and we strongly
support this.
My name is Kim Lagan on behalf
of Mescalerapache Tribe, we
support this memorial, and I
would just encourage the state
to develop a tribal
collaboration plan so that
everybody is included. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Sky Devore and
I am a private citizen and
beaver enthusiast, and I support
this memorial.
Thank you. Good morning, Chair,
Senators. My name is Chris
Smith. I'm a registered lobbyist
for Wild Earth Guardians and
part of the New Mexico Beaver
Project, We strongly support
this, and I would just add to
the benefits that Senator
Hamblin listed uh beavers are
proven to also mitigate wildfire
risks and catastrophic
wildfires, which is increasingly
important in our state. So,
please pass this memorial.
Thanks. Thank you. Now I wanna
make sure, is there anyone in
the audience who's opposed to
this amendment or to this Senate
memorial.
has twice, OK, there was nobody
online, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, I let this thing get
out of.
rules on a unanimous motion that
I was uh
Smiling about the contents and
not.
And attention to the motion.
There
Would you help me again.
Much appropriation is 82.
Madam chair and senator, I can.
Leave it's 2 million, it is
in-house Bill 2. There is an
appropriation for that. I, I
don't remember. I it seems like
I
For some reason my memory is
that it was 3.5 million, but I
don't remember what it is, but
Do you know
Just out of curiosity, I mean.
These.
Species, beavers are we trying
to
Protect or work on or study. I
mean, do you know what the
population is currently in New
Mexico, Madam Chair, I do not. I
think that's why this is so
important because this was
brought forth in 2014 and
nothing happened, so I do think
it's something that's it's going
to have a great deal of impact.
I appreciate, I appreciate you
bringing the bill forward, but
Madam Chair.
Don't make a unanimous consent
because it.
Yeah
Because this
So everybody knows. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um
Other questions, yes, senators
so.
Me to very fast, Senator Hamlet,
whenever you say that the game
of fish is going to be involved.
I know that they have ample
money, so would that
appropriation.
Not being utilized through the
game of this department instead
of a separate appropriation and
House Bill 2.
Madam Chair, that's a very good
question. Um, I would expect
that that appropriation is to
really work on gathering all of
the groups that I've mentioned,
and I can go back and do that
again if you'd like. Um, I, I
don't know if
the Department of Game and fish
is going to be the sole
instigator of that. I think it's
a collective group of people
getting together to to work on
the study and the path forward.
Madam chair, um,
We're also asking the forestry
division energy minerals and
natural resources and state land
office, and I think all three of
those departments do have
sufficient funding there.
Uh, I understand what you're
trying to do here, but
Damn, that's a whole lot of
money. That was aon y'all. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
For you
Was it
Wow
I only use 3, OK? You got a
4-star rating, madam chair.
Thank you. Thank you.
Anyone else
Is there a motion on the
memorial?
Madam Chair, I move a do pass on
Senate Memorial 3 as you.
There is a motion and a second.
Could the secretary please call
the vote.
Sorry, it was Senator Pope as
amended Senator Pope and then
Senator Charlie.
Santo Cervantes excused Senator
Charlie.
Charlie a center.
No, Senator Hamblin, Senator
Hamblin, yes, Senator Pope.
Yes. And the Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
And Scott, no, Senator Townsend.
The towns in Nome.
Lopez.
Excuse centered uponics, yes,
there's the phonics, yes.
I a
By a 4 to 3 vote, you have a due
pass on your bill or on your
memorial as amended here. Thank
you, Madam Chair Vivala Bieber.
Thank you. And uh as I
mentioned, I'll provide the list
of bills to the ranking member
and the vice chair to go over
for the next 2 meetings. Thank
you.
