Please come in your efforts.
One.
Let's start in subcommittee one
two three four we know we're
Senators souls Senator souls is
in a meeting for a few minutes
we'll start as a subcommittee
which means we cannot take a
vote until we have a full
committee present but my other
members usually or always come
so we'll be full soon okay so
please proceed thank you madam
chair thank you Committee
members today I'm presenting
okay just a minute for the
people on the web in the zoom we
are now on committee substitute
for house bill ninety five
renewable energy office in the
State Land Office with the
Representative Lujan in Sarnia
please proceed.
Thank you madam chair and with
that I'll just give a brief
introduction of the bill what it
does the purpose of the bill is
in twenty twenty nineteen
commissioner Garcia Richard
established the state land
office's first ever Office of
renewable energy this
legislation is aimed at
institutionalizing this function
and its successful efforts to
advance renewable energy.
what statutory changes the bill
makes a bill at a new section of
law to chapter nineteen which
covers a State Land Office of
formally establishes an office
of renewable energy at the
agency and specifically the bill
provides the commissioner
language the commissioner shall
establish and maintain a
renewable energy office to
advance the production and
development of renewable energy
and with that I'll have my
expert witness introduce
himself.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity here today I'm soon
lay Stewart deputy commissioner
of operations at the State Land
Office hang on one second can
they hear him on the web.
If not we're gonna have you do
the hand held.
Okay so you're fine so far.
All.
I to speak up that's better.
so just wanted to highlight a
couple of things this is a very
straightforward bill as the
representative I stated it
basically requires the land
office to maintain an office of
renewable energy we're trying to
ensure for the future that that
capacity it remains we have had
tremendous success in terms of
both revenue generation and
clean energy we've got thirty
nine projects on state trust
land right now we just had a
record year making over twelve
million dollars
it from these projects and we
really want to build on the
momentum so with that be happy
to answer any questions the
committee we have thank you
madam chair.
Thank you let's go to the
audience is there anyone here to
support this bill.
Okay we have a couple is there
anybody here to oppose this
bill.
Is there anyone online
supporting we have three people
online supporting and no
opposition so let's hear from
two members of the audience if
you please come to the middle.
To talk about your support.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee.
It is working with the family
that is.
Now it's working yes Morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Marco
Gonzalez and I'm the registered
lobbyists for both pattern
energy and and energy pattern
energy and and energy are doing
a combined of almost eleven
billion dollars of do renewable
projects in New Mexico this we
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward we think it's
eminently reasonable and
important in terms of the New
Mexicos energy transition we
support the bill in just a
committee to also moving forward
thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you very
much.
Mr Hughes.
Morning madam chair members the
committee and can use.
With the I don't think we're
picking up okay good because
that.
Right.
One two three okay.
I'm with the coalition
sustainable communities which is
comprised Los crucis Albuquerque
Santa Fe Towson Los Alamos our
members really like to have a
partnership continued with the
land office for many years to
come to meet our sustainability
goals and for that reason we
support the bill.
Thank you very much yes we'll
hear one more.
She.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Patrick Killen registered
lobbyists for chevron.
Late last year Stephanie
commissioner Garcia Richard was
able to come out to Eddy County
where we are currently in the
process of developing a solar
farm with fifty five thousand
panels to help power our
operations in Southeast New
Mexico we've been working very
collaboratively with the State
Land Office on this effort and
have had a great relationship
with the renewable energy folks
within that office so we stand
in strong support of this bill
to keep that spirit of
collaboration moving forward
thank you thank you very much.
Okay so now online we have to
supporters Amy Miller and
Camilla I woman and we have no
opponent so we're going to go
straight to the committee for
questions and comments.
Senator Sedillo Lopez first.
Thank you madam chair I think
this is a terrific idea.
While we are looking toward the
future though and
institutionalizing the office
the only goal here is to advance
the production and development
of renewable energy and what I
think about it and I have total
confidence in this state land
commissioner I think she has
done an amazing job.
However one of the things I
think about is people on the
Navajo reservation looking up at
the transmission lines and not
having electricity in their
homes.
And so when I worry about that
happening with renewable energy
that with these transmission
lines that that go out to the
renewable energy would be
exported and people in New
Mexico would be looking at that
the transmission outlines and
not having energy in their homes
so has we think of the future
and I don't know I mean I'm just
throwing this out for
consideration.
Is adding something like
ensuring the state's renewable
energy meets the needs of the
state prior to exporting.
That would give it a direction
and a mandate
I'm sure you need to talk to the
state land commissioner I am
sure that you you need to think
about that I'm not asking for an
amendment or anything I'm just
saying that that is a concern I
have for future land
commissioners not this one but
It certainly somehow in New
Mexico that has happened with
other cut other types of energy
and I'd like to make sure that
in planning for the future it
doesn't happen again with
renewables thank you thank you
madam chair thank you senator a
city Lopez I think your
your words advice are well taken
and I think that that is
something that down the roll
road we should be really looking
at but as you said right now our
confidences with commissioner
Garcia Richard and we can't take
our.
Our eyes off of what is going on
so I really appreciate those
comments thank you very much I
don't know if simply would like
to add madam chair senator I
think it's a really important
point on you know in terms of
energy production in general
just like a barrel of oil is on
the world market you know there
are markets regional nationally
it for renewable energy that
we're trying to meet we can't
lose sight of the domestic need
in terms of the state and the
commissioner has really worked
on a lot of our on the rights of
way side where a lot of these
gathering lines and
transmissions to ensure that
that we are working with
communities across the state to
it to ensure that there is some
of that infrastructure to be
able to tap into whether it's
you know electricity needs
whether it's broadband needs
etcetera so you know that the
point you make is is a good one
at you know I don't know that we
would be in favor putting in
statute at this point
by hi it is something that we're
committed to and would love to
you know have continued
discussions with you on that.
Thank you madam chair I I really
appreciate that and like I said
I'm not insisting I have a lot
of confidence in the
commissioner but this is a
forward looking state statute
and I think we we need to keep
considering that because his has
more more states move to
renewable energy the value of
our solar energy and our
Wind energy is really going to
go up and so the markets will
start being outside and it's
going to start looking very
attractive and that's what I
think happened when you see
these transmission lines passing
areas with no electricity so but
I really appreciate the bill I'm
strongly in support of it and I
think it's a statement of
support in the in our state our
current state land commissioner
and happy to support madam chair
thank you.
Yes senator Gaydos your next
anyway Senator thank you for
this bill I in in thinking
through the New Mexico first
thought and I don't know how you
the man that it just took
thought and discussion.
I know that the a lot of these
outside companies are coming in
New Mexico but something to
think about is make sure that
the local contractors paid the
for the subsidies are given
because once they leave the
state.
In there is on our other states
then we lose the leverage to be
make sure that New Mexico's care
for first so like the point is
Center made on you know just
make sure that we're looked at
first before they go out and
brought so I think that Austin's
portals.
Thank you any further comments
madam chair over the past there
is a motion for do passed from
Senator pope and a second from
center city Lopez with the
committee secretary please call
the roll yes centers of this six
it is Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senate Bill.
Excuse Senator pope yes.
Senator committee excuse Senator
souls excuse Center Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator panics yes.
My vote of five zero you do have
a due pass thank you madam chair
thank you members thank you very
much thank you before we move on
to the next a bill of which will
be Senator Woods we have a
couple of announcements first of
all if you see bills
disappearing from the agenda it
is because the sponsor has asked
that it be removed temporarily
or carry out carried over so we
are trying to get through all
built in numerical order but I
did want to let people know that
I'm not doing it arbitrarily
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
madam chair I'd like to make a
motion to remove from the table
SB three twenty six and what is
that bill that is the bill
carried by Senator Hamblen of
dealing with renewable yeah with
renewable portfolio and how how
energy is calculated renewable
energy calculated in into the
portfolio okay and I I will
second that motion.
Is there any opposition to
taking a bill off the table.
Yes Senator Gallegos is opposing
that motion so I'm not sure how
you record that Micaela.
So you have okay so the would
you repeat the motion please I
move to remove from the table SB
twenty six and I seconded.
And.
Could you call the roll yes
Senator boxes excuse Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes Centerville
excuse Center pope yes.
Senate committee excuse Senator
souls skews Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator phonics yes.
So we will schedule of that bill
by a vote of four to one we are
moving the bill off the table it
will be the last item on
Thursday's agenda if we in we'll
see I'm sure we could try to get
to it.
Okay Senator Woods please come
forward you're on the state how
you're presenting house bill one
ninety five as amended and that
was Representative Matthew
McQueen Representative Greg
Nibert to and yourself okay so
please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair this is
house bill one ninety five but
before present madam chair it I
would like to take a minute a
personal privilege and we have a
lot of red flag warnings in
eastern New Mexico and I'd like
to take just a minute to to ask
god to look over those farmers
and ranchers out there in
eastern New Mexico during this
time of high.
Wind warnings red flag warnings
and low humidity thank you madam
chair.
House bill one ninety five.
Is related to forestry and it
demands The force conservation
act authorizing the force
division of energy minerals and
natural resources department to
contract for and conduct force
fire prevention suspension
control suppression
rehabilitation and repair and
also post fire slope
stabilization erosion control
riparian area restoration
seating and reforestation of
burned areas and removing
references to the repeal of
Force conservation fund and
making technical changes
amending and replacing sections
of MSA one nineteen seventy
eight and madam chair I've got a
very good.
technical adviser with me the
state Forster
Forster McCarthy is with me
today and I'm gonna let her
further explained the bill so
that you know exactly what
happened here thank you thank
you and welcome miss McCarthy go
ahead madam chair and members of
the committee.
This forest conservation act
dates back to nineteen thirty
nine it's been updated five
times but the last time it was
updated is thirty five years ago
a lot has changed in those
thirty five years including much
warmer winters that up faster
insect outbreaks and skills
we've never seen before as well
as wildfire behavior and we all
know the outcome of the twenty
twenty two fires which what
we're devastating both for our
communities and for our water
supplies are long term water
security so madam chair this
update to the forest
conservation act through these
amendments is the sensual to
qualified New Mexico to receive
more federal funding to
eliminate outdated outdated
practices that conflict with two
days firefighting safety
standards and practices and to
clarify the division's
responsibility for slope
stabilisation and erosion
control after wildfires so that
we can provide technical
assistance to the communities in
need madam chair with that we
will stand for questions.
Thank you we're going to go to
the audience is there anyone
here in support of house bill
one ninety five.
Okay I see about four five hands
is there anybody here in the
audience that's supposed.
To house bill one ninety five.
And.
Anybody online this one person
support yes.
And we have one person on the
line in McCartney's so let's
start with an would you like to
make a statement.
Yes thank you madam chair and
committee.
I am a member of three fifty New
Mexico when we stand in support
of this important legislation to
to support our management of
forests and buyers.
Thank you okay so let's hear
from two or three people in the
audience you need to come up to
the middle and hold the Mike
please.
The.
good morning madam chair members
of the committee and was gonna
with the circle of Yogananda
chapter representing our thirty
five thousand members and
supporters we stand in support
with the fourth conservation act
which brings the act up to date
with my mask up for the brief
better doesn't make the forestry
division for fire suppression of
restoration activities but
perhaps the most important
aspect of HB one eighty five is
that it will clarify the grant
of authority to the forestry
division to include conserving
forests the forest resources and
providing technical assistance
to mitigate and adapt to
changing climatic conditions so
we ask for your support today
thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
If you were under the committee
your name at a Vigil I'm
representing the the soil and
water conservation districts and
we wholeheartedly support this
is we have a lot of districts
that have and will use with the
state forestry division and they
handle a lot of the money and of
we support the program thank
you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza Rachel
this with the New Mexico
coalition of conservation
districts and the New Mexico
forest industries association I
stand in strong support of the
legislation is really a support
the efforts for four some
watershed restoration and post
fire recovery thank you.
Thank you.
We will now go to the committee
for questions and comments on
the legislation.
Center city office.
Thank you madam chair of in
looking over the FIR and and
maybe addresses and conservation
and amendment I mean in the in
the house on the outside in the
minutes but I noticed that one
of the significant issues with
the State Land Office wanted to
clarify that that it should be
that this authority granted
should be exercise in
cooperation with the
commissioner of public lands did
you did you address it in an
amendment where and with.
In the over here it is okay I
found it the from the amendment
number one.
Okay
thank you I think that this is
an excellent bill and I stand
instructable.
Thank you other questions and
comments from committee members.
Yes Senator great.
Madam chair and senator thank
you I do like the bill I just
had a question of went to the
previous pollution powers
when was it taken away from
force.
In the center of our lives my
expert witness so you all about
the deal thank madam chair and
senator it's actually the same
issue that the Senator Sedillo
Lopez Reyes the police power
that the forestry division
retains is the ability to access
private lands for a very narrow
purpose and that is to
extinguish control or limit the
spread of an active wildfire.
Otherwise permission from the
landowner must be secured in
writing whether that landowner
is a private landowner or the
state land office and that's
what the amendment on the house
floor took care of.
Thank you for that madam chair
and etcetera expert witness so
and I'm just trying to
understand prior you said it's
been thirty five years this is
been amended or changed up prior
to that you guys didn't have any
pollution Torrez madam chair and
senator the language was and you
can actually see this I believe
it's on page six the old
language said
Fire suppression and prevention.
And the definition of prevention
has changed considerably in the
last thirty five years such that
there are now entire federal
programs dedicated to prevention
which is defined as of.
Free.
A as defined as activities that
take place prior to wildfire
when there is no active wildfire
and that was the concern.
Thank you for that madam
chairman chair Mister Carty I
would hope that the federal side
would look at the state side in
purview would just say to some
of valuable and so with that are
you thank you thank you other
questions or comments from
committee members on this bill.
There is a motion for do pass
from Senator Sedillo Lopez a
second from Senator Hamblen
anything further.
Okay with the committee
secretary please call the roll
Senator font this.
San Diego this is from Senator
have a yes Senneville you
Senator pope.
Yes.
Committees.
Centers sold yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes there's a panic yes.
By a vote of seven to zero you
have a do pass thank you very
much thank you very much madam
chair thank committee yes and
thank you for presenting that.
Okay we members were going on to
Senate bill three ninety one as
amended Senator Cervantes.
Morning colleagues.
Three ninety one proposes to
change the composition and
membership of the water trust
for the water transports
important function as we know is
to approve an overview water
projects and to fund those on an
annual basis we do this every
year we've approve that bill
that initial fund pretty close
to two hundred million dollars
in water projects for local
governments the decision about
which projects can be funded and
to what degree is made by the
water trust board historically
money my concerns has been the
water trust board is
predominately the look at the
membership in the majority of
membership it's Santa Fe
dominant board in other words
almost the entire composition is
either members of the executive
branch cabinet secretaries for
appointees of the governor which
shouldn't and surprises that the
decisions about what water
projects are funded and and
again somewhere around two
hundred million dollars this
year are made by a group of
cabinet secretaries and folks
that are appointed by the
governor it seems to me that.
This project going to be a
little bit more of an outreach
into rural New Mexico to the
state as a whole including of
course our parts of the state
and to have some representation
for the principal purpose of
this bill is to assure that
their appointees by the
legislature in the water trust
board as opposed to purely from
the executive branch so when you
see page two of the bill line
fifteen you'll see that
currently there would be five
members no appointed by the
governor confirmed by the Senate
this would.
Find for six public members by
Legislative Council so this
gives the legislature gonna buy
and enrolled in a place at the
table along with the executive
that you've executive the
governor still has all of her
appointees through her to her
cabinet positions.
There were there were a couple
of.
amendments adopted in the rules
committee namely with regard to
that that particular
paragraph so the amendment
you'll see on.
Subsection I guess what would be
a which is lines fifteen through
seventeen on page two
the the rules committee added
language that said that the
representation of the appointees
by Legislative Council be
geographically diverse so you'll
see that in the amendment I
think that was probably a good
well it was a good amendment.
The
The other change to subsection
see on line twenty one which
would be to broaden the
composition water trust board.
A point appointments to not have
it limited strictly variegation
and Conservancy districts but to
the agricultural community more
broadly right now the existing
languages.
Dissipation by an irrigation
Conservancy district that use
groundwater that seems to
limiting the Legislative Council
we also added we were made some
changes in the rules committee
on page three to the existing
board membership right now the
existing language as one public
member appointed by the Indian
Affairs commission.
And and we don't have an in
universe Commission any longer
so that's antiquated language
and for once we we change that
and we also thought that it
would be important to.
If you look on one six and seven
the current language provides
for an appointment by the
president of the Navajo Nation
it seems very clear to us that
the appointment from the Navajo
Nation should be a New Mexican
of appointment not just in the
somebody appointed by the Navajo
Nation and rigorous the
potential to somebody outside
the state on that so madam chair
members that that really is the
purpose of the bill again
fundamentally to have some
better and more diverse
representation on the funding of
water projects in the state of
New Mexico and I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much is there
anyone here in the audience to
support this bill.
Is there anyone here to oppose
this bill.
Is there anyone online for this
bill.
So this is a neutral.
Well maybe maybe maybe nobody
really cares too much about it
but but I I think this committee
understands what's really going
on here and you know bit
challenging I'm asking the
executive to give away a little
bit of their authority to but
ultimately I I serve with for
governors now to the Republican
to the Democratic I hate to see
the shift and we see it in
partisanship when one governor
we have a Republican governor
the water board water trust
board has a very different
agenda then when the other
Democrat governor and I think
that we have the legislature at
the table and having a
meaningful role that will maybe
even out some of that swing that
we see going back and forth
between different
administration.
Great okay we're not too
questions comments from
committee members will start
with senator Gaydos Senator
Sedillo Lopez and Senator
Hamblen thank you madam chair
center hello of the bill I think
you're right on as far as even
in education it becomes a
political football in this would
dampen that severity going one
way or the other but I was just
going to ask so you have a
member of the Navajo Nation are
the pueblos looked at I know
there's a lot of.
Problems is the tribes in
working as one in discussions
have we looked at maybe brought
in that have killed the pueblos
have a a member and chair
Senator so madam chair answer
it's a good question is one that
the committee came up in the
rules committee has come up
repeatedly the thinking is if
you look on page three line for
there is one appointee made by
again what will it was formerly
referred to as Indian Affairs
commissioned now we've changed
that and the thinking there is
that given the opportunity
center for the public to
participate by an appointment
there so we're.
Right right now we have a
specific appointment in existing
law by the Navajo Nation I'm not
about to be the person to
suggest that we take back that
that appointment but the
thinking is that the public to
have an important role as well
and and that's where we're
hoping that that appointment by
the Indian Affairs Department no
would consider pueblos and let's
also recognize the Apache
Mescalero Karia and others too
so that's an opportunity for
them to have a I think an
important part in the in the
funding I I should have and
elected to say that this for
perhaps part of the reason that
this bill is not drawing as much
attention as yours because we we
have so much money that we're
funding every project we're an
application was submitted this
year so when I said we're
looking at about a hundred and
eighty hundred ninety million
dollars worth of projects every
project applicant is being
funded at the request of level
because we have those resources
but I've been here long enough
to other many years when there
were not nearly the resources to
meet the application process and
so the agency board became a
very critical part of deciding
among priority projects.
Thank you for that enter madam
chair center stands for I I
really like the idea that the.
Person from Navajo Nation would
be New Mexican because it some
Mexico issue should be dealt
with here locally so with that
are you thank you thank you
senator Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair I noticed
in the in the FIR and I don't
know if if you have a response
if you already responded the
NMFA expressed concerns that
eliminating its see would
I would lose expertise in the
state engineer on also echoed
those concerns about the the
technical financial expertise
provided by the executive
director of the water transport.
or the.
Yes.
So what are your thoughts about
that so madam chair the
The NMFA really acts as the.
Administrative agency that
handles all these applications
are the one that that's them
refuse them.
And I and I think it's important
that they serve as a technical
adviser in a role as a resource
but but if they're part of that
is there such an integral part
of the process taking the
applications process in the
paperwork and so having a vote
on the projects I think that god
gives them to much of of of of
thumb on the scale of you will
and I I maybe they're still
gonna have a very critical
meaningful role but really
really should have a vote on the
on the board and doesn't seem to
be a critical issue for me at
all to an end to be really
directly Senator the the goal
here was to look at that total
composition the membership look
at the numbers and figure out
how much it is going to be
executive branch how much it's
gonna be legislative branch and
have something resembling parity
I mean even with the the
membership of the board going to
fifteen members from sixteen
you you've got six of those
legislative appointments so we
still don't have a controlling
vote from for more points but at
least it has some kind of a
meaningful role I see that with
having them run run that and
also have a
I understand that that we and
then the other thing that I just
question but there may be an
answer and in other statutes on
page three where it says the
chair will be elected by the
corner of the board members how
long does the chair serve.
Madam chair I don't I don't know
the answer to that and and it's
not in the existing law so I'm
not sure how long term of office
maybe in which referring to is
existing statute and yes so I
haven't attempted to address how
the the board is chaired I think
just so you know historically
what what was really going on is
this if you want and insight
what historically used to happen
was the chair was oftentimes the
state engineer state engineer
would chair the board state
engineer with fracking control
the the process and what was
really happening was that most
of the money that was going into
this fund and these projects
that we was going to to projects
it's going to the Gallup
McKinley and the U. projects and
originally some of the thinking
was that's where this fund was
created was to fund major major
projects what we've done in the
last ten years we begin to shift
that to making this funding this
process more available to
smaller committee smaller
projects and not just to the
funding of the big ones but the
but historically state engineer
would chair the the board and
frankly station we control we're
all the funding was going we
really brought that out for
quite a bit.
Do you think that that existing
laws should be amended in this
transition or or just leave it
alone that.
It sounds like the chair could
serve for an unlimited terms
what you're what you're
describing and there is a
benefit to.
To transition.
But I if if you don't think it's
important of I'll just leave it
it's it's not a subject that
I've attempted to address in in
this bill and we're change that
existing language I think what's
important is is one the language
referred to centers as the chair
should be elected by a quorum of
the board members of the board
members look more like all of us
and the rest of the state and
less like the executive branch
and the executive agencies then
I presume to chair the board
will as you're pointing out
maybe change from time to time
or at least to have a little bit
more of a Representative role
but as I was saying earlier
historically the the chair was
almost always the state engineer
and and why would we be
surprised if you look at the
existing long composition almost
everybody on the board as an
executive branch officer from an
agency of the state appointed by
the governor or they're part of
the public members appointed by
the governor so effectively the
water transport is of branch of
the executive branch and nothing
but the executive branch and so
you shouldn't surprise as the
chair would have been decided by
the executive.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center Hamblen thank you madam
chair minor really just kind of
thought comments because I do
appreciate this bill because
I've not been a fan of of
government appointees regardless
of party hi I see this in
regions of the university's
commissions and from southern
New Mexico we often get ignored
and that's something that we
talk about on a regular basis
and so I'm I appreciate the
considerations to have the board
to really reflect the face of
New Mexico in the needs of New
Mexico as we've stated we both
of of talked about this is south
of Sapporo the state has a
tendency of getting ignored when
it comes down to addressing
state issues and the the the
concerns that we have a direct
Southern New Mexico is a
different creature but it's
still part of the state and so I
do appreciate that and I
appreciate the Sanchez efforts
to make sure the that we're more
representative from the entire
state and one particular region
so thank you so senator Sanchez
and thank you madam chair thank
you any further questions or
comments.
I move it to pass Madam there is
a motion for a for a do pass
from Santo pope is there a
second.
And there is a second from
Senator souls could the
secretary please call the roll
yes Senator Vontaze yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes Senate Bill
excuse Center pope.
Yes Senator Ortiz.
Senator souls yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
phonics yes.
By a vote of eight zero you have
a do pass thank you senator the
members were moving on to
Senator harm me is he in the
Andrea.
In the back.
Please please emerge Senator.
So
The members at nine thirty I
have to present the first bill
in finance so I'll turn it over
to the vice chair and we have a
the entire list of opponents in
speaking order that I'll pass on
to her and so Senator please go
ahead and present Senate bill
for the audience that is
watching we're on Senate bill
for eighteen oil and gas act
changes please proceed thank you
good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to present our
bill now The New Mexico oil and
gas act was passed in nineteen
thirty five at a time when the
only public interest at stake
with development of resources.
Fast forward to twenty twenty
three and now but now we know
the oil and gas operations one
contribute significantly to
climate change to the right and
public health expressions who
live work and play closest to
oil gas wells and three
environmental justice
communities communities of color
indigenous communities those
communities that get hit the
hardest.
Senate bill fourteen madam chair
brings the oil and gas acted to
the twenty first century by
modernizing the act to take
account of all public interest
at stake in today's world my
expanding the oil and gas
conservation division and oil
conservation commission's
authority to consider these
public interest in the decision
making and by expanding the
composition of the OCC to
include two new members who
would represent these public
interest joining me this morning
a status boxes my expert witness
and I yield to her for a few
comments this fax.
That's a.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is tennis fox and I'm a senior
lawyer with western
environmental law center of
practice environmental law for
over twenty years spending most
of those years of the New Mexico
environment department and the
New Mexico attorney general's
office since last summer we work
hard to reach out to all
stakeholders we work closely
with energy and minerals
department and the State Land
Office the two agencies most
impacted by the bill to gain
their support for provisions or
at least minimize their concerns
and I'd like to thank both of
those agencies for workings with
us so constructively we reached
out to the two largest New
Mexico oil and gas associations
last summer the Moga and the
independence of last August
before drafted this bill was
presented before the interim
committee and we worked across
the spectrum of environmental
and civic NGOs and have broad
support within that community.
before I we begin I would like
to point out one mistake in the
bills F. I. R. and that is on
page one the FIR states that.
The bill completely revises
existing definitions and now
includes correlated rights
environmental justice community
and fair treatment and
meaningful involvement in
addition to other pertinent
definitions this is not correct
the bill does not revise
existing definitions it only
adds to definitions
environmental justice community
and fair treatment and
meaningful involvement all the
other definitions in that
section including for quality of
rights are currently in the act
and we're not changed according
to legislative format those
definitions by L. but
Legislative Council Service were
re ordered to be in alphabetical
order and that's why it looks
like their new definitions but
they're not with that on stand
for questions thank you madam
chair.
Thank you senator you have on
the amendment we do with this is
just a clean up this ammendment
is just inserting that combine
and you'll see that on the page
that will be distributed to it's
just a cleanup of of one.
So on page twenty one.
Line eight.
After the word wells in third a
comma.
The.
Upon transfer.
When it.
The line twenty one line eight
after the word wells you'll
insert that comma.
And then insert upon transfer
comma.
I see okay so answered as well
upon transfer come.
Is there discussion on the
amendment.
Is there a motion to adopt the
amendment I have moved to that
building and.
Okay is there any opposition to
just to the amendment.
The amendment has been adopted
okay we are now going on to the
supporters and the opponents and
of could I see the hands of
everyone in the room who is here
to support this bill.
Okay keep your hands up for a
minute please to.
Eleven approximately eleven
people anyone here in the room
opposing the bill.
Six seven eight nine ten it's
about evenly divided at ten and
eleven online there is one two
three four five six seven eight
nine ten supporting and three
opposing.
Okay so we're going to take
six people from each side two
who support and who oppose we'll
start with the supporters if you
would please come to the Middle
you need to line up introduce
yourself by name and
organization and keep your
remarks to one to two minutes
and.
We'll go from there.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee David economy on a
registered lobbyist for the
western environmental law center
as well as the in our DC both up
into to stand in strong support
of this bill it's important to
to highlight what this bill does
and what this bill does not do
this bill is not an existential
attack on the oil and gas
industry that knowledge is that
the role of that industry in
both our community as well as
our finances it only seeks to a
dating almost nearly century old
statutory regime to the modern
day part of what it does is very
similar to what Senator want
this has attempted to do with
the water board which is
addressed the composition of OCC
to make the to to meet the
current needs the realities of
our modern society it updates
penalties and allows for a long.
Changes to address the impacts
of this industry on our
communities doesn't seek you're
going to hear from the industry
the does not seek to drive
anybody out of business it does
not seek to change the way they
do business instead it just
seeks to acknowledge their foot
print our our in our society and
create a statutory framework
that addresses that foot print
in the impact both economically
and environmentally in our
community thank you.
Thank you.
Okay thank you madam chairman of
the committee my name is
expanding cattle and the climate
energy advocate with
conservation voters Mexico and
my mission of the organization.
Transition away from oil and gas
that being so this bill is one
of our priorities this year the
oil and gas act no longer
reflects the public interest and
we have entire communities in
the San Juan and Permian basins
who deal with polluted air and
tap water that is unsafe to
drink
this bill will help us protect
the most important are most of
vulnerable communities excuse me
so I urge your support of this
bill thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee was gonna with
the Sierra Club noted in the
chapter representing our thirty
five thousand members and
supporters in New Mexico we
support the efforts to modernize
the oil and gas sector bring it
to the twenty first century as
the second most productive oil
state in the country to ensure
that our oversight agencies have
the tools they need to meet the
challenge the bill does not it
does start the bill does a host
of things to better serve our
communities from removing the
cap a blanket bonds in caps and
finance to better representing
New Mexico's interests on the
oil conservation commission and
on issues of of our mental
justice as well as establishing
setbacks that are essential in
protecting our communities who
live near oil and gas operations
and we also want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward and pass you will vote
yes thank you thank you very
much.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Charles
to sail and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the coalition for
clean affordable energy and I
would we very much appreciate
the opportunity to speak to you
this morning to support very
strongly support this bill
as a sponsor stated this bill
will help to bring the oil and
gas act first passed in the
nineteen thirties into the
twenty first century among other
things the bill would authorize
the oil conservation division of
the Energy minerals and natural
resources department to adopt
regulations for protection of
the environment and would allow
the the oil conservation
division to take environmental
issues into consideration when
making decisions on permitting
and other matters
second the bill would.
Change the make up of the oil
conservation commission it would
add two new members one of whom
would represent environmental
interests and one of whom would
represent local communities the
folks who are
primarily affected by oil and
gas operations third the bill
would eliminate the two hundred
thousand dollar cap on the yes
civil penalties fifty oil
conservation division can
currently assessed in
administrative actions and
finally the bill would allow the
the well conservation division
to establish by regulation
setbacks on oil and gas
operations so for example to to
prevent that the wells from
being located too close to a
school or or residents or church
we strongly support this bill
and we urge the committee to
adopt a do pass thank you.
Madam chair and honorable
Committee members good morning
are you better off on behalf
commissioner of public lands
Stephanie Garcia Richard the
commissioner of public lands
strongly supports this bill
after almost a century of oil
conservation commission
appropriations it's high time
that frontline communities be
brought to the table this is an
inclusive bill it does not take
away anyone's vote the
commissioner house it doesn't
need on the oil conservation
commission and she welcomes
additional participation by
affected communities in addition
I think the commissioner has
shown by example that it is
possible to have oil and gas
responsible oil and gas
development and conservation at
the same time we think that the
well conservation commission
should also embody these values.
Finally this bill very crucially
as a Mister to sail and pointed
out would eliminate arbitrary
caps on penalties and bonding.
New Mexicans and responsible oil
and gas operators or only helped
by the agency OCD being
empowered to go after the truly
bad actors that are out there
thank you madam chair New Mexico
and committee members and we
again strongly urge this
committee to support Senate bill
fourteen.
Thank you.
Hello my name's Matthew hacked
my background is in physics and
climate modeling I am a
relatively new volunteer without
the three fifty just.
Are we on now thank you I'm a
relatively new volunteer with
three fifty Santa Fe and I just
want to say that with our out
sized role in oil production
here in New Mexico I think it's
very important that we do that
oil production well and to me
this looks like a significant
step forward towards doing that
thank you.
Thank you.
The chair has given me a list of
opponents and so if the
opponents could come forward I
have Mike Miller Caitlyn Hart
clear chase Molly Sancious
Patrick Killen and Larry around.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Mike Miller and I represent
the Permian basin petroleum
association we stand in
opposition yes before eighteen
for a variety of reasons many of
which you will hear the pointed
out in later testimony I would
like to point out that the F.
our our call for the addition of
at the minimum for additional
ploys at a cost of five hundred
thousand dollars per year
beginning in FY twenty four by
their own admission the
department is significantly
underfunded and understaffed
would it be more sensible to
fully funded and staffed
department so that we can they
can perform the obligations
already placed upon them before
we had more duties thank you for
the opportunity to speak today
thank you Mr Miller.
Good morning chairman Sedillo
Lopez and members of the
committee my name is Caitlyn
Hart and the executive director
of loan over to a coalition our
members are come kompromat
camara comprised of farmers and
ranchers with approximately two
point five million surface acres
in sixteen counties in New
Mexico a service owners we
depend on the technical
expertise uncertainty of the oil
conservation commission to
protect our lands and our
livelihood the service is often
impacted by OCC decisions and
regulations we are concerned
that the dilution of the OCC
Authority and expertise will
inadvertently affect service
owners well we believe the
sponsored good intentions we
send instruct strong opposition
to SB fourteen thank you thank
you miss Harper.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Claire chase them a vice
president of mac energy
corporation headquartered in
Artesia mac Energy employs over
nine hundred hard working women
and men primarily in New Mexico
but also a few in Texas.
Senate bill four eighteen
supporters argue that this law
is necessary to quote unquote
reform industry but we need only
look toward Colorado to see what
this bill will really do.
Colorado passed a similar law in
two thousand nineteen to quote
unquote reform industry and the
result could not be more clear
from two thousand nineteen to
two thousand twenty two under
Colorado law well permits fell
by ninety five percent facility
permits fell by ninety six
percent the permit approval
times have increased by nearly
six hundred percent in
Colorado's agencies have engaged
in four years of continuous
rulemakings resulting in over
three hundred pages of new
rules.
I'd like to call this bill for
what it really is what is an
attempt to block all development
and drive a stake through the
heart of New Mexico's largest
industry and source of revenue
thank you.
Thank you Mr chase.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is lunches I'm proud to be the
city park of gel and vice chair
of the board of trustees for the
jail hospital district
respectfully we ask you to
oppose SB four eighteen the oil
and gas industry not only drives
our economy in general but it
helps to improve our quality of
life through access to health
healthcare insurance public
safety and assist with increased
our ongoing infrastructure
repairs and expansion because
this industry is able to operate
New Mexico in a town of less
than twenty four hundred we are
fortunate to have three health
care providers associated
nursing staff a full time
dentists dental assistants a
hygienist and on going
behavioral health services
currently our EMS and police are
fully staffed we have worked
hard to create these
opportunities for our residents
and oil and gas has played a
major role in allowing us to
pursue options to serve child.
The best serve gel we all know
we are working toward an energy
transition but we must make the
transition through collaboration
and thoughtful decisions that
still allows industry to operate
safely and efficiently thank
you.
Thank you Mr just.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Patrick
Killen registered lobbyists for
chevron chevron respectfully
opposes SB four eighteen because
a roll back years of compromise
collaboration and progress that
we've made in updating the
state's oil and gas act
supporters of the bill before
you today have said the oil and
gas tax has not been updated
since nineteen thirty five and
that is simply not correct
section seven of this bill
negates an agreement on updating
the laws financial assurance
requirements that was made in
twenty eighteen between then
Senator Richard Martinez
environmental groups and
industry with the passage of
Senate bill one eight nine and
section eight of this bill rolls
back the compromise language on
restoring administrative
penalties there was a go she is
in twenty nineteen within center
Martinez and representative
Nathan small through the passage
of house bill five four six the
state's financial assurance and
administrative penalty laws as
updated in twenty eighteen and
twenty nineteen are working as
intended by the state
legislature and the oil and gas
act is an important technical
Law needed to manage our state's
resources.
This what should not be Hasely
changed especially when there's
been little engagement with
industry from the bills
advocates.
In closing however I do want to
take a moment to acknowledge and
thank senator how to me
for reaching out over the
weekend also for taking some
time to meet with me yesterday
to discuss industry concerns
with this bill we are committed
to continuing that collaborative
dialogue with Senator how to me
as we move forward however as
currently written chevron
respectfully opposes SB four
eighteen thank you thank you Mr
county.
Madam chair members the
committee Larry heard and
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico oil and gas association I
just want to touch on a couple
things that haven't been talked
about yet we all share the same
goal for clean efficient and
reliable sources of energy but
also we need to do is look back
in the past few years about
what's happened around the world
not just in New Mexico we have
the COVID crisis that created of
dramatic spikes in energy and
production of energy and
production of oil and gas and
just now in in Ukraine where the
one year anniversary and the
crisis in Ukraine and you see
you're going through some pretty
serious issues as related to
getting reliable oil and natural
gas we should focus more on
domestic production and less
reliance on foreign energy
sources I think New Mexico's at
the forefront of that effort and
so we don't think it's the time
to put further restrictions on
the oil and gas industry and we
also look at these record
revenue levels we have this year
the opportunities we have for in
education public safety
behavioral health all of those
other areas it with the state
budget you're dealing with so we
just don't think this is the
correct time we do appreciate
the Sanchez efforts and also we
all share single having a good
good clean product coming out
and being responsible partners
but we don't think this is the
bill that does that thank you
madam chair members the
committee thank you Mr Moran.
Want to mention that we have
supporters of online but it just
because of time we're not going
to thousand to speak but I will
say their names and thank them
very much for being available
Patricia sheerly Maryland Hugo
Tim Peterson honor Rios Kathy
Baer Barbara Calef Joan brown
and McCartney Sally pipes.
More of mera Yarborough.
Dan Schreiber Kaylee Shoop.
Okay and then we also have a two
opponents on of online Sir fitz
Gerald and Larry marker which
again I want to thank you very
much for being available to
speak but just in the interest
of time we wanted to balance the
the speaking
so with that.
Let's go to the committee or
would you like to say something
before we go to committee the
madam chair is just disappointed
by bomb to Colin but that's
okay.
I'm ready for questions about
object.
Are there any questions from the
committee.
Parents for okay Senator
Gallegos etcetera etcetera
appreciate the dialogue.
Just want to go back in time a
little bit in I one of the
gentleman's stopped and talked
about the amendments in eighteen
and nineteen I believe up Hey
you guys look at those and
looked at what the changes here
will do to center Martinez is
built in what the effort that
they've done have you guys gone
through that.
Senator madam chair the answer
is yes but to further the answer
I'll defer to my expert witness.
madam chair Senator guy a goes
thank you for that question
We're aware of those come
completely aware of those two
changes from twenty eighteen and
twenty nineteen.
almost as they were written they
were outdated and I think you'll
see from the FIR is from both
the energy and minerals
department and the state land
office the two agencies that are
impacted by those two provisions
one is some financial assurance
provision the others the cap on
penalties both those agencies
say that number one the
financial assurance amount the
cap at two hundred fifty
thousand dollars is arbitrary
and needs to be updated
and number two they say that
with respect to the cap on civil
penalties the oil and gas act is
an anomaly in the major
environmental statutes that we
have here in New Mexico setting
a cap like that the only one I
know of the other major
environmental statutes like the
clean air act the solid waste
secretary water quality act do
not have that kind of a cap
those were compromises their
out dated and I think that you
know there's been a lot in the
papers the last several years
about the fact that the cost to
plug and abandon and remediate
Wells has just skyrocketed and
the last number of years we're
facing an orphan well situation
in this state and across the
country and so I think ourselves
and both agencies are supportive
you know in particular of making
sure the financial assurances
adequate to do the job.
The madam chair and senator up
I'll take opposition to the
outdated I think the legislature
takes the best information those
are compromises so so we'll try
to table so I was in the house
of time I remember Center
Martinez working on that so I
guess I'm just offended that
possibly what we're doing today
is outdated so up all go on then
chairman Sir I had some
questions on of your bills.
In.
Going to.
Tourists are
In page twenty one.
The bills.
In the first.
Two senses and it starts action
twenty of it's going into the
the plugging in in or from will
issue I believe but in to page
twenty one twenty four twenty
five continuing on to page
twenty one line one and two.
I see you're taking up to two
hundred fifty thousand dollars I
didn't see what the Max bond
would be if we take this out
insurance center.
madam chair center today it goes
that would be established by
rule through rulemaking process
before the oil conservation
commission based on evidence.
Madam chair and senator eight
our job is legislators to put in
statute valuable motors and and
there again that goes back to
the.
Comment you made to work.
Outdated.
I do have gray hair but I think
there's evidence already on that
this two hundred fifty thousand
work for all appropriations even
the the producers of but I'll go
on my next question then is of
on the same page lying.
I through.
Ten.
Up.
This this portion here will
affect property sixty thousand
wells here in the state the they
would all have to have a single
well bond is up on hi I read
that then turned center.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos
know that that's not correct the
one well in assurance is for
a minority of wells that are at
risk.
Those of the wells that are most
at risk of being orphaned and
therefore most at risk for the
state to have have to take over
that financial responsibility so
this also has a provision that
you'll see from the FIR that the
energy and minerals department
supports the so those at risk
wells include on in active wells
and wells that are for example
what's called
expired a temporary abandonment
status so it only applies to the
the highest risk wells not
active wells.
Madam chair and senator
can you tell me how many are at
risk wells.
You once we get my data here.
Approximately the.
three thousand.
Thank you for that I have had
another highlighted area I I do.
this is pretty minor
It is where you're at in the
two.
New members earlier Madam chair
and senator there's a gentleman
the talked about no fun this all
right I think is a young lady
most vulnerable
areas and and they're talking
about pollution and
Of the bad tap drinking water I
am one of those most vulnerable
I live in the county of and I
don't know if everyone
understands water in the state
or waters actually brought
through on the Ogallala so it
would be from Kansas this way if
the water was bad I think she's
just trying to show or what was
trying to talk about some of the
production waters the we don't
drink but in that I was
wondering because they're
talking about of the.
It would be good for us to have
the affected communities to be a
part of the discussion someone
in those to us thought of
putting one in a yearly county
and one in Farmington on your to
mint new members that's not how
it reads but if you're wanting
those are affected in the state
to have a voice to be a really
good start insurance center.
Madam chair Senator guy a goes.
That's a very good point what
we've done with respect to
making sure that affect
communities are have more of a
seat at the table that they have
now is a couple of things in
this proposal so one is having a
representative of frontline
communities or people have an
expert our expertise and
frontline communities as one of
the five members on the OCC so
frontline communities to have a
voice through the oil
conservation commission you know
which is the decision making
rulemaking body and then the
other vehicle for of a
communities have voices the
Advisory Council which is toward
the end of the bill and so
that's by Advisory Council made
up of to a large extent
frontline communities as well as
native communities and in
particular there's geographic
diversity required on that
advisory committee that includes
both representation from San
Juan and Permian basins.
Thank you for that.
I just don't know if that my
frontline communities would have
state but thanks for the
dialogue madam chair center I
want to shift a little bit too
on February thirteenth I had the
opportunity to go yes by before
Congress and it seems to be a
disconnect from what the states
do and what Congress is looking
at so in that discussion they're
asking to see what they could do
to help us with education we're
fiftieth in the nation.
In all test drives or funding
for education.
So in the discussion we had.
I brought up a lot of points and
and Senator if you don't mind
I'd read a few of them in it
just shows that in twenty twenty
two all guests contributed ten
point eight billion dollars to
our state local coffers.
And to me the majority that goes
to our students and this bill
here to me looks like we're
hurting there's a young lady put
in there were seven the of the
industry
I think were heard in the golden
goose right now we have and
madam chair and senator I have a
theory or a when I go to dinner
I don't drink so I don't buy so
those are with me I'll buy the
dinner they by their alcohol
because it's just a.
A fact of of how I live in right
now we're given madam chair in
center four point one million
dollars to take back to our
communities.
This provided by these people
gaps also I wouldn't mind
spending your money for you if
you take oppositional gas but
what I'm leading to madam chair
and senator is the federal now
looking at how they can help us
with permitting State Land
Office takes a lot of pride and
how much they make but it's a
slow plan permits the feds have
been slow play on permits all
guests madam chair Senators
maybe forty four percent
increase.
Since a year ago their hog tied
blindfolded gagged and
handcuffed they still produce
money for our state I'm just
trying to understand madam chair
and senator why we would be
looking at to hurt the industry
this providing for students in
education Senator.
Madam chair I would give you all
of my junior money and of my
capital outlay if that meant
keeping the members of the he
could he could have nation safe
and the members of northern Rio
Arriba county state because I
value their safety first in
their health and welfare above
any monetary value and with that
I yield to my expert witness.
madam chair Senator again thank
you again for that question I
think as we've tried to explain
this bill the point of this bill
is not to hurt oil and gas and
we don't believe that it does
the point is to bring balance
fair balance to the discussions
around oil and gas in the FY are
you will not see any analysis on
any impact to state revenues as
a result of this bill and that's
because none is anticipated
except the State Land Office
thought that revenues could be
enhanced by the decreasing the
cap on financial assurance
because that could mean that the
state would be less responsible
for over orphaned wells so I I
don't believe that this will
have any impact on the state's
revenues but it will broaden the
discussion it will allow
environmental and health and
each a concerns to be taken into
account in the rulemaking but
for example then I was involved
in both of the methane waste of
methane rule hearings that took
place in New Mexico over the
last couple of years one before
energy mineral oil before the
oil conservation commission and
the other before the environment
improvement board those rules
going to cost oil and gas a lot
more than this this is not
intended to cost oil and gas it
is intended to bring balance to
the discussion.
Madam chair and senator.
The gentle lady that's not how
industry looks at it and reality
is you brought it up already
that were outdated so I don't
know how you bring balance if in
eighteen and nineteen the
legislature made decisions that
in your testimony.
Was already updated so madam
chair and senator I'd like to go
on so a in and I would take your
money because I think Rio re but
is safe so all look for working
in that so I can spend it for
you but
actually and and I'm just
wanting talk but just my
district and I look at this and
in is when I shop in the
Congress the value for us our
constituents so thinking about
just constituents in my district
all guests supports fourteen
thousand seven hundred ninety
three students and thirteen
hundred and forty three teachers
just my district there again
that's why I take opposition to
built in you and I are friends
but the bill looks like on the
faced in the basis of it is it's
going to do things that are.
Harming all guests and and you
may not it may not be intended
consequences I would love that
we run a bill of five years from
now we would be held accountable
for our mistakes collamer
on ten the reality of it is when
industry looks and read your
bill and everything that I
looked at and read the bill it
to me is very offensive because
it is going to hurt my district
in my district overwhelmingly
sent money to Santa Fe to be
distributed so my thought is we
haven't had a young lady from
jail the brought up in in how
important it is for small
community that I live in units
work twenty miles away and it's
all oil gas or restaurants are
everything we do our fuel
everything that we do that areas
oil based because everything
that is surrounding us is
industry I did have just a final
point
madam chair and senator when.
Well J. as concert represent but
Floor leader egolf of speaker
you got it got around state even
to all guests he asked them
about jobs because he went out
there in his jobs jobs jobs sure
and then chairman center has
anyone talk to you about how
many jobs will gas produces
statewide because I know that
was his thing he's trying to
build New Mexico I mean a
Democrat going out to all guests
asking for help to build New
Mexico by providing jobs has
anyone madam chair insert giving
any kind of indication of the
jobs will gas produced a
provides.
Madam chair Senator guy a goes
oil and gas is a large employer
in the state and this bill will
not do anything to that format
level I think if you look at the
F. I. R. I understand with oil
and gas is saying.
On the one hand on the other
hand the agencies charged with
making an analysis for purposes
of the FIR to see you know what
kind of impact if any it would
have on state revenues have said
there won't be any except to the
extent that there maybe
enhancement so
and I do appreciate being called
a young lady Mr center today so
thank you for that madam chair
and senator you lied thank you I
I guess my thing is in in all
finish up with this I just want
to give just a little bit of
detail in this has net
contribution from counties in.
person I'll just give you a list
per person there's hundred
thirty eight thousand five
hundred.
Eighty two from Lee County
there's a hundred thirty six
thousand two hundred nineteen
dollars from Eddy County Los
Alamos is twenty three thousand
one hundred eighty five.
Per person.
And Bernalillo seven thousand
five hundred seventy three.
And then San Juan is only two
thousand thirty six dollars if
you look at the total cost is
brought into the state for use
and I'm thinking just there
again I know you and you don't
think that you're doing harm but
I just wanted to highlight those
numbers because I think that
right now Lee County manager
center is number one in the
nation in production.
And all that does is benefit our
state coffers so all yield with
that I just want to make sure
that we're all on the
understanding that the golden
goose is before you.
What you do to it.
We should be held responsible
for with that are you thank you
senator okay go Senators maybe.
Madam chair Senators maybe thank
you for that question Senator
Smith could you turn your
speaker please repeat the
question would you mind
repeating the question they were
able to and I meant to do that
thank you madam chair yes I'll
repeat the question on page ten
eleven and on page ten we're
striking language that that says
that there's requirement for
these commission members are
some of them to have
Petrone production education or
training
could you fill me in on that
please yes madam chair Senator
Schmedes thank you for that
question that provision by the
way is supported by the energy
and minerals department because
what it does is it doesn't
really
reduce the qualification reduce
the ability reduce who is
qualified to service OCD
director which is a critically
important position in the state
but expands eligibility really
to meet today's concerns because
as pointed out by EMNRD in the
FIR
the regulation of oil and gas
today goes beyond the need to
understand what petroleum
engineering is which is what
that focus was in nineteen
thirty five you essentially had
to be a petroleum engineer or
have expertise in petroleum
engineer junior in the oiling
regulation of oil and gas is
much broader more complex than
that now and so it expands the
eligibility requirements to
include and require somebody who
does have expertise in the
regulation the overall
regulation of oil and gas
production and could include a
petroleum engineer.
Yeah and and then chair Senator
I I realize it could include but
I I have some concern with how
we're changing that and I I've
seen this in health care in a
variety of other
Other industries it seems that
we are moving away from
allowing.
Hard science scientific bodies
to drive our policies and then
when we come in here we say well
they just have to have knowledge
of regulation with all these
other things the line eight it
says environment law or science.
So in and I you know so I I have
sent some concern with that I I
think that we are starting to
push too hard from a political
level we're removing kind of
some of the science and of
course we fight over the science
we fight over what's what's
evidence based or not so I have
a concern there I'd like to try
to you know and I your your
point is well taken but my my
preference would be to shift
more toward someone that is not
just having knowledge of public
policy but is more of a hard
hard scientist
my my other my other question is
on page twenty one
I madam chair and senator I I'd
like to know it so it says that
we're gonna have you know these
these these financial assurance
bonds.
for wells that produce less than
sixty.
there is a day or less than a
hundred twenty thousand
you if your gas per day how many
how many wells are we talking
that would would fit.
In into that category those
categories.
Madam chair Senator Schmedes
that those are also the ones
with the amendment was added and
so there's a qualification to
those types of wells which are
commonly referred to as stripper
wells or low producing wells of
which there are many in New
Mexico but that provision for
one well insurance for those
types of wells would only kick
early and when those swells are
transferred from one company to
another and I'm I don't know
that data that OCD has on the
specific number of those types
of wells because it's not the
whole universe a stripper wells
only when they're sold.
And the state at that point time
does have to approve that
transfer.
Madam chair and senator I would
I would urge great caution this
body if we don't have that data
we're basically just admitting
we don't know what this bill is
going to do
we look at putting financial
assurance on other industries
you bankrupt companies you know
state Washington did that with
solar panel recycling they they
required some financial
assurance for recyclers I've got
a big list of companies went
bankrupt this is a you know I
think we have to realize the
businesses run on a a very tight
margins you know if they can
give employees bonuses they will
do it if they can't they won't
they will try to give their good
employees raises I mean they
some of these very very small
companies very small producers
are just.
You know they don't they don't
have a lot of margin
if they did they'd have better
health insurance for employees
of other things and they do
their best but.
If we don't have that data we we
should urge great we should have
great caution with this bill we
really should it's not a
critique your bill I'm just and
it's not I guess your fault that
we don't have the data but we
don't of the day we need to get
you know the State Land Office
of the city or somebody to at
least take some measurements and
figure out how many how many
well as we're talking here I
think that be very wise as we as
we move on so
I think you're a and it's about
all I have you know I could do
some of the comments but I would
like to hear from from the
committee thank you Mr.
Thank you senator committees
Senator of or madam chair
Stefanics thank you madam chair
the comments I had first of all
I have I received a text from
or an email from yucca they had
been online and they wanted to
make a statement so in support
so we're now looking that but I
Madam chair the Senator the
issue that I hear that I think.
It's time for is the
environmental justice peace.
And I've had time I've spoken to
opponents and proponents of this
bill I've talked to the
Department and regardless of how
this bill turns out this
particular legislative session I
believe many individuals are
interested in continuing to work
on that piece thank you very
much madam chair thank you madam
chair Senators about this.
Centers of this thank you so
begin by sparing everybody with
the obvious observations goes to
Senate Judiciary Committee New
Mexico.
So madam chair you can you can.
You can spare me the finger
But but I you know I always use
the opportunity of this
committee to try and express
some of the concerns that I
would have if the bill makes a
that is coming going to
Judiciary and for it to be heard
in Judiciary of it's ever going
to be heard of judiciary
I think it's important for us
always recognize that we're
we're here to being law making
and I
emphasize that a great deal as a
lawyer we're here to make laws
and so I want to start with miss
Cox's observations that we start
really with with the beginning
of the bill if we can which with
the definitions.
And and I agree with her
observation that mostly
definitions it looks like we're
doing a lot here in those first
few pages but they're mostly
existing definitions for adding
a couple of new definitions and
I'd like to talk about those two
new definitions.
But before I do that I think
it's also important point out
that even though some of these
are existing definitions that
doesn't mean they're good
and I think that you know we
should use the opportunity of
this bill you're saying this is
the first renewal in a very long
period of time we should really
use the opportunity of doing
this to really do do good work.
I've got to tell you that some
of the exit one of the existing
definitions right now court
correlated rights
this is not an area of law I
practice in and so I respect was
**** you do and I I hope you
were not the person who wrote
the definition of correlated
rights are you're shaking your
head no good for you
this is the worst legal writing
I have experience in twenty
three years here
I mean let's look at the
definition of correlated rights
on page four this is the
definition of correlated rights.
This means the opportunity
afforded.
So far it is practical to do so.
To the owners of each property
in a pool to produce without
waste the owners just and
equitable share of oil and gas
for both being an amount so for
as can be practicability
determined and so as far as can
be practically obtained without
where waste substantially in the
proportion that quantity of
recoverable oil and gas for both
of the property bears the total
recoverable oil or gas or both
in the pool and for such
purposes to use the owners just
and equitable share of the
reservoir Energy completely and
unintelligible
and nonsensical really whenever
you have law making in a on a
law that says.
What's your defining something
that means the an opportunity so
far it's practicable
you know that's that's
meaningless
And and when it says supports
practical to do so.
That's not a law firm in that so
you know I always use the
simplistic version for me Dr
fifty five or you pay a fine
well Dr fifty five if you can
you know this is so long it's
practical for you to do so
that's not a law
and so now again that's existing
language on so I'll grant you
that.
But we should be trying to do
better.
And then and then when we get
free frankly I I use that as a
T. up to what we are adding.
For definitions which I think
are equally problematic for me
and it gets to Senator Stefanics
point which is you know the that
there is a place for
environmental justice we should
have that discussion but we have
to understand what that means so
for example this bill adds a
definition for quote fair
treatment and meaningful
involvement that's memorial
language right what is fair
treatment to you is not gonna be
for treatment to me and it's not
going to be for treatment of
Senator Gallegos or his
community
and and meaningful involvement I
I bring this up because we we
create a new fifth of all all
jumping around a little bit but
and this is again not to bring
offense to anyone I I hope it's
never interpreted that way but
we create the.
The new commission and Advisory
Council you'll see this in
section nine this is where the
back and jumping around section
nine an environmental justice
Advisory Council I think that's
what you're talking about
centers to function and that's a
good thing but then let's look
at who is composed of that
environmental justice Advisory
Council in this bill I'm reading
this correctly there are nine
there are nine members of this
environmental justice Advisory
Council eight of whom are
representatives of Indian
affairs
and tribal communities eight out
of the line.
Sir Hamlin Center souls and I
come from a part of the state
where we have environmental
justice needs as well
communities that are affected a
representative someone part the
revenue you Representative the
committee's right nurse on board
at the adversely affected in in
need of the Marvel Justice no
less so than the native American
communities and so what we would
create a council and it's got
eight of the nine members
representing native American
interests doesn't strike me as
well thought out and I and I say
that with I hope no absolutely
no offense to native American
communities
but but how to the rest of us
get cut out how did I as a
Hispanic get left out of that
equation or before the
communities I represent Hispanic
communities colonias.
and and I see Mr **** maybe
trying to point out something by
mistreating that my wrist
reading it.
Madam chair Senator Cervantes no
there's a mistake in the bill
that you have just identified
for us well sometimes I do that
sometimes you know over the
state about a squirrel and that
and line and you know.
but but I mean you get my point
right is and I hope you can
understand why and I'm not just
here to identify issues and
problems with your bill but to
hopefully give you some guidance
if you're ever going to get hurt
again and and I'll just make
note that I already heard some
suggestion this may not be the
session this bill gets where you
want to be but hopefully it uses
this opportunity to increase the
dialogue in the interim process
for you for you to get so
because I I I understand the
discussion about the need for an
update.
And you can you hear me loud and
clear to which is going to talk
about and ramble Justice don't
forget about other communities
that have been marginalized
right from the standpoint of
economic justice and it's not
just native Americans it is not
just Hispanics we can go in and
we could probably look at any we
can look at social issues we can
look at economic issues it's not
just the
You know I'm a native American
issue nine I know you know that
senator you're nodding your head
and I I know you're gonna be
sympathetic to that but you can
understand how when I'm reading
the subs and women you know so
we go back to the definitions of
the new definitions you're
adding your adding an
environmental justice community
in in your new definitions and
then you're saying who's gonna
decide what that means and
you're cutting me out
of your environmental justice
community means a community or
population of people this is
where law making really begins
to get to me which is your
defining and environmental just
committee using a commuter
population of people that
experiences where it is at the
risk of experiencing higher or
more adverse human health
environmental effects when we
stopped there with a calm as a
that's the entire state of New
Mexico.
Right a community or population
of people that experiences a
risk of expense a higher or more
adverse human health or
environmental effects it's all
of us right so I don't know how
that defines environmental
justice community in any way
this of meaning to me and then
it goes on to say it says
meaning consist including
communities of color low income
tribal and indigenous
communities once again your
including but you're also by
omission you're excluding in my
mind when you say that
environment just committee is
going to be committees of color
low income tribal and indigenous
communities.
Where where is my district in
that definition we're we're is a
a Hispanic colonias interest
they're they're not referred to
there it is an environmental
just committee and you know
center guy goes you're part of
the state where this activity
that where the production's
going on you've got colonias in
in your district to right and
and I want to do on our and
Justice of them as well too so
when you define an environmental
just commit you're gonna have to
do it in a way that has meaning
to me Senator and and right now
when we to say it's a.
A committee that experiences for
us at the risk of experiencing
higher adverse human health or
environmental effects that
definition doesn't have a.
Any parameters to me once again
it's it's so ambiguous it really
has no meaning.
Then we had and the other second
you to definition is quote fair
treatment and meaningful
involvement well you know again
ISIS at early what's what's fair
treatment to some what is
meaningful involvement to some
is going to be different and and
as lawmakers we have to we have
to have some greater precision I
think so get of this was to get
heard in judiciary I would
expect that.
On the definition of fair
treatment and meaningful
involvement here's the
definition means to avoid or
minimize once again I understand
would avoid means minimize
difference of opinions right
very subjective so it means to
avoid or minimize in developing
and implementing a policy
program practice or activity
disproportionate adverse health
or environmental effects on a
group of individuals including
environmental justice
communities through consultation
with the participation of
individuals from committees
affected meaningless to me
unintelligible to me nonsensical
to me so I I hope you look at
those definitions again because
they really they're not
something that a lawyer can
interpret their not something a
court can interpret and and when
we don't find good definitions
then we leave it up to the
courts to effectively become
lawmakers.
What really happens the courts
have to sit there go with those
with those knuckleheads mean
when they gave us this
meaningless definitions and the
courts have to decide and and
then the then the courts become
the lawmakers really and the and
and I don't I'm never
comfortable with us
that's that's one place that I
would I would be really focusing
a great deal of.
Senator the
I wanted to turn real quick if I
can to section three this is the
commission membership which I
think you're your check your
changing a little bit.
If you start with me on page ten
line sixteen says the commission
shall be composed of a
designated the commissioner of
public lands was employed by the
state land office that's number
one.
then comma doesn't do the
secretary of energy and mineral
natural resources that's number
two.
Then there's a comments as the
director of the division so
that's the third members that
right of this group and then and
then we're adding language to
members appointed jointly by the
speaker of the house the
president pro so to protect with
the Senate.
Help me understand my
expectations is probably pretty
powerful commission said that of
would you agree with with me in
that regard.
Madam chair of Senator Cervantes
yes it is.
And so we're gonna have three
members who are State Land
Office a couple of or secretary
and director of the division
that those three appointments
are going to perhaps change in
the political winds depending on
you know who gets elected and
and what's going on there that
is the two members appointed
jointly by the speaker that
president
with with this being such a
powerful position I always
wonder what happens when the
speaker and the president pro
tem don't agree.
How does that get results Madam
chair Senators Servan tastes so
right now the commission is
composed of those three
members you identified in the
beginning that's who the
commission is right now the
State Land Office doesn't need
The OCD director and EMNRD
secretary employee T. so that's
the commission right now what
we're doing is expanding that
commission to add these two
positions to represent these
public interests that aren't
represented on the commission
right now and I think the
thought is is that the the
speaker and the president pro
tem R.
Mature enough to be able to come
to an agreement and the the
challenge for you of course is
that I've been around long
enough to remember with the one
chamber was by Representative by
one party one chamber was
represented by different party
with the commission is very
powerful and going to control
the oil and gas industry when
the Republicans have the speaker
of the house I couldn't for C. a
circumstance where the speaker
of the house and the president
of the Senate might not agree on
who the appointee might be and I
think you need to rethink how
that works because I I could see
a clash and reconcilable clash
Mr **** you Madam chair Senators
about this thank you we're I
personally I'm definitely open
to that kind of suggestion the
idea behind having an
appointment coming from the
legislature is that it would
that appointment would be
broadly representative of the
state and so that was the point
so whether it comes maybe only
from the speaker if people are
really concerned about the
potential conflict you know
that's that certainly
you know an idea worth
considering but the point was
that it that that those seats
would be rob broadly
representative of the state well
I appreciate that is an
admirable goal the I'm a I'm a
politician I hate to admit that
please don't tell anybody but
you know the the reality is that
the speaker in the presence
percent maybe on a very such a
very powerful appointment and
powerful Commission I could see
where they may not agree and I
in fact I think that's probably
predictable.
Then you go on the next page
page eleven you talk a bit more
about those appointments and an
online I choose income we talk
but the point is is that in
addition to members appointed
jointly by the speaker and
president.
One of the members shall have
expertise in environmental law
policy or science or public
health law policy or science.
And show represent the state's
interests and beautiful and
healthy environment.
I understand again that's not
law to me to have to have
somebody who represents a we're
gonna make an appointment by
somebody who represents the
state's interest in a beautiful
health and environment I hope
that includes all of us
help open because everybody on
this panel Democrat and
Republican hope includes
everybody in this room I think I
want to believe everybody here
represents our state's interest
in a beautiful and healthy
environment.
For those of you in the room who
don't want a beautiful and
healthy environment please raise
your hands because I'd like to
know who your.
But but that's not a
qualification really hope that's
not a meaningful qualification
from of.
The other the other other member
appointed jointly by the speaker
the president pro tem by your
new language quote shall have
expertise in fair treatment and
meaningful involvement fair
treatment and meaningful
involvement of environmental
justice communities once again
of a meaningless unintelligible
unenforceable
standard right who who this
appointee be who has expertise
in fair treatment.
I like to think I have expertise
in for.
I'd like to think that I have
expertise in meaningful
involvement in environmental
justice but those are those are
unintelligible nonsensical
standards.
And and the appointee shall
represent the state's interests
and fair treatment and
meaningful involvement of people
in communities once again.
It's it's it's really pointless
the appointee shall represent
the state's interests and fair
treatment and meaningful
involvement people.
I don't get it.
Of.
So madam chair you over at the
at the risk of the labor in this
committee I'm again trying to
very quickly identify where I
think you're going to run into
some issues on page twelve you
you again talk about the two
appointments.
Of the speaker and the president
pro tem.
The four year terms.
Of the appointments shall
represent the state's interests
in a beautiful and healthy
environment you'll see that
language you get on page
nineteen twenty I I you know I
encourage you to
it must also give you that
opportunity to consider coming
out of your chair for me but but
but you know as a as an attorney
and coming to Judiciary we're
looking for laws that can be
interpreted understood applied
enforced and when you say the
appointments are going to be
people who have over like a
beautiful and healthy
environment.
At the so I'm sorry go ahead Liz
costuming tell me why that means
something to you madam chair
Senator Cervantes thank you it's
miss fox I'm sorry or if it's
like the animal right so I
understand the point that you're
making on the one hand on the
one hand on the other hand I
would like you to know in the
committee to know that we
thought long and hard about
these definitions and looked at
other states and the federal
government for guidance on these
definitions and so the two
definitions do come from a
federal law that is before
Congress right now the
environmental justice act and
while
it you know I have no objection
to improving upon those
definitions they were thought
out and for example you know
there has been environmental
justice executive order from the
federal government in place
since nineteen ninety four with
this kind of language this isn't
the kind of language over which
gets litigated
you know the real issue here is
involving these communities to
extent to the extent that we can
and and and we haven't you know
here here to for and so that's
to me that's the real issue I
think we can get beyond the
definitions although these were
well thought out but the real
issue before us is that
environmental justice committee
communities in New Mexico are
disproportionately burdened and
we just saw a study of that come
out last week from UNM and a
consultancy out of
San Francisco looking at it
across industries in New Mexico
and the impacts on people of
color indigenous communities and
low income people and that's a
real thing in New Mexico and so
this is an attempt at addressing
that so I think the focus should
be on well this should be the
goal of the policy the
legislature you know what is the
best language to craft that I've
packed.
Just forty years I I have
you know language is one of my
things too so I appreciate any
any you know improvements in
that regard but we did take a
lot of time to provide you know
definitions that you know are
widely used in around the
nation.
And I appreciate that effort and
I respect it
Then you so there's you know the
thought behind it was long and
hard it's going to be longer and
harder
you know to say that the where
we took the language out of of
an act that's before Congress
then something before Congress
doesn't really mean a whole lot
one you know you know this
because that means it's a bill
that's been introduced in
Congress but has been passed by
Congress which means it's a work
in progress as well there too I
presume
and in referring to for
referring me to Congress as an
example or in an ideal that
sometimes is so I'm not always
your best argument with me these
days as well too so but I I you
know I I hope you find a better
definition I really do and in
the example I like to give us
just a real world example
Center ham when I talk about
this from time to time the the
trash Malpaso comes to someone
part you know the the think
about that from of the trash
from el Paso gets landfilled and
someone parking Mexico por New
Mexico probably ninety nine
percent Hispanic border
community right when we get we
get all the trash in the city
Texas because they are clever
enough to take their trash and
dump it in New Mexico so I don't
need to be schooled on
environmental justice or the the
exploitation of certain
communities but your if you're
gonna ask me as a lawyer to
interpret an issue that it's got
to have some meaning to me and
these these definitional have me
of the
I just a couple of other
thoughts to to hopefully improve
things for you on page thirteen
you've got language here that
requires the members the
commission disclosed sources of
income financial interests and
so forth I don't know that's the
best place to put that we don't
usually Kandace sprinkle these
things throughout various acts
and statutes we really kind all
refer everybody back to the
government conduct act present
members the commission would
have to comply with financial
disclosures just like all the
rest of us have to do so I don't
know that you really need to the
trying to have something like
that there.
page fourteen of in your section
five.
We're talking about the powers
of the commission once again the
powers the commission are to
protect health environment
promote public interest health
safety and general welfare
promote the fair treatment and
meaningful involvement of the
public including environmental
justice committees once again
meaningless to me candidly as an
attorney you know what what is
your requiring somebody to
protect the health and the
environment I don't know how you
measure that hi I don't know how
you evaluate that when you say
that their job is to promote the
public interest I don't know how
you evaluate or for that when
you say their job is to promote
public health safety and welfare
promote fair treatment and
meaningful involvement once
again of standards that can't be
measured can be evaluated if
they miss I system we will
nobody litigate these issues
nobody really cares the weapon
in the bill
Why even include the language if
if it doesn't have a meaning and
we can't really measure anybody
against and and that's not to
say that your bill doesn't do
important things but maybe we
don't need to do those things.
you've got that same language in
page of page twenty.
Requirements to promote fair
treatment meaningful involvement
once again we go back to that
definition that really to me has
no meaning.
When we get to the substance of
the bill the there's a
requirement for establishing
minimum setbacks haven't talked
about that I hope will get a
chance to maybe talk about that
if Judiciary I think the biggest
thing your bill probably does is
the financial assurance
requirements that really seems
to be the substance of of of the
with the bill really deals with
the release actually two things
one of so one of his removing
that cap I think right
the other one is the venue we
have talked about the venue
issue here you're smiling so you
know what I'm going with this
one of venues lawyer word that
says where you where you get to
bring your lawsuit that's that's
the legal term and right now the
existing law.
Provides for a lawsuit brought
to for some of these
requirements in the county where
the well is located.
you're striking that language
which would mean that you could
bring the lawsuit presumably
someplace other than that other
than the location where the well
for the environmental impacts
having an effect this is a
philosophical issue that lawyers
debate right which is should you
if you're gonna sue chevron or
some of the issues to the should
you have to sue them in the
community where they're
operating where their conduct is
having an effect where should
you be able to sue them in Santa
Fe obviously if you're part of
an environmental interest you
want to sue in Santa Fe
Los Alamos or towels or
someplace right in and if if
you're not you wanna you know
you want to soon Eddie Lee
Chavez counties so I I don't you
know open use looks like again
you're coming out of your chair
I can read your body language
like you but but go head to I
mean that that's a very
significant change in this bill
that we have talked about.
Of madam chair Senator Cervantes
that provision you know really
this then lines up with what
general venue provisions provide
and that is that a plaintiff can
sue in we know we're here she
here it lives help for consumer
defendant we're in it operates
or would it lives lives so that
that provision which I think is
you know I think it's relatively
benign I'll just brings the
statute in line with today's
practice and allowing a
plaintiff which would in general
be the energy minerals
department this is really for
the benefit of the state agency
being able to sue in Santa Fe
are Bernalillo county well I
understand why that's for the
benefit of the state agency the
the producer may not see that as
a benefit to get hauled into
court in Santa Fe they may feel
like they get a better shaking
their in their home communities
but you may suggest it's an
innocuous changing the law would
I would as as a lawyer who
litigate a great deal I would
tell you where you bring your
suit is a huge part of the
strategy that I employed in any
lawsuit right is trying to
figure out which cord I'm gonna
be in state or federal which
county or district I'm gonna be
in has a very meaningful impact
on me and and from time to time
I'm suit buyers to state
agencies and they they love to
be in Santa Fe
they know the judges they know
the venue they they know where
they're at and how I'm coming
from Los crucis I don't
necessarily like to get called
up to Santa Fe I'm feel like I'm
gonna get home town and then a
fortunately for that doesn't
always happen but you still have
that that sense of I would
suggest you that I think that's
probably a pretty big change to
the with their in the industry
has brought up nobody's brought
up here today so maybe I'm maybe
I'm just off of off off on my
world but but in my world we're
used to and then you this is a
very critical issue with the
you're changing that in this
bill and and then again the last
issue which.
I think.
I'm just about done then is
again I've already covered the
end of the bill with this
advisory
Council and the composition of
that you told me there's a
mistake so I I don't know if you
want to identify the mistake of
trying to fix it now or you want
to of trying to work with it
between now and and another
hearing but but you didn't tell
me what that that mistake is.
Madam chair Senators of artists
yes the the way that it should
read.
On that is that the
Number the number one of the of
on the membership list it is
that page twenty nine age twenty
nine line twelve exactly thank
you
for representatives of
disproportionately affect
communities that should be
appointed by the chair of the
commission.
Yeah so that regulators
appointed by the secretary of
Indian Affairs right and so
those are people who are broadly
representative of impacted
communities like the ones that
we've talked about today and
like the ones that are you in
your communities and then the
second one should be for
representatives of tribal
government governments and those
are appointed by the secretary
of Indian affairs so the who
appoints got mixed up and I
apologize that is my fault for
not catching that yeah looks
like there's some significant
switching around that's got to
be done in those two paragraphs
and and the other thing too is
when you say well the
appointments including when you
say in a when you put into
building state including
representatives of communities
within the San Juan and Permian
basin.
It's hard for anybody who's
making those appointments and
not recognize that there's a
reason the legislature would put
San Juan and Permian basins in
the it it's going to suggested
that's where those appointments
need to come from where those
individuals those appointments
should be given a preference do
they come from San Juan and
Permian basins and I think I've
already made my point that
Senator only get excluded you
you you were on my prior fill on
water transport team was maybe
we have a chip on our shoulders
from from this the part of the
state the seemingly always gets
excluded.
And then of and then there's a
cap on the cut cap on fines and
penalties I think you cover that
somewhat right now there's a cap
at two hundred fifty year bill
would remove any cap and maybe
if we're updating this maybe
there's something in between
maybe maybe there's maybe two
fifty is in all caps and maybe
it's no longer relevant maybe it
should have been updated the
sky's the limit may not be
two in a realistic expectation
as well too and so there so
there's a lot of room between
two hundred fifty thousand and.
In infinity right so maybe we
can find something that might be
something that we could work on
Senators thank you madam chair
so if you.
Thank you Senators advances is
there anyone else who which
wishes to speak.
what I'll make a few comments do
you want to make the change on
the chair of the commission the
switch now for.
Madam chair if it gets out of
this committee will work on that
change okay I just wanted to say
that the environmental justice
issues are absolutely crucial in
the state not just within the
state but also for our state
itself as compared to the entire
country and the EPA has been
doing a lot of work they have an
environmental justice office now
and I recognize some of the
language also it comes from the
environmental justice of the
state environmental justice
office of the EPA and so I
applied that I think that this
conversation I I really thank
you so much for bringing this
bill because has you recall we
saw it in intercession or into
interim and I
with very interested in the bill
thank you for sending it to me I
feel like that what happened in
my life and was able to get back
to you but I think that this
this focus this update with this
focus is is way beyond over due
because we've just seen the
heritage and the history of our
communities of color including
Hispanic communities
throughout the state really
bearing the brunt and I think I
share with you at that time the
doctor if you look at a map of
the state and where the
communities of color of reside
in more populated areas just
like what the are you were
talking about it's just very
clear and if you match that with
health outcomes including as my
cancer and toxic poisoning of
the overlap is is expanding and
so I'm I am very very grateful
that you brought this bill I
support this bill I hope at the
end and I'm gonna vote for it
because I think it's important
that you go on with momentum and
get dressed I mean I think it's
important I I don't necessarily
agree with all the changes
suggested but Judiciary has a
very very important role in
making these bills enforceable
And and strong and and achieve
what they need to achieve so I I
appreciate that and I I I'm
going to support the bill and I
believe I was the last person to
speak so will the secretary
called the roll.
is there a motion again I'm
sorry thank you of motion to
table that has precedence so
let's go ahead and call the roll
on the motion to table.
Senator want this no.
Senator Gallegos is for.
No.
Senate available yes.
Senator pope no.
Senator committee yes.
Senator also.
As the lotus no sense the
benefits no.
K. do I hear an alternative
motion for a due pass please our
second okay a motion for a do
passed from Senator sold the
second by Senator pope will
madam secretary call the roll.
Senator Fontana yes.
Senator Gallegos no matter
Center happen yes explain a
vote.
Senate Bill no.
Center.
Yes thanks committee
Center souls yes says the office
yes Senator fonts yes.
Okay with a vote of six to three
you have a do pass.
Aftab salute Africa I'm sorry
thank you know that's alright
then I'll be very brief I I do
think madam chair and and and
sponsor I do think this is an
opportunity for a conversation I
have the the luxury of sitting
next to centers of ansys and
watching him markup bills and
and I strongly encourage you to
read for you.
and I strongly encourage getting
that getting his copy up but I I
do think that this is something
that is is a conversation that
needs to continue and it's not
something that we're going to be
that you know able to address at
this time but I think it's a
very important conversation and
I appreciate you being open to
these different perspectives of
this and wanting to make sure
that this truly represents the
state and what's in the best
interest of the the residents of
the state so I thank you for
that and I think you for bring
in the bill and starting that
conversation thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair and
if I just want I respect every
single one of you even the of
the opponents of the bill I
become a better Senator by
hearing from you and what your
thoughts are and being objective
and so I look forward to working
with all of you on cleaning up
the bill thank you so much.
Thank you thank you senator our
next of next on the agenda is
low income solar Act SB four
thirty two.
Would you please be a little
more quiet has you leave
chambers.
Thirty two.
And then we're gonna do for
twenty nine.
As you can.
One of you here in one of their.
Thank.
Yes thanks.
Senator Hamblen we have twenty
minutes to finish so if you can
you've got it madam chair and
committee thank you very much I
appreciate this I do a love
scene the young people that are
coming in and out of this
committee today and is there
moving all over the capital in
understanding how the state
legislature works with Senate
bill four thirty two this is a
low cost solar low income solar
acted as a state with over three
hundred and forty days of
sunshine a year I think we all
can agree that we have an energy
resource that we can maximize
for use in our homes our
businesses our schools and in
every building and structure in
our state however access to full
solar systems on our homes our
businesses still seems out of
reach for a lot of low income
homes and residential building
products that projects Senate
bill four thirty two takes
advantage of the federal
inflation reduction act in it
those monies that enable tax
credits connecting affordable
housing units to the statewide
clean energy movement this
haven't happened by establishing
on site net energy metering for
qualifying low income building
projects it allows tenants to
receive the benefit of the
twenty percent Attar on top of
the thirty percent investment
tax credit authorized by the R.
A. for solar installations and
for single family households as
B. thirty two would ensure
equitable tax rates for on site
solar upfront costs for solar
system can typically range from
fifteen thousand to twenty
thousand dollars and unless you
have access to financing the
system purchasing the solar
system to reduce you you'll
utility costs is typically out
of reach and so I do have to
experts here with me there will
be able to make brief statements
I've Christopher Worley who is
the director of PA a public
policy for sun run and then we
have a familiar face in our
committee Jim did Tarzan who is
the executive director of
renewable energy industry
association so what I like
Christopher where we go ahead
make a comment first if you want
to go ahead and use this one and
hold down the button.
Thank you senator
madam chair and Senators thank
you for the opportunity to speak
about this bill I'm Christopher
Worley was son run I cover
policy in the four corners
States I've been in the solar
industry for five years and
before that I spent six years in
state government with the
Colorado energy office developed
a renewable energy and energy
efficiency programs.
Hold down the button.
Good morning Madam chairman
members the committee Jim day
sure to I'm the executive
director of the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico and we think that this is
a final bill that when able
a just transition to renewable
energy renewable energy in the
state of New Mexico thank you
very much.
Thank you madam chair and
committee gonna open it up for
the and for discussion in public
testimony okay how many in the
audience support system.
Anybody in the audience opposes
bill.
All right just in the interest
and we have online Sarah manning
who supports and apparently
nobody who opposes just because
we have such little time left
and we only have one opponent if
we can have to supporters
testify and one opponent just
to.
Just to move quickly if that's
okay would you like to select
your I'm I'm fine with you madam
madam chair there's two
opposition across there's two
opposition than that perfect to
into.
So come on up.
Two in favor into up in
opposition.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Sankalp
come energy but I think so okay
I think that working you just
need to keep holding it down
please just eat them yes.
Yeah and project okay this will
to remain standing County
climate energy advocate with
conservation voters New Mexico
and we are also in strong
support this bill we see it like
a mini version of the community
solar act on it we were very
fierce advocates for that bill
like Mr Darden said it is
another step in achieving a just
transition over the others
you'll hear we ask that you
support the bills well thank
you.
Thank you one other speaker.
Of good after good morning.
If you forgot.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee al park
representing project vote solar
we want to thank the senator for
bringing the legislation and for
all the reasons you've heard
you're gonna hear from these
experts we stand in strong
support of this legislation we
think it is an important step
towards energy independence
energy efficiency for all New
Mexicans thank you madam chair
thank you and I just want to
apologize to Sarah manning whose
been online we recognize your
support for the bill but we're
now going to move to the
opponents and I believe we have
to opponents.
The good morning members the
committee madam chair Mike
d'antoni with Xcel energy we
serve electricity to the eastern
part of the state of New Mexico
this the bill we're concerned
with respect respectively
propose that that's kind of
concerning to us when we just
passed the community solar act
last year this seems to be a
subset of that acted it did to
plies to multi family apartment
complexes and so on it seems
like it actually competes with
the folks at the the lowincome
bill that passed last year has
requirement of thirty percent to
low income folks and it's This
seems to take away from those
community solar
Folks they may want to sign up
for the community solar as I see
it it's all confusing to me from
that perspective it also just
inserts a middle man in you know
with the the the the the
utilities there it doesn't
require the unique connection to
the the apartment complex which
is required to be on site and so
what you're doing is you're
inserting a middle kind of a
middle man to to doesn't really
provide the power provides the
power to the grid and utilities
required to pay a a net meter
value or building credit which
is very is can be subsidized by
all of their customers the the
problem you know it touts I
guess also is limit oversight
over that energy provider via it
also touts stability use the
irate I R. a funds which is
confusing because also in this
bill it allows for is the rule
valuation for net property tax
purposes how can you get a tax
credit from the feds if you have
zero of credit valuation sincero
valuation so that there's a lot
of this bill brings a lot of
questions
I guess for those and I guess
the lastly here
We would
say that this increased costs to
customers of utility scale solar
utilities when we take advantage
of the I. R. A. bonding with a
hundred percent of the credit
goes to the customers if I we we
just we could reduce the cost of
our of our project by that
amount so we are shortly will
pass a hundred percent these
these customers may not do that
nothing they won't but they may
not do that so for those reasons
we are opposed thank thank you
Mr Dantonio.
The morning madam chair.
The committee approved my with
the New Mexico rural electric
cooperative association and it
seems like this bill
Is a is is community solar on a
smaller scale applying only to a
specific income group.
The community solar act that was
passed.
allows rural electric
cooperatives to opt in.
The decision of a rural electric
distribution cooperative were to
opt into the community solar
program will be the sole
discretion of the cooperative's
governing board.
Under typical net metering rules
our corporate are allowed to
true up on a monthly basis yet
this bill states that kilowatt
hour credit would be carried
month to month and definitely
this is in direct conflict with
our current net metering rules
at the PRC.
My current statutes cooperatives
have the right after considering
the benefits and costs of DG
systems to make sure we we cover
all our fixed cost.
The fiscal impact report also
denotes numerous departments
like the PRC the the LFC and
energy and minerals have have
issues also with the bill a
normal rulemaking process is
approximately eighteen months
long and this bill allows for
six months rulemaking process so
we willing to work with a
sponsor with some of this
language concerned so with that
we oppose this bill thank you
thank thank you very much.
So now let's go ahead and turn
it to the committee.
Senator Gallegos etcetera
etcetera I appreciate this I've
got a couple questions so
earlier we're talking about
low income housing and how the
media's can you explain to me
what this bill will do if the
landlord does is how do they
recoup their costs.
Madam chair and senator go ahead
and that Mr really go ahead and
answer that question Mike should
be on there we should be right
Madam chair Senators thank you
yes so
landlords can opt in and choose
to do this and it will lower the
the bills that all of their all
of their tendency but also the
a certain amount of the energy's
going to use be used to offset
the the COVID area so it's going
to lower the the bills for for
the landlord as well.
Madam chair and senator I guess
my thought is if you go solar I
try to do this at my mom's house
I had heard advertisements that
the governor would pay the rest
in the rest was like forty
thousand dollar hit to me in
some I'm trying to think if the
tenant if a landlord go solar
and we've had discussions about
the metering just part of it in
a different bill but I'm just
wondering how a landlord and I
understand reducing your utility
costs I'm talking about the hard
costs the actual solar panels
the to the lexical system how
does that get handled Mr chair
and senator.
Madam chair and and senator
thank you for your question so
the system is is financed
through a through a solar
developer like sun run another
one and we the the developer
pays for all of those costs and
then
Cells essentially sells power to
the the the on site building at
a lower cost so it's going to be
lower than the the utility costs
that that the the the rate of
the utility and madam chair and
senator if I may also interject
there is that many solar
companies have agreements with
financial institutions to try
and finance those they also
project out how long it's going
to take for you to pay off that
system with what you what your
expenses at that time.
Thanks for that madam chair and
senator then what would be the
final cost to the tenants I'm
trying to figure out if they're
just thinking through statewide
we're looking for reduced
costing for housing because just
the the economics we have here
and I'm just wondering if this
would be an add on for the
tenant to the for the landlord
to the tenant mentor center
thank you madam chair and
senator I think you know when we
talk about the final cost that
really depends on the usage of
each of the tenants in the
apartment complex a like a hard
number on that I think is a
difficult number to give you but
I think what we can do is look
at that we know that there is an
island Mr really go ahead and
follow up with that we know that
there is a savings I mean I have
a savings in my house and I'm
single single family unit and so
we can look at the overall
savings on that from a multiple
unit apartment complex and see
that not only is it saving money
for the tenants but it is also
saving money for the landlord
well it Mr really go ahead and
add to that Mr Dujardin wants to
also comment on that briefly
madam chair and senator thank
you for question we you may have
this one page summary right up
in in your notebook I don't
think they do though they may
not so we can make sure you get
to get a copy of this we have an
example of one of these projects
in San Jose California in their
bill savings monthly bill
savings for customers of forty
five dollars a month so that's
real meaningful impact on their
their monthly budget for sure.
Think that madam chair and
etcetera and just thinking
through my mom's house I would
be in the landlord at forty
thousand savings within forty
five dollars a month and I just
don't I can't do that math but
without all you Senator thank
you senator smitteez.
and we're we're pretty sure on
time I will accept your answers
for sure madam chair and senator
page eleven it says soldiers
system subject valuation
property tax shall be guided the
zero dollars so are are there
appraisers that are currently.
Putting the systems into
property tax relief and and
people are having their.
Property tax increase because of
those the valuation of the
system is that correct.
Madam chairs and I'll let my my
expert Mr detergent thanks for
that Madam Senator minis so
currently if you own a system on
your home and there's about
maybe thirty five thousand
people New Mexico that do you
don't pay extra taxes on that
system so essentially what we're
strike we're trying to do here
is to make the same type of
accommodation whatever for third
party on systems thank you and
manager etcetera it is there how
how do you deal with a liability
if there is a a damaged system
that's obviously damaged does
that ever get the.
Mentioned by an appraiser or
some this value in this
property.
thank you madam chairman Senator
committees again for that
question so first like to say
that solar systems one of the.
Eight things I've had a solar
system for thirteen years is
that there's basically no
maintenance but occasionally
something does go wrong when it
does it would be taken care of
by the owner of the system okay
and that's kind of where of my
and my last question chair
Senators who when this systems
installed I don't see anything
in here about the end of life
solar panels or who's
responsible when it needs to be
replaced
who's gonna bear those costs.
Madam chair and senator I
believe it would be the owner of
the system so that would be the
apartment the the the landlord
of the system as a homeowner
myself if I have to make a
repair to my solar system I know
that the either it's it's a
they're covered under the
warranty or there's going to be
a cost with that and I would
assume and maybe Mr where they
can go ahead and confirm I would
assume that that would be the
person who is actually owning
the system.
Yes madam chair and senator
that.
The Center hand was correct
that's the owner of the system
so if you as a homeowner own
your system you're responsible
for that if it's a if it's a
third party on system where son
run another developer owns it
they would be responsible for
for end of life R. thank you the
thing.
All right Senator Madam chair
Senators to fund it will.
Okay seven.
All right we have a motion for
do pass in the second do we have
any other comments questions
madam secretary will you call
the roll.
US centers of this yes Sen Gregg
goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senate Bill.
Senator.
Yes.
Thanks committee the.
There's also yes.
And the city of this yes.
With a vote of sixty three you
have a do pass thank you madam
chair thank you committee
appreciate that you madam chair
my bill has a one word change
I'm gonna try to see if you like
it or not okay.
And let's see we have five
minutes on one one more change
let's see what we can do.
This is just before twenty.
Government unit utility savings
contracts.
Madam chair members of the
committee this bill was brought
to me by one of my constituents
and as I had some town hall
meetings other people express
the same concerns this is
relates to governmental units so
property owned by a local
governments and the fact that we
as property owners we are
putting money into running state
government county government
city government at centre and
that we should be looking at
utility savings so this bill
changes the word may to shall.
And that's all it does.
Okay and you don't have an
expert I don't know if Mister
McCartney is here but he was the
constituent who instigated this
and then as I mentioned I
brought it to several town hall
meetings and people like the
idea.
Mr Martin is a Mister McCartney
online.
And I don't see anyone in the
audience okay let's go to the
audience is there anyone in the
audience in support of this
bill.
Okay when is there anybody
opposed to this bill.
Okay so that makes it easy when
one we'll hear from the the
supporter.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee of the real
brief you just get it over with
the Sierra Club noted in the
chapter we support the idea the
public would be compelled to
enter into utility saving
contracts with qualified
provider to reduce energy Water
or conservation related
operating costs such a contract
can be guaranteed rather than
make such contract option this
could represent us the utility
savings for the state government
we recognized we recognize the
need to add FTEs to make
additional work look for EMNRD
of reviewing these contracts
possible but we do stanice of
our thank you.
Thank you Mr get it okay.
And that will go to the
opponent.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee can you
hear me OK yes the holding the
buttons okay.
my name is Anna Silva I'm acting
secretary for the General
Services Department and with me
I also have are secretary
designates will be acting for a
few more days when I'm not
acting on the director of the
facilities management division
so I'm standing in opposition of
the legislation and the reason
is a few reasons one is when we
look at the language in the
second paragraph A. as as after
review of the efficiency
proposal there's no definition
of the utility efficiency
proposal now before when it was
in may and I shall it was not
that a crucial however now that
the requirement is to enter into
esco projects the
requirement for the efficiency
proposal I'm assuming that's an
investment grade audit or
assessment investment grade
audits and assessments are not
covered under on you cannot pay
for an audit with us severance
tax bonds you could pay for out
of general fund or operating
money but not out of several
severance tax bonds this would
be a huge costs to introduce who
are I'm looking at capital
outlay projects the second is
the procurement mechanism
there's no statewide price
agreement that would allow local
public bodies and entities to
enter into esco projects these
projects are expo next Grace
extremely complicated there over
much sometimes often eighteen
years or more and the
contracting mechanism if you
don't have a
Energy engineer or attorneys to
help with the contracting
mechanism the contracts can be
extremely difficult and also you
can has still enter into and
have a deferred maintenance and
energy efficiency projects
without entering into entering
into just go pop.
So far if you don't like how
many how many of to to pass the
sludge many
guarantee due to the savings
contracts you've entered into
madam chair on this point it's
indicated that energy minerals
and natural resources has the
technical assistance for this
project.
Madam chair
thank you yes the facility's
Management Division in
conjunction with the EMNRD
Energy mineral energy minerals
energy minerals and natural
resources department we partner
with all of our just go projects
we have conducted one here in
Santa Fe for thirty two million
dollars we should receive an
annual savings of one point one
million dollars it has been four
years in the making and we
partnered with EMNRD in order to
do that we are also looking at
an investment grade audit one
for the penitentiary of New
Mexico and one for Las Vegas
each of those have cost
individually hundred sixty five
thousand for one just to do the
audit and the other was roughly
a hundred eighty thousand to the
second audit once we complete
the audit then we will determine
what the measurement of
verification is going to be for
each of the proposed audits
however we had to pay for those
drugs out of our operating money
because we couldn't use
severance tax bonds.
Thank you.
So now we'll turn it to members
of the committee.
Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair I hope to be brief
because we're down to one minute
so I'm just wondering why it has
be mandated if it's already
working and she just testified
on some of the ones are already
there if it's a real savings are
we having.
Mentors so madam chair and
senator thank you for the
question in Valencia County I
had some an individual
constituent who brought it to my
attention that the local
government did in fact do of an
energy savings contract and once
they learn the results they did
nothing with the results.
So they felt that their taxes
were going to the local
governments to operate and yet
the local governments knew that
they could improve the
conditions and they chose not to
so they felt like this needed to
be managed to move ahead.
Madam chairman center and I
appreciate I'm wondering if you
had discussions with the local
government sectors other
extenuating circumstances that
they didn't go forward because I
think this is more than a nudge
insurance center so madam chair
Senator many governments and I
have several counties in my
district that might claim to be
on the verge of bankruptcy or
have no of extra income or extra
reserves to do projects such as
this nature and would always put
it at the bottom of their list.
Final question and madam chair
and senator if they're close to
bankruptcy and we mandated.
how are they going to handle
that Madam L. madam chair
earlier this session I brought
forward the the climate.
Investment center fund which
would leverage state funds with
nonprofit funds with the
inflation reduction act there's
twenty seven billion dollars in
the inflation reduction act that
would be available to not just
lowincome communities but other
communities as well for
renewable energy and renovation
projects for energy savings and
out of that of twenty seven
billion whatever portion would
come to us forty percent is
allocated for the lowincome
communities of the rest of the
money would be allocated for
other projects and so that bill
Senate finance is considering
and if we did have a project
where we could leverage some of
the federal dollars it would
offer some opportunities.
Thanks for that madam chair and
center and I'll finish with this
I like your bill I just have a
problem with one or thank you.
I
think what else.
Some of the best okay we have a
motion for two passed we have a
second.
Also okay we have a motion and a
second of would madam secretary
please call the roll yes Senator
Vontaze yes said that goes.
Yes for the bill.
Senator pope.
Yes thanks committee no Senator
also.
Yes.
Says the phonics test.
With a five to four vote you
have a do pass thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair
