Years for that cut Senate
conservation committee secretary
personal secretary and panelists
have been of revised renewed so
we have nobody's name email or
phone number to get in touch
with if you would like to be
contacted in the future for your
opinion in an analysis or
whatever please stop by my
secretary's desk in three twenty
eight her name is in and there
is a place for you to sign in
your name and your of.
Interest topic it's cetera and
we'd appreciate that but if you
don't want to that's not a
requirement at all it's just so
that we can get a touch with
you.
So we're gonna start out with
the introductions but I first
want to say Center sh metes is
excused Tuesday and Thursday of
this week and Senator guy it
goes had a death in the family
and is also not with us today so
Senator souls can we start with
you please.
Thank you good motive good
morning madam chair I bill souls
state senator from Los crucis
area the beautiful organ
mountain desert peaks monument I
get your mountain biking it's
about half a mile outside my
door regularly in our beautiful
monument like to always break
about that I've been on this
committee since I've been in the
Senate starting in two thousand
thirteen and find this one of
the most interesting facet
committees because it's kind of
a catch all of all those other
things around the environment
around minerals oil hunting
their land and water and it's
just fascinating always thank
you madam chair thank you
Senator.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Hemphill public junior district
twenty three northwest
Bernalillo county Ventana ranch
area have petroglyphs a national
monument out there as well I was
elected in twenty twenty can't
really say and freshman anymore
were you know being here for a
little while know what's going
on happy to be here and Senate
conservation thank you.
Senator thank you madam chair my
name is Kerri Hamlin and I am
the the senator for district
thirty eight in southern New
Mexico also instrumental in the
designation of the organ
mountains desert peaks national
monument during the day my job
as the CEO and president of the
Las Cruces green chamber of
commerce and we talk about the
importance of locally owned
businesses also creating
sustainable communities keeping
money in our community and
keeping jobs in our community
and also protecting our air land
and water so I'm very happy to
be serving on this committee
along with everybody else here
thank you madam chair thank.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Antoinette Sedillo Lopez and I
represent district sixteen which
is the university area in
Albuquerque and I've been here
since two thousand nineteen so
that's been already for years
I'm very excited to be here I
think that this committee is
addressing the most crucial
issues facing our state for the
next few decades so I am very
pleased and honored to be the
vice chair and to support Madam
chair in in working on this
committee thank you Senator
thank you madam chair of senator
Steve Neville from Senate
district to which is San Juan
County from about the overall
about a third of Farmington
going east to Navajo lake with
that as tech Bloomfield lots of
property to conserve we need to
work on so thank you thank you
Senator Cervantes.
That's all right we're doing it
I know I'm Joe survive just a
few Dona Ana County and the
films committee for a long time
chair this committee years in
the past were from a farming
family that borders the state of
Texas New Mexico one of Harmon's
my grandfather's farm that we've
expanded a little bit over the
years and top of that I practice
well when when I'm not doing
things that are more fun up here
Santa Fe with all these thank
you mentioned thank you very
much I'm Liz Stefanics I'm a
state senator from district
thirty nine it covers parts of
six counties Bernalillo Lincoln
San Miguel Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia and in two years the
district will change and lose
two of those counties but right
now I'm very pleased to
Representative my entire
district from San Miguel down to
Lincoln now we'll go on to
introductions we did Senator.
We'll go on to introductions of
first of all let's do our
committee analysts if you stand
we have loosened the full some.
Thank you and Richard by Nick is
joining us as a committee
analyst hi Bridget I'm a water
turned.
Great thank you so much our
committee secretary McHale I the
Calvin solace this is my second
year with conservation right
really love it
of retired from the City of
Santa Fe police department House
retired as a crime analyst out
there did twenty seven years and
just happy to be part of the
legislation by fifty years ago.
They can be heard and and this
is in my personal assistant who
I was talking about to go get
your name cell.
I'm and one niece and that this
is my fourth year with the
legislature and with the
conservation committee and I'm
happy to be here thank you so
much okay so going on we'll go
to the major analyst.
Avid fuss go ahead good morning
you want to stand up good
morning.
This is my second year.
Thanks and Paul are you also
with the major.
Retired attorney and.
As a staffer for the
legislature.
Thank you so much our minority
analyst.
Anthony doing stand up in unity
should help Representative
Burton memory as well as.
Thanks for joining us okay
security Melvin.
know them all from as we all.
Great and Melvin who else's was
is anybody else so here with
security your session on.
This was back in that okay you
want to go ahead and introduce
yourselves.
You use.
Right thank you Martin and it's
been the.
A retired warden so that means
everybody.
This is what okay the next we
have our committee attendance.
Barber.
Yeah.
Okay thank you and I zoom staff.
More more more and more yeah
this.
I think it's a mapping on.
Basically.
Right now you realize is assumed
operating you don't get to
testify.
Okay do we have anybody on this
morning.
Out of the moment.
Out anybody yes is it was posted
on the web so thank you very
much so I made the announcements
about signing up if you would
like to be contacted for
information Committee members
we're going to circulate of a
form for you to indicate whether
or not you are interested in the
committee dinner this yesterday
and what night is preferable for
you we've had some offers of
putting one together.
Okay so I think he is are there
any questions before we move on.
To our agenda.
There have been questions about
how we will handle testimony in
the room and on soon and for
those people who have made the
effort to come I'm going to of
course recognize the room first
and then we will go to zoom to
see if we have people who are
online.
Sometimes we have so many people
in attendance so we just for the
hands of people who are in
support and people who are in
opposition so that the committee
can get a sense of where it's
going and then we allow so many
minutes or so many people to
speak from each side sometimes
we don't have enough people to
or enough time to let everyone
speak on the topic so just keep
that in mind okay any questions
committee members and again
thank you for being here so the
first one we're going to hear is
senator Wirth regional water
system resiliency.
And of Senator.
Do you want me to sit with your
just shared.
Up to you I think I'll just keep
sharing and this is Senator
Wirth is doing this with
Representative Herrera and
myself and others who are
interested.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of her a I think
will be on her way she also has
committee this morning that she
chairs but indicated that she
was planning to be on her way
over.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present Senate bill one
with me this morning is Ramona
said from the rural community.
Assistance will assistance
corporation I didn't get the A.
R. C. AC who has worked
extensively on this bill Senate
bill one of this bill is modeled
after a bill that then
representatives Servan tastes
passed in two thousand nine the
lower Rio Grande water works
authority currently under our
laws if to introduce want to
regional lies they've got to
come to the legislature and pass
a specific bill on that's what
then representative to serve on
days did
we've got another example of the
legislature's involvement in
regionalization in the
Bernalillo Albuquerque authority
that was done in not so
collaborative a fashion to say
the least but the legislature
stepped in created that
authorities been tremendously
successful we'll talk about the
benefits of regionalization and
what this bill does but there's
a couple of key things that I
just want to lay out and then
Ramon certainly can talk about
some of the specifics this is a
template it's not a mandate in
other words this is not going to
force anyone any entity to do
anything that they don't want to
do
what it does allow the is that
when two or more entities make
that decision voluntarily to
form a regional authority to
share resources operates more
efficiently and provide water
waste water road improvements
infrastructure this allows them
to do that without having to
come to the legislature for
specific bill.
there is incredible economies of
scale that come with
regionalization also with
drought climate change fire.
This bill is becoming more
important than ever all these
small systems are currently when
something happens and and
Representative had at us here
and she'll talk about her world
up north I can talk about might
world right here in Senate
district twenty five you know in
the system runs dry it really
creates an extraordinarily
difficult
situation and and a really
limited set of resources many of
the small mutual domestics have
twenty five even fewer members
that are part of an entity and
they've got to come to us and
ask for capital outlay that
happens a lot they've got to go
trying to scramble for money
they've got to hire people like
Ramon to figure out solutions
and just as an example here in
Senate district twenty five I
have a small community Kenyatta
de Los Alamos that has a mutual
domestic with twenty five users
and Ramon was hired because they
simply ran out of water last
session the speaker and I
appropriated seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars to that little
system as kind of a stop gap
measure they're interested in
regional icing and trying to
figure out how to connect to the
city.
And I'm really proud of that
little community for what
they're doing and how proactive
they are being but in many ways
they really don't have a choice
because drilling wells at we're
reaching the point where that's
not an option it's cost
prohibitive and so this bill
allows for different entities to
join and form that regional
template so with that madam
chair I think I'll yield to
Representative Garratt a to talk
about her world and I just
really appreciate the work that
she is done boy is that she has
brought to rural New Mexico and
she'll explain why this bill is
important her district thank you
senator thank you madam chair
it's a pleasure to be here I'm
I'm sorry I was a little late I
was set up opening our committee
agon Water over in that the
house side so that's what kept
me a little late I'm very
grateful to be part of this bill
to be part of this movement a
district forty one just so that
all of you know is it starts at
the Rio Arriba
Rio Arriba Santa Fe County line
right below Espanola I go all
the way to the north to the
Colorado border I I veer off to
the left to go over to Cuba and
then I come around less process
pass it I come in details and I
have four precincts inTaos so
it's not the largest district in
New Mexico but it is about the
size of Massachusetts and when I
came to the legislature my
background is really I I ran the
Landel foundation I thought I
would be working on educational
issues I am on the Education
Committee but I can tell you
seventy percent of my time is on
water I have the most mutual
domestic water systems I have
the most to Seki is
and I had the most land grants
in the in the state in one
district and so.
So that is what that is what we
talk about it's it's agriculture
it's rural but it's really about
water how do you conserve water
how do you protect water
on a personal note my well went
dry about I don't know two years
ago and the.
I knew it was going to happen
sooner or later but I just want
you to know it takes a year and
a half to even get a well
drilled and hauling water is no
fun and there are a lot of
people in the north that are
hauling water for drinking water
it's it's a critical issue in
the north these mutual domestic
water systems god love and they
do what they can they do what
they can but if we the
regionalization is so important
because unless you get a common
me of scale that's about five
hundred users that's when you
can afford a full time manager
and the US system operator and
that an accountant and that's
really five hundred is probably
I've I've looked at a lot of
systems in our in our area and
five hundred is probably the
breaking point where you can
pull people together and then
you can have a staff that can
actually handle the system most
of our systems are are under a
hundred people and and these are
not people of wealth frankly I I
represent poor communities and
the the going rate right now is
about fifty dollars a month for
water for most systems of some
systems are so small and so old
that there need not even on the
register and I just want to tell
you a story in my in my little
town of of Dixon include all of
the dock Rinconada it's it's
probably in the area of about
fifteen hundred people we have
four different mutual domestic
water systems in that area the
river in brutal because right
through my neighborhood and
that's and highway eighty four
and so one side of the river has
a mutual domestic the other side
of the river has a domestic
mutual domestic and then highway
seventy five to than to the to
the east you have a mutual
domestic on this side and then
you have another one on the
other side so this one up here
says about twenty this.
One is about fifty users is
about a hundred over here in two
hundred over here it's
They.
They all go to the same church
the the the managers of these
water systems they see each
other every Sunday you know we
see each other
until I called a meeting they
haven't met together as a group
of people running mutual
domestic systems in thirty years
and I called a meeting and I
said you know we had a really
tough and and Rinconada the area
below decks and has no there
it's all wells in ops also takes
so we are putting together a
community organization to look
at creating one mutual domestic
system that will serve all of
these communities about fifteen
hundred households and waste
water system what a concept the
sept six don't forget the the
waste water systems are are
ruining it so what we want to do
is really uses legislation to
make it easier for people to
really do this work and that's
we're trying to do thank you
madam chair thank.
provided you would get expert
witnesses to sure yeah.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that I want to set a high
work with an organization by the
name of rural communities
assistance corporation Senator
Wirth mentioned and we're a
nonprofit organization based out
of Sacramento California and to
give a little bit of perspective
on some of the work that we're
doing here in New Mexico we
probably have about ten
employees here in New Mexico
who are currently working with
about ninety communities across
the state for the work that we
do with small communities
because we are a nonprofit is at
no cost to the communities and
some of the work that we're
doing is helping them really
with some of the technical
managerial and financial
challenges that senator Wirth
and Representative it it I just
outlined.
About to start a like to just us
start off by the.
Letting you all know how
grateful we are for some of the
regional collaboration
priorities that have started to
occurring across many different
agencies and then to start with
that I'd like to start off with
the New Mexico environment
department so as many of you may
know all the New Mexico
environment department recently
created a section of the
drinking water bureau that is
called the regional resiliency
team that particular team is
going to be made up of three
individuals one individual that
was already employee plus two
additional individuals and
what's really a parent about
that is the the environment the
department's willingness and
acknowledgement for the need for
regional collaboration based on
all the challenges that we kind
of deal with on a daily basis
the next one is the New Mexico
finance authority as many of you
may know the New Mexico finest
Authority recently changed or
modified some of their policies
to really support regional
collaboration so some of the
policies now provide a mechanism
to provide more points if you
will for communities that are
working with each other so that
we can so that we can really
kind of promote this idea of
regional collaboration to face
some of the challenges that that
we're talking about and then the
third is the water task force to
state engineer Mike Hammond comp
worked with to to pull together
and working Group One of the
water task force identified five
priorities and some of those
priorities are regional
collaboration another one that
really kind of supports that is
to incentivize incentivize our
regional collaboration and then
third workforce development to
support the needs of hi
breaking certified operators and
people that can run water
systems so those three efforts
really kind of start to
demonstrate the willingness of
from the state side of of we're
working towards regional
collaboration and so that
willingness is really kind of
helping us before with this the
other thing that's apparent
about that is also as senator
Wirth was talking about this
bill we've.
Introduced this bill since
probably two thousand and
fifteen or two thousand and
sixteen what what we see in our
since that time is at the
community level well there's
there's a willingness to do to
really kind of look at regional
collaboration so RCC is
currently working in addition to
those entities that I've already
done some sort of formal
formalization of regional
collaboration we're currently
working with about twenty
different sectors across the
state with communities are
interested in forming regional
collaboration so when I think
about those twenty communities
or regions of the state there's
probably over a hundred
communities that could
potentially benefit from this
bill which would which would
really eliminate that some of
the challenges that we're
talking about are some of the
channels it would that we're
trying to to face so so we have
a lot of Willie yesterday as
opposed to when we introduced
this bill in two thousand and
sixteen and again in two
thousand and nineteen.
and then lastly I you know I
will reiterate some of the
things that Representative added
on to their worth already talked
about but lastly in the FIR we
talked about you know the
potential fiscal impact of this
bill to the environment
department but one of the
questions I'd like us to
consider is well what if we
don't do regional collaboration
so when we think about the
challenges that small
communities face across the
state and the number of
compliance issues or the number
of infrastructure issues that
need to be addressed but they
just don't have the capacity to
do that I think that those just
get over time worse and worse
and as you all know this year
over the next few days there's
legislative hearings for capital
outlay to talk about you know
fight is in funding being spent
from many of the communities
that are there are also a lot of
the local governments and one of
the largest reasons that I based
on my experience is that they
just don't have the capacity I
work with community water
systems for over twenty years
and the the lack the technical
financial and then chair of
capacity to be able to one keep
up with all the regulatory
requirements second to
effectively apply for funding
for infrastructure improvements
and thirty they do secure that
money for infrastructure
improvements to be able to
actually implement those
projects will see them all the
way through so so you know so
what what if we don't do this I
think that the challenges and
the issues that we see today I
think we just get larger and
larger.
Thank.
Senator you have any
So there were two up madam chair
to technical issues or to to I
think type type issues that were
flagged by miss by an act in
your analysis and we can
certainly talk about those I I'm
not sure if Council services
going to get it down in time
they're working on it on the
other thing there was some
suggested changes
In section three paragraph H.
and hi and we'll bring down some
language to discuss this just to
make it very clear that section
H. currently says an authority's
initial service areas shall
consist of the founding entities
existing place of use on file
with an approved by the state
engineer and and the request was
to add some language that that
basically clarifies that the
following comma but shall not
encroach upon the surface area
of an existing not joining
entity so just clarifying the
lanes you know what happens when
you create an entity making sure
again this is the key to the
whole bill we're not gonna pull
people in that they were
entities in that don't want to
be part of it but making sure
that that's clear and then there
was an additional
suggested language that if you
have to introduce and there's an
area in between so in other
words an area that doesn't join
making sure that that area still
has service either from a an
entity that exists wearing on
joining introduce you don't have
an area that gets excluded
somehow so what let's see if
those come down and we can give
those hand those out to be
specific on that when we get
there thank you so we'll wait
for them.
I have several small.
Together and done this and it it
doesn't happen overnight it's
not the.
But it's a process.
Other at.
Water families.
So I've seen it work and
We can make this.
Sessions comments from committee
members.
Senator Neville.
Thank you madam.
Share.
I deal with water all the time
we've got a lot of communities
systems in my part of the world
I guess how would I'm sorry I
forgot to take part I was
wondering.
That are okay is there anybody
here in the audience I just.
Your who are here to support
this bill.
Is there anybody here to oppose
this bill.
Okay so we have I use
supporters.
So let's start with the top five
people who are supporting so
many are.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
I went.
This is being.
Being watched or later and we
need to spend a record thank you
thank you for money the manager
yes my name is Mike Allen and
the state engineer for New
Mexico
and I rise in favor of of this
bill and I wanted to emphasize
what the Mr zero it's a
regarding the interests of the
by the community at large and
then the that was identified in
our of water policy and
infrastructure task force that
the governor's authorized and I
can do to ensure that all over
the summer the report that's now
about dated December two
thousand twenty two it has I
major recommendations and it's
associated with supporting
community drinking water sewer
storm water systems throughout
our state which is highly needed
and necessary as you all know
that also has a recommendation
one point two that specifically
cites the need to incentivize
and and promote regionalization
of systems that want to work
together and optimize their
systems going into the future
and we fully support that at the
state engineers office as well
as there's water right issues
that come up associated with
that consolidation of regional
systems and also individual
groundwater wells that need to
be appropriated in in the
permitting process and we stand
ready to support that that
effort
on a daily basis going forward
I also wanted to just thank all
the people that work on this
somewhere in the room here and
that we really appreciate the
effort that went into this and
there are several other
recommendations that we hope to
share with the legislature going
forward thank you very much
thank you for okay in the row in
front.
Be okay with the next.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee of my name's
Rebecca Roose former deputy
secretary of the apartment
apartment I stand in support of
SB one appreciate all the work
the Sanchez and there experts
have done going to this bill I
have concerns about really
addressed in past years and
right now I feel the bill in
front of you is a no brainer for
the state I don't see any
downsides to it honestly other
than maybe some stigma and
perceptions that might might be
out there the fact is that this
is a bill that in involves the
legislature removing roadblocks
that stand before our
communities across the state it
and as as senator Wirth side it
doesn't require anybody to do
anything but it removes us
robots for people who want to
move down that path to regional
collaboration and what's at
stake in addition to too much of
what you've heard and just to
really emphasize a couple points
that really hit home for me as
somebody who is been and
regulatory role working to help
protect our drinking water
supplies for customers and
protect our surface water and
groundwater from pollution.
What's at stake here is creating
a greater opportunities to have
higher public health in our
communities by increasing that
consistency and reliability of
drinking water service to
community members and on the
waste water side we're talking
about removing roadblocks to
help communities stop polluting
they may not want to pollute
most of who wants to pull it
right especially community level
but the fact is when they don't
have the resources when they
don't have the capacity we are
polluting our groundwater and
surface water and this bill is
an opportunity to take some very
odd way and that's why stand
strong support thank you thank
you let's move to the side of
the room.
yes first from the back.
Chair and fading.
I.
Three others on the waterfront
for selected.
Many many times or I totally
understand why we need to do.
That small they have to come
back at that point.
Thank thank you yes please madam
chair members the committee.
A week policy work to happen
last.
We support Senate bill one.
Credit.
But we think that it's a really
important.
Voluntarily want to reach out
winds had.
Statute to allow.
That makes sense for their
communities.
Process water during Christmas
to their constituents we look
forward to the bills and.
The way thank you yes Sir.
My name is Joseph and I'm a
executive director of the
vehicles problems which is a
statewide water protection
organization
I happen to live across the
river from Senator
Representative Herrera
distribution of talked about
some of these issues in northern
New Mexico quite a bit for all
the reasons previously stated
stand in support of the bill
thank you okay so yet still have
full work with this.
Thank you Paul Gibson co founder
retake Our to.
The only other thing I want to
add is it's perfectly obvious
before the start to face in
terms of drought and heat in the
state and if we don't learn to
come together and work
cooperatively and collectively
we're just gonna get crazy and
we're not gonna be a compact
obligations and we're going to
have people without water like
Representative Ferrary and this
is a great way to a whole lot of
community.
Together and learn that by
working together.
Thank you very much for your
time your service thank you okay
so there is some concern yes.
That would be.
I appreciate all the efforts
that are here.
My name is Paul Spencer from the
water sanitation.
I mean I'm sure and my concern
is that.
In order to afford the funding
that we need to improve our.
To transfer of ownership the
transit responsibilities at on
the far right spectrum of
regionalization analytics incur
just all work together to work
on a cooperative programs
system that can help these
communities retain their
autonomy retain their
sovereignty but provide those
services that we need so that
they can have the capacity to.
Provide the services in the
financial capacity to secretary
managerial and operations its
the the states and federal
governments regulations and
policies that we're trying to
uphold and this is the
communities are like you said
they're small they need help so
we have like a regional system
and again a lot of credit to up
Representative Herrera she's
been working at this very long
time I appreciate all their
efforts and enter bill of health
bill two four eight point twenty
was very good in helping these
communities in that in that way
during the construction phase
but we also need help this for
to to keep in compliance of the
state.
So we had a regional program
that the legislative operators
provided a managerial
secretarial
of the county that we can get
our projects funding on times of
you have audits and to be very
helpful for us and we can still
maintain.
That so I sent in the post this
bill because I believe that was
built retained part time.
And still be able to have a
capacity to to operate and if we
had that help extra help the
original for a program such as
what we do that.
Thank you so the figures have
An amendment.
Thank you madam chair and see if
I remember how to do this but I
move a do not pass on Senate
bill one.
not that.
Okay.
Session.
So.
Like the amendment.
Contact madam chair I'm happy to
walk through it
into these are.
Basically kind of typo type
issues on page three line
fifteen the term.
It basically states are read to
starting on thirteen upon
adoption the resolutions in
accordance with subsection C. of
the section the founding
entities shall draw up the
articles of incorporation and
bylaws this just change that to
prepare again that's just legal
ease issue page four line for.
Sure.
This so this Senator Ortiz
initial service areas shall
consist of the founding entities
existing place of use on file
with and approved by the station
state engineer and this strikes
the word initial.
From that so the service areas
shall consist of the founding
areas introduce it just strikes
the word initial we can explain
that.
And then the remaining three are
the ones that I discussed on
page four lines five and six.
Adding at the end of that
paragraph eight in a a clause
that states on page four lines
five and six
Strike
In their entirety and insert
there are in in in certain in
lieu thereof quote not be within
two miles of the surface area of
an existing entity.
And so.
That basically is to address the
initial.
Question again of encroachments
and we can talk about that just
the minutes page for lines eight
and nine strike lines eight and
nine in their entirety insert
their of quote into the service
areas have become part of the
authority's service area
excluding any surface area
already certified by the state
public regulation commission or
within two miles of such service
certificated area
and and again the idea here is
to ensure.
That we've got protection for
entities that are not joining
and then there's a typo
correction on page six line
twenty four after rights strike
for and insert their in lieu
there of that was the type of so
that's what this does and I'm
not sure if you know this this
with the the the primary
substantive issues were brought
to us by miss Velarde already
already in a I might let Mr
loose Errol I know there was a
meeting to come up with this
language and address those.
Three.
Yes this is been.
Budget pushed.
So madam chair let me just I'm
just being told that this
actually is not the amendments
language the agency Velarde had
suggested so let's just pull
this back let's not take a month
does not take a vote on this at
this point.
I would probably motion.
Thank you so we're back on the
bill.
In this is.
Our.
Is.
Thank you some senators for
professions.
Thank you Madam
I've got a lot of water systems
in my area in the county has
taken the.
Kind of the stance that anytime
there particularly when there's
a fiscal agent for some of these
that are not.
Really recognize.
And even some of the others they
try to.
Sure that when possible we
interconnect all of these Water
System so one water system has a
problem the pump goes out or
whatever then they can back flow
water the other direction from
another system so we do that
quite a bit already but they're
not legally organized with no
with this require would have any
would still allow them to do
that to continue to unofficially
have a region you might say.
So madam chair and senator the
answer is yes and I can
certainly relate to that because
I think Santa Fe County has been
doing some real proactive work
in.
Kind of working with smaller
entities to address issues that
they face for example I
represent the community of
Eldorado which is a water and
sanitation district and they've
agreed with the county to allow
the county to we'll water
through the Eldorado system to
get the canyon CTO
perfect example of what can be
done and so those types of.
End of collaborations can
continue to occur if those
entities decide you know what
this is this makes sense in the
smaller entities going you know
why.
It would be it would be
beneficial to us and and the
county or the larger entities
willing to to join with them
that would be an option under
this bill versus right now you'd
have to bring your own
legislation and senator just
been representative our office
did to create that so this just
gives them an option to
memorialize and formalize I
think one of the big objections
that I've heard from
You have a poorly constructed
Water System that would cost a
lot of money to fix our to
maintain and they want to tap
into somebody else's system
because of reliability the other
system doesn't want on because
they've got this big overhead
problem is this going to be.
What will this do much to help
that kind of a situation so
madam chair again I think it's
going to depend those those
entities would have to sit down
and figure this out and you know
one of the issues that was
mentioned to kind of by the in
opposition was the was the
funding that's available to help
that happen again I'll use all
use Eldorado in in Santa Fe I
know Senator fan expense to the
county commissioner I would
always put money on the I. C. I.
P. list to purchase that water
and sanitation district and make
it part of the system clearly
you know that specific financial
situation Eldorado the cost to
purchase that system years ago
from the developer was high and
so how that all works is
something that that would have
to be pieced together and and
assuming that was done then you
could join here the key thing is
no one's going to be forced to
do anything under this that's
the really important piece to
this and so in your situation
absolutely I think different
entities could say wait we like
the way ours works and we're not
interested in doing that for if
we're gonna do this we need some
help and I know when
Representative survived as did
did the.
Then Representative serve on to
if you were representative of
state.
Back there I was I was I I don't
think let's see two thousand and
nine.
So I just come over I was also
Representative worth there just
a little bit before but but I
know that part of the that the
help of the for that specific
lower Rio Grande public works
water authority was governor
Richardson was able to get some
money to put into the mix and
that's an example of what could
happen okay yeah this makes
sense to do it but we need to
deal with the financial
situation that's where I think
and what Mr lucerna talked about
that's were the state is really
kind of focusing on this to get
resources to make that happen
that's always been the challenge
for us is to we've got a.
Really maintained and worn out
system.
Nobody wants to come in orphans
of the even if they have an
opportunity a couple different
directions time they really
can't because the other guy
didn't want them because of the.
The cost of trying to fix
whatever it is that's all
manager thank you
thank you very much next is
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
madam chair during the interim I
had the opportunity this twice
and I you have thoroughly
convinced me about the the value
of of doing this
and but it the end you'll recall
every time I had these little
technical questions and just
My interest in making this the
best bill they could possibly
bill of the and there were a
couple of issues that were
raised by the state engineers
office in the analysis that I
don't know if you remember but I
raise the same issue about co
mingling I I've worried what
does combine incoming call maybe
in in the in the area of water
loss and I was gratified to see
that the state engineer has a
solution I'm not asking you to
to create that solution now but
on the way to Judiciary I I
really urge you to consider
changing the phrasing to say we
need to apply to the change of
place of use for point of
diversion of the transferred
right because that's consistent
with how the administration of
water in New Mexico works and
that what that won't set up some
kind of case some kind of
judicial case like what does it
mean to co mingle income
combined that is worried me and
I I hope that you do that I'm
not asking for it now but I
really urge you to consider that
before Judiciary because I
thought they get they gave some
good advice and they also said
something
And I don't know if this is
another incentive to join and
and so I'd like to have you
explore the purpose of section
three G. which allows
associations to accept the
transfer of liability assets and
liabilities with the exception
of fines and penalties incurred
under state and federal law is
that intentional to.
To encourage these associations
to join.
and if so I I just want to know
that.
Sementara like Mr lucerna
address so madam chair and
senator Lopez thank you very
much for both of those comments
and we agree with the the
recommendations from the state
engineers office on the first
point that you made and on the
second point is exactly the
point that you just made so one
of the challenges in trying to
bring small sisters together no
go back to Senator built simple
so I was a part of the invite
water and I intuited Senator
systems to fund its talked about
and in that particular case we
had twelve different systems
ranging from twenty let's say
connections all the way to a
hundred connections and to start
right that conversation we were
having a similar conversation
that senator Neville was talking
about in that the the challenges
some systems didn't have a lot
of debt associated with their
system but they had a lot of
cold infrastructure in the
ground other systems had a
really good infrastructure in
the ground and a lot of debt and
what we worked out over time was
that that all balances out in
the long term right where you
start sharing some of those
costs to a similar to the point
that you were just making
similar so there some systems
that have lots of compliance
issues or perhaps that and so we
but you omitted that is just
because we want to encourage
again water systems to work with
each other and then find
solutions to that through the
process of bringing the
community watches to go to to
discuss those particular
challenges with with that part
of the bill so so that's really
where we're really leaving that
at the for the communities to
kind of work out before they
actually decide to move forward
and actually come together.
Thank you madam chair and and I
guess my final point is I think
that there will probably be or I
guess I'll ask this question
Do you envision funding beyond
the state funding.
Like federal funding to also
encourage these transfers and
will this bill help help
increase access to that.
I think senator of madam chair
and senator Lopez I think to the
point that we were making
earlier I think that
what do we help communities
build capacity I think that they
have more access to forty
whether it's state or and or
federal funding and we we we we
get to see that so there's
several entities that have
formed regional collaboration
around the state and what we see
in that experience that or if
you are on the regional water
authority for example they've
been in existence now for but
you know for over ten years you
know close to fifteen years now
and the ability for them to
access federal along with state
funding is just incredible so we
you know through the
organization that I work with we
document leverage funding that
we work with all for Cologna
Communities and last year we
document a fifty billion dollars
of leverage funding for colonial
Communities across New Mexico
Arizona and California and the
lower the yield on there was
thirty million of that fifty
million so it's just incredible
that so it just kind of shows
the capacity when you build
capacity well you have the
ability to leverage lots of
funding for for infrastructure
work.
Madam chair that that's an
excellent point and I I think
that this is an important thing
to do they'll just end with the
one question that you already
answered but I think it's it's
really a.
Shows the need for this bill how
many do you anticipate using
this within within the next
couple of years how many
stations madam chair and Senator
Lopez thank you for such a great
question so again we're
currently working with about
twenty regions across the state
probably impacting a little over
a hundred communities so there's
about for about five hundred
let's see community water
systems across the state if we
can help those twenty regions
and all of those entities are
involved in that because you
know increases to to do this to
do regionalization I think that
will begin to eliminate a lot of
the challenges or compliance
issues that we see today and
I've been then leverage more
more funding to address
infrastructure thank you madam
chair thank you Senator about
this thank you madam chair of.
Madam chair that the issue part
of this story and sent us that
our work is right we did this
back in two thousand nine it's
been enormously successful in
the lower Rio Grande rex said
the right behind the line is had
affirmatively but the the
federal funding to communities
that come together in that time
too bad that it's been two
thousand nine that's taken this
long frankly you know to get got
twenty some years later and
trying to make this a statewide
initiative the the important
point I think your number
Senator was for me was.
That effort was very vigorously
opposed Frank Kappeler and the
city of Anthony you we're very
strongly opposed to that effort
and that was difficult for me as
a Representative because after
he was the principal population
center my district so to have
the major city in the majority
population opposed to this at
the time very vigorously was
problematic for me as the
elected official right how do
you how do you propose the
majority of the will of the
largest city in your community
and sometimes you gotta just do
what you think is the right
thing to do with the political
consequences be what they are
and it's worked out really very
well I bring it up because
through a substantive reason
because I I think you're gonna
run in some challenges here that
between here and judiciary I'll
be looking forward to working
with about it the big issues the
service area so for example the
proposed amendments that the you
put out in the withdrawn I
realize but I would I would I
would propose your amendment
because that would have
prohibited consolidation of of a
and area within two miles of an
existing service areas read this
and and you're not you're had
yes but I can hear the words
coming out about no so let me
let me clarify so that was the
initial proposal and then the
advocates all sat down and
worked on it that is not the
final agreement because I think
for exactly the reasons you say
the two miles didn't work so it
so that will be and it's a
technical clean up piece to it
and you know we'll certainly get
that get that right when it
comes to Judiciary good I I I
know you were driving and I
would sure exactly why but yeah
that I would propose the
amendment for that reason
because that that was the issue
in Anthony's Anthony did not
want to have these regionals
coming together mutual domestics
and all that coming together
near their service area because
they wanted to expanded that are
in becomes territory it's a turf
battle in we were we were
butting right up against the
city of Anthony servicer and I
was the fight and then I was
those fortune to prevail but
members close it was a really it
was a hard I took many nights
many hearings and in.
Anthony was very vigorously
opposing had good legal
representation and it was it was
a nasty fight but it's worked
out really enormously well and
again it's it's too long it's
taken that long to get there let
me just if I can because it's
going to Judiciary I'd never
want to turn this committee into
judiciary of manager but I also
like to maybe just very quickly
go through issues that I that I
would identify for you and then
have you think about before you
get to Judiciary the defined on
page two you have a number of
definitions need to provide a
member you find a members a
property owners receive services
this is always a fight we get
into these areas because later
on in your bill you put together
the voting rights of people that
are in in this kind of an entity
and the question is you know
when you to find out later here
he says every member gets a vote
well when you find a member as a
property owner receiving
services
is that the owners of tenant
that becomes an issue right when
you've got somebody who owns it
somebody's leasing it who is the
member who gets the vote and
sometimes these votes are pretty
tight in a pretty contentious
but particularly when you're
raising rates right.
That becomes a big fight and so
who gets the vote is that the
owners of the tenant is the
occupier what about when you've
got the two different owners of
the property and they have a
difference of opinion on the
issue who gets to vote so I
think you're gonna need to
really think about that issue
what I've just been there I've
seen it before up into those
meetings before there's a fight
about who who gets a vote that
properties vote
yeah the other issue too
sometimes is when you look about
who gets the vote I don't know
you're going to do that here but
who gets the vote maybe
dependent some cases on who's
got what property or if you know
of a person owns
six acres in the service area
one person was a quarter of an
acre they'd get the same both
perhaps are these the same on
water.
So that that becomes an issue I
think that you all should
explore a little bit about I
Let's see.
when in a page for you're going
to amend this it looks like
you're gonna come in quite a bit
the sections H. and I it looks
like so I'll wait to see how
that looks at Judiciary but.
When you've got impaired FH the
existing language of a initial
servicer once agains becomes the
whole fight right what is the
service areas of the service
areas shall consist of this is
an aside right another sect
member this
you know cut my districts always
been so entertaining with the
servicer there's a big fight
between students on a part and
still is right between their
service area and other providers
deal Crowder group and so forth
you know we the more got
arrested number that
we so does this morning water
you know the expression waters
for you know for fighting in
down there
there there's infighting among
the more change himself to the
caterpillar.
And and more got arrested in
their bonfires burning builder
since T. shirts and you know
it's very you know big drama
right so the servicer becomes
really important so when you
talk about program face the
servicer shall consist of the
founding entities existing place
of uses really question that all
as the state engineer later it
Judiciary is that really the
right terminology the for the
the existing place of used to
define the service area it may
but I I presume that those
founding entities already have
what is it prescribes service
area and and I think that the
that the combined the
consolidated service area would
be those consolidate servicers
as a poet as opposed to place of
use because I can vision there
may be circumstances where the
place of uses outside of service
there I think that happens
sometimes a look in state
engineer does not exist yet so I
think that that's true so you
you know you may want to tweak
with when you're looking at all
that language.
I don't know the need section
for it all I would consider
abandoning that it just says the
articles corporation of the
entity shall do a number of
things shall recite in the
caption.
Of the has this actors with I
don't know what the caption of
an article of incorporation is
you you do more this work that I
do legally Center work but I I
don't know that makes any sense
to me and then.
The fact that the articles of
incorporation have to have their
the name of of the authority or
the address of the authority you
know you're always going to have
that in articles of
incorporation anyway I mean it
seems like everything in there
should be pretty self evident to
me but think about that a little
bit I noted in section five
reviewing the authority not just
water waste water but renewable
energy projects that's that's an
expansion of what I did I think
that that makes some sense but I
don't know that's going to mean
are they going to be able to do.
solar projects in wind farms.
By this authority maybe that's
the idea behind it but it'll be
a question for the judiciary.
I don't like Santo I can
subsection B. two on page six
the fact that there'd be a
standby charge to properties
that are not within the service
area but that within some
proximity to the service areas
so we have would be on property
near the service area but you're
not in the service area we're
going to you're going to
authorize them to charge that
property owner of for the
privilege of being near the
service area even if you're not
getting any of the services and
I'm not sure that's a really
great idea.
The subsection C. two is the
forty year issue that all of
your level come up I think you
should be sure to is you get to
type water rights for forty
years I think that makes sense
but we remember we celebrate
that over and over and that was
a big issue in the last time
around too so I think we'll talk
about that as well to.
I'm sorry to bug down the
committee madam chair but I just
gonna want to give the yeah I
get ready that we have time
yeah.
Well you know that you don't
know that means but the this
there will be a lot of surgery I
think early potential surgery.
The of subset on page seven
subsection the land grants and
pueblos may connect.
I'm not sure why we need to have
that I mean I would assume the
maybe can tell me why it seems
like you're anticipated that
question so what what what we
have to tell Senator Ivey Soto
in the interim committee brought
this up as something he'd used
with Representative Smith
another bill just negotiated
language there that and he can
explain that you know we get to
Judiciary but this was a
specific just again part of the
process of going to the interim
this is something he wanted so
that's certainly can be
discussed and he can give you
that logic every think that a
little bit too because with all
respect to Senator Ivey Soto you
know I I don't know what that
you need to have languages as
the land grants in Indian
nations make connected
infrastructure they should be
just like any other the
participate right so
subparagraph P. on that same
page right below that just
doesn't make any sense to me if
you read that for a second tell
me whether it makes sense to you
or whether you think there needs
to be some language week but I
just I'm reading it and I I can
understand what it means or what
it says.
So madam chair what's what's
interesting and I just I I do
have to point this out is that
much of this language actually
come from your bill I have no
doubt.
I I I you know I I this is the
joy of being here and it's good
we're going to we're going to
get this right we're going to
give a little bit of a surprise
to you that was coming in well I
I had a full I had to pull your
bill up right here and I'm going
yeah that's the language that we
that you use which is again this
is where we started so for two
things we need to let all of our
friends are you and I were Law
School together and and the moot
court team has six members that
goes around the country and
competes against other loss was
Peter I really only males on the
T. right so there we have some
bonding right and so there's a
little bit of ribbing that goes
on to but yeah there's no the
only other point I'd make is
that since I I did mine in two
thousand nine you know I've
learned a few things of twenty
three years.
I've maybe got a little better
at this but but I doubt that
language to me is is pretty
awkward and and I I take full
responsibility for that
the subsection six I'm sorry
section six on page eight talks
about in pair of aces the
authority should be governed by
a board and says initial board
shall establish the boundaries
and the number of electoral
districts within two years so
with that suggests to me is that
you're going to have the
authority having electoral
districts and you're looking
members from each of those
districts which is what we do in
the lower Rio Grande and make
some sense of but but it doesn't
just I think that's the only
time in this whole bill where
there's a reference to that and
and so I would you know I I
think the you ought to think
about some more language about
how those districts are created
because again it's just like we
just went through this last year
when you do a read redistricting
of where the districts get more
drawn who lives in which
district is going to get elected
is going to get excluded from
the board by where you draw the
districts and and how you do
that becomes of of pretty again
creative thing these these water
associations are as political as
yeah I see both matter there
there is political anything we
do up here and and it matters to
people because your tier your
raisin their water rates right
and there's a range of so how
you do the districts and higher
let people within that I think
is important you may not
prescribe the number but you
might you know you might
prescribe the number of
districts and how you're going
to draw the or at least talk
about how those are going to be
drawn to just if I could madam
chair this is there were changes
Senator Ivey Soto the local and
the big election clean up and
all that basically for the lower
Rio Grande association these are
changes that were made for that
association which state they
live within sight again I think
this language is tracking kind
of the existing law with respect
to to the lower but we'll we'll
certainly look at that and get
let's look at that paragraph
because it says says the board
shall conduct elections pursuant
to local explosion Act in the
election code and I suspect
Senator Ivy Soto because of his
interest no there's probably has
some is about about how.
How the election takes place but
and and that's another point
that I'll make this your real
quickly in a moment which is the
notice for these committee
becomes really important because
once again if you're trying to
influence the outcome you make
sure that you get notice to the
people you want to come to the
meetings and the other people
don't get notice and and you
know these these movies are
usually very sparsely attended
given the number of people that
are affected rights you may have
hundreds of people that are
affected by the by the outcome
but they make sure that they're
twenty or twenty five or thirty
best friends show for the
meeting and they elect the board
and they like the you know the
the rules and and and control it
and this is this is the local
control at its you know its most
extreme really from my
experience so so think about
that'll but the districts
Let's see just roof quick I'm
almost on madam chair the of
let's give some attention to of
paragraph.
G. on page ten.
Welcome back to with local talk
with about that little bits
Senator Wirth you know that
becomes the that that's the
whole issue about conflicts of
interest right and that's
something that we all Russell
here all the time to that
becomes important the the
program I talked about the
board's fix the time and place
of meetings and the method of
providing notice I really I
really think we should prescribe
with that notice should be and I
I got to believe we have places
in statute we we talk about what
that notice should be at least a
number of certain days or paper
newspaper pop General
publication or
is going to be mailed notice you
you deserve a get of something
in the mail at the address of
the user on on file those become
good things I think to put in
the bill of sale was really up
to four to provide notice I'm
gonna tell you what's going to
happen that board is going to
get really creative about how to
give the notice to these
meetings and again I'm I'm not
meaning to be disparaging of
these boards but I just a minute
to introduce me as I I I I know
the game it's played very well
by some so
The I have a real chance a real
problem you'll have the
commencement judiciary Senator
again this may I mean you have
responsibility for the same in
subsection hi so part of a three
a looks like it's it's going to
be on page eleven.
subparagraph Hey there it says
until rate all rates fees or
charges come constitute a
perpetual lean.
I'm not sure that's a good idea
you know to say that there's the
you have an ongoing a perpetual
lead at all times on the
property that may be the way
they should work but it didn't
make it I don't like it and I'm
I may put it into mine back in
two thousand and but but you and
I understand the implications of
that to say that I just by being
and water user I've got a lean
on my property for your charges
and rates and all that that may
be the only alternative but I've
got to believe we have ways that
we do this and all of our other
municipal you tell utilities or
that I'm just a little trouble
by that says Lee maybe for
closed by provided by long once
again a aboard might get pretty
aggressive and saving I believe
in your property pager rates for
closing the property.
What can be pretty creative
about some of this paragraph
page eleven winds twenty one
twenty two attorney's fees job
find a picture we were the
prevailing party
Center were those with the smile
that over Judiciary we don't
like that provision very much if
I wrote that into two thousand I
have learned a lot of twenty two
years but but New Mexico is
progressing of policy American
rule we don't generally work
turns fees.
In the case of that that's it
that's a lot but I just want to
give you a you know what well
you have my attention and time I
just want to give you my initial
thoughts before you get there
otherwise I'm gonna move on to
other things and forget all
about this bill until we see
over there so thank you madam
chair thank you Senator bye.
Any further questions not
motion.
I move to pass.
There is a Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Passes are second.
Thank you madam Hamlin is the
second.
Anything further.
Okay with the
Committee secretary please call
the roll Senator survive this
yes.
Senator Gallegos fuse Senator
Hamblen yes.
Senator bill yes.
Senator pope yes Senator
committee is also excuse.
Senator souls yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator fine
yes.
By a vote of seven to zero you
have a due pass from Senate
conservation thank you very much
for coming from thank you moving
along Senator Campos
Representative Castellano and I
see Representative Sanchez here.
We'll start as soon as the room
is resembled.
Okay Senator Campos the floor's
yours.
Thank you very much madam chair
and of course members of the
Senate conservation committee
it's great to be here with you
today in essence Senate bill six
seeks a hundred million dollars
and with those hundred million
dollars what we're looking to do
is to help take care of the
travesty that occurred of course
with the hermit's peak cat
canyon fire this is a very
restrictive bill in the sense
that what we do is we work
directly with FEMA.
And within that as they have
continued to evaluate and gather
if you will the information that
will help them make good
decisions to take care of the
public need within this
particular area.
But this bill would do then is
to take the hundred million and
as we work directly with FEMA on
the Public projects the
resources could be given with a
low interest loan directly to
the entities within the area
that have been adversely
affected there's more
information but what I'd like to
do is to go and also defer to
the co sponsors since April six
we've continued to go ahead and
work diligently with all sorts
of issues when it comes to
taking care if you will of the
health and welfare of our
constituents within the Arian of
course with you madam chair
you've been very much involved
with this as well but in closing
in terms of the remarks that I
will make the indication first
and foremost is that what we
want to do with this and it does
have the emergency clause get
these resources to the entities
so that they're able to take
care of the roads the other
infrastructure that has been
devastated and damaged.
And along with that begin as
soon as possible to prepare to
address the issues that are
going to be created by the run
off of the fire itself as we've
dealt with the infrastructure
and thanks the New Mexico
department of transportation to
all of our law enforcement
agencies and our local governing
bodies they have worked very
closely to address the issues of
the constituents this does not
involved if you will the private
repair that is necessary will
continue to go ahead and work
with the local entities to see
how we're going to be
approaching that but again this
is an issue that we are in dire
need of the resources by FEMA
are slow in coming and it's not
to detract from the institution
if you will feel on the work
that they've done but it's to
indicate to the public that
there is an urgency and the
state of New Mexico through the
consideration of the New Mexico
state legislature.
Hopefully will consider this and
so we can prepare if you will
for of what's to come when it
comes to the overall
infrastructure of the area that
has been adversely affected and
so that madam chair if I may I
would like to defer to our co
sponsors Representative
Castellano and Representative
Sanchez and again they've been
with us all along as we've
continued to go ahead and fight
this devastation thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
thank you so almost madam chair
members of the committee thank
you guys for listening to this
bill I think this bill is going
to be very very influential far
communities and that have been
affected by these fires in the
studies right now we have
cultures that have been of food
on the ground a secularist what
does that have been pulled out I
mean like Senator Campos said
right now with the the run off
and and stuff that's coming out
in the spring we need to get
these back up in order and we
cannot wait for the money from
FEMA for these entities to get
back to working in the rules
being fixed as as we move along
I know there's a lot of people
that need the a second for the
agriculture that they that they
plan to know the of fell fun
stuff so I think it's very
important that we as a
legislature released look at
this bill and and supported it's
as strong as we can madam chair
thank you guys thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair of I guess hi I agree with
everything that's been said I'm
not gonna take too long term.
I think a lot of people.
I haven't seen the the
devastation first hand it's it's
tremendous are we going to do
everything we can as a state to
to help this area I was building
up like the hurricanes in
Florida and
Stuff that happens in the the
Midwest every time there's a
major issue over there
it seems like the taking care of
right away and hearing Hispanic
northern New Mexico I'm our
federal delegation they got a
lot of money I appreciate it's
just the process that's taking
forever but are you really got
to do what we can to to help get
money to that area it's it's
it's really needed and I really
appreciate what our federal
delegation is done on the line
and billions of dollars but we
we need to get money there now
as soon as possible so thank you
madam chair thank you can I see
a show of hands in the audience
of those people in support of
this bill.
Is there anybody in the audience
opposed to this bill.
Okay seeing that there's no one
opposed I think we're going to
go on Senator to questions or
comments from the committee is
there anybody on zoom.
Up from.
Madam chair I would moving to
pass okay I have a due passes or
second by second okay thank you
there's a motion for a do pass
and the second any comments
whatsoever before we go to the
general when three question just
one of the comments in the
analysis just kind of support
the bills that I'm gonna vote
for it but it said I want to
make sure that the the scent
Sunnyvale county manager said I
want to make sure that the
reimbursements don't cancel each
other out because I don't think
the federal government and the
state governments are going to
reimburse us for the same
projects so is there something
built in or other laws to make
sure that.
This goes smoothly and well and
we don't have problems later so
madam chair for males I'll go
ahead and start to thank you
very much Senator Sedillo Lopez
in essence the resources are not
to go and convoluted or if you
will duplicate the resources
there to ensure that the
resources are available so the
work can be done so there will
not be a duplication and so with
that particular comment I hope
this is the assurance that we're
gonna be working closely with
FEMA and use the state dollars
and when they were reimbursement
comes will work directly with
DFA so there's not going to go
and be any duplication.
Except okay thank you the with
the committee secretary please
call the roll Senator senator
Sanchez.
Second help put excuse.
That goes used to Senator have a
yes.
Bill yes Senator pope yes.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo okay yes Senator
funds yes.
Five out of six zero you have a
do pass thank you very much
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee
committee.
Coming.
Okay we're now on to Senate bill
twenty one.
Senator Griggs.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee of co
sponsoring this bill Bobby
Gonzales Senator Gonzales is in
financial fully he will make it
in time and also I'm going to
ask that Mary Kay route please
come should appear with
mediation expert okay.
Senator Patrick I appreciate.
Madam chair and and committee
fire in New catastrophic fire.
Have become an all too common of
an occurrence in New Mexico.
Citizens of washer lives and
millions of dollars property
both public and private.
Have been reduced to ashes.
People all across the state were
impacted.
Too many of these fires started
because a prescribed burn got
out of control.
The legislature can ensure that.
To eliminate or greatly reduce
the risk of fire caused by an
out of control prescriber.
I believe this bill will reduce
the chance of this type of fire
ever happening again.
Senate bill twenty one
eliminates the implementation of
a prescribed burn by a person or
federal state local of tribal
governmental entity during the
months of March April and may.
In my experience and I've only
lived here in New Mexico a
little over fifty years.
The windiest months of the year
are March April and may.
I believe the band during this
time of the year will protect
our state and our citizens from
this type of fire.
I urge the committee to consider
to seriously consider this bill
as one way to reduce the chance
of these fires occurring again
I've asked that the law
concerning prescribed burns be
passed out to each of you so you
should have that in front of you
as we as we listen to comments
and if I could I'd let mery K.
make just a couple of comments
and then maybe maybe Senator
Gonzales will be here to add his
input.
Thank you please introduce
yourself for the record.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is more
resistant of the guy in this
canyon and a volunteer
firefighter the for the loss
proceed to volunteer fire
department.
Sorry.
I lost my I lost weight.
Completely to us is we knew it
was a red flag day why did you
stop and start again so I'm
sorry you'd live where I'm going
this canyon.
And when the two fires joined so
I'm very near the base of
permits peak and then the
perfect storm so when cav canyon
fires join its peak fire.
That is when I lost my home my
sister lost her home my mother
lost her home.
And some of our family of
companies that we use for
rentals for lost as well.
And.
We knew they shouldn't be
starting a fire they don't
consult with the local fire
department the the volunteer
state don't check with us to say
he would the weather conditions
so everyone was aware that that
was no day to start a fire we
are already began letting people
in the canyon no to not go ahead
and bring their brush because it
was just too windy and far to
drive.
I hope this kind of thing can be
curtailed in the future.
Thank you for coming and being
with us today we really
appreciate it and we are
concerned about your loss and
everybody else's of loss from
all the fires of I mentioned
that I represent six counties
and I had major fires and three
of the six counties this last
year.
So in the audience of could we
have hands of those people who
support this bill.
Okay good I have hands of those
who oppose this bill.
Okay we'll hear from about five
people on each side if there are
so let's go to the supporters
for.
One is a camel for.
Local knowledge.
Okay thank you very much.
Other supporters of this bill.
Is there anybody online to
supporting this bill.
There's someone online but they
have not let me know that for
against okay so we'll go to four
or five opponents of the bill.
Yes go ahead
Senator.
The tragedy.
To.
We are close to the left.
Practice of.
Phones.
From.
Right out for.
And was stopped I.
So there are so.
The challenge with this
legislation.
Echo the firefighters.
Education thank.
And we are such a large.
on in areas south of.
They're
putting.
In some cases.
Work work from happening that at
the end of the day.
Thank you very much another of
the opponent right yes ma'am
Madam chairman of the committee
members my name is Bronson corn
on the president elect of the
New Mexico cattle growers we
have had good conversation with
Senator Griggs over the past
couple of days and I fully
understand the intent behind
this piece of legislation and
once again I would like to
reiterate that what happened is
is a tragedy and we are
extremely sorry for not just
your family's losses but
everybody that lost stuff but on
to some of the concerns that we
have
I understand that under the
prescribed burn laws that
agriculture is exempt from it
but I'm gonna give you a
scenario that's going to affect
those of us ranchers that use
fire as a tool there's a lot of
brush there's a lot of certain
types of grasses that have to be
burned or livestock or wildlife
can utilize and so it's a tool
that that I want to make sure
that we can continue to use but
I'm gonna give you a little
scenario that it from a private
property owner and I go through
the prescribed burn training to
be a technician for
utilizing prescribed burns and
on my private property.
I have that.
Federal grazing lands BLM or
Forest Service that ties in with
my private property and I'm
burning a said a brush or the
giants Act grant something that
goes through that drawl and I
crossed from a private property
into the B. L. M. or for
service.
Is it still considered.
A prescribed is it now
considered a prescribed burn
because I went through the class
to become a technician.
And now and is every fire that I
lied is it going to be
considered a prescribed burn
these are these are questions
that I'm asking
You know some of the other
issues like like was stated a
second ago there's a lot of the
country that we have to to be
able to burn for the economical
and the environmental
feasibility of it but it has to
be done from February to April
if you burn it after April now
you're destroying new grow and
so we can't destroy new growth
we're trying to harvest off the
old growth where the new growth
can prosper for the livestock
and wild.
So those are a couple of my
issues and I thank you for your
time thank you I yes Sir.
Thank you.
Kind of.
Because our agency.
All of our.
With.
Mitigation work.
Restorations.
Thank you we'll have one
opponent from the side yes
please.
And.
To try to get.
To.
So now.
Certification.
But.
We're going to use this
committee for.
Hamblen madam chair I move to
table.
The motion.
And I'll have the committee
secretary call the roll
centers of office no.
Santo Domingo's.
Yes.
And avail.
No.
Senator Paul.
No.
Senator committee excuse Senator
souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator products.
Yes.
Madam makes my my vote.
Yes Senator this is the manager
of.
This time of of so center I
would have opposed to your bill
but I opposed to tabling motion
because
it's my experience generally
that we don't use tabling
motions to cut off debate and
discussion I think it's useful
sometimes for the committee
members to have some debate
discussion before does
automatically go right to a
tabling motion and I would like
to have some more discussion of
had some discussion at all on
the on the committee before you
know that's not a criticism you
Senator but I just a that's
that's the reason I opposed to
tabling motion and madam chair I
want to explain about thank you
very much.
I.
For.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you in and members of
the of the committee for for
here that and I I hope I hope as
we move forward in the session
that we consider what has
happened if we if we do
genuinely believe.
If we delay in January believe
that prescribed burns are not
going to cause additional fires
in the future I think we're
kidding ourselves because as
hard as these guys work.
The weather changes and they
can't get away from it show if
there's another way I'd
appreciate somebody else bring
in the bill forward to provide
an answer to protect the people
like Mr route and others who
have been this is this is not
just you know their land behind
way to do this is our homes
their lives in other people have
been have been lost in this
issue.
So what is the solution.
Hopefully you guys can find it.
Thank you thank you I think.
I hope so which which provide
with role metal.
Thank.
I want to.
Three.
There is something to the
general fund
I think that committees.
The poor scheduled.
So I wanted to go ahead.
You got it.
Thank you madam chair I move a
do not pass on Senate bill fifty
three and a do pass on Senate
bill fifty three committee
substitute for the purposes of
discussion.
Alice's.
So please proceed centers thank
you thank you madam chair and
committee could be with you this
morning I'm joined by Bruce by
cell who's the general counsel
for the New Mexico environment
department is my expert witness
of the committee set up madam
chair colleagues on page four
section the.
That is of the new language
we're adding I guess six words
to the definition of a disposal
facility it was language that
was in a previous draft and we
made our last change it actually
got left out so college eyes but
I wanted to start off this
process with a clean bill so I
chose to do a committee sept
Revenue ma'am thank you
mentioned.
Secretary to.
The second.
Okay.
Okay thank you mentioned so
colleagues.
This bill before you deals with
the prospect of bringing in.
A very large were to use the the
word of the company's twenty to
a vast of facility holding all
the country spent nuclear fuel
into New Mexico.
It was not a proposal we ask for
although there are a few people
in that area of the state that
asked where in fact most of the
state much of the state's passed
resolutions saying we don't want
this and today as we speak the
Dona Ana County commission
passing of voting on a
resolution opposed to it and as
is Bernalillo county today.
But prior today up to forty
percent of the state's
population including all Indian
public council governors is that
we don't really want this the
the bill all.
Deals with this issue of spent
nuclear fuel up a contemplation
of privacy in two ways chair
committee number one it
strengthens an existing task
force in law called the
radioactive consultation task
force which was created to be
our interface with a federal
facility wept and.
We are adding to that task force
and departments well some
important departments homeland
security Indian Affairs and the
State Land Office and we're also
adding their purview to consider
impacts of a private facility
when this whole tech proposal
came around in the previous
administration they said Hey
we're under no obligation under
law to do do any due diligence
on the impacts of this they
references law that it only
considers professor facility so
we had private so that's an
important thing and something
it's come before this committee
many times but secondarily madam
chair committee what the bill
does is it prohibits the storage
or disposal of spent fuel for
high level waste in a disposal
facility in New Mexico until
number one the state has
consented or concurred with this
facility.
And that's super important and
number two until there is a with
a permanent repository.
As defined by the nuclear waste
policy act federal law the deep
geological repository that we
will not allow storage or
disposal of high level
weighs in New Mexico unless
there's a permanent repository
and waste in law in existence
sorry and I would add colleagues
that this is required in federal
law the federal law standard for
how to deal with spent fuel on
high level waste is the
construction operation of a deep
geological repository.
And so we're saying until that
exist.
We don't want to become the de
facto deal it's it's a anyway
that that we're not going to
support it so that's that's what
it does I will also say that it
has kind of and a unique feature
of which is that it puts a
little bit of of legislative
intent into the bill into areas
of recognize state authority.
And we'll hear the word about
preemption and with the there's
been Supreme Court case law
dealing with California banning
high level waste essentially in
California new power plants and
high level waste Pacific Lee and
under certain grounds it was
upheld by the US Supreme Court
and under recognized authority
what the court said as well
federal government reserves the
right to deal with secure safety
issues.
We recognize the state has an
inherent right to consider the
economic issues in the economic
impacts of the state in addition
to that it's recognize that the
state will have to issue about
sixty permits dealing with water
quality and other issues so
there's state authority there's
recognize state interested in
this bill speaks to that and
that's why we are legislative
intent into this bill and with
that I'd ask Miss Suazo if you
want to add anything and stand
for any questions please
introduce yourself.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Bruce Basil
I am currently general counsel
for the New Mexico environment
department.
and I've been.
I'm consulting with the senator
on this language we've been
involved with the New Mexico
attorney general's office and
some litigation.
In this area so my expertise has
been in
In this complicated area that
falls between federal government
and state governments not just
in our state but in other
states.
So are you here representing the
department.
I am not individual to speak in
support but I believe my
secretary is here and.
madam chair yes we are in
support of the bill.
Okay in the audience I see a
show of hands.
Of those people in support of.
But I see a show of hands of
people opposing this bill.
Okay.
Right we have let's hear from.
Anything else to say.
We stand and support okay thank
you so let's hear from like four
or five said well actually let
me see I have seven opponents
who are
Organize so let's hear from
seven support.
It's the fact your.
Yes.
Mexico share.
Stewart.
The United States.
Is radioactive.
The ways to save.
There's no real re.
Thank you let's go to this side.
Matt Charboneau that goes with
Martin chief militaire rail
transportation transportation
division I am a locomotive
engineer this will be moved by
train.
To give you an idea how close
where we are to these trains
moving the opposite direction I
was going westbound two months
ago.
The container door a train going
the opposite direction that's
one of them.
I jumped up out of my seat my
conductor thought I was insane
what's the matter with you and
the working more knocked off the
visor.
With with if within six inches
of so we're passing the stranger
carrying radioactive material.
Not to mention the communities
that those are.
This this.
Good morning.
Madam chair members of the
committee yeah diminishing a we
are working to get twenty to
initially it's an out of the
bushes to Chianti digitais
clothing addition now let I am
from the Navajo Nation my family
has been hurt by uranium mining
for decades we've been hearing
about all the problems of
radioactive waste I'm here as a
member of the Navajo Nation to
remind you all that the we have
a a law against the transport of
radioactive waste through the
Navajo Nation but because of
interstate commerce we can't
prevent it on the rail I forty
so we're looking at you all to
help prevent this to prove like
us like we were hearing to
prevent the any kind of risk to
the communities along
reservation in on the
reservation along the railroads
and are too sacred mountains so
I'm also speaking on behalf of
the spiritual beings on mount
Taylor which we call set up
success and then in in Arizona a
double speed is San Francisco
peaks thank you thank you and I
support please vote yes thank
you.
I'm gonna take two more support.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee that was a medical
child.
Conservation voters is very
concerned about the possibility
of New Mexico becoming the
repository for all of the
nation's nuclear waste we think
that this bill effectively
addresses that problem we think
this will help
we address.
Possible preempt.
Regulation of nuclear waste I
just I.
This supports the committee
substitute percent of fifty
three thank you thank you Mr yes
on the aisle.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Josie path
executive director of America's
problems in addition to the
health and safety of our
communities of been talked about
previously we stand in support
of this bill to protect our
ground water resources across
New Mexico.
Thank you now for those people
who did not.
To.
There is
a danger to the members.
Speaker today putting more on
the program director for us or
which is the proposed
in Saudi interim storage
facility proposed for the
counting.
To tell take international's
founded for thirty seven years
old I guess apply the highest
levels of corporate ethics
technical skill manufacturing
expertise to serve the worldwide
energy industry with
distinction.
Senate bill fifty three there
are three years I'd like to
cover today first this whole tax
safety record.
Second is the safety and
security posed so third the
safety and security of
transportation of spent nuclear
fuel so first our safety record
holding international has
appointed let me safety for all
tickets are ninety five thousand
spent fuel assemblies over
eighteen hundred cast no
accidents no release of
radioactivity no one control
contamination no personal injury
absolutely not Holtec
international's full safety
record and in the state.
Second the safety and security
the proposed facility.
The high school facilities CPS
all natural and manmade events
and secure its terrorist
threats.
In the design process whole type
use the worst case market
conditions natural disasters
manmade.
These printers ensure the
facility can withstand a one
point three G. earthquake an
explosion from high pressure gas
line seven thirty seven
aircraft.
Crashing directly into it
Senator terrorist attacks we
just exempt public drugstores
technologies known as the high
school you Max and it's the gold
standard worldwide no other
technology is a safe and secure.
Third transportation spending
with you.
All spent nuclear fuel will
arrive to the proposed facility
by Representative.
Our nation a ship spent nuclear
fuel from commercial and
government react for over sixty
years there's been over one
thousand three hundred shipments
for commercial fuel over.
Government few and that's with
no release of radioactivity.
Shipments of spent nuclear fuel
use type B. can just and then
the robust design.
Physical testing actual testing
shows these containers are so
strong you can drop from thirty
feet.
You can drop in for fuel
slides further for forty minutes
a hundred degrees that question
for.
And they won't release it will
bridge the NRC is also shown.
That these casks caring is still
oil canister.
Can be accelerated two hundred
twenty miles an hour and then
hit confirm yielding object C.
will bridge you can burn a
program three hours thirty
thousand gallons of pools.
It's hard to overstate busters
containers.
Summarized if you look at the.
I just have a few other items.
Recently a local poll stated
that they were thirteen
accidents out ten thousand
shifts the tax it would release
radioactive material director
comments to the committee okay
this is categorically incorrect.
The poll took an official
statement by the NRC out of
context and linked it to
unsubstantiated.
Madam chair members of the
committee the fact is.
There's a probability one in ten
trillion that there's going to
be a severe relaxes.
And if that severe accident
occurred at one ten trillion
per.
There would be radioactive
release.
These casks are that robust.
Foreclosures one last item this
perk to discussion interim
storage.
And that's the focus areas of
this legislative session.
State Connie diversity great
energy and a goal of zero carbon
emissions.
This project fully built out is
it three billion dollar capital
investment would generate about
four hundred fifty high paying
jobs and a permanent full time.
I have a letter signed here has
the signatures of all the
elected officials in Eddy and
Lea counties in Carlsbad and
Hobbs they represent their
constituents and they consent to
the facility.
The power is critical to green
energy and a carbon free future
helping to solve the impasse
storage of spent nuclear fuel
system nation.
Future submit it here so that
your question is I.
Yes.
Good morning madam chair.
Members of the committee I'm
gonna keep this brief but I just
want to say that I'm born and
raised in Carlsbad I am raising
two young children here in
Carlsbad
in addition to what that is a
about the whole tax robust
technology and save state track
record
I can confidently say that I
would never embrace of projects
were industries that would come
in our community to put anybody
at risk we are proud to be the
any energy corridor of the state
of New Mexico and hopefully one
day United States so with
respect to the sponsor I'd like
to urge you to please vote
against this bill because New
Mexico deserves the opportunity
to to diversify.
with that thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee it is
an honor.
My name is rod McCall provided
through.
I come our.
With your.
School.
I want to do something for the
environment that helpful.
We all talk about the
radioactive materials inside
those canisters what I've seen
so.
Planning hospitals rely.
All Things.
There are a couple things.
when the bomb cyclone winter
storm value these girls.
That.
Of the P..
What offline effect.
The new capitalize on.
California.
Work.
Listening to some of the same
arguments here today about why
these facilities outside.
Orchestrate the early shut down.
California race every other.
Actually build.
But they couldn't build up I
changed if you know is coming to
California that.
They realized they could change
their decision.
We've got all talk about that
but the bottom line is
California not just but.
This way even loading.
Jobs are just for.
Your state.
Where.
We already have a great.
This is so we will have a
synergistic about Mexico B.
Google.
By addressing the elephant.
solution so out of you know.
For your life.
Second of all states going all
the way through.
and then third are.
Right.
All of the country's most.
At a moment like.
Step back.
This facility in southeast
Mexico allows us to.
Yes ma'am one place the facility
is being proposed here facility
and Garcia is going.
Mexico be part of this computer.
Look back on
Look at the debate we're having
now they will look at the
decades of service to get a
repository they'll have to look
at.
I glad.
The place I I would encourage
Mexico to look for.
You're already off to a good
start that part of your.
There's a tremendous.
You now
Expected is.
I still have.
If you are not quick with.
There
we're Rodriguez.
Madam chair thank you for the
opportunity my name is that were
tier three is I am of a city
council across that a more pro
tem um I am here is support I am
here to support full text in its
in its efforts and I want to
point out that the eighty Lee
Alliance sample tech together
started this whole process and
twenty seventeen they have but
they have moved steadily forward
at the speed of government
slowly but not too quickly the
process has been rigorous and
thorough but completely
transparent plot the efforts on
that the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission did commissioned an
environmental impact study which
found that there was no harm to
be done to any of the
stakeholders in that area and
the NRC issuing a final safety
evaluation report in the coming
weeks that the decision to
license will occur within thirty
days there after
they're also future plans for
building at a
A manufacturing facility here in
New Mexico location has not been
determined yet but that is
coming the initial bill that
would be a three billion dollar
bill that most of which of those
dollars to stay in New Mexico so
I see I stand before you
representing the souls that live
closest to this in full support
of this whole tech initiative
thank you thank you.
J..
Development we speak today in
opposition of of this bill.
The MRC has done a very thorough
job an overview.
And we trust their assessment
not only that.
There are facilities.
R. that that have been
intractable
Solution for spent fuel but it
also.
Thanks.
the bill and the support all
type project thank you thank
you.
Next we have Susan Crockett.
Okay Mike chair committee
members good morning my gals and
fully County Lee County is the
host county of repose interface
with celery all Lee County any
County Hobbs Carlsbad the forms
of how these in southeast New
Mexico are have been supports
project back this project really
started two thousand four when
the affirmative Valdez to
miscarriage in the counties came
together to look at that first
part of our economy in a safe
manner as you know we have your
directly was saved in the counts
Hobbes so you uranium conversion
facility that's been in place
now for fifteen or twenty years
this is similar to a land uses a
similar industry to same
industry our residents our
communities were comparable this
industry we work in this
industry we have done our due
diligence and visiting other
types of interim storage
facilities in the country that
have been developed and overseen
by full talk and we have been
rather communication with the
Garcia the experts in regular
with regulating of the nuclear
industry in of in the country so
armors you respond or is our
public safety officials are
elected officials
we understand this project yeah
so we've done our due diligence
we've had regular continuous
coordination and communication
with energy and we support the
project and we would ask for
your opposition to the proposed
bill thank you Madam thank you
very much
Waterview.
Hello.
Business and really.
Especially if you're in.
We have done.
As previously.
It is four hours
the transportations.
Kaspick area.
Challenge all.
Find economy which all you
wanted and that's what we're
doing we know that a lot.
And we know that we have to have
other capabilities in the area
and so that.
They protect us when asked.
The that.
Nobody helps us we have to do it
on our own as all.
Everything.
once again could I see that
hands of.
The committee okay.
I have plenty madam chair but I
know we're trying to get out of
the floors of images of an.
First off but you know that
that's one of the yeah I I I
know this gonna go to the
judiciary so we'll deal with
some of the the legal issues I
think which is always been the
the point before of this bill
you've been carrying us a
version of this bill for please
couple years etcetera I guess
probably two or three years of
this this bill this year is very
different and we got a twenty
seven again so it's Checketts of
supported progress which I
appreciate you doing and I want
to acknowledge and recognize
that I think it's also important
for us point out there's a
reason why it's taken two or
three years to get to this point
time because the I think the
work that you've done needed to
be done I I don't think the
earlier versions of this bill
would have resulted in anything
more than a lawsuit frankly and
I'm not yet sure this is not
going to get there to but I you
know my goal is always at least
by the work we do madam chair
this committee and Judiciary
that we're not just creating
laws that are going to lead to a
lawsuit and sometimes it's
inevitable but I'm I'm trying
really hard on this issue not to
dot to go there so what we'll do
we'll deal with this there I
think that
Senator you've you've addressed.
One of the principal issues
which we're not gonna talk right
here today because we don't have
the time or the four or the
interest perhaps on the issue
professor preemption.
On the last bill that we dealt
with concerning prescribed
burning in the really limitation
on that one of things that build
it that we didn't talk about was
that it if it essentially banned
the federal government and the
tribal governments from
prescribed burning which would
exceed our Thorgy would've been
unlawful law would just would
would of been been a nobody so
here I'm I'm so concerned I
think some of the language in
here is going to be preempted to
be very honest with you so we'll
talk about that Judiciary I I I
would also encourage you to
to not be enamored by the
insertion of legislative intent
to this bill you made that point
a couple of times but and those
center city Lopez and I've had
this discussion it has worked we
consistently try very hard here
to to not put legislative intent
into into a legislation because
the problem the problem with
legislative intent is the courts
will interpret the absence of
legislative intent we have
legislative intent in the bill
the absence of legislative
intent then is interpreted by
the court as a purposeful
omissions that make some sense
it also be put something in if
you have nothing if you're
silent you're have a better
chance frankly of the Courts
saying we're gonna read in
legislative intent to be
consistent with what the
legislature did but if you put
the intent in the court's going
to say well the absence of
legislative intent is going to
be doing the into purposeful of
a act but let's six that's what
we do that so again what manager
you know I'm gonna I'm gonna
support this as I have in the
past through this committee and
I think we'll get to the the
legal nuances that you know that
you distribute I'm always going
to remain a little concerned
with the preemption issue I
don't like federal preemption of
issues but it's it's a reality
and the federal government has
preempted certain areas and some
of this I think is still
probably probably preempted not
all of it the the you got some
of the other the other window
here Senator Wirth I think you
found one right thank you madam
chair thank you center city
Lopez.
Thank you madam chair we have to
has chairs of this is that we
have discussed this and I really
urge you to try to keep the
legislative intent in because I
believe that that's what saves
this bill from preemption under
the neck under his of rethink
Evette as I've looked at the
basis.
If we try to do something based
on safety that is not our
purview that is up to the new
nuclear regulatory commission to
do so the intent here is
environmental justice which is
our intent
is to pursue of our economy.
That is our intent and so I
really of.
Urge you to keep that statement
in because I think and I know
this is really hard and it to to
deal with injuries Judiciary
that is if you look at a clip if
you look carefully at what we're
trying to do.
Is to protect our beautiful
state.
The beauty of our state that the
health but not look at safety
issues because those will be
preempted and so a lot of the
whole tech report on their on
their safety record is up for
them to.
Convince the federal government
not us what we're looking for is
something different so I urge
you I really applaud the bill I
think it did make strides from
last time and I support it and
I'm really really glad that
you're doing this
because of the risks this not
the risks because of the impact
this could have a state.
Thank you
seeing no further questions or
comments is there motion.
The past.
But there is a motion for a do
pass and the second would the
committee secretary please call
the roll the centers of this yes
Santo Domingo's excuse Senator
Hamblen yes Centerville no.
Senator pope yes twenty two
center St is accused Center
souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator phonics yes.
my first of all I want to thank
everyone who came for this
hearing I know some people
traveled very far and I
appreciated by a vote of six to
one of the bill does pass thank
you very much and Committee
members were expected on the
floor thanks.
We were at we are.
