Senator they're not able to hear
you so cool for giving thank you
thank you manager so what I like
to do
with the committees approval is
utilized money from dfa to the
city of albuquerque to restore
the bosco.
Two to the create and benefit
endangered species migrating
birds and other species as well
as the quality of life of the
people in new mexico to do the
following remove jetty jacks.
Like the opening scene of saving
private ryan those huge metal x
things are no longer needed they
were needed back in the day so
that all the pazard is fuel
wouldn't go all over the north
valley remove hazardous fuel
that was horrible fires in the
bosco last spring in which the
fire actually jumped the river
and and burnt both sides of the
bosca.
Um
and removed non native species
particularly
sold cedars and rushing
knowledge which suck up just the
hundreds and calends of water a
day and just.
Leave it on under.
It's not a pleasant place to go.
People are afraid to jar because
you can't really see.
And it's not utilised to its
full extent.
So so anyway of the city of
albuquerque has put it on its
official ask for a couple
outlet.
And the middle roger on the
conservative district.
Will approve the what I just
said about removing the jetty
jacks and hazardous fuel
if the money is secured.
And with that all stamper
questions.
Thank you very much is there
anyone in the audience here to
support this bill.
And is there anyone here to
oppose this bill.
Is there anybody online.
Okay so let's have the
supporters come up please
introduce yourselves we have to
be at the mike so that everybody
can hear you online
and we have a tool in the
audience you're going to speak
and one on line so very briefly
thank you madame chair i'll be
brief john thompson registered
lobbyists for the middle real
grand conservative district we
enjoy a positive working
relationship with the city of
alba kirky support the bill I
appreciate senator my estimates
bringing up the purpose in the
mission of the conservative
district most people are unaware
of the catastrophic floods that
used to inundate the valley and
it's really important to bring
that up but also appreciate the
the language and the intent to
deal with invasive species and
and the health of the boski the
fire risk is something that is
of great concern particularly as
we move into drought years and
believe this would be a positive
measured to address that to
begin to address that thank you
manager thank you next please.
The.
Good morning good morning madame
chair
members of the committee.
My name is melissa bernard and
i'm here representing the serra
clebrio grande chapter and our
thirty five thousand members and
supporters i've recently joined
the lobby team nice to meet you
all we are here in support of
skate restoration and
preservation of natural habitat
and we think senator mysters for
bringing.
Thank you very much online we
have adriana navaro.
Please.
Thank you good morning madame
chair members of the committee
my name is age random to borrow
and I am the legislative and
email marking cord data with
smith strategies and also
filling and we're closely with
the smart project as well and we
are here to vocalise our strong
support for senate bill when
sixty and we think
my senator by assist for
bringing this to the table as
well I have called new mexico my
home for my entire life and i've
heard the phrase repeated
constantly water is life the
real grand the fifth longest
river in the united states is a
symbol to her friendline
communities and has played a
vital role and shaping the
history culture for all new
mexicans there's me a project
has are you demonstrated great
efforts to clean and preserve
the real browns river and the
boski habitat surrounding it the
recreational activities are
mission is to promote and teach
her youth about the importance
of conservative our natural
resources the requested twenty
million dollars would increase
those efforts and help restore
the real grand ellie state park
ensuring that we can maintain
healthy ecosystems I protect our
diverse wildlife ensure that
those southwest interfuge
generations have the human right
taxes clean water and air thank
you for the opportunity to speak
this morning and thank you for
your time and have a great day.
Thank you very much we are now
going to committee for questions
and comments we have senator
gagas and center hamlin senator
gaygos their stern center thank
you for the.
The operating vision on this
bill just couple things i'm not
from el cookie so can you
explain the location of this
again
I think I understood by the
casino is that the area thank
you madame chair center gagos no
the
up
the bosca is essentially the the
forest on each side of the river
through burning county
the city of obecricy has just
diction of throughout brilliant
county with the exception of
sending a public on the north
and is let the public on the
sale so essentially
up and down
north bally south belly
essentially every year
but it's between the
they're not a loyals cause
they're not line but between the
ditches there's ditches on each
side of the the real grand with
the exception of the mess on the
on the west side but essentially
the entire
voice care within that within
the county of burner leo is is
is designated are the real
granddaughter valley state park
in state statutory night and my
mike was in on manager but the
state statutors
are
is sixteen dash four dash one
through that dash nine through
seventeen I appreciate that and
I guess my question then was
going because there's on
a brand of son that area they
have horse trails already so is
that not part of this area.
Madam chair in the gagas it is
there is horse trails there is
dirt trails
but there's also huge huge
underbrushed growth and
hazardous fuels this would open
it up and and quake more up more
space for folks to enjoy the and
hopefully stop the wildfires
mentioned center my next
question then is so I do
construction and as we build a
facility and leak a word try
part of the state we have to
prepare things for the hundred
year flood if we do this is
earned alternative to
if if you did get the hundred
your flood is our alternatives
to santa fe or down the tricky
where this wouldn't be an issue
if we cleaned it up in and do
what you're asking at the point
of a hundred year floor the
bosket's going to run over
anyway
is that an issue I guess in
ubank thank you madame chair
center gaggles no I believe the
mirror grand the conservative
district has has a.
As solved the issue of the
hundred year flood that that the
north valley
I don't believe has been flooded
since since the since the levies
and the and the flood control
measures have taken place I
think up it's kind of neat from
a legal standpoint that the
middle of on the conservative
district was credited by court
order.
But it's now a legitimate legal
entity and it is essentially
solved the problem with the
hundred year flood in albert.
Madame chair if I could ask
mister thompson to clarify.
Madam chair members of the
committee preference I am not an
engineer I am a lobbyist but I
grew up around the middle of
your grand conservative
district.
One of the main purposes senator
is to prevent flooding we have
levies and we also have the
coached reservoir up north to
prevent those massive woods from
coming down south
I do not want to say that it is
impossibility but we do our best
to mitigate I will say this in
recent years we've had severe
severe storms pop up and dump
intense amounts to rainfall in
certain areas.
I don't think there's any
infrastructure that is built to
withhold some of those things
but we do our best all right
thank you for the man to instead
of the reason for this so I
don't on the range colorado
anymore
we are always having to build
our sick as our head gates and
everything for the car the
possibility to break so with
your
area that's not cleaned up right
now that catches the debris come
off the tributary's government
during the flood my concern then
is downstream if we clean all
that up make a national pretty
all that garbage all that trash
will go downstream it is just a
concern for later in life that I
like the idea to trigger cleaned
up I understand up their b.
They're say resort behind the
casino they even do horseback
writing down in that area so i'd
like the options I just wanted
make sure the guy's thing about
the hundred year flood and the
potential cause for debris going
downstream and affecting someone
else with that are you thank you
manager thanks center thank you
senator gay goes senator hamlin
thank you madame chair i'm more
of a comment we've had a
conversation about this and and
as you know i'm i'm a big fan of
protecting our outdoor spaces
one thing I would incourage is
to move forward i'm gonna
support this is to look at funds
from the land and water
conservation fund
the land and water conservation
fund
were apparently having the
challenge in the state of
accessing those funds but that
is a national fund that we can
get matching dollars for it out
stretch that
so that we can make sure our
money is is well spent that all
of us are hoping to do that but
we know
we know that those public spaces
became super important during
the the pandemic and how people
really needed to get outdoors
and so to protect those and to
revitalize them and to to clean
them up like you want to do with
this I think is super important
and just also salt cedar as a
bear we had it down in southern
new mexico along the real grand
it's a highly invasive species
and it takes a long term
dedicated eradication plan to
get rid of but we need to do
that because water is our source
water is life and so when that
keeps sucking that up from water
systems then we're going to be
in a world to hurt so I
appreciate your efforts on doing
this and and i'm go.
Thank you center city
thank you I too want to thank
you I go back writing along this
area all the time and it's just
it's it's so beautiful and you
can you also can see the scars
of the last fire
and so this is just really
important to preserve the area
and also to prevent downstream
damage and it it's it's in the
city of albuquerque in in
burning your county it's not not
up near time I on the casino up
there so it's it's down and it's
a treasure for all city
residents so i'm really grateful
you're doing this.
The is this enough twenty
million how far is it going to
go because it's such a.
Intensive like though their
little squares say they can use
something about the little what
they call and jack will come
jetties.
What yeah.
What about this weird square the
little you know what i'm talking
about what do they jettison yeah
of the jetty jacks I knew the
price take of the jide's ex the
water thought he did a huge
friday is doing a huge project
now and they're removing about a
hundred I think there's a
hundred and seventy five left.
They can be rip I I don't want
to miscall but they're um
there it's.
They're relatively inexpensive
because madam chair center see
though because we don't have to
would have to buy land we don't
have to build a building it's
really cost effective to do this
and we could literally have like
a central park type area up and
down the bosco there and i'll.
Thank you venture.
Thank you any other comments
than her mechanism thank you.
I do just want to point out that
we are thinking in order to
control.
Uh you know we can overlook that
thinning and managing the crop
of earth is extremely important
to.
Okay senators the deal office
okay is there any other comment
before we take a second.
And is there a second and there
is a second center's european
center hamlin could that
secretary please call the boat.
Senator savantes.
Center guy goes.
Senator hambling
sent him a courting
senator ville
center yes center souls yes
senator deal opens yes
definitely yes you have a down
to spoke thank you very much for
coming thank you manager while
we bring up center consulars i'd
like to first of all let the
committee you know there will be
a breakfast year on thirty eight
eight thirty sponsored by
charles good marker
he
lobbies for a variety of groups
but he said this is my
contribution individually
personally so eight thirty on
thursday secondly I have in unam
in turn for the week camera and
taylor would you stand up please
and could the committee please
welcome him
in a cameron is going to be
doing an analysis for one of our
bills on thursday yes centers
I have an intern from unam to
madam chair I have
so please
and her her masters is in water
I need to maybe hook her up with
you for for a
for that opportunity as well.
Can tell us and we are on for
the public senate bill one
eighty five good morning madame
chair good morning committee and
before we move on with that
north I have an intern also I
can present to you
nathan asked well he's some
stood any medical highlands
university thank you very much.
Thank you manager with her son
on senate bill one eighty five
for this appropriate appropriate
hundred and fifty million from
the general fund to the water
project fund or expenditures for
the year twenty twenty five and
subquent ears for the purpose of
the fun
i'll be i'll try to be brief her
loan with a one eighty five.
The.
Oh heard us.
Oh the new medical finance
authority makes grants and loans
from the water project fund for
a project's recommended by the
water trust board.
Up to the legislature funding
the water project fund comes
from the annual nine percent
distribution of the servant's
tax one along with an annual
four million distribution from
the water trust board
this year a hundred and fifteen
point seventy four million will
be available from this to
sources for projects authorized
by the water project fun
bill our one one forty eight
musical finance authority
administers the annual
application cycle on behalf of
the water trust board demands
and needs continued to rise for
water trust board funding in
this year the mfa received sixty
five applications totally two
hundred and seventy seven
million thousand sixty five
projects are included in house
bill
one forty eight and
manager members I do have an
expert with me for a more than
the medical finance authority
and this is my call vendor.
You'll pronounce your western
bonder hide okay very well to
provide us with a few comments
also on the expertise
you said please introduce
yourself and then make a few
brief comments thank you thank
you madame chair good morning
members of the committee michael
vonder hyde i'm the managing
director of public programs at
the new mexico finance authority
and it's senator gonzalez
mentioned we had the finance
authority staff the water
trustword we also run an annual
application cycle on behalf of
the water trust board and then
in turn make grants and loans
from the water project fund as
the senator mentioned this year
we have a historically high
volume of applications about
sixty five totalling two hundred
and seventy seven million what's
available for funding is a
hundred and sixteen million
through the nine percent of the
severance tax bonds and the
water trust fund distribution
so sent a bill one eighty five
really just helps to bridge the
gap that hundred and fifty
million dollars would help
bridge the gap between
applications that we have in
house and the total dollars
available right now we are at
about forty six percent we think
we could fund about thirty or so
projects with the funding that's
currently available we could
probably double that or come
close to doubling it if the
hundred and fifty million dollar
appropriation was to come
through to the water project and
with that i'd be happy to answer
any questions thank you matter
chair thank you is there anybody
in the audience here to support
this bill if you would raise
your hands.
Okay anybody to oppose this bill
is there anybody online okay so
let's have
two or three people come forward
please introduce yourselves and
make a group comment.
Please come forward.
We need you on the mike.
The.
Thank you
manager members of the committee
my name is john or take up and
the mirror the village of.
The water trust fund helps rooms
penalties like ours and getting
our water projects done and
twenty seventeen.
We had a major water outage in
question that lasted from
december through january
this fund will help us there.
Number one this year we have a
new water well in the fund
but we are also working with the
state engineer on improving a
water lines.
And getting all that problem fix
it one point we were putting a
lot of water into the ground and
wasting it we want to consider
all that water and make our
system all against.
I stand the strong support and I
commend the center for bring
this bill forward
thank you very much and thank
you for coming down.
Porning madam chair committee
members.
And christianizedly registered
lobbyist for chevron i'm loss of
the shepherd on lead regarding
water issues for the former
question minor tales county we
are strong advocate and
supporter of investment and
water infrastructure and sound
water management throughout the
state so share ron supports this
bill and ask you to vote yes
thank you thank you very much
and next.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee my name
is alice and nichols with their
new mexico unicipal league the
medicine police strongly
supports the spell.
Um as the sponsor mentioned
there are about thirty projects
which probably wouldn't get
funded under current levels we
know a lot of those are for
municipalities and other smaller
entities that are really
critical for health and safety
clean drinking water replacing
leaking pipes etc so we think
this is a great time to invest
in water projects especially
those that have already been
vetted and gone through water
trust for application process
thinking to the sponsor
thank you very much questions
comments from committee.
There is a motion for a due pass
and a second we all know that
this is extremely worthwhile and
thank you center for bringing
forward could the secretary
please call the vote.
Center survivors.
Senator dagos
senator hambling
santa mercurgen sent on a bill
senator pope yes senator souls
yes senators a deal best yes to
finish yes.
The.
The.
You have a unanimous vote thank
you very much for bringing that
forward and senator can sell us
will go to your next one the
towers county water projects
senate bill one ninety seven.
I will thank you manager.
Of manager members so with them.
Senate bill one eighty seven of
this appropriate seven point
nine million from the general
fund to the environment
department for a variety of
water infrastructure projects in
task county specified projects
individual appropriations then I
do have to expert witnesses that
can give you a short synopsis of
you know why we are with this
legislation and the first one is
mr isolated from chevron mining.
Good morning again madame chair
many members can hear me press
good
okay it's hungry now thank you
madame chair committee members
christianized the registered
lobbyist for charon also lead
advocate for water issues in
tales counting for shop run and
the communities have surrounding
us this bill was work together
with a lot of arters to
determine shell already needs
for critical water
infrastructure investment in
towers county includes seconds
throughout tales county but also
mutual domestic water
associations I wish to implement
projects that will support
implementation of the obedience
settlement including mitigation
wells it also includes funding
for the village of question of a
million dollars for for the
water treatment plan and waste
water management in addition to
tales county
so these these projects are
ready to go I will add that in
addition to implementing the
abated settlement this will help
to address the affordable
housing issue in tales county
which we all know is the
significant issue it requires
infrastructure water investment
to put in place and water a
needed for those kinds of
developments and i'd like to
introduce and mister wants to
serious
madame chair
thank you madame chairman
committee for giving me a chance
to brief you guys on the senate
bill and work on with the
senator then this might inspect
the snatters a resident of tal's
county I am a member of a four
of the secure associations that
are in this bill
i'm a school board member
business owner and if you have
any questions regarding the
projects for the secure
associations I will be happy to
thank you.
Thank you very much will go to
the audience is there anyone
here in support of this bill.
Okay money so work your way up
is there anybody here to oppose
this bill
is there anybody online.
There are two people.
Go ahead and let's hear very
briefly
manager committee members my
name is louis area.
I'm the president of the yano a
second association I represent a
hundred and sixteen percent this
in over fifteen hundred and
thirty two irrigated acres and
also a member of the question
comic board of development find
and I just like to let you all
know that I really think and
appreciate center to conself or
sponsoring senate bill one
ninety seven this build provides
the much needed infrastructure
that required to contain our
culture are irritated lands we
have so much old and dilapidated
structures that really need this
we habilitation and these funds
thank you madame.
Madam chair members of the
company again my name is john or
take on the mirror of the
village requester.
And had standard support of this
bill I commend sent to ones on
this for bringing this forward
as well as under completion
representative or test.
Right now is the village of
plastic stands about half a vira
constituency is still stuck on.
Alternative tangs we would
really like to
get them on there on the sources
dominant with that being said we
are at capacity with our current
waste water treatment facility
this bill would help us
grow that facility in and all to
allow for the village to grow
william.
So search even should the mind
down in twenty fourteen we've
been understand still we're
trying to convert to her.
To a post binding economy and
one of those things that we're
looking at is housing when I can
get trying to bring a hotel in
but
in order for us to read the
final economy we need that waste
wire treatment facility expanded
that way we can allow for the
housing we can allow for the
growth we can train
recruits from new businesses to
the area that would help me to
find that economy so.
I really appreciate that you're
hearing the bill and I would
appreciate the support for it
and i'm here to stand the
support thank you all for
listening to me to be thank you
very much for coming online we
have mister carnroich you know a
country you want to make a.
Good morning manager members of
the committee my name is
coverage you know and I am the
registered lobbyist for tosbublo
and we in are in support that's
legislation
for some reason so large because
sort of the projects are named
of the bill are
and that would be funded on this
piece of legislation are water
projects that are part of the
tows public are better water
right settlement agreement as
has been referenced the bill and
the appropriation will go
toward satisfying the state's
obligation to do under the the
capital agreement which was
approved by the state and by the
federal government but more
important madam chair
estate funding is needed now for
a wells and pipelines for non
indian owned and operated
milture mutual benefit projects
to be constructed off towers but
will tribal lands
the telstra public water right
some agreement is fine on and
enforceable but unfortunately
implementation has been
difficult for many of the
reasons that it beside at this
morning as well as the increase
in construction costs were those
reasons why it should of the
committee able to reduce to to
pass out set a bill one ninety
seven thank you.
Thank you next we have sam
dishorses on a line.
Yes madam chair thank you for
allowing me to speak
I am the president of the
telstra security association and
we also stand and start strong
support of this bill
as many of you may know the the
better settlement would have
provisions in it for funding in
several projects.
The funds however were non
indexed and so we are basically
capped and
are unable to complete many of
these projects because the
funding has not kept passed with
inflation and a supply
so we urge you to please pass
this bill and and support of
these projects.
Thank you very much for now to
committee for questions comments
I have center souls and then
sitter novel
manager as I read through this
lots of these look like they are
capital projects is the local
delegation if you put your
capital money to these and is it
insufficient as well as grow
money for ones that may be our
quite directly capital if we got
a lot of capital last couple
years
old madame chairman senator
soles it would be insufficient
to for us to fund at that level.
From our capital.
Madame chairman and senator I
understand it's not enough but
have you put that in his some of
the start money I know and don't
yet account you are fled things
I put some there and that allows
them to leverage other funds
through the federal government
so so kind of the question is
the local delegation putting
their capital money towards this
as well as asking for state
money or manager senator row
souls though yes they have
throughout the year yes.
Okay the the other the bill
manager that we just got a due
pass on the trust fund or those
moneys available to help these
are mostly water projects and
that seems like that money is to
support these kinds of things
that the state level rather than
his direct appropriations.
Though madame chair
members of the committee i'm not
sure I would have to go back and
look at them maybe one of our w.
Yeah madame chair committee
members while the my
understandings of the water
trust find and other funds will
be available in the future of
the timing for this is critical
at this point especially in
regards to implementing the
obedit settlement and all allow
mister a sister stating.
Committee mister senator I I
think that there has been some
secure associations that have
reached out I think the process
and the final funding is not
easy and I think they're they've
been discouraged in in the past
I guess I mean even we've had
had some projects come out
through there that may be take
five or six years to to try to
complete so you know and it's
we're working on projects that
have been the
put into six seven phases this
bill would allow them to
complete those projects start to
finish and will be found is
leaving those projects kind of
have funded is where the time
were on phase two or three we're
going back to one to make
repairs because they're
utilizing these systems in
complete.
The.
Thank you manager.
Amount of care of the point i'm
making is we have water issues
in every county across the way I
know down done yet account and
we've got major flooding
concerns on the east may said
that I represent and so every
year a large portion of my
capital money has gone to that
and I did the dragonfly one over
five or six years where i'm
dedicating about half the
capital that I get each year and
the county is then trying to
leverage other funds I worry if
we come for direct
appropriations for all of these
everywhere around the the state
that you know that becomes a
parade of of direct
appropriations for water
projects instead of the capital
money from legislators using to
to leverage that's all thank you
manager thank you next the
center no bill
thank you madame chair my
questions are come along the
same line this is a little bit
typical assume there's not a
line item in the house bill two
that covers all our part of
these was at a fair statement.
Manager said it never yesterday
is then it's part of the obeda
settlement so that the twelve
million dollars is a line out of
in the heater yes so it's
already this is already it's
been better
okay the whole travel meal
are just parts of our words at
there was different numbers that
were presented to ourselves
during the interim but I think
it started off with the state
engineers as high as thirty
million
and so I don't know who we're at
now but it it is there okay
I think it probably if if it's
not in the house biller house
bill too all our part any that
are not already in there
probably or not not going to go
very far i'm suspecting.
Some of these are relatively
small that could be paid for
personal capital sometimes the
governor her list for capital
they might cover some of these
have as a governor requesting
any.
Her list.
My knowledge the governor did
not request any of these
projects these projects were
floated though with the
governors office and reviewed
with them and in agreement that
this is priority for telstra
county.
Thank you madame chair okay.
Okay legacy manager i'm I guess
we're in passive through but i'm
I think it is we clarified what
it gets over the next committee
so thank you center gay goes and
then center cities.
A mental insider appreciate this
up on back to sir my essences
this looks like a lot of
diversion dams who's gonna clean
up a shine explain that earlier
because if you don't take care
of it and change center if you
do item one and then the rains
snows come
you go back to fixed nine and
one of stated earlier I like the
idea but I do have a couple
questions here when chevron was
in place did they help with any
of these kinds of funds outside
of what they did for the
community
of madame chair community
members you know chevron
investment in in these kinds of
projects yes.
To date we have not invested
directly in in the assectors in
the question area but are intent
is to help with that in fact we
have a current commitment of a
hundred sixty thousand dollars
we started the first
disbursement of funds last year
not as to stand up helped stand
up original assected association
modeled after the tales value
second association so I I can
tell you sir that madam chair
many members of chevron
prioritizes investment in the
esecos in northern tales county
and we are working closely with
the community up there to look
at opportunities for future
future investment thank you for
their man turn gentlemen so if I
understand right you guys gave
water rights to the community
question last year is that no
matter share committee members
are intent is to donate water
rights to the community so
minimum of a hundred twenty acre
feet to the village of question
mean this a water system we also
hold a water rights on the
assectors and the quest area
offend I don't remember the
exact number but our intentions
to donate those surface water
rights on the second to the
assectors themselves and to help
them we are also looking at
other potential opportunities
the sques across the school
district and other local stay
holders but our intent is to
donate and divest of of of west
water rights we have not
unfortunately been able to
complete destinations
yet because of the outstanding
water issues with the state
engineers office.
I'll thank them and turn soon
gentlemen I appreciate your
willingness to work on these I
said earlier at insecure system
in colorado mexico waters but my
was finals in colorado but I can
appreciate the.
They need and I do know that any
time there's every run off from
snow or rain goes a lot of
destruction so I just wanted
thank you we apologize for being
um
over regulating for the
extractive industry so I
understood gentlemen from
question that they're going to
the post minding minimum
economy so I feel for you and
i'll be voting at some thank
you.
The.
Thank you senator city a lot
thank you madame chair met
insurers is state engineers
office here.
Thank you madame chair
senator I would like to know a
little bit about the beta
issue they're better settlement
issue ventural at sixty years
okay could you see
me
and it it audience please
introduce yourself in the
question absolutely thank you
madame senator my name is tinya
to review i'm a deputy state
engineer and would be happy to
answer questions and if we need
to provide follow up information
we can do that as well so the.
The a beta settlement has been
improved for several years and
has gone through the federal
authorization process and is
really in the final stages of of
being implemented so there are a
few outstanding issues that are
still remaining and we're
working very closely with the
local parties with the federal
government with the weblo of
course to try to wrap everything
up
er injures to clarify this will
help with that yes
thank you the only other little
question I have is and I
appreciate that I just wanted to
kind of put up put that all
together the other question is
in the fire they talk about no
agency funding in the bill and
so the burden it's going to put
on
on the agencies that are
administrating this
are you thinking about that as
you get to finance like making
sure that the agencies have the
capacity to do this.
Mr miss any mountain
medium chair rom senators yes of
course okay thank you I I think
that that's really important and
i'm glad i'm glad that this is
being thought about because it's
no good if you have the money
and you don't have the staff to
get it out the door but I
support this bill thank you
thank you is there emotion
there is a motion from center
ham one and the second from
senator gaygos could the
secretary please call the boat.
Center shortest
center guy goes
sender to hamburg yes and i'm a
kitchen
center of ill
center or pop yes center soul
snow
senator deal up this yes
to finish yes.
The.
By a voda of eight to one you
have a new pass thank you very
much senator for being here
thank you madame chair thank you
committee members thank you well
jumped to senator greges and
then we will finish up with
seven or two c p no and
representative
where both of the
gricks.
This is a very simple build
correct.
Senator great please go ahead
thank you madame madame chair
can is just working just right
for everybody
this next bill is just a it's an
appropriation build help the
community of timberon which is
located in the southern shackle
men and mountains of terrill
county
edge it's well removed from most
any other place you will see on
as a crowflight though which
about twenty five miles shall
south east of alama ordo but to
drive there takes you about an
hour to to do that so the little
community was established
sometime around nineteen eighty
waterlines and and water supply
is windling in in that part of
the world and show timeran
earlier this year made a twenty
million dollar request emergency
request for water from the year
from the governor
where he's trying to help them
with a little bit little bit
more than I am able to do
through through the capital
outlay so we're asking for two
and a half million dollars to
help time ron to continue to
work on their water lines in
their water supply
and.
That's the dish the bill
thank you very much is there
anyone in the audience here to
support this bill.
Is there anyone opposed to this
bill.
Is there anybody.
Thank you we are now to
questions and comments from
committee members center ham one
center gay goes and centered
novel
madame chair and and some of
this is more of just echoing
your comments I remember in the
eighties we were invited to go
to timbron
to see this new development in
the hills
that were just north of el paso
and remembered the development
in that case in the eighties
very lack of development and the
idea of trying to get those
things started but now I know
people who vacation there and
who have homes there and who are
heavily dependent on this and we
have all of these different
things that were worried about
in terms of water access and
fire in accessibility and so
mine is more of just a comment
madam chair is that you know
this is an area that is is
getting to the point where it
could be kind of like another a
cloud craft but we need to
provide that infrastructure to
help them secure that and I
think this is something that we
can do that there in southern
new mexico so thank you senator
for bringing this bill and
that's that's all I have to say
manager thank you very much
thank you center gagas
and chair thank you center also
on a echo that it could be a
really nice place oh they do
have need a used to all kind of
letter years ago but it's one of
the square i'm just wondering
because we've had a lot of water
issues just now a is it just
because the trust funds
overwhelmed that they don't have
grants I need for anything like
this you gone through them.
In mention senator the the
community
of of timber on again is that
they're their concerns right now
you're losing about they think
seventy percent of their of
the water is a tried it
delivered due to do the leaks
the community was an ambitious
plan back as center hambling
your references back in the in
the eighties to really be a
unique community in the southern
mountains away from anybody.
And he just had quite panned out
show the the development as far
as people living there is not
near the people needed to
sustain the systems and so this
is this is a way to help them at
least get caught up somewhat and
be able to deliver the the need
it should be the community
timber on timor under not
incorporate your time roger not
a whole lot different in the
community of chaperelle other
than the fact that they are a a
short win and water district or
an able to actually actually so
water sanitation issue show
shoulder they have that level so
we can provide funding to that
community where a community like
like chap rail which is not
incorporated yet we have
challenges trying to trying to
help them with other things but
timber on week we can do this
short of thing for for them.
I'm had insurance center thank
you
sir crystal brandly I had had a
comments last year on just the
same thing on their input into
their water systems a tearsing
and their output was huge
difference in in amount so I
like the idea of putting this
money in on long term
investments and that's what it
would do for an already losing
water and losing opportunity for
growth in that area this
consultant thing so with that
all yield thank you
patient thank you senator center
no bill then center city locus
thank you madame chair senator
I assumed this is not on the hbs
to the capital wheel one of the
other as a governor was was the
governor approach to make it
when I heard projects by chance.
Senator or madame chair and
senator
which naughty and hb to the just
you know hopefully it will be
able to add it and the governor
has received you know the the
capital outlay request from
timberon and she does have the
request that would you know for
the twenty million dollars i'm
not quite sure where where that
will be she and I have not had a
meeting yet we we intend to on
on this and a few of the things
you know terrible to it so it is
on the capital request list I
guess madam chairs interview
as you know if it's not one of
them bills it's going to be hard
to do so.
Thank you center center city a
lot.
Thank you madam chair of course
I support this however there I
did they they did describe a
couple of issues and they are
fire that I went to them of
course was the same issue as the
last one the capacity of the
agency to to do this I noticed
that they asked for
they need at least three
additional left heaters to
support this bill and they also
say that they're the
construction in the middle um
requiring requiring a media to
conplan and construct drinking
water waste facilities a
presents a conflict of interest
with its regulatory rule so I
was wondering if there are
better agency and will there be
sufficient staff to do this
and share and senator the the
community of timberone has been
able so far to spend any any
money we we've sent to them
don't know exactly how they you
know how they contract for
others in using the manage at
their disposal as a short and
water district or aid out water
and sanitation district and show
they been able to accomplish all
of them I expect that they'll be
able to do that or working with
the call to be able to.
Oh thank you so it's not ed that
would as require to do this if
this is just passed through each
just the past agency.
Madam madame chair and and
shattered how it would actually
work out you know I can't tell
you but I do know that as we
funded timber on in the pash.
The ability for them to contract
and utilize the fines we have
provided a head.
Okay perfect thank you that
answers my concert thank you
manager.
The seller posts
thank you madame chair and thank
you center
you mention that this is on the
capitally list so
have you yourself and the
representative have you been
giving capitali to this project
or do you plan on doing that.
Men madame chair and senator
timberon this is not the only
project timber on has as
requested and and this year yes
I have have capital of my own
allocated and I probably over
the course of the lashed five
years when we've had available
capital have spent somewhere in
the neighborhood at two million
dollars with.
Great thank you center i'm going
to support the bill but I just
like that some questions and and
thank you manager and thank you
sinternet love to spend some
yours if you just want a yellow
send it that way.
So before we go to emotion i'm
going to make a comment we're
hearing some bills here that.
Our capital requests and we all
have capital requests and
many entities would like to come
in front of us and make their
request in their please but the
needs are overwhelming I
appreciate it i'm going to
support this bill but I think we
might have to put everything
into perspective
and we're not on.
Finance so we won't be making
those decisions but.
Thank you for it coming forward
is there emotion to do pass
manager there is a motion for a
new passes there are second and
the center gave us did second
and the secretary could call.
So she wanted
senator gagos
center hambling yes sent him a
country
senator novel
center poll yes center source no
for the same reason
senator deal office yes the
parnicks.
This.
By a boat.
Via vote of eight to one you
have a pass thank you very much
for coming thank you madame
chair and yeah I think it's
important for like communities
like this and as you mention
there's a tremendous amount of
water needs out there and we
need to figure out other ways to
maybe get money to them and
hopefully that it's some point
we can we can do that thank you
matter.
Thank you now we're ready for a
center or two you know and
representative picture should
robot cover euro she's been
sitting very patiently in the
back
rating.
The.
And center police sign a copy
for us.
The.
Here.
So senator I know for the public
despite seem an ethetical but we
start with the amendment first.
And then you hear about the bill
later so senator teased you know
you have an amendment.
Madame chairman yes we do
this amendment.
Makes first of all it it makes
clear on page eight lane twenty
four that
we're asking the energy minerals
the natural resources
department.
To develop criteria for
approving projects for the loan
that's created in this bill for
loans from the fund is created
in this bill.
And that they have to prioritise
that
so that it's not just a first
comfort serve they would have to
have criteria and they would use
is the primary criteria
the economic benefit to the
state from each of the projects
that asks.
The.
Thank you is there motion to
adopt the amendment without the
amendment is there any objection
to the amendment
okay senator let's move on to
your amended bill thank you
madame chairman.
Members of the committee last
year you saw this bill.
I received great support
unanimously passed the senate
three negative votes in the
house.
For reasons that were never made
clear it was pocket vetoed and
we met with governor staff
during the interim to try to
figure out.
What could possibly have going
wrong they should I think it was
just a misunderstanding the one
thing that was brought up with
this should have gone to higher
education because you're
creating a center of excellence
why you would put a loan fund in
a grandphone at the higher
education department for
companies that might want to
develop.
For state department for state
agencies tribes or communities
that might want to develop these
projects didn't make any sense
so I think they understand it
now they've assured us in fact
we have a message that's why it
was declared to remain I I
believe and as a result we we
come back to you with this bill
they were given in mexico and
opportunity to join other states
that have started moving in in
this direction and actually
aren't as well situated as we
are the states of colorado and
texas for example have already
begun developing geose activity
and a test well was drilled in
the bushill down by any month
that went down to I think
eighteen was at eighteen
thousand feet it went down over
four miles.
Four and a half miles using
drill birth with with the
technology that was developed at
sandia national lives they
reached hard rock.
And in that's a cute point they
weren't act actually coming down
into steam they weren't hitting
water that turned into esteem
they were hitting rock there was
so hot.
At four and a half miles down
because in new mexico that risk
rest is there many locations
where the earth crust is that
shall that if you go down the
deep you'll hit temperatures the
four hundred degrees.
Which was.
Twice what you need to boil
water.
You run a loop through that a
closed loop.
You bring the heed up not water
nothing but he heat.
It runs through a head exchanger
at runs a turban generates
electricity cools and returns
down and it just continuous.
Twenty four seven three sixty
five a year.
Solar is good when the sun is
shining wind is great when the
wind is blowing.
This is good all the time and it
has the potential in new mexico
to be the final fifteen percent
to make it possible for us to
truly.
Go to sustainable.
Forever as long as the earth is
hot as long as we're living on
the earth this source of energy
will be there and so that's what
this billers it creates a
division within energy minerals
the natural resources there
would be the contact point the
the the focal point within state
government the place for
companies could come to where
universities could come to for
information about where should
we go how do we get it done how
do we get the permitting how do
we get the financing put
together.
We already created in in in the
bill talks about a center of
excellence that money has been
was was actually included in
last year's budget the center of
excellence has been created at
new mexico tech.
They've already begun work had a
great conference less fall
they're going to have another
one to spring bringing together
private companies that want to
do this work like the company
the drilden in the boot heal.
And then after having proved
that this technology really does
generate electricity of in in a
fashion that's developable they
went to never neutral never I
forget either you turn of it but
they went to nevada where they
actually drilled one for google.
And they have a google facility
right next to this all the
electricity that that google
facility will need is being
generated from geotheral from a
technology that we developed in
new mexico that we tested in new
mexico and that we didn't
capture here we let him get away
we can go back and get him there
is an incredible opportunity
here that we need to capitalise
I and with that ask my house
sponsored the bill my co
sponsored the senate bill
representative
but this year robot cover you
know to say a few words and then
we have an expert witness at a
time solemn and who could answer
any questions that you.
Madame chairman members of the
committee I can't I can't say it
any better than the senator just
presented all of the excellent
points and I just came here
today.
To actually just give him thanks
for having he and the working
group for having welcomed me to
vehicle sponsor
out of my commitment towards
energy democracy and so I just
wanted to say that this actually
creates perfect pathways for a
communities and for developers
towards a clean sustainable
renewable energy and.
Other than that as I mentioned
the senator gave all of the
positive discussion points in
arguments for why this was a win
when last session in the house
as he mentioned we only had
three no votes and they were
basically based on
clarifications that weren't
quite clear they make those
clear at the committee level
madam chair and so in the floor
they exercise their right to
continue to raise those
questions and not why deeply
appreciate it that.
And we've had the governors
assurances obviously with the
car that this is going to move
forward and as I said it's a win
win for everyone involved in our
communities especially mine in
district thirteen have been very
loud and clear about wanting to
go wanting me to focus on
renewal energy and thank you
madame chair and senator.
That would be helpful
is the radio anybody in the
audience and support of this
bill how many are ported
is there anybody in the audience
in opposition to this bill
is there anybody online and
support of the bill.
The end locked logsten is in
support is there anybody opposed
only this is just one person and
does mislocked him once one to
speak.
Great all right we'll wit let's
start with the the people in we
don't need everybody to speak so
would be great if you could
select like maybe three of four
people to to speak and support
the bill since we don't have
opposition.
Good morning madame chair and
committee sponsors expert thank
you for the opportunity to
address as my name is jim
mckenzie and the coach warden of
three fifty new mexico
environmental organization here
and i'm speaking in support of
this bill in this day and age
when we have lots of different
technology advanced to solve our
energy transition problem some
of them are what's known on the
street as fault solutions this
is not a fault solution this is
the real deal so
you've heard
this the sponsors in the authors
this talk about the detail I I
don't need to go into that oh so
one of the important reasons
that we need to support this
today as this is a very
promising technology in terms of
cost it's not quite there but
it's very early in his
development so we need to get on
board with this and and the cost
will come down i'm convinced so
it'll be very
favorable in the market place
thank you very much
thank you
madame chair members of the
committee melissa bernard and
representing serious club real
grandday chapter we support this
bill for the aforementioned
reasons and we would add the
development of geothermal energy
represents a transition
opportunity for workers in the
oil industry and many others for
jobs throughout the state
including disadvantage
communities and we urge your
support thank you
thank you.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee my name is
linda borch field i'm a
concerned citizen I urgent a
vote yes on sb fifty nine for
jewish certain will energe this
is the clean twenty four hours
seven twenty four hours seven
day and energy source that new
mexico needs to generate
electricity we now have the
drill bits they can handle the
granted and high heat and then
fact the demonstration growing
took place in new mexico but the
industry packed up and went to
nevada let's bring them back
here we need to diverse supply
away from the boom imbust oil
and gas industry
new mexico has has great
resource new mexicans need clean
energy it's cheap it's
successful they can use existing
drills and skills the workers we
desperately need to diversify
would be crazy not to develop
you with her more energy.
Thank you and now missed logston
you're online could you speak
briefly on this bill.
Yes I went down.
Like to first think madame chair
and vice chair and the
proponents of this bill i'm gene
logsten I represent the league
of women voters of new mexico
the league supports climate
change
because
an inner related approach that
will help to
defend the overall integrity of
the global ecosystem is
necessary to protect public
health jail thermal energy is a
win when when
solution for all of the reasons
that has been presented by the
previous speakers in particular
we support renewable resources
and that geo thermal is quite
consistent with that thank you
very much thank you miss luxen
okay so now let's go to the
committee I have senator soles
on the on the list thank you
madame chair and this may just
be a clarification that on page
two line twenty two
says this is anywhere a hundred
degrees
is that accurate or should it be
celsius because it sounds like
we're talking about boiling
water and making steam which
would be celsius not there
is that a friendly amendment to
make that change or is it
supposed to be paranight that we
really can generate electricity
on from the soil on a hot summer
day
thank you
madame chair and center souls
that particular provision for a
hundred degrees for height was
added into the bill excuse me
excuse me you need to introduce
yourself i'm sorry i'm a tom
solemn
retired electrical engineer and
the facilitator of.
Thank you if you would continue
yes
so senator souls we added this
provision in in order to allow
some of these funds to go to
businesses like mass and farms
in regions
which is using direct heat from
the earth in order to for
exampl.
And that is not an electricity
producing
system but new mexico has you
thought of resources of many
different temperatures and
direct use of geothermohe for
those purposes heating buildings
for example your bill
and the hotsprings and bars we
want to be able to promote the
all those resources in addition
to the electricity electricity
generate madame charit and thank
you most of the discussion had
been about generating
electricity and boy i'd like to
see that technology they can use
hundred degree temperatures to
generate electricity but that
clarifies it lots thank you very
much thank you senator senator
mccatchen.
Madame chair
right notes over here madam
chair and and and senators epino
appreciate you bring in the
subnew mexico's obviously an
energy state we've got tons of
great natural resources
you know great climate and and
what and a lot of things like
nuclear knowledge and things
like that as well what does it
cost you drill in eighteen
thousand foot well.
Criminal of different time
solomon who's been doing a lot
of the basic research he is
actually an engineer which
makes him qualify to answer
questions like this
madam chair center of a kitchen
the technology that is used to
drill is essentially of the same
draw rigs that the oil industry
uses and their number is
something on the order of a
million plus per thousand feet.
To drill a well so that's the
number we're using
I know it's pretty feasible
right it is more or less right
there madame chair so so I mean
we're talking about eighteen
million dollars well my guess
was going to be between the
fourteen sixteen we have any
idea
how many.
Kill what sort the.
That i'm chair senator
mcketchen.
So this particular test well
that was drilled in near animals
was right next to the existing
lightning dark geotherman
facility the one electricity
plant for geothermal that new
mexico is operating today it's
on p and m's grid that
perticular geothermal plant is
rated at about fifteen megawatts
and one of the concepts for
drilling this test well adjacent
a lightning dark was to be able
to potentially expand that
facility beyond its fifteen
megawatts so they were probably
looking at you know potentially
doubling it at that police
there are other geothermal
advanced it enhanced your
thermal projects being drilled
in produced
today there's one in utah from a
company called frivole and that
is.
Projected to be rated at four
hundred mb.
Very
consistent with you know height
of housing electricity
production.
Plants
made a mountain turn and center.
So I might understand that one g
or thermal well this well that's
drilled in the boot the idiots
yes my mouth all snuggle up to a
little closer here i've just
scared of it with our history
but that been working real good
today.
The okay although leave a
stationary for sure.
So I might understand that this
one well that they'd really in
the boot hill is a fifteen mega.
Power generator
so and chairs there might catch
in the well they drilled with a
test well to demonstrate their
technology the drawing
technology the new bits that
they design
and the established that they
met all their technology goals
the planet that is operating
next to it is using classic old
style hydro thermal technology
with their taps into an existing
hot water aquifer that is a
fifteen mb plan they are kind of
separate concepts is that makes
that matter cheers at is that
one will.
Though the well that is
operating in for lightning doc
yes you know I am not sure okay
okay what would we.
Madam chairman and sender what
would we expect like said with
newer technology and things like
that what are you expecting the
magazine.
Okay
too bad I mean i'm just as we're
talking about rachel madame
chair center of a kitchen
division that we have for you
know developing new mexico
thermal resources is in the
gigawat scale so you know
basically tens of
plants of the size similar to
what's being done in in utah the
never we put to it is you know
potentially ten percent or so of
the total new mexico load out
into the twenty forty twenty
fifties 1-3 gigawatch total for
all geothermal development okay
madame chairman and senator i'm
just trying to figure out how
many magazines that one well
will do the idea
of ballpark yes
madame chair center my kitchen
I believe that that one well if
it were fully developed with all
of the branches that they would
intend to do are ultimately you
basically the concept is you
drill a a well down to that
depth and then that is the
that's the injection well and
then you could grill production
well that returns back to the
surface there's a close loop but
underneath the earth there is a
whole series of parallel lines
that can be
many kilometers long and you
basically drill as many of those
as you need an order to capture
the sufficient amount of the
earth heat to bring that up and
run it at the surface I believe
that it would be easily possible
to generate four hundred
baker what's out of the system
like that four hundred yes one
injection well one production
well that a whole series of old
network of radiator finds a
below the surface okay madam
madame chairman and sender so
this eighteen million to develop
this is just it's basically
prove a concept work were
checking the zones were saying
hey we've got enough heat down
here to do that.
The geology looks right for
development but then the actual
development there is a lot more
cost intensive than just the
eighteen may and cause now we're
going to go down horse on and
should we do this and and
leonetti county all the time you
know two miles down to my letter
of three mile at all whatever it
is the technologies there and we
could think the old guests
industry for developing that
technology and and the ability
to do that if it can be applied
here and that's that's really
really good what would we be
talking about to develop
potentially understand we're
just kind of thrown specially at
the wall here but what would we
be talking about to develop
fully the
the geothermore capabilities
down there in the boot in the
movie for one injection in one
extraction well with the with
the find I mean is it a four
hundred million dollar projector
being done what is the.
Yeah.
Madam chairs center by kitchen I
think above and would be
speculating too much to to
answer that question with
specifics I will tell you that
the department of energy has set
what they call one of their
earth shot goals
for the costs of geothermal
electricity and their goal is
forty five dollars per megawhat
hour into the next decade or so
and so that particularly set of
costs puts it very competitive
with a natural gas combined
cycle plant okay in terms of
electricity costs which I think
is the o.
Thank you matt manager
i'm intrigued by geo thermal
luck said it's probably in a lot
of the stages that some other
quote uncle green energy is is
at right now that
you know if we if we look at uh
well I like the fact that
you know the geoterman wells are
not made in the shunching
promise of china under
communists slave labor for
children right first of all and
like that so it betake out a
solar and just so we're all
clearing and maybe grasped the
flipdashprint that this would
have to the service to the
earth.
We just did a three hundred and
thirty acre solar facility in
eddie county and that was twenty
megawas.
And so if we're talking about an
injection well in an extraction
while we're probably talking
about a total live ten acres of
surface disturbance right or not
scraping the land off and keep
all the turtles and snakes and
everything like that it is it is
it is much it is much tighter
and there's a lot lower
footprint four g of thermal and
if we're if we're opposing that
to to three hundred and thirty
acres of a twenty megawhat plant
and potentially a call to three
or four hundred mbps well then
it's really easy to see there
and we also can compare that
three hundred and thirty acres
of solar to about two hundred
barrels of oil is about what th.
So
anyway.
It's there but I think it's
interesting project and and and
appreciate bringing manager.
Thank you mentioned saran
just a couple of questions for
mister solve and so um on page
six it's talking bad online at
eight or you're asking turn on
fifty thousand for the study
cost and benefits if we knocked
in you sort of have some numbers
rough numbers
have we not already done that
do we have
I guess do you have any
historical data if I understand
we have one gilt
in the state
is that my provided the
information we need to look at
this is large scale.
And i'm sure center guy goes
there are you know there's a
whole list of potential to your
thermal development projects
that we identified through the
year plus of our kind of
research into what new mexico's
your thermal potential was and
they run the gammit from you
know expanding a facility like
the direct use of geothermalid
mass and farms the hot springs
and sparse.
Grounds or as he pumps for
buildings.
And
it is you know the purpose of
the grand fund is so that each
of these businesses that may
want to expand or may want to
come in and set up and develop
can examine the geology and a
particular area at its own
geothermal potential as we know
recovering geothermal energy
depends on the subsurface
conditions which very
significantly throughout the
state whether you're in the real
grand rift or outside of it how
how far down you have to go
those are the kinds of
answers that I think they would
want to
uh develop by applying for these
grants.
The public of observe for
example did a study in twenty
twelve twenty third team using
subdepartment of energy funding
identified some potential areas
for geotherman development
within their public.
Thank you for that and churn
chairman.
Mister solven years ago i'm in
say probably twelve years ago
schools among their school board
we're looking to we have swimple
we lived to jail thermal to do
it and in our area.
The cost was too excessive so I
am in all I know you like you're
saying different areas will be
different depths but i'm just
wondering at that time the
cheapest route was pauly on a
roof and circulated pumps to be
able to draw the heat off the
son instead of ported from the
ground but i'm just wondering
how would you tell
it a ten year from them how did
you tell this is successful by
caused what were wanting to be
right by the consumers how would
you know that you're successful.
Ten years now in it if you if we
go down this room and your
caution hired the forty five
dollars meg what per hour
would that still be successful
or you look for something that's
more economical from
constituents and chair and
center
madam chair center guy goes
so that forty five dollars for
big about hour is the number
from the zards analysis of the
level is cost of energies of
many different energy resources
and they range from the hundred
plus dollars per meg a lot hour
for nuclear and call down to the
you know thirty dollars make a
what our for things like solar
and w.
Combined cycle gas somewhere in
the middle and so you know what
we are looking at doing is
providing a
electricity generation source
that is competitive with many of
those sources but of course they
come with many environmental
benefits along with them which
are not included in those just
direct costs and it comes with
you know reduction of the amount
of pollution that we're putting
into the air which show comes
with a medical cost for you know
hard disease and emphasimal and
asthma those are avoided costs
which are not included in you
know those benefits and of
course the impact on the climate
which is causing you know a real
crisis in terms of global
warming those are all avoided
cost benefits that come with
clean renewable resources like
geothermore so you would need to
look at the benefits across a
very broad spectrum of factors
including the ones that i've
mentioned but it just happens to
be that the cost projections are
are right in there in terms of
competitiveness with existing
electricity generation cheaper
than nuclear cheaper than call a
little bit more expensive than
in solar and we believ.
Thank you for that and chair and
center in a missolving and you
went to the area was trying to
get a handle on is a meaning
nuclear reactors what's that
base cause for baseline
I made sure center guy goes I
believe the lazard analysis has
that in excess of a hundred
dollars per make a lot level is
costly better.
The.
Where I appreciate that I was
actually opened there was a
little bit less but
that is probably
the safest in greenest energy
out there so would that are
yielded thank you for the
information and just want to see
if we would make sure we get it
of usable low cost for our
constituents thank you manager
just on that point madame
chairman of senator if you are
interested we can get your
copies of that lazard analysis
of energy cause I would.
Benefits centers the deal
appears
I looked at that language and I
guess my reaction was that we
are already
we have already developed
resources of the kid that we're
talking about and so there is
already a system in place to
permit those obviously they pass
because
you know operations like mass
and farms when it went through
that route
all that we're talking about
doing here is providing some
financial incentives for other
businesses counties governments
tribal entities to propose
projects of that nature and go
through that same route so i'm I
guess i'm i'm
not sure that there is a need to
make that kind of a change in
this bill.
Made chairman and senator said
the old opposed.
Nor am I on page nine for
example
paragraph sea at the top and a
similar language is in the the
the part of the building deals
with the grant
it says if you're going to get
one of these loans
earlier it said one of these
grants you're still have to
follow all the all the
permitting processes you have to
get all the applicable
permissions we're not you know
excusing people from anything
and so if the state engineer has
authority over those that would
still apply we don't need to say
it again item.
Yeah.
I.
Yet yes my matter thank you very
much i'm not sure the language
is exactly correct and here
there might be something the oc
statutes that are that say turn
fifty degrees but I believe the
oc regulation is below to twenty
five hundred feet and above ten
thousand test water and the ose
does permit those wells my
forget the name of it but they
have a decinct
title that they that they apply
to those wells and they oversee
those but I don't believe the
ossee would have any
jurisdiction on an eighteen
thousand foot well just based on
other regs that apply there but
a b.
And just if if you'd like me to
respond to that briefly senator
as manager center are you asking
for a question it was a
community if you would like the
clarification I was just trying
to add something to the
conversation that we have it's
it's up to you matter.
Thank you madame chair I move a
pass on senate bill fifty nine
is amended.
Center survivors.
Excused center guy goes.
Center hambling
said i'm a curtain
set of avail.
Center pope yes
senator source is.
Senator deal opens yes to
fantas.
You have an
h zero
billion earlier bill is best
where do you go from here to
thank you where's your next
committee
senate taxes.
Great good luck
with finance.
And I do want to remind everyone
to come early next week because
we will have a breakfast or this
week and this thursday we will
have breakfast thank you.
The.
Thank you
this meeting is a journey.
