Do all the motions first before
we get into the bill.
The motions to the amendments
you mean well for the do not
pass oh yes thank you that's a
good idea.
So this particular bill.
The.
Is a substitute is a committee
substitute.
Um so we need someone to make a
motion to do not pass the bill
the original bill senator poke
madam cherry move do not pass on
senate be all two ninety four in
a due pass for committee
substitute for senate bill to
ninety four for discussion
purposes
thank you senator pope thank you
this bill has a few sponsors
even though committee
substitutes do not have
sponsors it's myself center
munios and senators share and
the bill is brought to you today
as part of a vision that the
executive branch has for
attracting industry to our
state.
The concept originally included
rackish water and produced water
from oil and gas and that has
been separated out the produced
out water from oil and gas is
going to be seen in a memoir to
study where earth minerals
later.
But today this bill deals with.
Offering an opportunity.
For industry to know that the
state of new mexico.
Would purchase the water that is
cleaned up that's brackish and
they would buy it and they would
resell it for industry
the bill the hundred million
dollars and s tbs is not for
infrastructure.
It is intended for the.
Investors to come in.
And to develop the plants
for the cleaning of the brackish
water and to determine based
upon studies here in our state
where the brackets water pockets
are
with me today I have senator
sure as I mentioned we're back a
roose from the office of the
governor the executive office my
came on the state engineer
nature curious general council
for environment and also
he said he is the general
council for the state engineer
and we also have secretary james
kinney so send you sure you.
Thank you madame chair and madam
chair really in this case i'm
looking for.
Economic development it's also
useful to the state.
And I think at least in this
case we're starting we're
starting to process I think
it'll take several years maybe a
decade to get the whole thing
moving but.
The.
You have to take the first step.
Thank you senator sir thank you
I want to point out the hundred
million dollars bonds is only
for three year period and then
it would rue for it back
so now I would have my expert
witness miss rebecca roose speak
she used to be the deputy
secretary in environment but she
moved over to and be one of the
advisors for the governor
mr thank you good morning madame
cherry morning members of the
committee thank you for your
time this morning
as a center stavanic side I am
the infrastructure advisor in
the governor's office and we see
this bell as a catalyst for
moving both infrastructure
development and economic
development by bringing in key
manufacturing sectors to
diversify our economy without
further stressing our precious
fresh water resources so this is
tieing together our water
challenges in the state by
bringing forward alternative
supplies to expand our economy
well we simultaneously
move forward in that clean
energy transition so all three
of those things are at play and
part of why this bill is before
you this morning is because we
feel it so important to get
moving on their sooner rather
than later and the approach
that's reflected in senate bill
two ninety four is
provides a number of safeguards
a number of greater processes
and opportunities for
legislative involvement
throughout implementation of the
program and and by putting red
million dollars of severance
tax bind capacity aside at this
stage it enables the
state to move forward and
bringing private sector
investments to the state in this
coming calendar year.
And we can move forward quickly
we can take advantage of a
number of federal incentives
that manufacturing companies and
others are looking at to decide
where are they going to bring
their jobs and their revenue and
their economic opportunities and
those those decisions that are
being made across the private
sector are happening in real
time and this bill helps us move
forward and attract those
companies with out further
challenging further stressing
our fresh water resources so
without all
be here for questions along with
my other colleagues and thank
you again for your time out of
chair thank you miss russ
how many in the audience are in
support of this bill.
Okay they're about nine people
who seem to be in support of
this bill how many in the
audience are opposed to this
bill.
I can't five six.
Is that about rate five how many
do we have
in support and against.
Will let's go ahead since they
were about.
Let's go hill and take five on
each side
and i'll just go ahead and ask
the supporters to go ahead and
start with their five.
Madame chair members of the
committee secretary kenny new
mexico environment department
appreciate all the time that
this committee and many of you
have spent listening to the the
governor's goal of the strategic
water supply I won't take up
much year time other than to say
that being bald being brave and
and forging new pathways in
protecting fresh water while
diversifying our economy is what
we're doing here today and I
hope you can support this bill
and help us move work together
thank you thank you secretary
kitty.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee I think
the the sponsors for bringing
this this forward
this is a a component of a
comprehensive.
Water management strategy for
the state in mexico it's been a
developing brackish water and
figuring out a way ultimately to
address all our water resource
options.
Within a comprehensive approach
is the right way to move forward
and think about how mexico is
going to
prepare itself for an error
future which we know is already
occurring in terms of reduction
of snow package of sweater and
off impacts to our environment
etc so being in a position to
study investigate in courage
uh
industrial utilization of
nonpotterball fresh water within
our state is is an important
goal.
And when that we are fully
supportive and will continue to
work with the environment
department and the other
agencies through advance a
comprehensive water management
strategy that would include
development of brackish water in
our state thank you very much
thank you engineer hammond.
Good morning madame chairman
committee my name is john
rodrick i'm the director of the
water protection division at the
mexico environment department.
And this bill is extremely
important to ask because it
gives us another tool in the
boxes we work on what a reuse in
this state to to deal with the
the effects of long term drought
and diminishing supplies
our piece in this is to develop
the regulatory side which is in
progress now to ensure that the
rate is water that is produced
and potentially purchased meets
the requirements then make it
safe for utilization in approved
projects thank you.
Thank you.
The.
Can good morning madame chair
members my name is actually each
on the director of the state
border finance with the
permanent finance administration
we are supportive of this bill
we have worked with a team to
look at the funding of it we
believe it is visionary at a
time when the state has record
high revenues we are also very
much appreciate the protections
in the bill and the oversight
the bill that has been included
that something that's state what
a finance would expect to see
when we're committing this
funding from the severance tax
bonding fund so again in support
of this bill thank you.
Thank you
ok you said there was one online
a post.
To.
And and two.
And you said one supporting.
Okay
a matter of here can I ask you
question so we heard from all
state agencies where there are
no private industry here I
nobody raised their hill thank
you.
Is that correct is there anybody
in private industry that
supports us and is here.
Okay.
Thank you.
So
now that's let's hear from the
opponents and I said five so
let's go ahead and start
with five lining it.
Thank you madam vice chair
tears the ponics and sponsored
this bill and members of this
committee
my name is normgarm.
I'm a career water professional
in the mexico I speak to day for
myself.
Not for any organization.
I'm a product of water work
force development edina mexico
state university.
In the early nineteen seventies.
I got a master's degree and was
water and waste water
engineering there.
And I was actually paid of skype
end of two hundred dollars a
month.
To get my master's degree.
In order to help implement.
The clean water act the federal
clean water act in the state of
new mexico.
I've spent my entire working
career as in the mexico water
resources professional and I
want to tell you that this bill
is the wrong thing to do for the
mexico at this time.
Of water crisis.
I would proposed amendment that
I would like to offer to this
bill if I may do that and I
would like to read that
amendment after I explain the
need for it i'm sorry that i'm
out of breath.
I've rushed here from
albuquerque this morning to be
able to come and testify before
you.
And I assembled my testimony
this morning
is there any opposition to him
reading a proposed amendment of
course you know a committee
member would have to take that
up.
Um any opposition okay go ahead
mr no
first of all let me describe the
reason for the amendment.
This water.
Disrespects.
Wreckage water that was set
aside by law.
In the stated new mexico.
By state engineer steve
reynolds.
And by officials of the new
mexico environment department or
its predecessor in the nineteen
seventies.
In the nineteen seventies
protection was award and
understate law.
To all water in new mexico that
has a t d s concentration less
than ten thousand milligrams for
leader.
It is protected just as much
understate law.
As any other water that we would
call breakable because it tastes
good and it's good for us.
Water that is protected under
new mexico law.
Does not necessarily meet those
standards.
This loss says that in order to
use this water it has to be come
treatment after it
of a treatment process that
disrespects the protections
under law that have already been
granted to the swatter.
Further.
This is not beginning with the
end in mind it is not putting
first things first.
I'm speaking to you.
Microdentials include the
master's degree.
I'm a former director of the
interstate stream commission
I served on the water policy and
infrastructure task force.
I could charge the water
management and planning sub
committee or work group of that
test force all eight of our
recommendations passed
unanimously.
Past unanimously.
One of them.
The water security planning act.
Was passed unanimously.
By this legislature last year.
Yet you have disrespected the
very law that you passed
unanimously by not funding at
last year or this year.
And why not funding any.
Of their ten measures.
Sorry fifteen.
The the new mexican water and
**** put their logo on and
recommended to you in january.
You have not funded completely
any of those.
But you would borrow money.
The fund this ill perceived the
project.
Here is my proposed amendment.
The.
The governor shall insure by
using the integrated water data
and information platform
developed pursuant to the water
data act
section seventy two four b dash
one to seventy two four b days
four enemy say nineteen seventy
eight.
And collaborating with a bear of
geology and metal resources that
the mexico institute of mining
and technology
and the water resources research
institute that high quality
adequate science data and
models.
Needed for informed siding of
any facilities proponents of
bulk water treatment required to
produce deslalinated bulk water
to the state of the mexico
while preventing or safely
disposing of all residuals
applauds for emissions from the
treatment processes.
Or available to the distal
nation project proponents
that this reliable information
is used with scientific
integrity and inherence to
principles of honesty
objectivity transparency and
professionalism in developing
vetting and prior toys and
proposals.
Including ascertaining the
opportunity cost of finding the
proponent's project compared to
one competing use of the same
funds proposed by any inclusive
collaborative representative
group a water resource
stakeholders.
That is endorsed by no less than
six.
By partisan legislators and that
might bring comparable or
greater economic or water
security value.
To the state
manager thank you mister I I let
you read the amendment I also
realize that I neglected to put
a time limit on and anyone so I
should probably start now I
didn't want to interrupt you
because we did have unanimous
unanimous consent to to read the
amendment and any committee
member can take up the amendment
really appreciate you coming
before us and bringing your
expertise but we do have to get
on without hearing.
This hearing may I make one
closing comment this language
should be familiar to you
because much of it is lifted
correctly from the water
security planning act for this
legislature passed unanimously
in two thousand twenty three
thank you madame chair thank you
mister.
Think you guys terribly members
of the committee for the
approach
is the sign
many mistritious neighbor and I
am speaking to you today on
behalf of new mexico wild and
because bravos and the real
grandday chapter of the sierra
club we first one I think the
sponsors for bringing this bill
for word it's important that an
idea of this magnitude have
public discourse surround it.
And we do believe it is likely
that treatment of rockers water
place some role in addressing
our water crisis in the future
however we have a number of
questions and concerns around
senate bill two ninety four
though we do not believe there
is time to address this
legislative session first we are
concerned that the definition of
rockish water in this bill
creates a new category of water
greater than one thousand and up
to ten thousand tds we question
whether creating this new
category is wise when existing
regulations protect all
groundwater ten thousand td s or
less equally second we don't
think this bill addresses the
question of how the brand
concentrate that results from
treated rackish water will be
safely disposed of nor how
treated water will move around
the state to where it is needed
this concentrate represents a
real challenge to dispose of
with significant environmental
impacts and should not be taken
lately third we are concerned we
don't yet not have enough
information on our aqua for a
statewide or more broadly about
pumping water from deep aqua
first nor do we know enough
about the potential impacts and
unintended consequences that
this pumping of depart aquifers
will have an other new mexico
water resources deep groundwater
is unlikely to be replenished in
our lifetime it is therefore
incumbent on decision makers to
operate with caution since
mistakes cannot be undone.
Lastly we wonder what the
urgency is to push this idea
through when there has not been
time to fully vet the idea with
communities are stay holders
while at the same time their
existing ideas with bride
consensus that remain unfunded
the water policy infrastructure
task force made a number of
recommendations many of which
remain unfinded.
And one of which in is to fully
fund the awkward for mapping
program which works to better
understand a monitor new
mexico's groundwater currently
there is only one one hundred
and sixty thousand dollar
appropriation for this program
in each b two for a specific
project in rearing the county we
believe it we need a much better
understanding of our account for
is in a holistic view of the
impact of deep groundwater
pumping before we can understand
the true costs and benefits of
this idea on behalf of our three
organizations and tens of
thousands of members and
supporters across the land of
enchantment we ask that you
table this bill today so that
the idea can be more thoroughly
about it during the internet
session we look forward to
working in the future with the
bill sponsors and other
legislative leaders the
environment department and the
governor's office to ensure we
are moving forward the best
solutions to new mexico's water
crisis thank you
this will be our last commercial
because i've let these are these
three speak until they finished
so go ahead mister michael.
Thank you madame chair community
members i'm doubtless michael
china registered lobbyist or
conservation voters in mexico
and first time where to
apologize to senator sharer
because I did not hit the chance
to speak with him and let him
know that we oppose the spill
before this hearing
the conservation voters second
statements that have been made
already by a mister commun miss
snyder in addition a
conservation boaters would point
out that the bill although the
bill says something about making
sure that what other water
rights holders are not
absolutely affected by this
proposal there is nothing in the
bill to indicate that the new
mexico's compact obligations
also cannot be affected by this
operation
that is a serious problem and we
urge you to consider that when
you boat on this bill to
conservation boaters seconds
notion that you should table is
spill so that we can work on
this issue in the interim thank
you very much thank you mister
michael junk.
I did promise five if so i'll
just let somebody speak that has
been as as a point that his not
already been made because I
think it's important to get all
these arguments on the table so
does anybody have a point that
is not already been made.
Okay.
It is now what times it would
just tell me.
Let's go ahead and select one in
see if we get new points.
Mislion.
The.
Thank you senator thank you for
letting us comment I am
providing my comment on behalf
of the new mexico no false
solutions coalition which
includes public action alliance
youth united for climate crisis
action also not as yaka
indigenous life ways lost have
denies institute earth care new
energy economy and the center
for biological diversity
so trying to keep up with your
request for new comments senator
we are to committee to oppose
this bill for the hundred
million appropriations for the
strategic water supply program
to come modify bracket water
where we fear that creating a
market value on bracket water
could eventually lead to the
demand and exploitation of
another non renewable resource
we have seen how climate reacts
when a non renewable resource is
overextracted and we believe
that some more outcomes will
arise a disallonation treatment
plans are extremely costly but
also we're really worried about
the waste where will this go is
one of our chestings who will
regulate the by product of
treating bracket water but also
who has the authority to provide
permits for deep opera for
brackish water we're concerned
that these deep aquifers cannot
be replenished simply not in our
lifetime much less at all and
that drilling or pumping could
contaminate our potable water
sources meaning that this is
scientifically unproven and
might process the fresh water
the little fresh water we do
have in the state because this
bill is big and unspecific the
destinations also provide
uncertainty we will like the
committee the committee to
consider the questions as to why
this bill is being proposed in
the final days of the session we
had questions about whether or
not this had a note from the
governor and if so why it wasn't
discussed embedded by many
before coming in front of this
community and of course with our
communities thank you so much
chair and committee thank you
miss lyon.
This.
Does anybody else have a new
comment
that end up that did make a new
point and then a new p.
Mr mckinzee briefly could you
state the new point.
Mr mckinsey.
The.
Mr mce your muted.
I'm sorry consuming good morning
narrow chair media and expert
witnesses
this is jim mackenzie and my
three fifteen new mexico and is
very briefly we stand in
opposition to this.
And this bill are this last
minute the legislation for the
reasons already stated by many
of our allies so i'll leave it
at that thank you very much
position.
The.
Thank you
alright I think we got a lot of
the issues out on the table and
so now let's turn to the
committee I have mister soles or
senator soles thank you madame
chair.
Who owns the brackish water now.
Mister chair I think the state
engineer should probably answer
them wherever he want to
okay
they can thank you manager.
That senator soles
the
water.
Uh that resides deeper than
twenty five hundred acre feet.
Is not owned by anyone
essentially there are no
permitting requirements to
to assess access to the server
resource and that the the
ownership question would result
as as a matter of bringing it to
the surface and and and
dressing it from the standpoint
of of the investment in the
production of that water and and
then I would be
whoever is produced that water
would also receive a permit from
the state engineer to actually
drill
the well and and it would also
have to meter it
there would be an analysis
performed by the state entires
office to make sure that the
production of any practice water
deeper than twenty five hundred
if he would not have any
impairment or dilitarious
effects on other fresh water
equipment above it or any stream
courses that may be impacted by
that
thank you senators madame chart
so if I understand nobody owns
it and so it's ever has the
surface
ownership owns the water
underneath it that doesn't
I don't follow that didn't make
sense.
I mean if I there's brackets
resource under my house and I
could go and drill it because I
live there.
Medicare center sold the last
month general consider for their
address that matter madame chair
senator soles water in new
mexico introduced my name is
nature and the general council
for the office of the student
engineer water rating new mexico
do not follow the surface estate
new mexico constitution says all
the waters of the state are
belonged to the public and are
available for appropriations in
share explain
it's if if if you are tapping
into water shallower than two
thousand five hundred
you have to apply for a permit
and that water may already have
been spoken for by other
the other water rates owners if
it's deeper than two thousand
five hundred feet generally no
one's really been able to put
that to us and so that
you you still have to get a
permit to ensure safe drilling
but it is it is belong to the
public anybody can tap into that
water.
Okay a matter chair so I sent
the the public owns the water
that we're talking about for
this particular purpose is that
an accurate statement.
Yes madam chair yes.
Okay.
So madam chair as were moving
forward if you this were to move
forward why would somebody was
coming in to set up a
desalatization plant to treat
practice water.
Why would they.
The.
Why would they want the state is
the middle man instead of doing
it by themselves yellow somebody
comes in gets a permit from the
state drills the bracket water
and sells it to a business
coming in why sell it to the
steep first.
It might and please forgive me
if I get this wrong but what
we're not we're not talking
about the state drilling the
wells we're talking about
private company coming in
drilling the wells in the state
buying the water that they clean
up.
That accurate.
Yes madam chair and senator
jim getting environment
secretary appreciate that
question and
you're the the driving force
behind it you're your question
is establishing market
certainty.
For the industry to come in and
build the infrastructure
necessary to desalinate that
that water so the nose that the
the strategic water supply
concept is built around this
this advanced market commitment
if the state provides the
certainty of purchasing the
water in a longer term contract
than that is the catalyst by
which that they would invest the
infrastructure to clean that
water up to a standard
matter material and secretary.
Do we have a mechanism for
storing all of this water or is
it a product on demand type of a
contract
madam chair and center so is I
think you just gave me of an
accular that is probably the
better one to use which is a
produce on demand
terminology that that is the
concept behind the strategic
water supplies so that as
companies came in to manufacture
water intensive companies came
into manufacturer things like
solar panels or wind her bines
or batteries or whatever it were
talking about that they would
consume or use as much water as
could be treated in generated so
there would not be a storage
component to it per se
so anna and I say per se only
because that would be sort of if
if someone needed.
Five hundred thousand gounds per
year then we would work to make
sure that
a company who is treating the
water could produce five hundred
thousand gounds.
Okay manager and I guess some of
where my my confusion or
frustration.
Comes from his as a company it
almost sounds like the state is
telling them to turn on turn
off.
As is needed by some company
that needs the breast water that
doesn't provide that company a
lot of certainly for how much
water they're going to be needed
and produced as opposed to the
other states going to buy it
stored in tanks or something
like that where there's it seems
more certain days than when
they've got to turn it on and
off depending on what the needs
of the company is without
storage of madame chair and
senator soles where it what I
would say is you know that it is
hard to wrap your head around
this theoretical concept and and
I appreciate the discussion
where having here in the
discussion we've been having
on this topic and maybe the by
analogy that the advance market
committee and concept is better
just quickly explained as in the
vaccine world when you know the
government acts as effectively a
middle man saying that if you
need this many doses of a back
scene for you know the
population or a community than
the government works with.
The producers the pharmaceutical
companies to generate that level
of that those number of doses so
the production and the
consumption is merely spurred
by.
Contracts that that are sure
that the pharmaceutical company
will be able to you know off
load if you will that much that
that many vaccines it's that's
the that's the analygies.
Concept here is to be in the
middle to ensure that the
treated water is actually
utilized water because that's
the only way to represent
preserve fresh water in the
process and madam charity in
with your example there is a
little bit of a on demand
production that seems considered
a shelf
waters guy sitting a storage
tank or something is this part
of where the money or with the
storage of it be the company
that's coming in
madam chair ends that are so you
got it it would be the store if
there was storage and in most
companies will need a certain
amount of storage meaning of
your on the consumptive use of
that treated water you will need
a you know a day a month of you
know pumps go down things happen
so you will need some degree of
raw water storage but that is
you know that the nice part of
this is that capital out well
sorry didn't mean to say
capitalise that the nose part of
this is that the advance market
commitment sort of puts that
infrastructure on the producer
that treated you know the the
the company that streeting the
the water and the company that's
utilizing the water to work out
that key infrastructure.
Madame jerry what you just said
makes more sense to me because
that has the state pulled out of
that process if there's a
contract for a certain amount of
water and it's not being.
Produced or delivered is the
state as the broker the one
that's in violation of the
contract where is it the person
with the decilization plant is
not producing enough to meet the
contract.
I still don't understand why the
states in the middle of this.
Yeah in instead of just a direct
relationship with the person who
needs the water in the person
making the water instead of us
sitting in the middle if they're
going to be storing it
delivering it and.
Yeah mister chair i'm madam
chair and senator soles you know
the the the work that we've done
to prepare for this in terms of
understanding the market forces
and the certainty that the
companies need to access cap at
all whether that's from you know
jp morgan or or wells fargo
whomever is that the the
assurance that the state well
will be in the middle and create
the market and facilitate the
market is what
the company treating the water
needs to access capital to build
the infrastructure so we're
spuring the release of that
capital for them to build the
infrastructure.
Then once they can build the
infrastructure they need off
takers so when we go out and
talk to companies about unsuring
domestically to the US are
expanding in the US bate may be
pursuing to the inflation
reduction act.
Then they have certainty the
company that's expanding our
ensuring that the state is going
to assure that the the day will
have water not just word twelve
months but for a longer period
of time and by being in the
middle.
We are facilitating a market
that doesn't exist today if it
did we wouldn't be here because
they'd be building the
infrastructure and they're not
okay then should just a couple
of more kind of of quick
questions in this bill is their
prohibition on produced water
that's clearly one of the
concerns of many of the on the
environmental side does this
current bill have a prohibition
on produced water or is it just
silent on produced water.
Mr.
Madame chair and center souls
this bill as drafted focuses on
brackish water and excludes it
and and therefore excludes other
types of water including produc.
And then chair and secretary
that was a little bit of a
wiggle it focuses on sorry
does it exclude or is it just
silent on produced water madam
care senator it is silent on
produce water but we removed
produce water from the original
bill because we're going to have
a memorial next this morning in
this committee that addresses
having new mechanic goes new
mexico state university study
the rare earth minerals and
produced water so
this bill is not intended for
produce water I would also
mention madame chair that texas
and arizona have each allocated
one billion dollars to this type
of project and then texas the
boaters approved that one
billion dollars.
The.
Get medicare just
another kind of couple real
quick what is the value of water
that's been clean like this is
it more valuable than our
pottable water in the state is
it less value what is the value
and kind of the question goes
along why not use this money to
buy current resources up I know
the oil.
Over the east side bought up a
whole bunt of water rights that
they had
fresh water for the oil wells
caused some farmers and problems
is is more less valuable than
our crime pottable water.
They come to the senate
resource.
That there's there's lots of
different pieces to your
question but I I think an
analogy would be in a
municipality that is producing
water for its customer base
that they they set rates on the
basis of the cost of production
and the future.
Replacement ten development of
future water deeper wells i'll
give you an example of tell up
the city of galiferb and how the
government fits into this
is that somewhat analogues to
specifically aspect of the bill
is that um
has to produce some additional
deporter for water that within
that twenty five hundred feet of
a regulation of the state
engineer as they wait for the
now gallop water supply project
to be completed and come into
the region so we the state
allocated
eight million dollars of arper
funds to help them drill those
wells to prepare for their their
future
and and that's that's that
increment of water is is not the
most expensive for them to
produce so they've had a raised
rates to cover that piece so
it's really
the value of waters based on the
cost of production and the
increment of getting that supply
to the customer base so
there's comparable matters on
treat effort but those are
subsidised by utilities
particularly so they could use
treated effort to offset fresh
water use in parks and other
places so the other side of this
is that we want to offset as
much fresh water use in new
mexico for future industrial and
non partial purposes and that's
what's great about
this forward looking at approach
to plan and and prepare for
them.
That manager allen there but it
it just seems yeah
why wouldn't companies buy up
current water rights if that
value is better for them than
buying expensive treated water
but i'll listen to other other
questions and so thank you for
the answer thank you senator
mccatchen.
Thank you medicare and.
The.
The.
Is that those wells are called
their their talk about drilling
deep wells that are notice of
intent wells and their below
twenty five hundred one thousand
t p.
I think that's pretty key right
because.
If they're below one thousand t
v s and the water isn't just.
Venture.
And send her my kitchen and left
my general council to address
that specifically
i'm sure sender so I believe
natures again observation
engineer so so yes if the water
is below one thousand t d s it's
not brackish water under the
statute in that water is you
know available for appropriation
uh through the same rules as any
other water right right madam
chairman's regardless of the
death.
Manager correct okay so
but we do have rackish water at.
At lower intervals are hiring
everyone to look at that right
then the twenty five hundred so
this bill doesn't specifically
speak about notice of intent
wells.
Is that correct.
Madam sure that is correct it is
it is not specific just to
notice of intent if there's
breakash water in shallow
rentals that could be treated
under the spill as well okay.
Um.
Now what would happen madam
chair center what would happen
if the water was ten thousand
and one tds because then it's
not considered rackish water so
you can drill up.
Hundred for well and it came in
ten thousand one tdst regular
thirty five hundred foot well
and it came in at ten thousand
and one tds it wouldn't be
considered brackish under the
statute so therefore unusable
correct
madam chair not eligible for for
the this program correct.
Okay.
My my question in and enter to
speak a little bit to send
yourself.
I I had my trouble I had trouble
get my head around this and and
what really we were doing here
but.
What.
This bond is doing is
guaranteeing the production cost
of that water so the water price
is going to be the same price.
That you would pay for a fresh
water they're not going to pay
any more for it but we're going
to have the added costs and
clean in that water up for since
a gallon or whatever it is so
that's what this bond if I
understanding it correctly would
do it would make that difference
up so let's just say a more
produce and water right now for
opinion gallon that's common
through the the municipality and
I can purchase it it is micro
you know as microsoft cut chips
or whatever the heck i'm doing
with the water I can purchase
that water for opinion allen but
then we're going to.
Clean that water up for another
pinnie gallon and that's what
this bond is going to come in
and do and say okay we are this
bond is going to guarantee the
deficit from whatever the
brackish water company has
cleaned it up to sell it it's
just essentially a subsidy with
them but the price based on that
subsidy is going to be the
actual market value for the
water in the area is that
correct i'm sure
manager senator my experts are
saying maybe not correct okay
i'll stand for correct they're
going to come up and come in on
that thank you
madame jared senator
it the if I understood the
example rate what let me just
say this way.
The money that would be
allocated under this bill would
be for the purchase of water.
And in your example if it cost a
penny to clean up water penny to
purchase water a gallon of water
and a company was able to clean
it up.
Through the rfp process we would
be asking them to basically tell
us what would what would the
price be that they need in order
to clean up the water to a
usable standard.
Um.
On a per gallon basis
and end.
Depending upon the how that
water is going to be used how
clean it needed to be with is is
effectively what the cost is
going to be right because there
the lower the tds for example
just picking that pollution the
more energy and treatment it's
going to need to get it to that
standard so I just wanted and I
was certainly yield back to you
to make sure I mention your
question I just want to say that
the company money that were
allocating would be strictly for
the purchase of the finished
water but we don't know what
that cost will be yet because we
need to understand what it will
cost to treat it and and how it
would be utilized in the
industries were talking about
okay.
Madam chair center thank you I I
understand more the the
explanation now.
So essentially you would be
selling if they could use say
like you know golf courses use a
fluent water or something like
that.
If they could use a lower
quality water that wouldn't have
the taste and quality that that
we would for our our fresh water
then that water could because it
is it is pumped for free or
whatever.
In a court I quote if that so
that waters pumped and they
cleaned it up and end up with a
penny a gallon in that water and
then need to make fifteen
percent on their investment than
the waters you know one point
one five since whatever so could
cost a little bit more and and
maybe my my example wasn't
exactly correct because of the
lower water quality that could
be used for that but it is a
subsidy on the delta.
Right on whatever the one
whatever water they would need
and how much it took to clean
that water up.
This hundred million is a bonded
subsidy.
In making up that delta is app
correct madame jeremy
up madame chair and senator I
certainly think you could look
at it that way okay okay
do it managers there's are their
plans for
the storage of the waste product
because when you run water
through an r o system you're
talking typically and and
obviously based on the on the t
s levels of the water but it's
typically between twenty and
thirty percent waste water so
what would the plan be for that
understand it's like well we got
to get into it to figure it all
out yeah I got it but
I mean what we we kind of got to
have some sort of a.
You know some sort of an idea on
what we're going to do with the
waste stream of that water
because outwaters going to come
out.
Not ten thousand tds right it's
gonna have to be probably stored
in fits that are you know double
line league detection and all
that stuff maybe we evaporated
out and have salt that you know
I I don't know but there's gonna
be probably about thirty percent
waste water so forever ever
seven gallons you do or ten
gallons you do you'll have seven
gounder good and three gallons
of ads what is.
Has there been in discussion on
that front
so madame chair and in senator
points you're making her are
our sort of consideration at the
moment.
Meaning that we issued her
request for information from the
industry asking about that
question.
Um we've we've started getting
responses in
uhm there are
contractor.
And we you know just from a
basic engineering perspective
and understanding the laws the
governor was that's generated in
the US and in new mexico.
Are those sorts as you pointed
out could be
you know you you could evaporate
the water you could do a number
of things to remove the the
liquid component concentrate the
soul to those sorts
you know we we talk to them as
about them as a waste I don't
want to preclude that some of
those could be commodities that
are further you know refined
into something but to the extent
that those you know it's
traditionally those salts would
probably be landfilled beat it a
uh what would be known as a
solid wasteland full or a
hazardous waste land filled
depending upon the
characteristics of the of the
south
but that's governed by existing
state and federal laws already
but the got the goal here would
be to and and we've asked
industry to look at those
by products and determined if
they have commodity value waste
or would have no value and
therefore be ways and how they
would handle those.
Again given the volume the of
water that they be processing
mountain and centers.
Or are you all at all concerned
with sain hey we actually ended
up with a an awkward for
you know at three hundred feet
below the city of albuquerque
that's very polite I mean
obviously we know or but i'm
just speaking pathetically.
And not as early hypothetically
I guess because of it
engineer hammer could answer it
but you know if we if we limit
this to ten thousand tds which a
lot of water is is in this brack
is a lot of a useful water at
the ranch we have a lot of water
that is that is between this
threshold one thousand in ten
thousand and eight you know the
closure you get kind of **** to
ten thousand couch to it but
they still they still get a
little benefit out of it right
but you you do have some useful
water that it you know twenty
five hundred thirty five hundred
and so there's a whole lot of
shallow water that falls into
this that does have a water
right attached to it and so that
water I mean even if it's below
ten thousand and above below ten
thousand tbs and above twenty
five hundred feet then that
water still has a water right
attached to so that the
gentleman that was suggesting
the
amendment you know piece he's
covered there because the states
are properly appropriated that
water so but
evening of the water is a above
twenty five hundred feet and
above ten thousand tds it still
has to have water right.
Is that correct
manager.
Senator mckitchen that's correct
okay
so medicare centers
are you all concerned in
limiting this to ten thousand
because I mean we've got we've
got a lot wells are just above
that and that waters is really
really useless with that
handcuffers if we left at ten
thousand t d s.
Question mark.
About manager and and center I
was just checking and you know
it's always been the intent of
the street of of this effort to
exclude water that's been
allocated so the water you're
talking about it that's been
previously allocated so going
back to you what senator saws as
with the state engineer
you know the the focus of the
strategic water supply and and
if you think about it if we were
to use allocated water as you
are pointing out used for for
agricultural and ranching
purposes.
There is not real net benefit to
putting that towards green
hydrogen because we're not
conserving any water or or to
solar panels or whatever
industry we're talking about the
idea here is to.
Preserve the water you're
talking about it's already
allocated it's already in use
that against using
focus on water that has lower
value that is not part of our
economic today so I would agree
with you in in your sort of uh I
don't know if you made a point
that I should but I agree with
you that that we want to
preserve water that's in use an
allocated and use the strategic
water supply concept to focus on
water that would be used by
industry and not at the expense
of agriculture of communities
etc okay
ma'am chairs there's i'm certain
pixel i'm really trying to get
through this and in and I want
to the matter madame chair down
here in the hotel
I know III am trying to get to
the two
I do I would watch you know i'm
trying to get to the to the
to the crux of the issue here
and and and i'm glad we're
clarifying that but as the bill
is written it does not have a
car about for water that already
has appropriation it doesn't say
specifically these are going to
be drilled under notice of
intent whales or water pulled
from below twenty five hundred
feet so it technically can you
know we could say okay you know
I mean we could we could run
over here just in bernalio and
say yeah yeah maybe
deep water doesn't say that in
there and I missed it.
Madam chair and senator I think
the so it explicitly know but
the intent page three line for
in the line five.
That the projects will not
impair existing water rights are
adversely impact land owners is
maybe the intent of what I was
saying recognizing your point.
And madame jeremy senator
while this language may not be
exactly as you're saying it in
addition we have an rfp process
that would be prescriptive in
terms of what we want to see the
projects achieve out in addition
to state law so we can include
that in the rf process okay.
Um
in center's medicare
I don't I don't see that in here
you know I look at this and this
is determined that brackets
water treatment project will not
impair existing water rights or
adversely impact landowners all
they would have to do would be
simply to purchase for right.
That wouldn't that that that
would be the easy scurrier
because if they're proved up
water right they got a current
pbu you know proof beneficiaries
on the water right it's
legitimate it's moved you know
it's got a commercial or maybe
an industrial status to the
water and then it they would be
able to purchase that and just
use the shallow brown in all
farmers scarlet using or
whatever for that and that's out
that's already the understand
the intent but
it doesn't look like we're work
seeking after the decade the
deep awkward first in this in
this bill.
So madam current senator I would
like to just come at that almost
every bill that we pass the goes
in the statute at least it to
the department to establish
detailed rules and in developing
those rules they have to receive
written comment to have to have
public hearings they have to
revise and then do the process
all over so it is a pretty
intensive process to allow the
public to comment on whatever
rules they set up
thank you madame chairman
so and and I know that
everybody's gonna get a circle
back if we further and it's
probably why it's not in here
but you know how would be
concerned with two things one is
limited to ten thousand tds
water
because that's that is a little
that is a little tricky and
putting that on there too having
it come up come from above the
the twenty five hundred feet
because that would not be it and
and I don't know i've never done
an amendment because i'm I don't
know what i'm doing right but
and I would just want to see the
will the committee if we were
able to to to do
an amendment here and say you
know nonpossible water below the
twenty five hundred foot mark I
don't know if that would be
considered friendly or not.
Senator mccutch and where would
you insert that amendment would
you insert it where it is a
definition where would you yes
just in it in a definition
you're on the back it's it it
describes what brackish water is
and if and and throughout the
document talks about it talks
about brackish water and as
we've been discussing i'm not
really sure that the the bracket
water is what meets are is what
meets are going and we're also
putting some water rights at
risk above twenty five hundred
feet so if we did
the or order
I mean III don't know where I
would be out on the water right
on the water right.
On the
on the elevation I guess I guess
if it was if it was brackish
water that could steal probably
be ok
or simply changing the
definition to non possible water
would probably.
Would probably fix it because
that water is that water would
be able to include water but ten
thousand tds so if we just did
if we changed it to non possible
non partial water
medicare center what page and
line are you talking about and
experts can comment ok so
it's gonna be on the first page
and we talk about.
Treated water and i'm gonna have
to break is water.
And if we change that to non
partial and then we go to page
i'm sorry.
Um online fifteen the first page
like a page one line fifteen yes
ma'am says bracklish will swap
that to nine pottable.
And then page.
Twenty two.
Treated brackish you mean line
twenty two on the second page
lightly as man sorry but thought
you guys know what is doing
page two line twenty two and
change that one to.
It turns out into non partial
instead of brackish and then we
have.
We would have to have another
definition but if we did.
I said on the back page yes
ma'am so then then the last page
page four online five bracket
water we would just need to what
we we could actually leave that
definition in there but I have
another definition that we could
we we could insert
they would say none thought
water meaning that the seat
means water other than water
which meets the quality
standards prescribed the united
states public health service
drinking water standard or water
which is approved for drinking
water purposes by the state of
local authorities having
jurisdiction
some met and friendly amendment
no and madam chair senator the
reason why is it then when you
include non particle it includes
produce water and we
specifically took out produced
water from this
statute okay so we are only
focusing on brackish in this
particular bill and while I
understand your intent it would
open up the door for produced
wider from oil and get ok to
send him a catching do you want
to proceed with with your
proposal
I don't know that I don't have
any yeah
how many bearing I mean I guess
you could just ask the will the
committee can we do that okay so
i'll take that has a motion to
amend please do I hear a second.
Yeah.
Changing.
Um
fifty fifteen thousand would
help it would include more water
but I don't know that.
Are you are you talking about
proposing a minute in the
fifteen thousand and not doing
the non pottable
not just changing the bracket
manager if you did both if you
had the non part of it but you
change the dds so you know what
the
results were at higher
increments yeah it would it
could help.
So what is your what is your
amendment.
So the the proposed amendment
would be to change the
definition of change wherever
brackish water is in there an
incertant non potable just as we
went through the extra size
read a fine and then adding the
definition for nonpossible as I
read and then adding fifteen
thousand ten
one thousand and fifteen
thousand tvs
water in that definition of
rackish water on page four lines
seven one thousand two fifteen
fifteen thousand and I don't
know if that will be do I hear a
second.
Um man said I have now let's
have a discussion yet I is
not yep yes okay.
Madame chair members I just
wanted to comment on one
addition that came into the
amendment of increasing that up
for threshold of the four
rackage watered from ten
thousand fifteen thousand that's
something that were opening
considering but we not be a
friendly amendment this morning
if we move forward with this
bill we would spend more time
with technical experts who
understand the existing industry
standard definitions around
brackish and sailing water and
make sure we get that rate i'm
so we're open to it but not
comfortable settling on fifteen
thousand as the new upper
threshold earth this morning
ok so we have a proposed
amendment and the second.
That now discussion on the
amendment senator source thank
you manager and I don't think it
does but if we change for
breakers water non possible
where it still says a brackish
water aquifer is does with this
now allow the inclusion of
produced water or it still would
be
you have different by changing
that definition because
practices I mean produced is not
impossible but is different than
brackage manager thank you i'm
gonna let misrough that question
madam chair members center souls
eight working certain based on
where the defined hermes are
used in the bell and if i'm
following a lot correctly I
think that that is changing some
instances of brackage water to
non potable in the bill would
open the scope brought in the
scope to potentially include
produced water.
Thank you manager and thank you
it's just a concern because I
know it also talked about
aquifers and produced water
typically isn't in awkward were
brackish is whether we're
causing more confusion than
we're solving better.
Thank you
thank you any other comments on
on the amendment.
Okay
better sector will you call the
vote.
Center civilist.
No center guy goes.
So okay I go see how sand
hambling no senator have a no
center of a kirchen senate
catching you has centered
available
sound available yes center poll
not help no santa source no
center source no is there a
should deal office no service
deals the person serviced a
finance sounds far so
three the motion to a men's
fails six to three back on the
bill any other are you finished
senator because yes ma'am thank
you I would like the committee
to know that they've just my
dreams by killing my first ever
suggested so we'll send it her
congratulations on making your
first attempted amendment thank
you so much
senator hamlin thank you madam
chair and i'd like to
acknowledge that the
conversation surrounding this
bill of cost a great deal of
heartburn for a lot of folks
there because there is this
recognition of needing to move
forward with what are our water
situation is but also several
the questions that have come up
so I do have a a couple of
questions that i'd like to ask
do we know the impacts on our
groundwater statewide if we were
to do this
i'll refer to the state engineer
for that
thank you madame chair so
hamburg.
That's one of the reasons that
within the statutes of seventy
to twelve twenty five through
twenty seven it's called the
deep well that you component
within our regulations.
We the state engineer would
issue the the notice of intent
well etcetera mccatch and
mentioned.
Um for development the drilling
and we would also require
metering and we would also be
looking at impairment to any
surrounding aquifers or stream
systems as a result of the that
proposed degree of of production
it wouldn't one of the concerns
and it came up and and some of
the opposition was you know the
concern for roll communities
that continuously
have bad soil bed water bed air
as a result of the industry that
we're talking about and so there
is a a concern and i'm wondering
if there are
have been any conversations
about like the impact of those
communities if we were followed
through with this.
The.
Madam chair members of the
community center I have
there's absolutely been
consideration of impacts on
communities and the as including
from impacts on night taking at
action to address what the
science says is that we're going
to have twenty five percent last
fresh water available in the
future and the impact that that
could have on our communities
and including our rural and
agricultural communities who
rely on so much in fresh water
resources and also concerns
about how communities are
impacted by
frontline communities impacted
by the clean energy transition
so again the economic
development provisions of the
spell are intended to help sperr
new jobs clean jobs in
communities there that need that
economic opportunity and and
there's also been concerned
about making sure that any
brathish water treatment
facilities that
come to be in new mexico as a
result of a program like this
with the incentives and the
market drivers that with both
the treatment and the management
of that treated water and the
and uses that were protecting
the environment and human health
every step of the way so those
considerations are in here and
and would be happy to elaborate
if needed on on more specifics
thank you okay thank you very
much lastly just because we do
have a committee coming in after
this what is the threat of
contamination of the potable
water resulted from pumping the
brackets water is there a
possibility of crossed
interminati.
At the minimum chair center
employment that would there will
be a very focused effort on our
part to make sure that that
wells are constructed properly
and and that there would not be
any potential for across
contamination as a result of the
development of the deep deeper
across her.
I give my question is but the
follow up those what happens if
it does happen
madame chair uh is that are
hammering there would be
you know regulations in place to
monitor that and to make sure
that number one we prevent it
from happening with good quality
construction of the well
and and it's something we'll
look at in in in fresh water
production too we go through
several zones of different
across that we got to make sure
that there's only off and
properly in a constructed to
avoid that communication between
various activities that have
lower quality
it's a part of our standard
approach in
monitoring and and regulations
for that purpose I I just want
to mention we have two bills
after this one and another
committee is coming in and at
ten thirty
just i'm i'm fine I think
rebecca did you want to respond.
Right that's all manager thank
you senators advantage
Shall keep me honest we
routinely consistently reject
statements of purpose and
legislative history bill begins
with that in your first section
we don't do that for a lot of
reasons I think the committee
understands my explanation of
that in the past but we we we
would normally take all that out
the
there's a lot of superfalous
language in the bill so you talk
about the need to enter into
valid contracts I can imagine we
would ever enter into invalid
contracts but it's glad that
good to know that you want to
have our contracts
you want to
represent a fair market value
for comparable sales I just
using thing for me is this
particularly with the state
engineer here for years i've
made a point of the fact that
the history of the worst is
about moving water from where
it's needed or where it exists
to where it's needed of course
every major city in the west
does that including santa fe and
albuquerque
for years we've had people
proposing augustine planes as a
project stated engineers
rejected that because the
argument from the state
engineers offices there's not an
identified buyer of the water
i'm here there's not an identify
buyer of water and so I don't
understand the duplicity in the
state engineer's position on
augustine planes in here unless
i'm missing something could you
explain that
Setting it it's a permitted use
of water whereas of this new
source of developed brackage
water would be an unpermitted
except for the notice of intent
well itself
and I understand the distinction
accepted to argument the same
insurance office is made in
opposing the sound of extensions
there's not an identified buyer
of the water and here would you
at least agree there's not an
identified buyer of the water.
Move madame cherished under
responses at at this point in
time it would be a the purpose
of this is to identify and seek
uh the potential of of buyers
through the rfp process yet with
the answer my question is what
are no identified er need at
this point in time but we do
know that the ten elegance to
the the clean energy transition
we want to whatever happening in
terms of the development of new
industry to the transition away
from from fresh potable water to
this new resort granted and were
short on time but when we try a
third time is there an
identified buyer at this point
not at this time was that uh
chair senator savantes not at
this time thank you
and madame chair center I
ensured that before I took this
bill on that this was not a
fixed deal for any particular
company entity thank you thank
you okay and I understand to
appreciate why you would ask
that the senators will do so.
There's and be used for me so we
talk about here on page three
part aligned seven the
contractor has to demonstrate a
treatment of water to applicable
standards for water quality I
don't think we define what
that's going to be well you will
leave that to some future day
but that that kind of ambiguity
challenges me though the really
last couple of questions for a
quickly voucher is on page three
subsection e line fifteen this
is fifty percent of the state
proceeds at result of the sale
from treated bracket water and
goes on from there so as I
understand the scheme here the
idea is we're going to use this
hundred million dollars to buy
water from somebody who's going
to treat it and we we're going
to buy it and then we're gonna
sell it because that presumably
is what you're referring to in
the bill when you say fifty
percent of the procedure the
ideas were going to buy it from
some area sell is that the
scheme here.
Mr
I mean sorry madame chair
senator i'm going to have
a misroof speak for the
executive.
Madame chair center civil taste
short answer is yes
that state would provide the
water from you figured out my
I do like direct answers to
direct questions so if the ideas
were going to buy the water from
somebody who's treated it and
they were going to sell it why
would we be selling it for a
higher price than we're buying
it from the treater and I was
work where it wears our words
our profit margin can account
from here because we're talking
about proceeds from the sale so
why wouldn't why wouldn't
whether we're sounded too
despite directly from the
producer why they can go through
us as the middle name.
I managed share center civil
tastes center excellent question
part of it is because you're
after my heart to be entering
would be entering into the
contracts of potentially before
the water treatment plant has
made all their capital
investments and they'd be
relying in part on the contract
with the state to to later
purchase the treated water as a
way to derisk their up front
capital investments so their
incentive is up front then the
the price of water as it will be
weighed out in the contract
would determine contract terms
we determine what price we would
be buying it for and we were at
that point has either specifics
on who the and users would be of
the water which is likely to be
built in on a site specific
basis so that we have and users
and close proximity and needing
of the the right volume and
water quality specifications for
whatever the treatment is going
to be
and in one one safeguard in here
for a the state being involved
is that we're not buying the
water for more than we can sell
it so what if in the event that
we would be selling the water at
a profit at any level of profit
we want to make sure we've laid
out in the bill where those
profits would go and it could be
What we safeguarded it so there
would not be a loss.
Have we ever before to your
knowledge or can you give me
examples before ever treated
water as a commodity kept for
capital outlay purposes.
Before this bill.
Madam chair center star montes
not to my knowledge and as we
worked with the department of
finance administration and
buying counsel
the above ability to use a state
severance tax band capacity for
this purpose and it was as I
understand that a novel
and now the lady but within the
balance of of the definitions of
what it what constitutes capital
me and things will want to
explore that like think we all
know where this bills going
train stations what we call it
in my committee but but I don't
in any event the it'll be an
issuing discussion to know
whether we're going to treat
water as a commodity and whether
we're gonna be able to buy and
sell it where the state's gonna
set the price for it because
portion actually that's going to
mean a lot to those of us that
are farmers
we love to have capital outlet
appropriate to buy water for us
or to sell it and once the cake
state because the set prices on
waters are commodity we're going
to have a hell of it good time
down in southern new mexico so
thank you manager thank you
center city this m for one
question center care goes you
promise
chairman of care thank you just
real quick question so earlier
we'd have discussion on the
the material after the decent
voication of the tds and
chair member I was trying to get
that level moved up to the
fifteen thousand for simple
reason is if you're looking at
earning
what we can do with it
after the it's pulled out and
they would give you hired
threshold i'm just wondering I
know downing southeast we
already have areas that we can
place this material i'm i'm just
wondering what the overall
thought is and if it would be a
meanable to look at it now that
we've not changed were brackish
but if we'd be amazing just
moving up from the ten thousand
of the fifteen thousand.
Venture.
I believe you said it a future
time yes madam chair center a
guy who goes we're open to re
evaluating that upper threshold
and we just want to check with
more technical experts on what
the appropriate threshold is and
whether or not there is
different terminology other than
brackage that we need to be
contemplated so and we'd be open
to working between this
committee in the next committee
on an amendment in the moves in
that direction but aren't
comfortable making that change
this morning thank you matter in
turn certain you said one
I don't play well I guess my
thing is if
if you're gonna look at it later
why not now I don't know what
committee goes I thought this
goes to the floor next
finance and so in that
discussion I just think you got
to be talking through what you'd
do with the ways.
Because moving their threshold
up for right now at least gives
you a responsible method of
trying to deal with that waste
later as I think if you have two
thread two small the threshold
that you can end up with some
way she had to truck back down
set these so that was a concern
because I think you're going to
end up with a cheer you don't
know what to do with with that
thank you center cargo
venture madam chair if you're
getting close to vote please let
us know because sender share
would like to make a few
comments ok I believe we're
close to a vote so senator share
thank you madame chair so it is
we hear all of the concerns here
and I acknowledge there's
concerns here.
One of the things that i've
heard over and over over in this
session and previous sessions
it's unproven technology well if
we don't start it'll never be
proven we've got it we've got to
get a mind said that we're going
to try to
to get to this technology
whatever yes doesn't whether
it's this thing a road not
somehow we have to get passed
out because if we're not willing
to try something will never get
anywhere
automobiles were unproven
technology and now we can't live
without them computers and
unproven technology that we
can't live without them
one of the things was talking
about remember who it was the
rules aren't all in this bill
well
the rules aren't our road bills
either so we say we're going to
build roads we don't we don't
talk about the exact depth of
the uh the the base or whatever
their son that are him law but
most are just rules from the
department and then finally in
part of that mindset
the journey of the thousand
miles begins with the first
step.
This is the first step so it's
take it so we can get to the end
of the thousand miles thank you
senator will you call the vote
my signature
yeah do we have a motion i'm
sorry I do we have emotion on
this bill.
I would.
Okay do I your second.
Oh the committee so your motion
is to pass could you make the
motion correctly thank you
senate.
Thank you minimum chair do I
hear a second.
Okay
we have the substitute motion to
table
that's non debatable so man
sector will be coverable.
Senator savantes.
So I just want to see us sarage
goes
to google senator hambling per.
Senator kitchen
center catch and yes
santanaville
san available center pope yes
explain
their pope yes etcetera souls
yes there are source yes sounds
to deal up as yes
deal up as yes.
Center hambling
so I haven't yes saris the
finance.
Okay senator you have a your
bill has been tabled on a vote
of eight to one thank you very
much and is the cost for
indicated we don't have friends
here
thank you
alright
instead of a pope thank you you
know I just want to think the
sponsors
we know we're going to go in
this direction we know the needs
of our state but.
I'm just concerned with what we
have here will be forward we
heard all the concerns on the
questions here and we were just
talking about when I was in the
air force working on weapons
systems there's the term known
is like the known unknown and
that's really what we're talking
about here we're not even
getting into the unknown and
those right now and so we really
have to get this right and so
what I would suggest is let's
keep working on this let's get
all the state corners involved
because I believe we are going
to go in this direction.
I just can't support this bill
assessed thank you
thank you and that was pretty
much my concern to need more
work thank you and after this
will go to the senator I mean to
represent the data.
It's just not good
hopes.
Yeah.
Senator pulp
is it was a ten thirty
eleven
car has been eleven thirty seven
okay democratic office
representative editor
hospital.
Thank you thank you madame chair
thank you members of the
committee has been to eleven r
immense various sections of the
water project finance act and I
just want to say
this bill was put together by
over the interim by this office
of the state engineer
can't
okay is that better
thank you thank you matter
it was this bills were over the
interim by the office of the
state engineer and buy a ceo
market wrestle at the new mexico
finance authority the reason for
this bill is that we worked to
see how we could enhance
water projects being being moved
faster at the local level that's
where you're trying to do this
whole body has kind of done a
full court press i'd like to
think this body for putting
fifty million more into the
water projects plan of a fifty
million more into the into the
reserve there over at the end of
the trust fund
we did the match from where we
can hopefully come in where a
small mutual domestic systems
don't have a match we've done a
lot of work to make.
Re doing water planning for
local communities and necessity
and and I want to think the body
for that are in so that's why we
brought this over we looked at
are they looked at all the
regulations in both the state
engineers office and the method
to see how we could eliminate
really
programs are or statutes it
really didn't make sense anymore
and and with that I will let my
expert witnesses add a little
bit to this introduction thank
you.
Thank you representative and if
you would introduce yourselves
for the public thank you thank
you madame chair my name is
market a russell on the ceo in
mexico finance authority and as
the sponsor said what house bill
to eleven does primarily is to
update the water project finance
act which was created in two
thousand and one and to expand
it in two primary areas one has
to add wastewater as an eligible
use of the water project finance
act so right now there is a five
varieties of water projects
including the treatment of water
but not waste water so i'm
obviously their interconnected
thoughts and we think it's time
that we use this fund to help
wastewater as well and the
second is to allow for the water
project fund to also be used to
higher contractors to provide
technical assistance and
capacity development
particularly to the small
systems across the state we have
seen that that is an impediment
to accessing the water project
finance funds and so we think
that that would be an important
addition and then lastly some
clean up items in order to make
the process more efficient for
everyone involved there is a one
year and that effect of one year
legislative suspension that's
included as part of household to
eleven and that will allow the
finance authority in the water
trust board to enact the rules
necessary and the policies
necessary to govern the waste
water portions of these
amendments and hopefully to get
some of the technical assistance
out in the field before the
application process opens and
with that I would turn it to the
chair of the water trustport my
camera
thank you chair members of the
committee.
Um with both my state engineer
had on my camera of state
engineer and also chair of the
water trust board
we recognized one in one key
change that
impacted the state engineers
office in that typically the
water project fund has a ten
percent allocation back to the
agency for support for a
dudications and and also to the
the the courts they get a
proportion of that as well so we
amended that because of the
large
number
the the hundred hundred and
fifty now two hundred million
dollars that are being allocated
on you basis now for over sixty
five projects
we felt that a that reservation
of ten percent was way more than
the agency needed to function
for its adjudication work so we
kept our need at four million or
ten percent whichever's less
than that way there'd be more
funds available and wouldn't be
sitting in an account somewhere
that we would take a while to
to tap into but it also kept the
the the court's hole and they
continue to get there two
percent so I just wanted to
point that out to the thank you
thank you matter.
Thank you is there anyone in the
audience to support this bill.
One to keep your hands up please
three or four o k i've is there
anyone here against this bill.
Okay i'm line or their
supporters.
Okay.
Uh.
It so let's have three
supporters come up.
And it's be preferable if
they're not stayed agencies.
Porting the madam share
committee members christianized
registered obvious with charon
and the shover only or the
questioning water rights have
worked very closely with mutual
domestics up in tales county
as seconds and meaning
any bill that will streamline
the process for those
communities to access and put
their water to beneficial use by
investing in infrastructure is a
good bill we thank the sponsor
for bringing this and we urge
your support thank you very
much.
I.
Good morning manager members of
the committee let's go to other
with a serious club you'll go on
the chapter representing our
thirty five thousand members and
supporters in new mexico we
strongly support HB two eleven
this legislation makes changes
to the operation of the water
transport and also help ensure
that funding gets to the
communities that need at the
most
for this and many other reasons
I could take too much your time
we just ask you will support
this bill thank you.
Thank you next think you tricia
snater arisen waters program
director for new mexico wildly
stand and support this bill for
all the reasons already stated
and are you sure do you pass
thank you is there somebody
online that would like to speak
and support.
Yeah.
Good morning
good morning medicare and
members of the committee of one
to settle regional field manager
for the real community
assistance corporation we are
with passage of this bill it'll
create efficiency that will
provide more funny for community
water systems across the state
we stand and strong support of
the bill.
Thank you very much anybody else
online
which supporting okay will go to
the onions for opposition is
there any opposition to this
bill.
Is there any opposition online
questions from committee
elsewhere with center.
Well don't just wait for the
discussion
the center city a lopus
thank you madam chair
going through the bill
seemed like okay this is
dreamlining this is great that's
great and then a came to six on
page six um taking the
legislature out for the next
five years and has I heard use I
heard you say that and I found
it here but I don't understand
the reason for taking the
legislature out for five years
that was not clear to me
manager thank you madame madam
chair and as senator
we actually amended that on the
house floor so that they're
actually in committee in house
and that was reduced to two
years before representative on
the house floor but i'm going to
turn to
market a restaurant to explain
that further and the need for
that so so it would not be
twenty twenty nine it would be
and see that manager twenty
twenty six and so the net effect
of that is that in twenty twenty
five we will open an application
round for funding from twenty
twenty six because the language
is very specific that it covers
that I can't make a loan or
grant after july one of twenty
twenty six and since the funding
is not a made available until
june the end of june that's uh
we really wouldn't have the
ability to actually fund any
water projects so we'll be
getting that legislative
authorization process for the
twenty twenty six funding in
august of twenty twenty five so
it's a one year suspension is
the net effect of the
language changed by house
appropriations suspension of
legislative involvement will
there be loans made in the
interim between the legis madame
chair yes so it would be it
would mean that we would not
start our application process in
august if this has passed as it
is currently drafted we would
not start our application
process in august which is what
we would do normally if there's
a legislative authorization.
Process we could start it in
december january which is what
we do with our other earmarked
fund the colonious
infrastructure program which
does not have legislative
authorization so we can start it
later that has two in a benefits
one is we hope we can start
getting some
of the technical assistance out
in the field to get these
applications to help the small
systems access the fund and the
second is it allows us the time
to actually
promulgate the rules that the
waste water elements would add
to this entire set up the
policies for the waste what for
the review of wastewater
applications if we don't have
the legislative authorization
suspension for one year that
means that waste water projects
would not be eligible because we
wouldn't have the rules in place
until the twenty twenty six
funding cycle so it that it
really is the difference of
being able to offer waste water
as quickly as next year or if we
wait an additional year until
the twenty twenty sixth funding
thank you for the explanation
and I think you were there when
I talked about our friend that's
been trying to get some waste
water treatment but really could
use some technical assistance so
that's good to hear thank you I
appreciate that explanation
manager.
Other questions come
out.
I'm sure madam sure for many
years I work with marketing
carrying the legislation the
project legislation you all have
made remember point through that
process and we did a lot to
revise the process by which we
did that I think made it a lot
better process the reason we did
that in large parties because in
the past mentioned this funny
want to very large projects uh
at the time gallop mckinley and
of the ute project we're
receiving the line share of all
the funding and we wanted to
make the funding available more
to smaller rule communities as
well too what is the what is the
planning that'll be totally
appropriate this year from the
for for the water project.
Madam chair senator there's
about a hundred and fifteen
million total from those two
funds the water trust fund
distribution being about three
point six million hundred and
fifteen million dollars over how
many projects
madam chair the senate sorry
house the one forty eight has
sixty five projects for fifty
five entities many of them.
Twenty six of those projects
represent projects from
unicipalities thank you madam
sure united states through what
we've done in the past worker
with marketing when I charity
when the interim committee and
so with really successful we we
take a hundred fifty million
dollars and spread her to sixty
five projects in fifty five
communities that was a good
thing
the concern we have the time was
the water trustport had too much
power and we're really dictating
the projects i'm really
concerned about us delegating
our appropriating authority
always and that's what it would
essentially this is this is
taking away or appropriating
authority giving it to the water
trust board a board that is
comprised almost entirely
appointees by the government and
so well I may like this governor
of us i've served with four and
to have the governor controlling
a hundred and fifteen million
dollars and deciding that it may
go to one or two projects as
opposed to others that is
problem at it for me I
understand it's support the
addition of wastewater to the to
them as to the projects into
expanding that I think that's a
good thing but for us to
delegate at least initially five
years and even two years of our
problem authority to aboard in
them in the name of efficiency
means I could stay home I mean
you know we can make this entire
appropriating process very
efficient if we just delegate
everything to boards and
commissions and the legislature
just takes about so I I think
this is a bad idea manager we
won't do it thank you.
Thank you could we risk it so
closing right now other
questions.
Okay.
Yes this for the second time
thank you would it be a friendly
amendment to just because yet
the rest of it is so good would
it be a friendly amendment to
take out
the limit on the legislation
appropriation
that would be on page six lane
twenty.
A man and chair and senator
lopez I thought a lot about that
and and certainly that would be
the easiest thing to do a
I don't think you'd be a
friendly amendment because
really what we're working toward
is you know it's really
is really making this more
accessible to small systems
throughout our state I haven't
depth forty five mutual domestic
water associations in district
forty one alone it takes a lot
of work to go through this
planning I think of this state
engineers office and
the new mexico finance authority
have done everything they can to
make this process easier for
people they've done that
I just want to say that I too ah
senator savanches have carried
this bill on the house in you
know taking it through its house
bill forty eight today
the
the problem is it's it since two
thousand and fifteen
it was at nine years ago that
the regulations were changed a
little bit in since two thousand
and fifteen this has been a
unanimous vote in the house and
the senate for every single year
I mean we bring that forward
people love doing water projects
and they vote for it and all of
these applications have been
thoroughly better and they're
all shovel read so I would
that's why i'm I would just like
to make this process where
faster I did some I did some
junior money and my district to
look at to look at our wells in
the north we don't have anything
like ebid we don't have anything
like her middle beautiful and
conservative I put junior many
to look at the wells in the
north and they came back and
most of these wells have
bacteria that bacteria is caused
by these all accepting that are
leaking into our awkward so so
it is a myriad of problems that
we're facing so anything.
I can do to make this process
the astron easier and it's not
that I don't think we should
have legislated but oversight
but if regester rubber stamp and
we don't really change anything
I guess asked my question but I
would like marketer to respond
to that too.
Manager I would only just add
that again it really does impact
the ability for uh wastewater to
be eligible next year as opposed
to two years from now that's the
significant difference and again
it does say two years but when
you look at the language
relative it's a not effective
one legislative authorization
cycle during which time we would
be promotating rules and making
certainly we had the evaluation
criteria to accept waste water
two years from now if you choose
to amend that it would be
available two years from now at
that point the funding is
starting to decline we've
already seen the decline for the
last two years so they just be
you know they'd be fighting more
projects that are competing for
the same dollars
thank you better chair.
Thank you any other questions.
I was here remember going to a
hearing and now I think it is
truth are consequences when he
just kind of laid out how water
works in their state and that's
he was my priest teacher as it
as a brand new legislator and I
I tell everybody I thought he'd
come to this party and I thought
i'd work on things like you know
early childhood education eighty
percent of my work is on water
because that's the huge need in
the north so I do hope you'll
pass this without an amendment
but we will see thank you.
Thank you what suppleasure the
committee I move a due pass.
There is a motion for a new pass
is there a second one oh eight.
Oh yes that's committee so yes
there is a second is it
okay okay.
It's not archime.
Okay you're motion is an order
center.
There was several severe low
presidents and r.
Please call the book.
Center survantas sounds ranters
know center gagos.
Excuse senator hambling san
hamburg yes cinema cut
and recution yes senator ville
centerville yes senator pope yes
senator pope yes yes center
souls yes centers the deal
office yes service deal up as
yes similar to the finance.
Yes and to explain my boat.
The.
The vote is seven one and my
comment is it really bothers me
about the legislative authority.
Thank you very much for coming
today you have heard to pass
thank you committee so we are
now going to our last bill which
is a memorial from senator
mccatches and center share and I
think senator shares not here
senator mccutchen's pretending.
Yeah.
And committee members I believe
this will be our last committing
meeting that you never know what
happens in the session
and again i'd like to thank the
sierra club.
For the burritos in center chair
for the bagels this morning in
case I forget I would also like
to thank all of the staff we
have been with us so that they
don't think they are being
forgotten we really appreciate
it from tap to bottom.
Um center of a kitchen you had
the floor his mam uh.
Thank you madame chair and I
likewise of enjoyed serving on
this committee for
for the session and and have
enjoyed you particularly as as a
chair and fell like you run a
tight the tight ship and
have been very comedy so
appreciate that
so what we have years to send a
memorial this is something we
drafted a few days ago it's it's
not the original document that
we drafted I guess we should
problem with the committee sub
for discussion is that right.
Yes ma'am madam chair make a
motion that we do not pass sent
memorial fourteen and do in and
then I don't have to say that I
guess but we do
for the discussion purposes pass
the
committee substitute for some
more fourteen is that correct
okay.
Okay thank you so in essence
what we're doing we're we're
doing a couple of things here
were talking about the study and
produced water for rare of
minerals for what they contain
and what they could but possibly
be used for trying to put some
trying to put some regulation
and things in place for that and
also allowing for setbacks and
what set backs being mandated by
the state would what would what
they would do for
the financial impact to the
state of new mexico so manager
without an overshort on time but
you know with that stand for any
questions thank you and you have
any expert witnesses you would
like to speak.
I don't know
well senator share
okay so yes ma'am that that
would be fine and maybe.
Actually actually no.
Okay that will be then we get so
disround herself with good
people so that you can make a
comment and then we'll go to the
audience.
The design in spanish for what
senator shared it to me and
that's may they hope and what I
know is that you
best
we're ready but he just left me
here so well this is baptism by
fire and many of us are thrown
into it with big burning issues
they go up or they go down you
just never can tell this man so
misrouse and then we'll go to
the second expert thank you
madame chair members of the
committee again and we're back a
risk infrastructure adviser with
the governor's office and just
briefly on a say I appreciate
the opportunity I am in the past
couple of days to work with the
sponsors I I this memorial and
to see if we sign opportunity to
send a lot of conversation that
we've been having throughout the
session around the proposal for
the strategic water supply
to
excellent the development of
both brackets treated water and
treated produced water I am in
hearing a lot of the concerns
and debate that has been
happening up to and including
this morning this memorial
includes provisions to build on
existing work that the new
mexican state university has
been doing for a number of years
i'm researching produced water
treatment technology and
the water quality in the treated
and untreated produced water and
opportunities there in terms of
valuable materials that could be
a derived from treating produce
water and also the public health
concerns and contaminants of
worth so this bill helps to keep
us moving in that direction with
an I toward making sure we're
able to make very informed
decisions based on science based
on technical expertise in the
future i'm related to reasons
and treatment of produce water
thinking manager.
Thank you and your other expert
please.
Thank you
my name's tom flippered i'm an
economic researcher and fiscal
policy expert here in new mexico
I was house to look at the
potential
this implications of a setback
rule
as was proposed and certain
legislation
just for your information
colorado implemented a rule
along those lines three years
ago
they've seen a forty five
percent decrease in oil and gas
drilling in the state they've
seen a decrease and production
of twenty to thirty percent.
If that were to happen in new
mexico and needless to say the
fiscal implications would be
very significant we estimate
within three years state revenue
would be down by over a billion
dollars a year
that's if it doesn't apply to
federal leases the key question
there is whether the federal
government will attract the same
kinds of policies if they did
then the implications would be
in the neighborhood of three
billion dollars a year so the
upshot of the research is that
the setback requirements have
very significant fiscal impacts
for the state and i'm happy to
answer questions thank you
thank you go to the audience are
those are there those who are
here to support this memoir
okay see five hands and you can
come up line up please what here
you are is there anybody online.
Okay how many hands are here to
oppose this moment.
Okay well here the same number
five for each side please go
ahead
thank you madame chair members
of the committee I am actually
wagner the vice president of
government affairs for the new
mexico oil and gas association
we support senate memorial
fourteen because it is a piece
of the puzzle that seeks to
understand how set backs may
affect new mexico's economy the
motor remains committed to
working with ocd and other stay
callers as industry continues to
provide reliable and sustainable
energy production thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the clinia might miller with
premium based on patrolling
association as we've stated
previously the impacts of all
and gas development on people's
lives should be studied so both
the opportunity and challenges
can fully can be fully
understood and taken into
construation this measure asks
for exactly that it mentions
that producing counties and
municipalities have adopted
orders regarding the sitting of
oil and gas wells it expands the
stay cold or working group to
include lawmakers and ask for
the physical impact of any
proposed backs also be
considered we filled this
memorial dust really look at
opportunities and possible
challenges of only guests
development thank you.
Thank you madame chair members
the committee debit huge
executive director with the new
mexico association of
conservation districts and we
support this memorial of there
are millions and millions of
gallons of produced water that
are being wasted they may
contain rare earth minerals that
we can use for other things of
course we want to state to come
to safely clean this up and we
are concerned about about that
but we feel like with only the
agency's working together we can
come to that solution thank you
very much.
Thank you please
dillon huge deputy secretary at
the energy minerals and natural
resources department here to
stand and support a sentiment
moral fourteen consistent with
our support of senate memorial
eight emerged convenience
stakeholders to discuss
the sat backs questions starting
last september and is happy to
continue supporting that also
emergency actively engaged as
the agency was responsible for
most of our current produced
water on additional efforts to
think about additional ways to
use it thank you
thank you let's hear from the
person online.
Yeah.
The.
No we're in support
okay so now we will go to
opposition how many were there
here in the audience please
reach your hands.
Okay let's hear from.
The three or four people in the
audience for opposition you have
to keep it very brief like a
minute and a half to two minutes
a minute a half or give you a
warning
and then you must finish by two
minutes and after four people
here we will go to two people
online thank you please proceed
members of the committee my name
is normgom.
I have two engineering degrees
from the mexico state
university.
I have given I am not a person
of mains but I have given two
five thousand dollars gifts.
To new mexico state university
as an alumni.
One in my motor in as a memorial
to a friend who also graduated
from there and another because I
believe in the work of the
university.
I'm not in opposition or in
support of this memorial but i'm
here to tell you.
That new mexico state university
has two faces when it comes to
oil and gas in scientific
integrity.
One face is the face of in the
mexico produce water research
consortium which cannot be
trusted.
The previous chancellor of new
mexico state university relayed
a message to me.
When I was a member of the
technical.
Advisory sorry technical
steering committee of the
produce water and research
consortium identified myself in
twenty twenty one.
Before this committee.
As a member of that committee on
the chancellor told me he would
remove me.
If I ever identified myself as
such a get.
I was asked to sign a non
disclosure agreement on the very
first day the day after that I
discussed that now and
disclosure agreement with
rebecca roos she told me she was
powerless.
I believe in the scientists said
mexico state university and the
engineers.
You should not trust one word.
The thinner mexico produce water
resorts conserved him says this
bill does not distinguish.
You have the good there and you
have the ferry bad.
That it promigates
information not misinformation
yes information thank you.
Thank you very much next.
Madam chip medicare members of
the fending my name is tannes
fox and i'm a lawyer with
western information law center I
participated and the stakeholder
group can be by emnerd last year
to reform the oil and gas act
that worked established that
clut it establishing setbacks my
remarks have only to do with a
set back portion in the more
memorial before you are not with
the other portions the purpose
of requiring setbacks between
oil and gas operations and homes
schools and the surrounding
environment is to protect public
health in the environment.
Since sent memorial eight that
was given a due passed by this
committee a few days ago found
quote there's a reasonable
degree of scientific certainty
that living in close proximity
to oil and gas facilities may
result in increased human health
risks from elevated air
pollution levels.
Uh the memorial before you is
practically devoid of language
acknowledging a fundamental
reason per setbacks to protect
front line communities and the
environment from the hazards of
oil gas operations some in the
only gas industry deny these
risks even though they have been
identified through rigorous
scientific studies
that similarly the study before
you call for the memorial
memorial essentially deny these
harms without serious evaluation
of the potential harms
appropriate setbacks cannot be
established we therefore oppose
senate memorial fourteen and
stand by senate memorial eight
thank you very much.
The.
Thank you next please thank you
madam chair thank you committee
my name's syracunope and with
amigo's bravo sustainate wide
organization that works to
protect and restore the waters
of new mexico we believe that sm
fourteen is an oil and gas
driven memorial requiring a
study of set backs of oil and
gas that inconsistent as the
previous speaker said with
senate memorial eight which just
passed on sponsored by senator
stewart and mechanic that just
passed this committee february
tenth.
Send it memorial eight which we
support is based on sound
science that shows risks to
health and humans from oil and
gas drilling including increased
risk of cancer impacts on the
central nervous system respitory
effects and premature death with
people who have heart and long
disease it also recognizes risks
to our environment including our
precious surface waters at this
state.
Any true fiscal impact study
which is not what this memorials
calling for would have to be
comprehensive
it would have to study the
fiscal impacts of passing
setbacks or not passing them not
passing setbacks results in lost
revenue from people who are can
no longer work because of the
health impacts of living close
to oil and gas drilling it
includes fiscal impacts on our
health care system of dealing
with things like childhood
asthma that are increased.
Because of exposure to mething
gases it also of true fiscal
impact study would also include
the clean up of the cost of
spills which are amplified when
those spills hit our surface
waters such as they did in
shiprock um in december and
round eighteen hundred feet and
these are
lessly senate memorial eight
sponsored by senator stewart and
mechanic continues on the last
six months of work on behalf of
emnerd and all the stakeholders
including oil and gas and so we
believe that um.
We ask you to oppose a senate
memorial fourteen.
Madame chairman members of the
comma i'm charles good marker
excuse me speaking at both on
behalf of the natural resources
defense council and earth works
earth works by the way has two
professionals in the field every
day.
With digital imaging month
cameras to monitor the pollution
both liquid and and gasis that
escapes from wells that are
situative very close to home
schools etc.
At was previously eloquently by
the past two speakers the health
arms are.
Unquestionable the wrists are
enormous
the only purpose for setbacks
also previously stated is to
look at what are those potential
health harms we know there's
fifty
there there's more money to the
state by a continuous pumping of
oil and gas there's no question
about the fiscal issues
but also as stated the fiscal
impact analysis if there is any
needs to be very complete.
There was a room for fiscal
impact analysis and s m eight
which this committee passed
already as in fourteen is not
necessary.
Thank you very much please
oppose this.
I I think I might need it but
i've watched my audio.
Hmm.
I'm able to hear you.
The.
My yes we can hear you.
Oh thank you you just came in I
apologize good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is sally piazz
and i'm a stop attorney for new
mexico while stay right now
profit with almost thirty
thousand members and supporters
dedicated to the protection
restoration and enjoyment of our
public plans water and wildlife.
I haven't seen the committee and
so he suddenly said my comments
again focused on the set backs
person of the memorial today.
It's nineteen thirty five
outside his book to focused on
two economic principles only
which is the prevention of waste
and the protection of relative
rates are they don't lie does
not protect community health or
your replacement natural
resources and it's time to
incorporate those protections
since september mexico has been
one of the state holders
involved in process to propose
amendments to the oil and gas
act.
Step back for best waters would
help build the gap left by the
two thousand twenty three
supreme court decision and
sacket versus epa which stripped
I don't think moderate
protections from the majority of
new mexico streams and well
ends.
Additionally I just want to fly
that the federal bureau of land
management does already require
operators in new mexico to
locate well in gas facilities
away from surface waters and
sense of wildlife habitats
the sky all with regard to the
extremely high profits.
We supported that memorial eight
on saturday for the reasons that
others have presented but we do
oppose the memorial before you
today oriole fourteen because of
reflects the status well.
Eight directs ended to consider
set back to the same outdated
economic lands and consultation
with the legislative finance
committee and undermines the
long stake or process we
participated in to protect help
and the environment please
and memorial team thanks very
much.
Thank you and our last speaker
from online.
The.
Okay when do you please go
ahead.
Hello my name is windy at city I
live in a sound one basin in an
abhornation and never travel
member I think the committee
chair members for the
opportunity to provide comments
to not support sm one for
someone for his inconsistent
with senate memorial aid I can
only see what I observe on a
land around and health impacts
of the last forty three year
since the first oil and gas was
placed.
I saw first hand my family
living and proximity of two
miles with over ten oil and gas
wells where is the sound science
to show case these health
impacts are real as these wells
have not moved since nineteen
eighty.
We need s n eight to direct
emner to evaluate the risk of
airplanes from oil and gas
operations to front my
communities and spill suit a
surrounding environment work
with state holders report to
entering committees and proposal
back like just legislation for
the next legislative session
thank you.
Thank you I worked taking care
of it technical glitchier some
people only have AP one two
three five
okay so let's get everybody the
corrected copy.
Do you have the critical year
the adwent
you have three of four.
Okay we need copies for
everybody so we're going to
start with questions and
everybody will have the the
copies
senator gagas were you on this
memoir as well would you like to
make any comments.
The.
Venture just to thank you all we
get that memorial idea the day
and we had some discussions
afterwards during the memorial
eight we had some ideas on
amendments we just like the up
to have this look at I think
this results on the issues we
have in shopping so thank you
sir mccatchen for the heavy left
hope discovered better than your
last minute
thank you.
Okay so questions comments from
committee member centers to deal
offers and we will be getting
the copies
thank you madame chair of where
I come from the the car uncle
gather.
That I just said they left him
hanging and so i'd so I don't
know if you know the answer to
my questions and and I am
missing a part of the bill is a
difference in this committee
substitute that produced water
steady was added is that the
difference of venture yes ma'am
matt madame juran and senator
there were some requests to put
produced water in here for the
discovery of earth minerals and
and to try to start the process
on on figure out what we're
going to do with produce water
you know it's a it's a big ugly
face glare and learn right at as
that's going to be a huge
problem you know we've kind of
got we've gone to get nothing
figured out but but produce
water does need some attention
and and will you know in the
future so yes ma'am it was it
was added for those reasons so
senator do you want your expert
witness mistrust
or not or you think you'd
covered it if mr like the talk
she's she's made a little bit
more lined up on the issue of
produce with thank you mister
just briefly madam charis under
a city lopez
as I said in my opening remarks
the addition of produced water
study and recommendations from
technical experts and mse to the
legislature during the interam
for possible treatment of
produced water to be considered
as part of a strategic water
supply was added so that is a
change that is the driver for
the committee substitute and at
how it came about thank you
thank you
because I
produce water the the idea of
using produced water and
treating it wasn't in the prior
water plans so the first time it
came up with in the fifty year
water plan do you know if it's
going to be studied as part of
the.
The fifty year water plan caused
what i'm print concerned about
is
a lot of the water projects that
were in the the earlier plans
that have been drafted including
the one by the water and
ambassadors have not been fully
flended and so I I feel like we
should.
Find those projects first before
we start looking at produce
water has a has a solution to
our problems
but I do think it is study and
so i'm just kind of curious is
this the only place that it's
being studied where else will be
be looking at produced water and
the costs that it causes our
state madam turn center during
the the time to rebecca rouse to
answer that thank you.
They give my i'm sharing senator
i'd say the thing that new in
the language in the memorial of
related to produce water is that
a direction to the mexican state
university to make
recommendations to the
legislature during the interim
about produce water treatment
with some specific request
related to critical minerals
that could be drived from
treating produced water and
consideration for the strategic
water supply the absent are
beyond this memorial in front of
you there's a number of other
things that have been happening
i'm going back to twenty
nineteen when the legislature
passed the produce water act and
a tremendous amount of research
and policy making and rollmaking
and the fifty or water plan and
have ties up some of those
pieces together by demonstrating
that we need to continue to
invest in policy and science and
regulation related to water
reuse broadly including but not
limited to produced water
treatment andreas so that's
included in the fifty year water
plan that work has been ongoing
will continue and what are
policy and infrastructure task
worse than I was honored to
participate in in twenty twenty
two and did and generate
recommendations related to the
importance of
increasing our opportunities for
water reuse from multiple
sources of water across the
state and so there's some
there's a compliment in the
fifty or water plan discussion
of reuse including pretty
swattering implementation of the
produce water acts and the water
task force recommendations thank
you manager
thank you minimum chair so I
inames you has been working on
this since night it's in.
Since twenty nineteen.
Is that what you said manham
shares center city lopez they
since late twenty nineteen yes
they have
okay thank you
now that I have four
the reason who's water okay
I am concerned a little bit
about the boarding of this I was
wondering if I noticed that
senator stewart who worked on
the other memorial really worked
with the industry very closely
to get that more memorial and I
was impressed to see that
industry supported it where the
environmental groups consulted
with regard to this memorial.
Madame chairman centers I can't
speak exactly to that but this
was one key component that was
left out of senate memorial a
you know that that good
inspiration comes from good
information and and we felt like
we were studying all the impacts
of set backs and there wasn't a
provision there for the
financial
for the financial impact of the
state which we know we can't we
can't during the ship very
quickly on that so we wanted to
we want to add that that
provision in there to make sure
that that we all know what we
were getting into as we study
does march thank you agree with
you that more information is
better would you consider it
friendly to adam and meant to
include the costs
of of the industry in public
health and the cause to the
industry in terms of state
subsidy.
Madame chairman and center I
would probably not consider that
friendly right now the seen this
house and a memorial eight
really does that it
there's all there's a whole lot
in there to you know to study
health and all those things and
we do have some things in here
as well if we go to the second
page
line services
you know to support programs
protect environment and human
hails and then we end up with
some of the same the same things
as well and line nineteen
prevent waste and protect or
live right but the health and
the environment
far about data
we're doing so good the day
so
probably not concerned what
pages that
h two lines seven eight and
nineteen and twenty.
The.
The.
That's regard to venting and
flaring the there's been flared
their also the second one is
also I believe uh
produced water the person is
produced water so it's it's it's
trying to figure out the the
impacts you know what
environment along human impacts
will have produced water and
being flaring in those things as
well so
and can and I believe that we
cover incentive memorial eight
all the health of human risks
with the set backs in here we're
just asking specifically for
financial with the financial
impacts would be to the state.
Thank you but it does not
include okay thank you I I
appreciate the explanation thank
you manager
thank you center souls thank you
madame chair much of this is
very deplicated with what we did
with that that memorial eight
the other day
I do appreciate the newer part
where we're talking about
managing produced water.
Do we know yet is produced water
more or less expensive to clean
up to usable levels than what
we're talking about brackets
water in the earlier bill.
Chair center produce water is.
In an estimate if you're talking
about cleaning both of the
waters to the exact same level
and produced water is going to
be much more expensive to clean
up because it's got a much
higher tedious however the
market for produced water and
and clean it up could be much
different than what we were
talking about earlier in there
for it may potentially be less
costly to clean up they give
them manager and and I
appreciate that because I mean
we're talking about recovering
some of the rare earth minerals
and things that may have value
but if it's more expensive than
brackish water or we have talked
about a market for
water as a commodity.
Why would the state want to be
involved in a more expensive
produced water or will the
difference be covered by the
industry that dirty did up to
start with
the madame chair center so
I I don't know that I understand
your question exactly could you
please maybe clarify distinction
they can and manage a let me see
about putting a little bit clear
if it costs a dollar to clean up
practice water and it costs two
dollars to clean up produced
water to the same level if we're
trying to get a market.
For the cleaned up water will
the difference of a dollar be
paid by the state for a more
expensive water that sells for
the same value or is the
difference paid for by the
industry that made the daughter
water dirty.
Center state I don't think this
this memorial in any way is
asking for
any subsidy as was the first
bill so this is putting no
burden on the state this is
simply saying what can we do
here with the produce water and
I will tell you
you know being from southeast
new mexico that there is a whole
lot of produce water that's
already used I believe
sector refuse reported that in
twenty twenty two there was
about two hundred million
barrels of produce water that
was used and that was in strict
oil and gas operations now when
we talk about two hundred
million barrels of produce water
used what we have to realize is
that two hundred million beer
barrels of fresh water that was
not used and so that was able to
stay in the alka for I don't
know that it's the intention of
this memorial to say hey we want
to clean that matter fact it's
not the intention of a world say
we're going to clean this water
into the drinking liver quality
that's not that's not what it is
but it's the clean it up to a
relatively
decent use for a market that
already exists and you know
potentially expending in the
future on that if there was a
sakewaiter took to clean up
smarter than the absolutely but
you know comparing it to the
brackish water you know breakers
waters ten thousand tds and
produced waters two hundred
thousand test what's it's it's
much different but but this is
foxing really on those on those
rare minerals is there any value
to it and then we would just
have to let the market dictate
whether there was or not but I
don't anticipate on saddling the
the state with the huge
with a huge subsidy for produce
water when when we're using a
whole lot of it already thank
you madame chairman peaceful on
where is it ram line
well that holds hard that starts
on section ten but it says in a
treating produce water into the
strategic water supply program
that seems like what we are
talking about in that other one
is part of the strategic water
supply.
The.
And so it sounds like cleaning
it up for those same kinds of
uses
if there's a sounds like there
would be a huge difference in
the cost to get it to those
levels to add to that who bears
that cost is somewhat what i'm
asking and I realize that maybe
some with this memorial is going
to study doing.
Madam chair center soles and the
white you're right that the the
study and the recommendations
from new mexico state university
pursuant to this memorial would
include some of the economics
the cost of treating the water
to certain specifications for
certain fit for purpose uses
outside of oil and gas that
would be relevant to
any incorporation of tree to
produce water into a state
strategic water supply on the
road so economics is a big
factor there as we were talking
on the earlier this morning I
sent it bill to ninety four and
that the idea of you know down
the road if if we were to move
in this direction incorporating
treating treaty produce water
into a strategy water supply the
contracts that the state would
be entering into with the
treatment facility in this case
the produced water tremendous
facility would contemplate uh
the cost of treatment and those
economics and what that means in
terms of the potential and
likely cost of the treated water
and so the state wouldn't be
incurring any additional costs
associated with that but it may
be that the buyers would be.
Paying more for that tree to
produce water than they might
pay if they were in close
proximity to a brackage water
treatment facility but if that's
the water that's nearby that can
factor into the economics aren't
a case by case site specific
basis so there is a lot that is
very fact specific both in terms
of the cost of treating and what
it's going to be used for you
may have to remove more salts
and more other contaminants for
a certain type of manufacturing
process than you would if you
are going to use that treat a
produce water for pumped hydro
storage of energy for example so
it's very fact specific this is
intended to move us in that
direction to make more informed
decisions about what the
economics would look like and be
based on the fact that as center
in a cousin was saying the
amount of produce water this
generated in the well and gas
industry a significant portion
of that now being used for oil
and gas activities in the oil
field.
Even
all oil and gas production
operations in the state used as
much produced water as they
could limiting their fresh water
to only where they absolutely
had to use it to avoid cross
contimination there would still
be
millions of hundreds of millions
or billions of gallons left over
there being injacted underground
so that's that's the the
the universe of produced water
that we would be looking to
study for possible uses outside
the oil and gas field.
Thank you and and I very much
appreciate all that I I guess my
concern is I don't want the
state to be subsidizing the
clean up of the produced water
when it should be the industry
that that caused the problem to
clean it up by its kind of the
the public get stuck with the
problem well the profits go off
to the private
senator i'm gonna have to
suggest some rising we have a
decarcus at eleven thirty and I
just received a reminder would
like to take a final vote on
when very quick last question
this requires new mexico state
to do a whole lot this feels
like an unfounded and funded
mandate in the day there's no
money and get it tells them to
do a bunch of things how do we
do that.
Madam chair center souls
for the school drive now talk to
new mexico university about the
language and this memorial
however I do know that
there is a funding that they
requested for their ongoing work
for produced water research that
I believe last I checked was
still in hospital to so my
understanding is that and this
is in line with work they're
already doing and had already
requested funding for even
though the specifics of
reporting back to the
legislature with recommendations
is it's new in this memorial
thank you
thank you anyone else with
comments or questions
there is a motion by center in a
bill for a new pass and the
second place under gigos
would the secretary please call
the book.
Senator savantes
excused center gragos
bagos yes center hambling
senator hambling no center
mccurchan so my catch and yes
center novel so novel yes in a
report no center pope no.
Senator resource nope center
souls know centers to deal with
no source of deal opens now
sandwich to finux yes there is
the finance yes.
The.
Buy a four four vote your bill
your memorial has not passed and
it will lay on the table
unless someone brings it off the
table for a different vote that
is different than a tabling
motion if we tabled it it's done
but laying it on the table means
somebody could predict rested
from that further senator motor
thank you
you know I know there's a lot of
real bad stick my reproduced
water
but at the end of the day we all
live in the desert we live in it
in it in a desert state if there
is a way that we can use this
water to leave the natural
resources that are fit for him
and consumption in the ground
that's that's really what that's
really what we're doing here and
and trying to be able to study
those just explore options this
is not a bill is just a memorial
to see if we can get a few
things done out of that moves
and needle for anybody but you
know without including financial
set back study in center
memorially it is incomplete and
without at least starting the
engine on on look into what we
can do with produced water we
are we are
what we're leaving a whole lot
environmental risk out there
because like you said it's
produced it's being produced
every day and if we can start
doing something with it we
should I i'd like to make
thought after so we can do it
but as well committee thank you
manager thank you for those
comments so committee there's a
couple things i've first of all
nathan as wald is here as my
shadow today he is in the mexico
highland university fellow
and secondly in the committee
last week I think it was on
saturday.
We made a mistake and sent it
memorial eight we passed then it
memorial eight and not the
committee substitute so heads up
the
sponsor of that bill will
propose a floor substitute which
is the substitute that we
consider in committee last week
and any other comments.
Thank you again to all of our
staff and if you haven't seen
our fact our committee secretary
for low treats.
We have some for valentine's day
thank you to sender share and
thank you to the sierra club and
we are in recess yes
for anybody who might have been
here for education that we were
trying to hold right after this
because of the cockins we will
not we're going to try and
potentially have education meet
on a couple of a bill and two
memorials during the interim
between the two
floor sessions
