First hearing.
Senate bill fifty three we have
it up.
Yes so are we for the public
we're putting our bill numbers
up so hopefully it is captured.
which way this is to go just
weeks ago six of that camera
okay.
We.
Great.
Okay so Senator would you have
the floor please thank you very
much of Madam chair
representative today Senate bill
fifty three this is a
appropriations bill to the board
of regents in New Mexico State
University for the operation and
maintenance of that go to
experiment stations statewide.
We have a I'm asking for ten
million dollars to be
appropriated from the general
fund for the operation and
maintenance of twelve.
Statewide side Senators.
Madam chair the side Sooners of.
R. the last let's see the.
There was a assessment performed
by the association of public
land grant universities noting
that we were eighty seven
million dollars behind.
And maintenance on these two
facilities this is simply trying
to chip away at that.
Of these centers are a lifeline
for technology.
And research and if you ask one
there's twelve we've got lots of
different planets in the state
they said in different parts of
the state.
The functions or to to put a
wealth of look at crops for
those areas and we're hoping to
shift to a higher value crops.
So that we can get more younger
farmers in.
I've got a couple expert
witnesses that can fill any
questions that you might have
but I am that's essentially the
bill madam chair time is of the
essence so I'm ready for
questions so
This is the water and natural
resources committee interim Phil
and the discussion during the
interim I'm sorry I'm adding to
your presentation Senator Woods
indicated that we needed more of
weather stations around the
state so that the weather in Rio
dosa wasn't necessarily the
weather on the east side of the
stated etcetera etcetera and
that a lot of insurance is tied
to this secretary will this is a
different bill than the help.
This is for the experimental
science stations not the weather
stations okay not great hundred
percent with what you're soon
going on the weather who's
carrying the weather one.
I think it's coming out of the
house Martins a more okay sorry
then.
I interrupted incorrectly.
It's not a problem I'll thanks
for the plug.
It's great okay let's go to your
supporters first and your
opponents is anybody in the
audience here to support this
bill.
Okay if you would briefly stand
up introduce yourself what you
would like to.
The Ramblers both of this is
that.
Through this bill right it's on
many of our readers stations is
gone down.
Trying to navigate.
Mexico State University director
of state government relations.
So we.
Considering the.
Okay so are you have brought to
my attention.
That we are trying to be heard
on the webcast so if you have a
great loud voice you can stay
where you are if not you need to
move to the center said that the
microphones pick you up.
So next on that side yes Sir.
The most president New Mexico
tech we stand in support of this
bill has anything in advances
research to help people New
Mexico provided so thank you
thank you yes.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bradley
and I'm a registered lobbyist
with New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau on behalf of
our twenty thousand member
families we support this bill in
its efforts to provide
additional funding for
agriculture experiment station I
was actually able to visit and I
experiment station near
Farmington when I was a college
student and I was simply amazed
at how they took the local
problems of local producers were
able to find solutions to
enhance agricultural profits
profitability stimulated
economic development and
increase the reliability quality
with our products in the state.
Our agriculture fissions also
we're using third.
But budget wise with all the
Mexicans.
We know though that are
advancement stations need
additional funding for
maintenance operations and
expansion research.
Act.
The ability.
Thank you.
Anybody out yes go ahead is
back.
Your.
Members of the committee my name
is John Culbertson ranchers are.
You for all the reasons stated
that support this in the our
experiment station.
Thank you very much thank you
anybody on the side yes Sir.
Your members of the committee on
John board associate dean and
director of the New Mexico
for communications services and
one additional item I'd like to
add to.
Is this extension also.
Find Senators finally the
reserves that I research they
developed we use our extension
education program but we also
have a lot of our pension State
specialist in collaboration with
our partners in agricultural
experiment station so very
important to us an extension
offices thank you for your for
your consideration support thank
you anybody else on that side.
Okay do we have anybody online
yes okay let's first go to we'll
go to Joanne winner John Quinn
Matt Paul stout than Tom I will.
Johnny where serve on the
advisory committee for the
sustainable agriculture Science
Center at Committee before
retiring and since you're
getting but department of
agriculture ladies work directly
with hundreds of New Mexico
farmers and I've seen first hand
how the research done in the
state's agriculture science
centres has been decisive in
helping our phones press issues
water problem market choices
appropriate technology in this
climate changes the support is
more important than ever our
farmers have had to adapt all
the different environments that
encompass New Mexico farmers
have done that with the help of
science centers that are seated
in the areas where they are
farming conducting site specific
research on traditional props
and on the transition to less
thirsty crops and better use of
water and these centers on renew
Sheens admitted been using
bailing water and baling wire
and duct tape to keep their
tractors and irrigation systems
going through the long dry
period following the recession
of two thousand and eight but I
can only go on for so long
upgrades are desperately needed
Science Center was needed and
deserve our support please help
them help our farmers thank you.
Thank you we have eight more
people to speak so if everybody
could be very brief we'd
appreciate it popped out.
At you will need to unmute
yourself when your name is
called.
Madam chair you able to hear me
now yes we are.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Paul stay
out I serve as the chair of the.
Visor a committee for the Clovis
Ag Science Center.
And
us in our constituents strongly
stand in support of this bill.
we have many challenges out
there we have challenges keeping
good labor we have a provide
staff of researchers and we need
to be able to find them top
notch functional safe facilities
to work in we also need to be
able to find good housing for
our a research assistant to come
out to.
Help our staff
the last comment
the the analogy with baling wire
and duct tape.
That's kind of the way it's been
on some of our buildings and
maintenance so this ten million
dollars would go a long way to
help thank you madam chair thank
you of and so since we still
have several people were going
to keep you to a minute and a
half if you could of keep that
in mind that we have so many
supporters for this excellent
bill.
Tom side will and if you would
on mute yourself.
Chair and members of the
community thank you my name is
Thompson will I'm a rancher
northeast New Mexico and an
advisory committee member of the
two comparing a total function.
With the present routes that we
have and the prospects of this
continuing for a number of years
it's very necessary that
research be conducted to
discover new and innovative ways
of water use management and also
crops that use less warmth and
the also on M. and support this
bill thank you.
Thank you very much we next have
James Miller.
When you're on mute yourself
please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Jim
Miller and I live in Lincoln
County North and reduction on a
member of the New Mexico.
State corona range and livestock
research center I encourage the
committee to approve Senator
Woods bill to continue upgrading
decades old facilities and to
help develop on site overnight
lodging is a small animal a
small on site animal and plant
laboratory in a remote location
like corona.
To serve undergraduate and
graduate students from NMSU as
well as across the country.
Finally corona find sites for
engineering applications of new
and renewable energy
technologies to traditional
agriculture classes as well as
to applying train others and new
technology such as use of aerial
drones in ranch management tasks
your approval of Senate bill
fifty three will be appreciated
by the advisory board of court
thank you.
Thank you next we have D.
seller.
The leader of
this to.
Okay so I will go on next person
is Barbara.
If you would unmuted yourself.
Yes I'm my name is Barbara
saltwater thank you madam chair
and committee members I'm a
rancher in corona I'm also the
chair of the advisory board for
the run a range of my stark
research center I support this
bill and I I a concur with all
that has been set one thing that
I'd like to add is that we have
substandard housing for our
employees there I would like to
see that
Taking care of and we if we
don't do this we're going to
have to abandon some of these
buildings because of unsafe
conditions so thank you for your
time and support of Senate bill
fifty three.
Thank you very much next we have
known about.
I don't know if that's the
correct name but if you would
I'm meet yourself.
Can you making people hear me
now yes okay hi good morning my
name is known about lane in I am
a scientist and I am a farmer
and I'm for the Navajo Nation I
A. M. from communion on inside
New Mexico I am it's open near
the four corners area near
Farmington so I'm also the co
founder of Navajo ethnographer
culture which is a nonprofit
education farm and also the by
recommitting for the the the
acts Center at any deprivations
and I absolutely support this
bill because it is really
critical for especially the
future of of I am bringing
technology to bring higher yield
crops into just the New Mexico
economy especially with the
energy transition going on in
the state of New Mexico the
It is necessary that we we we
really elevates just agriculture
in general so support thank you
thank you and next we have
weighed Cabot.
You need.
Good morning.
Yes my name is Wayne Cabot I am
a chairman of the Babri
Committee and also the
southeastern New Mexico
agriculture research center in
Artesia in Austin in support of
this bill there's not much I can
add but our quick look in
facilities are collapsing
decaying and we're spending more
time working on the equipment
and we are using the equipment
to work so I stand in support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you next we have somebody
Roy.
If you would on mute yourself.
Yes.
Alright so president of the to
carry feed fissions intestine
rex courtesy accentor and to
carry.
Which is one of those Senator
statewide research facilities
that are critical links between
the charter of New Mexico state
and residents of New Mexico our
research at the salt is not
limited in scope to the benefit
of Mexican food rather to every
citizen or in the midst.
We are passionate and driven to
accomplish the goals that seemed
impossible only a few years ago
we're using the newest and most
proven technology to promote
deficient use of protein source
and water to produce healthy
food sources for the most the
Economic Forum form at.
To be clear we have the ability
now to that amendment I need
tools or any president New
Mexico over to seed stop that
will leave the to the thirty
percent reduction of imports to
boost the economy.
This reality is here today the
more firefighters have invested
over a hundred fifty thousand
dollars incentive within and
infrastructure in the last five
to seven years to carry accent.
We're not through investing in
the facility however we would
like to respectfully ask the.
The Rexy courtesy accentors and
other science facilities help us
attract the attention is our
upgrades the important
knowledges investments in
facilities to accommodate this
public.
Thank you thank you very much
that concludes our public
comments so we're going to go to
questions comments from
committee members Senator
Sedillo Lopez I saw your hand I
mean we do have.
Also okay there is a motion and
a second before we go to the
vote are there any questions or
comments.
Thank you with the secretary
please call the roll.
Yes Senator want this is.
Senator Gallegos yes I Senator
Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator pope
yes Senator.
Senator souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Stefanics yes.
You have a unanimous do pass
congratulations and I wish you
well in your next committee
thank you very much thank you
thank you.
So committee members we invited
Mike Hammond.
Our state the governor senior
water adviser to come and give
us an update on what he is doing
and his role in whatever you'd
like to share with us I asked
him to speak for about ten to
fifteen minutes and then we
would take ten to fifteen
minutes of two and eight and
then go on with our bills so
welcoming good morning Mike
thank you madam chair and good
morning to you all I appreciate
the opportunity to present to to
this committee this morning I
live interaction I I I grew up
in the house the I'm a UNM
graduate in civil engineering
I've worked the nearly forty
years now in the water resources
department within public service
at all levels of government.
my my lot my most two recent
jobs before getting tapped on
the shoulder by our our governor
to take on this new role was I
was the area manager for the
bureau of reclamation are
available kirke that manage the
federal projects from southern
Colorado down to four quick in
Texas.
And I would they serve in that
position for six years and then
most recently I a semi retired I
guess you could say from the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district where I served as the
chief executive officer and
chief engineer
in in that organization and I
also served.
as an appointed member of the
Interstate Stream Commission for
two and a half years before I
step down because of this new
appointment for the our
governor.
I also a are living growth of
small farms my family does
trying the farm to table a fresh
organic vegetable growing and
and and trying to trying to make
a little little my son is trying
to make a little money doing
that and it's tough.
The as the the governor senior
water adviser I I
I have several roles and
responsibilities that I wanted
to share with you here this
morning.
A second from members of the
committee you can follow along
on a handout if you want to
that's been provided sorry for
that in reference thank you
madam chair
who will win key role I I I've
I've been a collaborator and and
a bridge builder my entire
career that's the way I approach
my job in at every level I've
I've attained and my career and
and the most important thing is
to continue building.
improve the the improve
relationships with communities
and agencies and and
tribal governments in the
secular as across the state I
also am going to serve as a
point of contact in the office
of the governor on water and
water related infrastructure
matters and as that's the buzz
word of the day we got lots of
infrastructure to address with
that with of the funding that we
have
in the system where many state
and federal funding programs.
With that many of them have a
very strong emphasis on serving
the underserved communities
we'll talk more about that and
in a minute
also planned to serve as a
liaison between the communities
and the water natural resources
state agencies and assist with
any US federal agency outreach
that I can help help with.
I also advise the governor on
water policy and budget
recommendations and will work
closely with the legislature on
the state's water agenda and I
have my email is posted here at
the bottom of the page if you
need to get a hold of me.
The the evolution of the New
Mexico water policy is been.
A keen interest of mine
you know we we started with the
in terms of administration we
started with Spanish Mexican law
for a secular as that utilizes
the chair shortage and community
unity as a guiding principle.
The leader of and print in
nineteen oh seven the the the
state established the territory
at the time establish the prior
appropriation doctrine that
started the formal instruction
with that in New Mexico at that
point in nineteen twenty three
the Conservancy act approved of
and that allowed for the
improvement of the middle Rio
Grande Valley for flood control
drainage and irrigation
expansion it also provides for
the construction of a lot of
them that provided supplemental
irrigation for for the valley.
and then Senator interstate
compacts were negotiated for the
Rio Grande Colorado Pecos
Canadian closely a an animus the
plot of that really are guiding
principles for interstate water
management throughout this these
basins.
and for the federal projects
were kinda.
Late to the party but they they
came in and they they built
elephant Butte dam dams on the
Baker with uh Senator the San
Juan Chama project the Navajo
dam and then Senator of flood
control.
Rejects an axe and and and and
other things that the that's the
and and you know we're there's
been an ongoing process to of
within the state engineers
office of conducting educations
and and many basins in the
state.
And it also active water
resource management that is a
new tool available for
addressing water sharing and
agreements and various things
where education doesn't quite
meet the meet the goals of that
particular area.
So and then the question mark is
what other tools do we need to
bring to the table which are
going to be crucial as we face
persistent drought and and
impacts of climate change going
forward.
All of these all of these issues
here and the infrastructure
that's been built to date really
really relied on as our
twentieth century water policies
of that relied really on on a
wetter than normal hydrologic
cycle if you look at the long
term hydrology that that many
scientists have been
investigating for years
New Mexico has gone through some
very serious droughts in the
past and and and it's predicted
that they will return and I
think we're we're in we're in a
very serious fun right now.
And then how is that really
going to be further impacted by
the CO two climate change that
we are already experiencing I've
I've been observing the climatic
conditions since the eighties we
had great water supply snowpack
kept open view pretty full and
and everybody was a I call it
the fat and happy period of time
in the water supply business but
we've seen a steady decline and
even back in the eighties I grew
up in the house and and and the
snow used to stay around in the
valley floor up until late may
sometimes and maybe early June
you don't see that I haven't
seen it for the for a very long
time so something's been
transitioning in that regard
since the eighties and and so
we're seeing earlier spring
office and it's changing the
photographs the we're
that we're the technical basis
for the the the infrastructure
that was constructed of for that
winter period of time
and and and that you've heard of
the governor's fifty year water
planned process the first phase
of it this call the leap ahead
analysis performed by a doctor
New York Dunbar and her team of
of the from New Mexico tech in
other places including a state
climatologist and I drove just
and and they're they're showing
an increased aridity in the
state of New Mexico.
Under fifty years all of which
is very very concerning of
course.
The next slide shows of the over
and under delivery.
On a on a can we continue to
basically a year to year if you
have a color slide the letter I
have the black and white but the
the green or the lighter color
is the credits of the Rio Grande
compact to set up to allow for
credits and debits my New Mexico
to delivery to elephant Butte
and the Rio Grande project and
it shows that we've come out of
a this credit period of this
what period of talking about and
now we're we're steadily
declining as a result of the
dryer conditions ever seen and
the other thing we're seeing in
the mill valley in particular is
we used to benefit from a very
strong monsoon year in and year
out and that's been hit miss and
and when we do get monsoons of
course there very torrential in
the cause damage and and a lot
of property destruction but that
the that's water that helps the
state New Mexico makes its
deliveries to the contact number
you can see we're drifting into
a debit and if we drift below
two hundred thousand acre feet
that the formal violation of
article six of the Rio Grande
compact which could exacerbate
the the process of the time
going right now in the Texas The
New Mexico litigation so we're
obviously very concerned about
the despite this is despite the
best efforts of the Miller grant
Conservancy district and the
state Interstate Stream
Commission and and and manage of
that water we've we've the
district did many things to try
to minimize to questions and and
optimize the the delivery of
water down elephant Butte and it
was still a declining situation
the other thing that's
concerning in this coming year
is the the the the outlook for
additional precipitation is is
is is very telling we've we've
got predictions for below normal
and and well below normal
of precipitation in the region
under the law minha the issue
and then.
Also the you know from climate
change contributions to the
temperature of a higher than
normal temperatures predicted
for the next ninety days and
beyond really.
So
I'm I've always been a half a
glass half full kind of guy and
with such things but for so I
see that that you know in these
conditions we do have
opportunities that we have
solutions and their short term
things we can do and then
there's longer term actions that
we must take and and so the the
short term actions that we're
working on right now is is is
setting up programs for
voluntary and temporary
following in areas that are
stressed by surface water
shortages to address compact
debit.
And prevent few tile priority
calls and like on the page
because
and then we need to address our
infrastructure needs with the
funding that is now available to
us and we're we're in a once in
a generational opportunity to
take advantage of our funding in
the bipartisan infrastructure
funds and obviously the state
has a pretty good a budget
surplus as well that can be
leveraged against the federal
dollars in an effective way and
then we have the the fifty year
water planning process that the
governor's yes me to work with
the Interstate Stream Commission
on and we're gonna do that
through the formation by
executive order of a water
policy and infrastructure task
force that will be very short
lived that will come back to you
all
and the governor by July with
some very solid recommendations
on the policy and it and the
priorities of infrastructure as
as we look to the sixty day
session.
There's lots of things we need
to look at in the longer term we
needed to develop agricultural
systems that are scaled to the
new realities of the average
water supply conditions
we need to look at creative
conjunctive use strategies with
groundwater and surface water
in in a very well administered
way so we don't mind the ground
water systems but also provide
opportunities for better
agricultural production and
maybe on a higher dollar drops
as well and then utilizing the a
worm of for sure to turn
agreements and settlements is is
a way to.
the resolved issues before they
get into the litigation
category.
and I'm stormwater capture
treatment and use strategies we
we we we we see a shift from us
the snowstorms are generated run
off two months total generated
of water supply so we need to
figure out how to capitalize on
that and then let us to the
twentieth century reserve or
systems with their
authorizations were done for for
specific purposes and we need to
revisit those authorities at the
federal and state levels to do
to optimize our reserve or
system similar to what they're
looking at on the Colorado River
basin right now.
And then we also need to assure
preservation of our ecosystems
and traditional to communities
and it's a tall order but we
gotta do we got to do it all.
And I will get into the details
on the next slide on all the
water funding opportunities I'm
sure all of you are aware of
this but we have various
programs at the federal and
state levels that I am going to
coordinate very closely with
With the with you all in with
the the agencies to make sure we
we totally optimized for the the
availability of these funds and
and then work on our capacity
issues as well
as we as we look forward to
better serving our communities.
And the third there should be a
capacity slide there that runs
really another serious issue
that we face many of you've
heard that you know the staffing
levels at the state agencies are
there there's barely keeping up
with the current workload we're
very concerned about the added
workload that comes in with
managing all these federal
programs dollars and and
leveraging the other
appropriated dollars I think we
have a backlog of capital outlay
that maybe two or three years
old that are still working on
those are things that we got to
really tighten up and do a
better job on another I see that
as one of my roles and
responsibilities to work to
optimize the capacity that we we
have currently and then also
work to make recommendations to
the legislature and to the
governor the executive budget
where she has made some
significant additions and their
work out the differences between
the the the house finance
committee and and and the
executive we're still working on
those things but but but she
made a strong commitment to a
number of areas of very
important in the in the water
world and particularly in in
water at settlements and and
being able to administer Water
Rights application specially
with the the new cannabis rules
coming in that require specific
authorities there
and and then I've also had
conversations with the you you
madam chair about trying to get
money out where it's most needed
in the and then I collected
rural communities and and and
and the budget ministration of
funding has priorities for
underserved and neglected
communities and and we're going
to try to flip the model because
right now communities that have
capacity our our come up
competing the the communities.
That suffer with their
capacities and they don't have
good support so that's going to
be something that will be very
important for us to look at at
the water trust board and NMFA
and and other federal through
the the state revolving fund as
well to try to coordinate that
in a way that flips the model
and put some energy into helping
our rural community succeed and
get the the the infrastructure
they need to have good quality
drinking water and wastewater
systems so with that madam chair
I I I stand for any questions
and I sort really appreciate the
opportunity to to be here today
great thank you very much that
was fourteen minutes and thirty
seconds.
Okay so committee members if you
think about one question you
want to ask and if we have time
we'll circle back to for the
second question so committee
members questions comments.
I have a Senator Gallegos.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Schmedes.
Nothing just for fun.
Okay service centers about this
okay let's start there okay
Senator gave us please enter
thank you Mr chairman appreciate
the.
Handout wanting to get back with
you a few things I was just
going to ask just for
clarification so the Rio Grande
compact is that what we consider
New Mexico Texas border compact.
Chair of the Senator Gallegos
the river and compact is between
Colorado southern Colorado and
and and the sound was valley New
Mexico and and what they call
the the compact Texas which is
really the the agency that
everything below elephant Butte
or provide them all the way down
to four quick meant Texas so and
and so they called at the Rio
Grande project and in the middle
is the metal Representative
grant project and then they have
their Colorado projects as well
North and thank you for that I
guess I'm trying to figure out
the Pecos river as a gold pastor
Carlsbad kitchens Texas how does
that relate to our debit that we
have with taxes on water
company.
Then Madam chair of the Senator
Gallegos we we have a on the
pets because we have a the
fortunate situation with all the
work that that the Interstate
Stream Commission and and you
all the legislature of them
authorizing funding to develop
of the groundwater pumping
systems and retirement of
certain agricultural lands
they've been able to develop a
credit on the Texas side that is
is currently in and and play and
so that's we're in a good
situation there and in that
regard but they're still Madam
requirements between the
Carlsbad irrigation district and
and the junior pumpers in the of
Pojoaque valley
Artesia conservation district
that that need to be addressed
on on an annual basis.
Chair process last point of this
but Mr Chairman so the extras in
the Pecos.
Water tributary do not help us
with the Rio Grande deaths the
manager of the Senator that's
correct they do not help that
with that thank you for thank
you.
Be a little bit.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the excellent presentation
I'm I'm always so impressed and
I always learn something from
you Mr haven't and I really
appreciate the point you made
about capacity because in a
rural communities a lot of times
they just don't even have the
the capacity to withstand
federal audits so if you we they
just really need a lot of
support for those federal
dollars
but my question has to do with
the quality of the data that we
have to make a lot of these
decisions as you pass the water
data act a couple years ago and
I had an opportunity to speak
with miss Dunbar doctor Dunbar
whose
Who's the responsibility is and
she she chatted about the she
talked about how they have
established the vision for the
network which is an overlay of
all of the data that we have
that that that relies in each of
the districts and my question is
is how comfortable do you feel
with access to data now has we
embark on the fifty year plan
and what needs to happen to make
sure that we have good data to
make this decision.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez the the the the
data Water Act is is designed to
to do exactly what you're
suggesting and it does have
executive support in fact the
the executive budget had I think
four and a half million dollars
in it to refer the water
agencies and I think there is
other other agency
recommendations in the executive
budget to to help I move that
along with but to really answer
your question it's super
critical that we capture the
data and put it in a format that
will live on forever and and and
allow for access to anybody that
needs it right now it's just
scattered and and and various
states of of of.
You know the system capacity in
the agencies in particular
there's a bunch of new data and
metadata being developed in the
Texas V. New Mexico litigation
that could be very helpful and
and the settlement and and and
and the use of going forward so
all of that needs to be captured
and not lost and because there's
been a lot of investment I think
it's important that we do it on
on on a statewide scale in the
affirmative that the water data
act is is is advising so with
the exit the executive supports
it so do the agencies.
And how comfortable do you feel
with what we have gathered to
date and the accessibility of it
now as we embark on this fifty
year plan.
Will it the needed madam chair
and senator I need to do a
little deeper research on it but
I personally run into issues
where you can't really get what
you need quickly and decision
making and and it that form the
foundational.
Of need of when just doing any
kind of water planning or any
kind of water project to go to
have a good solid data
foundation in order for you to
design and construct and manage
of a water supply projects of
I'm a firm believer that we need
to do a better job on that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
centers committees.
Thank you very much and I was
listening in on on this is my my
question is I on your you know I
saw that really good slide about
the contact in the debits and
the solutions the long term
solutions to me to summarize
them use technology more
efficient how are using water
and that those kind of a big
thing I got from you my question
pertained pertains to some of
the short term especially this
top one about voluntary and
temporary following it it does
that mean that the temporaries
that like mandatory or people
looking at potentially.
Not being able to access their
their water rights to be in it a
mandatory way to address our
debits or could you comment on
that on the short term.
Thank you for the question you
madam chair the Senators
committee the
the it in the middle of grant it
it it's a managed a lot like a
the I call it a largest second
it's a shared shortage
situation.
and and and and and it's let it
let it lended itself to four
crop kind of and their small
farms there's not too many forms
there that are over sixty acres
there's a lot of the smaller
producers below that number and
and if there's a if there's a
forecast of say fifty percent or
less or sixty percent or less
March one with the surface
water.
Of folks are going to be really
concerned about making a full
crop we were able to just get by
the last year because of some
monsoons when the state we are
used to it's hard for me to get
my hat off for the milligram but
and and and and we struggled and
and and and but but there is
also actions that were taken to
limitation by reducing their
efficiencies and to allow for
more water to the ship down to
the compact and that's what
question what what is the action
taken what you're does that mean
that they get a notice you have
to stop watering your crops and
this is the the meter somehow
has at work Senator.
Madam chair the action taken
would be either be of funding
available to fairly compensate
not profit make large profits
but to fairly compensate someone
that would voluntarily of fellow
their land for the entire season
we did we've been doing the the
the middle valley has been doing
some of that under an
environmental leasing program
that the bureau of reclamation
put in play for the Endangered
species act requirements so
there was about a thousand acres
that participated in that last
year and their target is three
thousand acres this year but
we're looking to get of some
funding to increase that so that
we can catch up turn the turn
the deliveries around get water
back to the Rio Grande project
too often view for a couple
years and and it's a good timing
because of auto them is now
under construction it's it's a
it's an unsafe facility and the
feds and the and an emergency
are costsharing to reconstruct
the them over the next two years
so one tomato is of available
again and we've cut back up on
the compact deliveries then the
cycle that we've been enjoying
for the last twenty five years
or so comes back where we have
water to use in the late summer
to get everybody through the
irrigation season and keep the
endangered species issues
address as well so that that's
the short term plans long term
we gotta do something about the
heavy losses in the river
channel down below CENIC usher
working with the bureau of
reclamation and inner street
Stream Commission to make that a
more efficient delivery channel
so that we can get water more
water down to the ocean view in
the long term.
You're welcome.
Thank you ask Senator about this
thank you and welcome to the
position I appreciate the
governor putting somebody in
your position the governor
Richardson had a bill Hume have
been around that long and and
the governor Martinez didn't put
somebody in that position so I'm
I'm glad to have of somebody's
of the mouthpiece thank you the
At the middle are grants as a
motion expense with middle Rio
Grande have they begun doing
Judy K. Education lawsuit as
education proceeding for the
middle Rio Grande.
Chair Senators want this the.
The Conservancy act allows for
the holding of the water right
the reclaimed water right that
was it's it's it's a sort of
history there.
And and I won't get into the
nitty gritty details but they
put the Conservancy act in place
because the middle Rio Grande
was completely flooded the.
Water log and and also horrible
flooding problems and things it
is not a yes or no question is
is Education proceeding for the
middle Rio Grande it it's a
criminology cation through the
declaration of the pre nineteen
seven water right so there's
there's been probably twenty
five thousand acres of are gone
incrementally through education
but the district right is held
on behalf of all of the water
users so that part doesn't
really necessarily need to be
educated.
Is there a is there a legal
proceeding in the for the middle
Rio Grande education water
rights no Sir there's not a for
the entire but there like I said
there's incremental declarations
going on happening that's our
you'll hear me say this
throughout the committee members
to Center Hamlin Centers souls
and I drive south every year
many many times up and down and
it always troubles me because of
course we see the the right
dishes on the channels in the
fields of the middle Rio Grande
full of water and and we're
usually told that there isn't
any water by the time you get to
the elephant Butte and so you
know it's troubling I know
there's explanation for that but
we'll we'll explore some of that
but but one of things that
troubles me always is that the
the lower Rio Grande below the
reservoir has been in education
for probably a decade or longer
in court with all of us at our
farmers are parties and
defendants subjects offers of
judgment and that that person is
not taking place with the middle
Rio Grande from Mexico to the to
to the reservoir and of course
this is all the subject of
litigation with Texas is whether
there are deliveries be made but
the but it it's best but you'll
you'll hear this from me in
quite a bit and and again all
due respect we the my my
oppression is always a milligram
doesn't educate because of.
There there's the there's the
emphasis on the Lara grabbing
not so much in the middle Rio
Grande about what's what is been
choose how it's being used it is
the middle Rio Grande is are
there are all the users the
middle Rio Grande meter.
Chair of the Senator we have we
have a sense of they have an
extensive community network of
over two hundred fifty sites but
not individually Noel and
Knoller everywhere they are.
Yeah so there's there's a to do
you know there there's always a
feeling that well the guidance
out there are being selfish and
unfair but but the rules are
stacked against us we've got a
meter middle doesn't we've got
an education going on for years
were important and all of our
rights are being challenged
middles not so.
You know when we get to this
issue about well of the middles
or word making all the delivery
obligations that we we can all
be I'll be asking a lot of
questions about that and of
course if it matters because you
all have seen the chart we're
we're getting close to compact
under delivery right a very
close to that and when that
happens we're looking at federal
oversight management of the
compact right damages
potentially financial damages in
the Texas V. New Mexico lawsuit
Texas is already moved to
amended the lawsuit to assert a
claim for under delivery Mr
Hammond's nodding his head
affirmative so you're aware of
that so we're this this issue
between how the lower gets
treated and how the middle gets
treated will be at a challenge
for you I'm sure throughout your
your advice the governance of I
look forward to that thank you
madam chair madam madam chair
Senator Sanchez I'd love to
spend some time with the one on
one and we can get into a more
detailed conversation about.
I appreciate that thank you and
welcome the opportunity thank
you madam chair thank you
senator that we have time for
another question if anybody has
one.
At anybody else for the first
time before I okay center city
Lopez.
And that includes.
Thank you one of the things that
I've been thinking a lot about
is our prior appropriation
doctrine which which is so old
up in times of scarcity
and I know it's constitutional I
know this is a big lift but I'm
I'm just wondering how we're
going to face I believe at least
fifty years of scarcity have is
there any thought at all in in
changing the framework for our
overall system where it's not I
mean our constitution basically
it talks about beneficial use
but in practice it's whatever
the heck you want to do with
water is a beneficial use and
then if you have that dog it and
then if you have a prior right
so that if we do have education
to the senators described I
think it's going to be a mess I
think it's going to be very
Divisive it's it's really the.
It's really a system that
doesn't that isn't really
thoughtful about maybe
prioritizing agriculture has
we're facing climate change
maybe prioritizing uses that are
going to help our state survive
of this climate change.
Is that any any kind of
discussion that you that is a
and I know what I'm describing
is is.
Is huge but I'm just wondering
if we should start thinking
outside of the box.
Madam chair the Senator Sedillo
Lopez the there's a lot of
raging debate going on in the
western United States right now
about.
Whether you know and then I
should be rated higher than the
other culture and or vice versa
and all that stuff and and being
a you know the water profession
at the federal state and local
levels I I think it's just
fraught with you know
The dispute the start heading in
that direction but with that
said
there there are mechanisms the
status put in the offset
requirements for and I it
affects on the river.
and and that has its own issues
but but there are there are
methods the maybe under the a
warm approach active water
resource management where you
develop shortage sharing
agreements between affected
parties the address is the
shortages that and we'll still
see see good water cycles it's
not like going to be dire for
forever because that is you know
if we go in and out of these
cycles background cycles
associated with with with with
that kind of twenty thirty year
ranges but
in those really tight years we
have to have mechanisms and the
safeguards and safety nets if
you will for for water users to
have different systems of of
coping and and that's something
that we'll be looking at it in
the policy arena in the in the
water policy task force for
recommendations for tweaking
things in that direction but we
we we what we are going to look
at at some of those those issues
for sure.
Thank you madam chair that a
warm concept does give me some
hope about about collaboration
so thank you madam chair
appreciate thank you senator and
thank you Mr Hammond for coming
this morning and I'm sure if
members here want to meet with
you individually Mr Hammond is
making time to do that and I'm
seeing some heads not so please
up to reach out to the members
of this Madam yes Representative
what's the best way to do that
for.
I'm I'm here to offer might my
telephone number I think we all
text back and forth a lot easier
than email I think nowadays so
it's a five oh five two zero six
six three seven eight and.
Google I two zero six six three
seven eight.
You're very welcome right thanks
again for coming this morning
thank you for the invitation.
So we're now on to Senator souls
Senate bill seventy two.
To include.
Or.
I'm sure with every place thank
you
Madam chair of the Senate bill
seventy two and let me give just
a little bit of background the
is I am the the Senate's
Representative two F. score and
I always have to look up exactly
what that stands for F. score is
a much better than its
established program to stimulate
competitive research it's a
federal program their number of
states that are considered up
scores States to encourage
research of as part of that F.
score each year the state group
which is made up primarily of
the vice president of research
from our various universities
but also representative from the
lab the legislature and others
here proposals of which were
allowed to forward one of them
to NSF for federal funding.
This year we have three
wonderful proposals.
And being on that committee it
was very difficult to decide
which one to advance.
In two of them they weren't able
to advance in these are
consortium projects they are not
how's that only one university
the usually are all three of our
research universities sometimes
are smaller universities with
that and usually the labs
involved as well.
And so after that was over and
we had information that the
programs that have been advanced
in the past often bring in four
to five additional research
dollar for every dollar spent.
I have to bills this is one of
them to support the other two
research projects directly the
state funding rather than
National Science Foundation
funding we know that it brings
in additional money this
particular one is the primary
research is done in New Mexico
state as the anchor University
but it is a consortium of
universities including.
The eastern New Mexico tech of
the labs they're very is other
people with it my expert today
Dr Leslie Edgar was the primary
Author I guess might be the
right way of that the consortium
project of all of this this
particular one and she can feel
and what's more the details but
this would be to set up New
Mexico on this is so appropriate
with the other discussion that
we've just been having on how
we're going to manage
diminishing water resources in
New Mexico this would set up the
the center for dryland
resilience.
As a center it has the potential
to become the world's Center for
how you manage lands when water
is scarce for the best
productivity for the best
outcomes all of the other kinds
of things that we've been seeing
over the last several years of
looking forward it has the
potential to be something like
another national laboratory
likes India like Los Alamos like
enveloping Colorado this could
be a national laboratory type of
a situation for drylands
research it supports our
agriculture it supports our
universities and research I
might also add that research of
this sort supports graduate
students at sports undergraduate
students it is going to support
our agricultural experiment
stations.
And brings in more additional
research grants every other FY
I've got the report from the I
think it was two thousand
eighteen where the F. score
supported smart grid Center and
I've got some of their report
reports about the number of
patents is spun off of that the
additional research grants and I
think the report that we got for
this is it brought in
approximately four dollars of
additional research grants for
the money the direct money that
was spent on that all of that if
you're in economics they call
those based dollars those are
not dollars that are just being
so.
Around the the state these are
additional monies coming into
the state as well as with the
commitment of details about this
particular one let me turn it
over to Dr Edgar can tend to
give you that the quick
presentation of which I think
you were allowed fifteen minutes
in front of F. score in order to
present.
Dr maybe but under fifteen.
The the five minute version.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity first of all my name
is Leslie Edgar I service the
associate dean of research in
the college of agriculture
consumers and environmental
sciences as well as our director
of the agriculture experiment
station so although I wish I
could claim to service the
experts that led this team
doing the online today is Dr
Larry for hot Mexico who did
serve in that capacity what I do
want to say about the center and
the opportunity that creates not
only for the experiment station
but for them this is truly a
collaboration that is multi
institutional and multi
disciplinary which is something
that's tremendous for the state
as you know the only way that we
can leverage research and bring
up our capacity of the state is
through scientific and an
innovative endeavors this is
center does that so I'll ask
Larry to join us online if
possible who can talk about
specific how that research team
foresees this the center of
trial and resilience what I will
say in in just briefly before I
turned over to her is at the
center have the opportunity for
us to create economic value by
reducing the vulnerability of
our environmental variability it
also leverages existing
resources in the state that we
can use for this so our weather
stations located across the
state that data would be used in
the system our ecological
reserves that are that is
gathered across the state would
you be used in the center to
help us as producers and
managers be able to make better
decisions about what we can do
with this data so madam chair
with your approval I would like
to invite a letter perhaps could
join us online yes this young
on.
He or she he.
Yes.
Thank you sorry just working
with the technology
madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for this opportunity to speak to
you today in support of SB
seventy Center for Thailand
resilience my name is Larry
Broncos drive Ecker said and I'm
faculty an animal range sciences
at New Mexico State University
and also at the interim
associate director of the
agricultural experiment station
and and I would like to say
almost the way that Dr Ecker
said that that while I'm
representing the center here
today this really is a deep
collaboration across the
universities and there were many
of us who were deeply involved
in putting together this this
proposed center and also working
through all of the details so.
And with that I'd like to to
begin with a few remarks there
could be no better time to
provide resilience science it's
becoming increasingly clear that
the ecosystem services we all
depend on such as clean water
healthy forests productive
ranging crosswinds and the
magical landscapes that draw
people to New Mexico are
becoming more vulnerable to the
threats that Senator schools and
Dr Ecker mentioned threats such
as drought fire climate change
land use pressures and others
loss of local species reduced
plant growth deteriorating water
quality and quantity landscape
level transitions from
grasslands to shotguns to bare
ground and loss of pinyon
forests are examples of
consequences for ecosystems that
are losing or lost resilience
these and similar changes are
occurring in ecosystems
throughout the western United
States and and drylands all over
the world however it's not too
late many species and ecosystems
are resilient to these changes
and we need to understand why
and that's the purpose of this
Center for dryland resilience
the center for dryland
resilience will advance our
understanding of why these types
of changes are occurring and
what we can do to mitigate the
impacts and maximize resilience
where possible some of the key
activities of the center include
deploying a statewide monitoring
network measuring variables such
as terrestrial carbon and water
exchange water quality plant and
soil microbial diversity
ecosystem productivity and
economic indicators among other
things importantly we're working
across disciplines applying
advanced computation techniques
together statewide data develop
indicators and actively monitor
for changes in conditions so
that that's what we're proposing
to do is to develop an active
monitoring system will use this
monitoring network to develop
models that predict future
trajectories of change across
ecological agricultural and
socio economic systems this will
provide opportunities to develop
deploy and analyze strategies.
That will help us maintain an
increase the sustainability of
New Mexicos ecosystem.
Funding to Thailand the center
for dryland resilience what also
develop are highly skilled
interdisciplinary data science
workforce the kind of workforce
that Mr.
We need to build capacity for in
the state to solve some of these
pressing Environment.
Well feeling industry jobs and
federal workforce needs
including those needs at the
national labs that we have in
the state it would also support
the state climate strategy with
job training data and and model
development as well because one
of the things that's missing out
of the the kind of strategy is
in state expertise on building
these models so that we can
understand what the future
trajectories of change are in
the state of.
It would also innovate novel
technologies computational
capabilities and strategies for
land managers ranchers and
farmers and it would strengthen
the state economy and three
important sectors including
private technical and scientific
services with that workforce
development outdoor recreation
and tourism by preserving our
beautiful landscapes and
agriculture which all three of
these are multi billion dollar
industry in the state so as was
mentioned by both Senator
schools and Dr actor this center
represents a new and deep
collaboration across the state's
higher education institutions
that will make New Mexico a
global leader in driving science
of this new center will
strategically build on our too
long term ecological research
sites that we have in the state
we're also home to a national
ecological observatory Network
site and of course our twelve
agricultural Science Center is
bringing all of those together
and working with the data from
all of those locations are you
New Mexicans are already forward
thinking stewards of the
environment we enacted the water
data act that we just spoke
about before and we also have a
pioneering state crime need the
center for dryland resilience
will leverage our password after
you can include.
Okay.
I was done
to prepare New Mexico for a
challenging future so that's it
that's we appreciate your
enthusiasm.
Senator any words before I go to
the thank you this bill really
could have gone to education
because it supports our
universities and the research
and how important research is to
our students it certainly is
science it certainly belongs in
conservation because of the
topic of drylands resilience and
so within the legislature it
ought to be a consortium bill as
it is within the the
universities but with that will
be open for questions thank you
very much is there anybody in
the audience that would like to
support this of well if you
would stand and be very brief.
Yes my name is the wealth
president New Mexico tech for
all the reasons Mr Hammond said
and for the fact that.
Providing support for research
to help the people of New Mexico
and advances significant so we
stand in support of this bill
right thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee have you in New Mexico
State University and we stand in
support of this bill I think
this process
that thank you thank you anybody
else here in the audience.
Yes please Morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kate was probably a register
of this with you Mexico I am I
serve you have on behalf of our
members we do support adequate
funding for needed research and
expand research and extension
education for agriculture
activities in New Mexico we see
this all as an opportunity to
find the solutions to the
resource challenges but New
Mexico producers face now and
will face in the future.
fifty percent the New Mexico is
a wonderful place to study their
striations briefly.
I'm including irrigation.
I just we believe that.
Senator in the state of New
Mexico State University I
probably.
What I'm trying to do for the
protective properties has
operation and help our land
managers farmers and ranchers
And so I thought.
Members
across the
the act thank you very much
thank you I have three people
online Romero Daniel Jones.
Alchemilla Senator you to
yourself.
Good morning madam chair
committee members Camilleri with
the New Mexico State Land Office
the State Land Office stands in
support of Senate bill seventy
two developing advanced
statewide ecological monitoring
network resilience strategies
for sustainable management
management of dryland will
provide and support to retain
and grow a healthy agriculture
sector in New Mexico this sector
in turn helps the state land
office the chief its mission of
caring for the land and
optimizing revenue generated for
public education and our other
beneficiaries thank you.
Thank you Daniel Jones if you
would on mute yourself.
All right thank you can hear me
yes.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment on SB
seventy two I stand in support
of this bill for many reasons
that the one that I'll mention
is this this bill would make the
state of New Mexico a global
leader in resilient science
and in doing so it would train
the next generation of students
in environmental science and
engineering and data science
would create new collaborations
across research or among
research institutes institutions
across the state so I'm
especially excited to be working
on this with with new colleagues
from eastern New Mexico from
NMSU for from you and that
you've heard from today
transcribers is you've heard
drilling cover forty five
percent their service in New
Mexico as a model for these
drylands everywhere
and so with SB seventy two New
Mexico would lead the way in the
school.
Thank you for your time thank
you we have that's the.
Five more people so everybody
person needs to be amended or
less please Gary Payton please
on mute yourself.
Madam chairman committee members
my name is Gary Payton with the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico.
Last fall we have the
opportunity to send a delegation
to cop twenty six the United
Nations climate job conference
one of the significant changes
in this year's U. and conference
was the breakthrough in terms of
natural solutions to deal with
climate change this bill before
you now is one of several bills
drylands forests water they can
move our state forward in
response to climate change we
urge you to vote yes for this
bill thank you very much.
Thank you next I have not I all
hunt on or Neil.
Yes thank you thank you Mr
chairman so my name is not on
hand in I'm a professor of
Trinity College in New Mexico
State University I'm also the
director of the NSF funded one
out of basin long term
ecological research site just
north of Los crucis a high
school this bill for many
reasons some of which have been
mentioned before so I won't
repeat them back to that I'd
like to highlight
firstly that the center will
build on the long term
experimental studies at the not
at this and be adopted and
elsewhere in the state providing
a real opportunity for us to
apply our experimental
understanding for the broader
benefit to monitoring and
understanding and managing
ecosystems across the entire
state and secondly
This center will provide an
opportunity for New Mexico and
particularly in New Mexico Act
academic institutions to to
raise our profile globally in
our management of dryland
systems which I think is a
Middle Committee for researches
in the state and the state
universities thank you thank you
next.
You childhood neon.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is to tell you
that I'm from Houston New Mexico
university I'm a chemist and a
participating member to the
center of dryland resiliency in
addition to what senator Morris
and my colleague is just
mentioned I just want to
specifically talk about they're
a waste water treatment and use
the New Mexico university.
And yes during the past few
years would be use algo
technology to play out there
with water this is for we use
that for turning waste into high
value products in a I appreciate
cost effective manner this not
only involving the two
institution to help develop
workforce but also help you his
resiliency of water resources
and grow Representative Pyle
economy I stand to fully support
Senate bill seventy two thank
you thank you so much young son.
Hello my name is also assistant
professor in the department of
electrical and computer
engineering at the university of
New Mexico so I'm a data
scientist so I'm in support of
these field because the center
will foster the input this
committee session on the biology
social science and engineering
and the computer science two
other also understanding of
resilience solutions Santa
discovers strategy is to
maximize the joint and the
reason resilience and the second
is the Santa Fe convention I
think the next generational flow
New Mexico data science and a I
will post benefits of nearby
research facilities such as us
and then national lab Los Alamos
national lab and the airforce
reserves lap so those are the
major reasons for me to support
this view.
Thank you thank you Jason
Espinoza and then my dad and
that were in the.
Madam chair members of the
committee dismissed as a
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico coalition of conservation
districts we stand in support of
the legislation thank you thank
you more state.
Yes thank you my name is Marcy
Act and our professor at UNM and
because system ecologist by
training and I'm also really
excited to be part of this group
I want to echo the support for
it from my college for this bill
as you've heard the center will
have far reaching consequences
outside in New Mexico given the
extent of violence not only in
the US but across the globe for
opposition New Mexico as a
global leader in dryland
resilience and sustainability
the outcomes of the center that
will provide for state have been
highlighted there are numerous
one of the things I'm really
excited about is the synergies
with existing programs
infrastructure and expertise
you've heard about these by
connecting expertise across the
state across our range of
disciplines selling quality
remote sensing advanced edge
computing machine learning
ecosystem modeling sensor
development across four major
institutions of the national
labs Senator will allow us to
address larger more far reaching
questions and it will allow us
to make more meaningful
contributions to protecting our
lands and landscapes against the
threats we know will intensify
in the coming decades will also
allow us to develop the
strategies that we need to
ensure clean water and health
plan managers ranchers and
farmers improve their
productivity and finally the
creation of the center will also
put us in a much better position
to go after big federal programs
and create the court.
Are requirements to help us do
that thank you very much thank
you at I'd like to thank
everybody who came to
participate in this hearing so
are now on to questions comments
from committee members.
With the.
There's a motion for a do pass
is their second and then I'll go
back to my second chair there is
a motion.
And then the second from Senator
Neville and then Senator pope
and Senator Gallegos question is
madam chair just briefly
etcetera etcetera and Dr I was
trying to find out and I I liked
some of the ideas that you have
here of.
Outside of Albuquerque approval
on the river there's some really
good farmers already have drip
system so they've been working
on is that some of the
resilience peace is truly
looking out on how to as
partially their culture stop is
it more the low ground drip
systems.
The madam chair members of the
committee thanks for the
question absolutely there the
research specifically and at
this trial in center would focus
specifically on surface water
and so we would be able to find
opportunities to work with
producers regarding
recommendations on
effectiveness.
Thank you for that and and I
know they've already done quite
a bit madam chair and senator
and Dr one thing that might be
worth looking at because
reinventing the wheel costs so
much is a few years back a few
of us were in a meeting with
Run grammar who is the master
from Israel he's gone now his
former ambassador but I've had
we had a discussion with him on
bringing technology from Israel
to New Mexico that door being
opened I also had a discussion
with Gilead cats.
Who is also called but that
Connections there it might be
really good opportunity to get
some of their information.
Brought to us to so that you
don't have to take as much time
no longer my final question on
that is I noticed it's like.
Two ninety nine point
almost three million per year
for the five year period how did
you come up with that and do we
have history on
previous
research that's taking that kind
of money I didn't know how we
came up the number.
madam chair members of the
committee thanks for the
question first of all mentioned
that the great thing about this
opportunity to create the Santo
drowns resilience is that we
will use all the existing data
that we have including what you
Miss World data that we have
specifically at our line decker
agricultural Science Center so
it's taking that big data and
it's putting it in a way that we
can actually understand it right
so we can tell producers this is
how you can be this is this is
the type of decision you can
make based on this big data so
that's really that's really the
benefit of it to add to answer
your specific question about the
monetary value this was based as
it Center cels mentioned are
sponsored off of the absa
project so that that that
percentage of money would be
used largely to support the the
initiatives which is focused in
providing funding for students
to be able to learn to be a
Friday works for workforce
support to be able to find any
type of data we need in to
purchase or the equipment that
we need to analyze that data so
I I can't speak to whether or
not it's based specifically on
whether or not this is what
other states have done to
leverage large centers but I can
assure you assure you that we
have the right to research teams
to be able to make it happen and
madam chair if I could could add
just a little bit the the
funding on this was fully vetted
through the F. score and the
very strict requirements that
NSF requires for those proposals
and so that's where the budget
in the five years at
approximately three million
dollars per year come from.
Thank you for that there's a lot
of questions thank you.
Thank you we have a motion and a
second on the floor request
there is a great requests yes
thank you I want to compliment
you this just seems like a
transformative idea but I and I
heard the president's that stand
up and support this but it
wasn't incorporated into the
research and public service
projects is there a reason was
it just too late.
Thank what we do madam chair.
The committee far as on the
budget in house bill two.
We've been talking about this
and it was brought up at the
science technology but getting
things into that budget often
requires a bigger lead time and.
Thankful that are on that
committee seeing it as
priorities there have been some
recent discussions with the
governor's office about how
support for major transformative
research projects like this are
good for New Mexico in
particularly when we've got lots
of money this is a semi
recurring type of a fund that if
a couple years five years down
the there's no more money we
understand that and hopefully it
should be self sustaining by
that point.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary all the world yes
Senator Sanchez.
Santo Domingo's.
Yes Centerville yes.
Senator vote yes thanks
committee yes.
Senator so yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
so I yes.
Thank you very much you have a
unanimous a yes vote thank you
very much of members I'm going
to ask
the vice chair to continue the
meeting and I'm gonna start with
Senate bill eighty seven since
my expert witness have.
Madam chair is here
Representative witness online or
he is our trial are to let.
The leading or percent bill
eighty seven.
Reporter to throw Archuleta on.
Mr I witness destruction letter
could you accept panelists
staff.
Mr Archuleta could you accept
panelists status.
So.
Okay.
Madam thank you madam chair
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee this
Senate bill eighty seven
appropriate.
Appropriates fifty thousand
dollars to the New Mexico land
grant council for youth
development program services at
the land grants around the state
usually the youth programs are
in the summer since the student
the user in school during the
rest of the year Mr archer
archer let it will let you know
how it will be utilized and what
they've done in the past.
In order you might introduce
yourself and your title
instructional.
Thank you madam chair Senators
funds for members of the
committee my name is our
department on the program
manager for the New Mexico land
grant council the you in a
moment studies program.
and we
have been working on developing
a youth program grams of the
targets that grant you.
For a couple years now and one
of the things that we've been
able to to start this year is
actually a
Youth conservation type program
where we have youth crew of of
land grant you they're going to
be doing some projects this year
we're doing in the east
mountains are that's going to be
a five member crew in the going
to be able to find projects will
conservation as well as
community service projects in
seven different land grants
from the.
Senator that's what this land
Grant broken COS all the way
down to the months on page two
million requests which on the
southern end of the month on us
so we have sort of a stretch of
the mountains we're able to
actually do that this year
through of some investment by
the Land Grant counsel from
their their general operating
monies as well as we were
successful in applying for an
outdoor recreation opportunities
grant the Economic Development
Department it's gonna let I was
to do some work around trails
development as well as
improvements to some of the
local community parks in in
various languages.
In addition.
We've been car partnering in
talking with the State Land
Office on identifying some
potential projects for fuel wood
for watershed health and then
also for kids with collection
for those and mostly needed some
of our communities or going to
utilize.
Some of the youth to help foster
in those projects along as well
and so on this one is going to
really help us to continue to do
those type of projects into the
next fiscal year in addition to
that we also do a
intergenerational oral histories
project where we haven't used
for various Land Grant
communities who will.
Do we train our mysteries and
then will conduct oral history
interviews with elders from
their respective language
communities.
and it will be done with that
programs been able to have the
students that do up and just see
where they kind of talk about
what they've learned and then
we're able to provide them with
the state and small state and to
just sort of value the time that
they put into it to learning and
it's also sort of just a kind of
a good reward for experiencing
in the and and this this will
allow us to be able to continue
doing that work as well
currently funded through some
requests to the northern Rio
Grande area heritage area on the
those are.
Madam limited to doing things
just within we regret houses on
the counties hi and this funding
will allow us to expand to doing
some of those intergenerational
oral history projects in other
areas of the state as well.
Thank you Mr.
The questions thank you Mr
Archuleta is there anyone here
who would like to speak in favor
of this bill.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in favor of this
bill.
Of public Garcia.
Could you and you.
Mr chair.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and Parker C.
with the New Mexico state
association and now we we
strongly support this bill as
appropriation and makes an
important investment in our
future by providing for hands on
learning opportunities for youth
from Land Grant communities
thank you very much.
Thank you and what else.
The.
We have a.
Thank you have a middle.
A new.
Good morning madam chair Camilla
more with the New Mexico State
Land Office and we just want to
stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you and I will turn to
committee members do we have any
questions.
Senator Neville.
Thank you Mr the madam chair of.
Senator have you of got a house
bill two referral yet as it
listed somewhere else will to
versus just a straight
appropriate I'm.
Thank you for the question madam
chair center renewable the land
grant council did request they
have a very small budget and and
Arturo can talk about that
material could potentially lead
to but they're very small budget
they asked for small increase
and they received nothing in
House Bill to for a
recommendation in terms of an
increase cells some of us are
looking to junior money to
support this there is a bill
from house members supporting
youth programs and Anton Chico
area but money money would go to
the lingering Council for
statewide.
Good.
I would move the passengers.
The second thank okay.
Any other discussion this
Senator guys with churn consider
appreciated I had a question for
to the in our to the way I
understand this is the one five
member crew going to seven
Representative agency said this
is that correct.
Madam chair of Senegal's that's
correct the crew with the
funding that we can have this
year including the the grant
that we received we're gonna be
able to do ten weeks of work
that's a five member crew is
going to be made up of you from
the various land grants on that
we're gonna serve and then
they'll be able to do a little
of a little over a week can in
each area welcomed some of the
less just because the school
project the new might be less
but to be able to shift around
that region.
Thank you for that I like the
idea has given thinking madam
chair and senator Arturo this
might be a really good start up
project for it You even talking
about the seconds but even a
some you know fire breaks and
general cleanup in a later in
life is just grows is there any
chance you've got a a point here
we talk about written essays and
managers Senator and Arturo is
there a chance that at the end
of this we would be able have an
update from the students here in
just that essay format I think
that would really give us an
understanding going forward of
how important your budget is for
the second and the land grants.
Madam chair a Senator ghost of
most definitely we we we could
even share with you some of the
S. is we have been done on the
some of the previous.
Mr interviewed you as well we
actually have the oral history
interviews themselves we're
actually working on I'm getting
those up putting formatted for
for placement and you too will
be able to sort share those out
with the just the general
public.
That's great and final hi just
common madam chair and senator
in order to I love the idea of
the video equipment so they can
interview the community leaders
once they are gone unless you
have something like this you
lose all their knowledge so
appreciation all stand support
thank you.
Thank you and I I just want to
comment I really appreciate the
oral history project and lost
one sentence the longtime
president of the land grant we
lost a lot so with that which we
call the roll please just
centers of this.
Senator.
Yes Representative Senator have
yes senator bill yes Senator
pope yes
committee yes.
Our souls yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator farms yes.
Thank you you got to do pass
thank you madam chair I'll go on
to Senate bill fifty seven and
this is the department of health
money for match of federal funds
for an expansion of the senior
farmers market nutrition program
and I do have an expert with me
you're from the department of
health New Mexico farmers.
Okay.
yes okay so with me today I have
the needs Miller from the New
Mexico farmers market New Mexico
Association and the money madam
chair members of the committee
it's the this is a request for
house bill two one million one
hundred thousand dollars
appropriation to DO eight
matches federal funding for the
expansion of the seniors farming
market nutrition program
administration costs are limited
to five hundred thousand of the
appropriation but remember the
rest of the all the money would
get matched by federal money
and the D. O. H. is current cost
breakdown indicates that nine
hundred thousand of this
appropriation would be used for
food costs.
The aging a long term services
departments department finds
that New Mexico's older adult
population continues to grow.
And nearly twelve percent of
adults sixty and older in our
state our food insecure and lack
reliable access to sufficient
affordable nutritious food.
The program currently serves
seventeen thousand six hundred
and seven seniors this
appropriation will serve an
additional twenty two thousand
five hundred seniors and with me
Mr Meese Denise Miller what has
a few words.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Stefanics thank you all
for this opportunity to tell you
about this very important
program that is an expansion of
a successful program proven
since really two thousand and
eight it
and again I'm with the New
Mexico farmers marketing
association the executive
director
we the department of health and
our partnership working on the
wick program the with farmers
market program goes back to
nineteen ninety four it was one
of our very first partnerships
and programs to create food
access and the senior program
began in two thousand and seven
with a tiny pilot of department
in hell of the department of
health promotion money in
support of County from that
little tiny pilot that showed
the need we got a small
appropriation from the state to
expanded to six counties from
that it grew to the federal the
federal program which we now
have in this will expand even
farther because the need far
surpasses the amount of funding
that is currently available and
there's some additional things
that this money will do so
as Senator Stefanics mentioned
you know who is currently
serving the seventeen thousand
six hundred seniors it will
reach it will basically more
than double that amount adding
another twenty two thousand it
also serves nine hundred and
seventy five farmers from across
the state at eighty nine outlets
that's farmers markets and farm
stands and those farm stands and
farms stand in farmers markets
when a farmer sells directly to
consumers they're getting their
very best price and so that that
that those sales are very
important because they get the
market there that really help
sustain their operations
the senior pro.
Graham has historically had a
ninety five percent redemption
rate and it's been lower the
last couple of years because of
COVID and because farmers are
also having trouble distributed
getting their checks in the bank
but seniors are among the most
active redeeming their vouchers
on the and in those vouchers
that's an important tie into
what this expansion funding will
cover because this funding is
the department of health is now
a leader in the nation with
testing a mobile technology for
the redemption of the budget so
the seniors will no longer have
to use their you know paper
checks paper checks and this
will and the same technology
will be used for whip but paper
checks are terrible for many
reasons
they they have to print they
have to.
Rate the cost of the printing
they have to overprint because
checks don't get used and
actually the reason that we
finally we talked about this for
years but the banks have stopped
accepting the checks so the need
for the mobile technology is
really critical and this program
will support this new mobile
technology that they have tested
this past year at the Santa Fe
farmers market they tested it
with forty one seniors there
were also twenty four with
families the the younger with
moms using Google wallet the
seniors use a they tend to if
you are code because they're not
is Google mobile friendly and
the department of health has
extensive plans for training
all of the farmers markets
across the state and all of the
farmers because switching change
is hard switching technologies
not gonna be easy but it's going
to be very important beyond even
the senior program because that
technology within a couple years
after they do all the hard work
of training everyone.
Of the New Mexico farmers
marketing association hopes will
be able to use that same
technology for the snap double
up food Bucks incentive program
so Google is the way to go
and it's a very small portion of
their budget as the senator said
nine hundred thousand is for
food and
Yes I think that really
summarizes the need comment is
really still here among us the
seniors need this we accepted
calls we're like a hotline and
we get so many calls and there's
never enough funding to go
around so stretching the the
number of seniors who will be
reached as well as providing the
funds for the technology will be
really critical thank you miss
Miller is there anyone in the
audience who wants to speak in
favor of this bill.
Madam chair committee members
Senator thanks thank you so much
for bringing this bill forward.
Ciation this program is at so
and I'm here.
I have to say this is really
personal I was percent in the
chair that.
In nineteen ninety four.
Dollars for the fourth for
farmers market nutrition program
in the state I also.
And since then as you heard from
this Miller we have a thriving
as all of you know a thriving
community farmers markets across
the state helping to really
support and economic.
Farmers and food processors as
well of food hubs as well.
Thank you yes.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee again my name's
Kate.
I have over twenty thousand
members we we.
Believing increasing our.
Only
have numerous benefits for
citizens are in our communities
but we also see this as a great
market for our Representative.
Thank you I think we have a list
we have of.
Seven people on the list if you
could keep your remarks to under
a minute please Mr Nicholas
Cordoba could you you please.
Yes
yes.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is Nikos
Cordoba with the New Mexico
Center on poverty we think the
sponsor for bringing this
legislation we stand in strong
support of this bill because
every New Mexicans should have
the necessary funds to provide
for the families especially New
Mexicans seniors so many of whom
live on fixed incomes many
senior Mexican space food
security roughly thirty percent
thirty seven percent next New
Mexico's current snap
participants are over age fifty
between thirteen and twenty four
percent of older adults live in
poverty depending on where they
live the snap program soon.
Percent of their income on food
however this is not realistic
for older adults especially for
living on a fixed income
nationwide snap benefits are we
spend within two weeks expected
to last a month.
This target money for purchasing
New Mexico grown fruits
vegetables will help reduce the
security we stand strong support
thank you and we're to to pass
thank you Mr Cordoba Dini's king
missed in the state.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Denise king
aging a long term Services
Department aging network
division director and we stand
in strong support of this bill
and work closely with the area
agencies on aging and the local
senior center providers and this
funding would greatly support
the seniors and the need for
them to get local grown fruits
and vegetables into their diet.
Thank you thank you Mr king
Pollock.
All of would you and you.
Yes
my name is I'm madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is product SCS I'm a volunteer
advocate with a a RP New Mexico
and A. A. R. P. New Mexico
strongly supports this bill for
all the reasons previously
mentioned.
And we urge you to.
Both to pass Senate bill fifty
seven thank you thank you Mr yes
Monica Abeyta.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Monica
based on the executive director
of the north central New Mexico
economic development district we
run the non metro area agency on
aging program for thirty two
counties in the state and I want
to strongly support the sale on
behalf of all our seniors and
senior centers in the state and
thanks Senators onyx for all for
work looking out for seniors a
great drive program and I'm very
excited to hear about the
changes that were just presented
we stand strong support thank
you thank you Mr beta Jamie
park.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jamie park we policy analyst
and staff attorney with the New
Mexico astika Association anime
has been a long time supporter
of the senior farmers market
program one of the core values
at stake is have and that
informs our work is a value to
grow our own food locally rather
than importing our food to the
industrial food system and
ensuring that this local food is
available and affordable to all
of our families especially our
seniors and not just the wealthy
New Mexico has one of the
highest food insecurity rates in
the country exacerbated by the
COVID nineteen pandemic this
bill addresses food insecurity
in a meaningful way by
supporting our elders a second
farmers ranchers and food
businesses we therefore ask for
your support of this bill thank
you for your time thank you Mr
Hutch Miller.
Good morning chair members of
the committee had to Millard
Santa Fe County
intergovernmental coordinator I
just want to express we plead
that the Santa Fe County
commission does have in place
the resolution in support of
this piece of legislation and we
focus sponsor for her support of
the local growers and as seniors
within the local area so we do
support this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Miller Mr Ernie the
better.
Miss Mister that could you and
your staff please.
Mr.
Welcome back to him if if he's
still there Mister Lawrence
Gallegos.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Lawrence di
eight was and with the western
landowners alliance and we stand
in support of this Sen bill
fifty seven and the one big
thing that we need to change
your New Mexico is to stop
exporting up our important
products and then importing the
food food for local people to
meet so we Spence for me in
support of this bill thank you
thank you Mr Davis and the last
one here is Anthony.
Was madam chair members of the
committee this is that the one
you're with Wagner farms we've
been forming in this middle row
Grande Valley for over a hundred
years growing fresh fruits and
vegetables on we have important
since the coral and paralysis
and we've been part of the New
Mexico grown for the school
program providing fresh fruits
and vegetables to the schools
we've been providing fresh
fruits and vegetables to for
farmers markets here in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe New I
think this is been a great
program for the seniors and we
also get the vouchers and all
that we have a roadside stand
also so it's a good opportunity
for farmers and the benefits are
seniors and thank you for your
support thank you Mr Wagner and
finally we have Jessica S. one.
Thank you madam thank you madam
chair person
on behalf of agricole Toda
cooperative network a network of
forty allied farms in the middle
Rio Grande district we stand in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you.
They'll turn to the committee
are there any questions comments
of the committee Senator
committee's chair and then
Senator have the thank you madam
chair and thank you senator for
the bill highly supported
certainly yes vote on this one
and my you know my my
constituents are really.
Concerned about this issue
seniors and their basic costs
utilities food
we're seeing gasoline prices go
up utilities the basic means to
heat their homes and it seems to
me I mean they're very
correctable ways to to remedy
those and so I would also like
to us to look at those things
I've spoken a lot about about
those issues the doesn't Nestle
pertain directly to this bill.
Additionally we're in my opinion
over regulating our farmers
markets we have a lot of
potential to de regulate
unnecessary permitting licensure
and other things for our our
farmers to produce a more
diverse.
group of the range of goods
and Services to their local
people and and thankfully we we
have been taking a look at that
issue in the legislature but if
I just want to make a brief
comment that because it is such
a big issue for for my district
and for my constituents in a lot
of potential here
so thank you very much thank you
madam chair thank others
meetings.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Stefanics and Denise
Miller for coming here it's nice
to see you in person
money is actually more of a
COVID as a member of an
incredible group of people in
the food farming hunger task
force that has been reading over
the last eight months we folks
we've had PAM Caitlyn who have
spoken today and also the folks
from I will go to a and the
acequia association I just like
the committee to know that this
is a ACOG an important cog in a
bigger machine that is happening
because we are looking at food
insecurity we're looking at food
supply chains we're looking at
locally grown produce and so I'm
grateful for this bill to come
forward because this is one of
the many aspects when we talk
about food insecurity and also
food production to make sure
that we are addressing that and
and I'd like to commend the
group of the food farming hunger
task force because there's so
many different people from
around the state who are
representing all different
aspects of this in the state to
have these conversations and so
you know I remember the with
checks I was in graduate school
is supported with student I
would go to the farmers market
and sell little signs that say
carrots and corn and all that
but I sat next to a farmer
looking for a local farmer the
Watson family and because people
weren't by my stuff they would
ask me to come and help them
amid a lot about selling produce
learned a lot about green chili
learned about a lot about what
would either hurt me in the long
run or something that would be
very enjoyable for me in terms
of green Chile and there's where
I saw this with checks.
And certainly understand the
challenges of those but also saw
so many people who were so
grateful just to get.
Healthy produce.
To feed their families and so
this is this is not a hard sell
for me obviously Pam you know
this is well entities and and
Kate when you know this but I'm
grateful for this pro for this
this bill to be brought forward
especially some of the other
programs that you've got also
Senator Stefanics that you're
going to bring up as well and
I'm in full support and thank
you for speaking out thank you
all for being here today and for
those of you online for speaking
as well thank you do we have a
motion.
The motion for the past madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
that's one of the motions Center
pope with the second would you
please call the roll.
Uh Senator Sanchez.
Yes.
Bill yes senator Paul yes
Senator if.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator farms yes.
Thank you.
Is your next bill this is the
line thank you very much madam
chair and thank him race coming
up for this one and it makes an
appropriation to the aging and
long term services department to
purchase New Mexico grown fruits
and vegetables for senior center
meals so that the farmers would
be of we would purchase the
produce and put it into some of
our markets our senior center
sorry right now let's see in
twenty two The New Mexico grown
program was expanded into thirty
six senior centers across New
Mexico The appropriation would
fund an existing F. T. E. of
four oversight program planning
collaboration and it would
expand to other counties so with
me today I have is Pam Roy from
also the farm to table and many
other groups what the agency
right.
Madam chair committee members
and things found thank you so
much for bringing forward this
bill The New Mexico from for
senior meals program
we are static about this as you
all know about fifty it just
about fifty eight thousand
seniors we're one of the fastest
growing senior population in the
country and.
Fifty eight thousand seniors
currently are serve through
things like senior centers
transportation meals delivered
to their homes curbside and that
creates to last year over four
point seven million meals to New
Mexico seniors.
And we were so excited to
releases program begin to build
and thanks to the legislature
for appropriating close to a
hundred thousand dollars in for
those thirty six senior centers
in six counties and Santo
Domingo pueblo as well that
applied for those funds we have
an amazing aging long term
services department and in these
can you heard her briefly a
moment ago age winters Services
Division director their team she
and
ms of delay step our whole
hardly involved in this program
and so it's not only the
agencies that the on on the
ground programs like this in the
years organizations that are
working with this with farmers
across the state some of the
heard on zoom minutes ago so we
see this in three things one
it's a nutrition program for
seniors it really adds to the
nutrition of their meals with
fresh beautifully grown produce
from farmers many of you know it
is an economic development
initiative in New Mexico it
really serves not only with the
farmers market nutrition program
we just heard about but the
senior program an anti Wagner
mentioned program to get a
produce and the schools over
million dollars for the produce
purchased by schools in last
year as well so it's it's a
builder and Center Hamlin said
it is part of a much larger more
coordinated initiative really
focusing on the economic
prosperity of our farmers hunger
mitigating hunger and creating
more food security in the state
to the food farming hunger
initiative just a couple last
things we are really not only
excited about seeing this
program happen and continue to
build on it but with the funds
that Senator thanks in this
particular bill what it would do
is we create this program as a
statewide every single one of
our senior service providers
could participate in the program
and provide beautiful produce
there's a ton of coordination
around the state of New Mexico.
To the network through food hubs
cooperatives in individual
individual farmers who are
working whole heartedly to work
together to make sure that we
get this produce round come
around the state and filled out
these economic opportunities
here in New Mexico thanks thank
you Mr right do we have anyone
in support of this bill.
Could you keep your comments
very brief because we have
another bill thank you.
Committee members of the
committee again he wants rapid
Mexico part
of this I'm again we just
supports increasing access to
locally grown foods in the state
facilities and just
opportunities that provides for
our farmers and ranchers thank
you so much for all your time
this thank you Mr.
If someone else yes.
Senator members of the committee
Denise Miller New Mexico farmers
marketing association and we
work very closely with the
agencies on the implementation
of this program and the scene
the support from the the
champions Pam is mentioned are
integral there is support and
all we need are the funds for
the food the infrastructure is
there all the work structures
there so thank you so much.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience.
K. we have a.
Seven people again and many of
them are the same so if you
could please be brief Mr up for
new data please.
Mr develop community you
yourself.
is Monica Abeyta.
I think madam chair and this is
Monica pager with the north
central New Mexico economic
development district in our non
metro area agency on aging I
believe we have twenty seven
senior centers that are
currently participating in this
program we are really excited to
see this programs those
statewide so that all of our
senior centers can take
advantage of this and this could
be equitable across the state we
strongly support this thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr.
The wider again with Wagner
pharmacists markets that we
form of gross and support and we
do part of the New Mexico grown
program for over ten years
getting produce into the school
so we like to see the singer
program goes statewide and not
and the state can get freshen up
local nutritious food thank you.
Thank you Mr attorneys came.
Madam chair and members of the
committee on the department
stands in and
great support of the additional
funding and creation for
expansion of the program very
pleased to say that moving from
FY twenty in a pilot's to that
end and now in FY twenty two to
a program I'm very happy and
overseeing this programming and
working with the eight service
providers which includes then
thirty six senior centers in
getting the fresh produce into
the meals and seeing the
benefits that that has to our
senior population so in great
support of the the the bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr king of Paula and I
think was because of yes.
All of.
Yes thank you madam chair and
members of the committee this is
I would like to see us again
volunteer advocate with a a RP
New Mexico and A. A. R. P. New
Mexico strongly supports this
bill to support senior senior
center and appreciate your vote
to pass thank you.
Thank you Jamie park.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jamie Parker The
New Mexico secular Association
this bill by spending the
capacity of the current program
will further food justice and
equity for elders and
historically marginalized
communities the Economic
Development aspect of this
program also has the potential
to meaningfully employment
equity and inclusion of our
second farmers ranchers and food
businesses from historically
marginalized communities NMAA
eight therefore strongly
supports this bill and we urge
your support as well thank you
for your time thank you Mr can
finally hatch Miller.
Madam chair members of the
committee to Miller Santa Fe
County intergovernmental Corning
and I just like to express the
Santa Fe County commission
support for this piece of
legislation thank you.
What will turn to the committee.
This sample I mean Senator and
with.
I go by many names thank you
madam chair.
it's it's more of a COVID and
and Pam you might be able to
chime in on this but at it I'd
like to remind the committee
just in terms of again this is
one component into a bigger
picture but it is when we
continue to talk about small
farmers and food supply and food
insecurity this is a statistic
that is alarming for me and it
really demonstrates that we can
actually provide food for the
people in the state of New
Mexico and yet we continue to
export ninety five percent of
our food and ninety percent of
our food is imported.
So there is there's a disconnect
there in terms of where our
priorities are in what we're
doing with our food that is
grown by our small farmers
throughout the state and this is
USDA data for twenty twenty and
also from the New Mexico farming
economy report an eighty six
percent of the farms in New
Mexico are small to mid sized
and so but the challenge that we
find in this is the conversation
that we continue to have is that
are small farmers can continue
to provide food for senior
programs for young people for
schools but we have to provide
that support for them the big
challenge that small farmers
have is that there's no cold
storage the warehouse storage
and they need support for
machinery they can do that and
so I encourage the committee to
continuing we have these
conversations is to recognize
that we can do that that's our
job is to help them do that they
are ready the people that we're
hearing talking on the on zoom
are ready they want to be able
to do that and so it's really
it's really important grateful
for again this legislation Pam
is always grateful for you and
and all the the people that we
get to we get to work with on
the food farming hunger task
force so it is an honor so thank
you very much and certainly you
have my strong support on this
thank you senator how much.
Anyone else.
Join your motion I move for the
past.
Madam chair representative Helen
and Senator pope would you would
please call.
As
centers of office.
Think of this.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Fund yes.
You have a it and another
unanimous to false thank you
very much members of the
committee I forgot to say this
to last two bills were for the
health and Human Services
interim committee.
my last bill this morning madam
chair members of the committee
is Senate bill eighty eight and
two of my land grants.
T. he gay and Torreon have come
forward with a very modest
request of thirty thousand
dollars for volunteer
firefighting training and is
primarily for the materials of
the training materials the video
tapes tapes that are necessary
for this The appropriation would
go to DFA and then would be
granted out to each individual
Land Grant as they requested the
funds so the question was in our
analysis whether or not that's
it enough money of for such a
training but I'm just bringing
forward directly the request
from the to the land grants.
Thank you do you have a an
expert for.
I don't know if they will be
online or not.
One on one of the.
Twenty people.
for this with the expertise.
Well either Arturo are to let
the.
Chasen can Tana.
With the expert on the bill
please raise with the help.
It Mr Jello who.
Online now.
Thought they might those twenty
people might not be here to
comment are they here to come.
Okay with a razor handle with
the people online for here to
comment on this bill please
raise your hands.
And meanwhile I will go to the
audience guidance is there
anyone in the audience in
support of this bill.
Is there was room for him on
this bill thank you.
how Kobach Act.
Great okay a Mister Baca.
Would you madam.
Yes madam chair can you hear me
yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Michael Baca
I am at work in the staff with
the New Mexico Land Grant
councils this bill will support
the creation or and I'm sorry at
some that important funding that
the Manzano and if he can land
grants I need the staff there a
volunteer of fire departments as
we also with the docket fire
about five years ago and she
needs those mountains amounts on
my words are incredibly
vulnerable we are unfortunately
in that in a historic drought
and the area's perimeter box
these are areas that are rural
L. on that edges and are largely
supported by these volunteer
Volunteer firefighters the need
the land grant approved in that
they can be incredibly effective
in protecting their community
and this funding would help the
mines on a and if he can land
grants I do the same so the
council.
Very much supports both of these
land grants and will work with
DFA to make sure that they're
able to receive expense money.
Thank you Mr back up.
Is there anyone else online.
Let's speak about this book turn
to the committee.
For the past madam chair okay
motion for two passed by Senator
Hamblen second by Senator Sir of
the phonics.
So the clerk called the roll
please.
Mr chair Senator about this.
To see if you guys have for us
yes.
Right those.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Seven of bills this.
Senator post yes Senator is.
Senator.
More.
Senator souls.
Yes yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator I yes you are batting a
thousand right
Today another unanimous across
thank you very much madam chair
